==PAGE:1==
3D face image generation using GANs
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
3D face image generation using GANs
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Alvils Stūre
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and in collaboration with
the Norwegian Biometrics Laboratory (NBL) at the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU) in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a degree in Master of
Science in Computer Science and Engineering (”Kandidatret. i Informationsteknologi”).
Alvils Stūre ­ s202586
Signature
Date
ii
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The availability of biometric data has been a crucial factor in the success of any state­of­
the­art recognition system. Often, datasets are collected primarily for biometric recogni­
tion and not utilized for further processing, such as training and evaluation of biometric
systems. Gathering and labelling qualitative and discriminative data is a time­consuming
and often prohibitively expensive process, and with the introduction of the European Gen­
eral Data Protection Law (GDPR), especially in the field of biometrics, acquisition, sharing,
and usage of the data are highly restricted.
Human faces are attractive biometric modalities due to their uniqueness and non­intrusiveness.
Nowadays, many real­world applications replace traditional authentication mechanisms
with face recognition systems in order to increase overall security and trustworthiness.
Most of the research on face recognition is performed using 2D images, but in order to
improve overall face recognition performance in a wide variety of the in­the­wild condi­
tions, additional data needs to be acquired, which in most cases can be an expensive
and time­consuming process.
The recent development of generative adversarial networks (GANs) has proven to be a
potential alternative to acquiring a large amount of biometric data for a fraction of the
time and cost compared to a manual collection. Synthetic data usage is widely used for
autonomous vehicles, healthcare, biometric systems, and other industries, as it provides
a way to generate new data from the same sample space, including face data, that can
comply with GDPR restrictions.
In the thesis, we propose a pipeline for generating controllable 2D head samples from 3D
Morphable Models (3DMMs) with different head poses, head shapes and expressions,
textures, camera, and lighting conditions. Additionally, the domain gap between the gen­
erated synthetic data and real data is evaluated for some cases of how the face recognition
system performs on different poses and lighting conditions within the image in compari­
son with real data in order to see if synthetic data can be applied in finding these edge
cases where face recognition system may give inaccurate or less accurate results in face
verification.
3D face image generation using GANs
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
2
3
Biometrics
3
3.1
Face Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.2
Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.4
Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.5
State­Of­The­Art Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Artificial Intelligence
6
4.1
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3
Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4
Unsupervised Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.5
Discriminative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.6
Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
Convolutional Neural Networks
10
5.1
ResNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
6
Generative Adversarial Networks
13
6.1
Pix2Pix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.2
CycleGAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.3
StyleGAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.4
StyleGAN2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7
Computer Graphics
25
7.1
Meshes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.2
Texture Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.3
Normal Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.4
Displacement Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.5
Linear Blend Skinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.6
Blendshapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.7
Rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
8
3D Morphable Models
30
8.1
Flame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
9
2D to 3D Registration and Reconstruction
33
9.1
Detailed Expression Capture and Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
10 Proposed Approach
36
10.1 Unpaired 2D to 2D Translation Using CycleGAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
iv
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:6==
10.2 Paired 2D to 2D Translation Using Pix2Pix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
10.3 Paired 2D to 2D Translation Using CycleGAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
10.4 Paired 3D to 2D Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
11 Analysis
44
11.1 In­Domain Face Image Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
11.2 Cross­Domain Face Image Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
11.3 Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
12 Conclusion
55
12.1 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Bibliography
57
A Software Framework
61
B FFHQ Dataset Reconstruction Results
62
C FEI Dataset Results
64
D Network Summary
67
3D face image generation using GANs
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Biometrics [1] is a field of study that provides means of identifying and verifying individuals
in a reliable and fast way through unique biological and behavioural characteristics. Face
recognition is a process of comparing (according to ISO standards) a person’s face from
a digital image or video against of database of faces. It has been dated back to the 1960s,
beginning as a form of computer application. With the recent hardware computational ef­
ficiency and efficient algorithm development increase, many face recognition applications
have surfaced, which are used in photos, videos, or in real­time for criminal identification,
access control, and many other areas. However, with the face recognition application
explosion comes the need for gathering and labelling qualitative and discriminative data,
which is often a long, tedious, and expensive process. Moreover, with the introduction of
the GDPR [2], acquisition sharing and usage of the data are highly restricted.
Generative adversarial networks [3] could be a potential alternative to acquiring a large
amount of data in a fraction of the time and cost compared to a manual collection. Many
companies are diverging from manual data collection to synthetic data generation, which
is proven that, in some cases, is on par with the real data and is also used for data
augmentation purposes. With the possibility of generating high­quality and high­fidelity
data, synthetic data can be used to test and augment existing or generate new datasets
for face recognition systems to increase overall performance.
In the thesis, we propose a pipeline for generating controllable 2D head samples from 3D
Morphable Models (3DMMs) [4], with different head poses, head shapes and expressions,
textures, camera, and lighting conditions. Additionally, we evaluated the domain gap
between our generated synthetic data and real data and tested some cases of how the
face recognition system performs on different poses and lighting conditions within the
image in comparison with real data in order to see if synthetic data can be applied in finding
these edge cases where face recognition system may give inaccurate or less accurate
results in person authentication.
In the chapter 2. we analyzed related work of generating 2D facial images that we used
for inspiration for our pipeline development. chapter 3. gives an overview of biometrics
and face recognition systems, which includes the overall face recognition pipeline and
state­of­the­art models currently used. chapter 4. provides a reader with an overview of
artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning, and the types of algorithms used
in this work. chapter 5. provides an overview of convolutional neural network core con­
cepts that are used in our pipeline. chapter 6. describes the general idea of generative
adversarial networks and explains some of the most widely used types of generative ad­
versarial networks. chapter 7. gives a brief overview of computer graphics and rendering
pipelines. chapter 8. explains the general idea about 3D morphable models. chapter
9. we explain 2D to 3D registration and reconstruction, which is a backbone of our ap­
proach. chapter 10. we describe our approach, which includes unpaired and paired 2D
to 2D translation, as well as 3D to 2D translation for generating facial images. chapter 11.
provides an evaluation of our approach for performance testing of face recognition sys­
tems and domain gap comparison between synthetic data and real data. Finally, chapter
12. provides overall analysis results and possible future work direction in order to improve
our approach.
3D face image generation using GANs
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Related Work
There are several approaches proposed for face image generation, such as 3DLPFR [5]
uses FLAME [6] topology where they are using two generators for texture map genera­
tion and background generation in order to generate realistic facial images using the PIE
dataset in a controlled environment, and does not provide any information about camera
and lighting parameters. MOST­GAN [7] provides disentangled face generation based on
FLAME topology. They train individual networks for FLAME parameter estimation, light­
ing and camera estimation, and hair generation, which provides full disentanglement and
control of the manipulation of the facial image generation, but has some limitations. For
example, fine­grained details are embedded in texture maps. StyleRig [8] has a rig­like
control over StyleGAN­generated facial imagery, which uses a rigger network to estimate
generated image FLAME topology parameters and by injecting in style code estimated
parameters, they are able to control the overall generation results in a semi­disentangled
way. GIF [9] proposes using FLAME topology and using a generator network for gener­
ating hair, mouth cavity (i.e., teeth or tongue), and fine­grained details like wrinkles and
pores that FLAME does not model on the modified StyleGAN2 network. L3DMM [10] uses
the Basel Face model as a base and learns a nonlinear 3DMM model representation,
which fully models shape, albedo, and lighting estimation. GAN­control [11] constructs
sub­vectors of features to manipulate in separate sub­spaces, where each sub­space
corresponds to a specific feature and encoders are trained to map interpretable parame­
ters to suitable latent vectors. CFIWSC [12] uses the Basel face model for facial image
manipulation, which is based on conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and
uses semantic descriptors.
Additionally, as part of our work is based on texture generation, there are several ap­
proaches proposed, such as StyleUV [13] generating high­fidelity texture maps using the
StyleGAN2 network, which is learned from the in­the­wild images but does not disentangle
illumination and albedo maps. UV­GAN [14] uses a registration and localization network
and afterwards uses an inpainting network to fill occluded and non­visible regions. FDTL
[15] learns from 2D data 3D representation by reconstructing objects from different views
and designed an attention­based mechanism for texture map generation. Part of MOST­
GAN’s work was based on texture generation and disentanglement between lighting and
albedo map estimation.
2
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:9==
3
Biometrics
Biometrics is a field of study that provides means of authenticating individuals in a reliable
and fast way through unique biological characteristics, such as the face, iris, fingerprint,
veins, and other biometric characteristics [16]. The earliest accounts of biometrics can be
dated as far back as 500BC, and with the advancement in the middle of the 20th century,
biometrics grew exponentially as a field of research. Within the last ten years, biometric
systems have passed another stepping stone with the recent advancements in algorithmic
techniques and hardware, and face recognition has become one of the most widely used
techniques in biometric recognition in different sectors and our daily lives.
With the hardware computational efficiency and efficient algorithm development increase,
many face recognition applications have surfaced, which are used in photos, videos, or
in real­time for criminal identification, building access control, and unmanned and au­
tonomous vehicles. While to us humans, recognizing a person’s face is a small effort, for
the computers, this is a challenging problem, which involves estimating the identity of the
human in the image in challenging environments. For example, changes within the im­
age, with different appearances and illumination conditions, poses, and occlusions [17].
See Fig. 3.1.
3.1
Face Recognition
Face recognition has been dated back to the 1960s, beginning as a form of computer
application. Face recognition is a process of comparing a person’s face from a digital
image or video against of database of faces. This process is employed in a wide variety
of use cases in applications where it is needed to authenticate, track, and control based
on facial images.
The Overall pipeline for face recognition can be divided into 3 steps : [18] (See Fig. 3.2).
• Face detection. Detection and localization of the facial region within the image
obtained by the system.
• Feature extraction. Extraction of person­specific details within the detected facial
region in order to get feature vectors for comparison.
• Face recognition. Using the feature vectors in order to compare it with all biometric
templates within the database.
3D face image generation using GANs
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 3.1: Example of illumination and appearance changes of the same identity within
the images. In some cases, it is hard to identify, even for a human, if the images contain
the same identity or not. Although a human can distinguish if the images contain the same
identity or not, the illumination and appearance factors influence the overall decision, and
for computers, it’s a challenging task [19].
3.2
Detection
The first step is the detection and localization of the human face within the image, the re­
sults which are used in the next steps. As there are many factors that influence the quality
of the image and proper detection and localization of the facial region within the image,
there have been proposed several detections and localization algorithms that are quite
robust to the changes within the image, such as Viola­Jones detection, HOG transform,
and newer advancements propose deep learning­based approaches for object and key
point detection of the facial region [20].
3.3
Feature Extraction
After the detection, feature extraction is the next step within the face recognition pipeline,
as we need to extract robust features that can be compared in the next step of the face
recognition pipeline. Before feature extraction, usually, the detected facial region within
the image is preprocessed, for example, by using face alignment to get more qualita­
tive feature extraction results.
Over the years there have been proposed many fea­
ture extraction techniques, such as independent component analysis, scale­invariant fea­
ture transform, local phase quantization Gabor filters, and also deep learning­based ap­
proaches such as Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) that are trained on substantial
facial databases for extracting the face features within the image [20].
3.4
Recognition
The final step is comparing the features extracted from the facial image with the face
database in order to determine the most likely match. As we acquired compressed feature
representation of the face image within the second step, we can compare the similarity of
feature vectors using cosine or euclidean distance by using the K­Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
algorithm, correlation filters, or deep learning­based approaches such as Siamese­based
networks [20].
4
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3.2: Example of Face recognition system pipeline. The first step is to detect the
face within the image or video. Afterwards, feature extraction is used to extract person­
specific feature vectors that can be compared with the face database. And finally, finding
the best match using feature vectors of the face to estimate the similarity with the face
database [20].
3.5
State­Of­The­Art Models
Over the years, deep learning­based approaches have grown in popularity.
FAANG
companies such as Google have invested quite a considerable amount of research in
face recognition, which is used on­premises and applied in various products, such as
Youtube. Currently state­of­the­art models publicly available are VGG­Face [21], Facenet
[22], OpenFace [23], DeepFace [24], DeepID [25], ArcFace [26]. Also, there are models
such as Dlib [27] and others that are still highly used but can not be considered as start­
of­the­art anymore.
3D face image generation using GANs
5
==PAGE:12==
4
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the ability of machines or computers to learn and perform
tasks that possesses the same characteristics as human intelligence, such as the ability
to reason and discover meaning. Unfortunately, general machines can not perform such
tasks as human beings, and AI has remained in science fiction. However, there has been
advancement in the field of AI, such as machine learning and deep learning, that tries
to replicate the human intelligence (See Fig. 4.1), and it has been demonstrated that
computers can be programmed to carry out very complex tasks that resemble human
behaviour to a certain extend.
4.1
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence and uses algorithms that learn auto­
matically through experience and from the data without explicit programming and makes
a determination or prediction about phenomenons observed in the real world. Machine
learning models, most of the time, are fed structured data or hand­crafted features and
output a result by learning from data over time. Some of the approaches used included
decision tree learning and inductive logic programming, clustering, Bayesian networks,
and other types of approaches.
4.2
Deep Learning
Deep learning is a sub­field of machine learning and artificial intelligence that primarily
uses neural networks. These networks can learn from raw data, both structured and
unstructured, such as images, videos, and texts, and it is able, without additional prior
knowledge, to make a determination or prediction about something in the world. It is used
for a variety of tasks such as object detection, speech recognition, translation, and other
tasks. Deep learning is responsible for many AI achievements such as Google DeepMind
AlphaGo, self­driving cars, intelligent voice assistants (Amazon, Alexa, Google Home)
and many others in different research areas.
6
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4.1: AI, machine learning, and deep learning in set visualization. AI and ML, and
DL allow systems to automatically learn and improve from their experiences through data
without being explicitly programmed. ML is a subset of AI, and DL is a subset of ML and
is inspired by how human brains work in another way than how we do ML. [28].
4.3
Supervised Learning
Supervised learning is a commonly used learning approach for training models. This ap­
proach requires the output of the input data to be known ­ each instance has to have
ground­truth data that indicates what kind of object it is or other types of information to
learn information based on the output data (See Fig. 4.2). The training process of super­
vised learning is based on the following principle. First of all, the training data are fed into
the model to produce a prediction of output. This prediction is compared to the assigned
ground truth data of the training data in order to estimate model error. Based on this error,
the learning algorithm adjusts the model’s parameters in order to reduce it.
4.4
Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised learning is a learning approach where the model is trained by observing
new data and extracting patterns within the data without being instructed on what they are
(output is not known), as opposed to the supervised learning approach, where the output
is known. These algorithms are centered on the idea of discovering hidden patterns in
data. The goal in such unsupervised learning problems may be to discover groups of
similar examples within the data, which is called clustering, or to determine how the data
is distributed in the space, known as density estimation (See Fig. 4.2).
3D face image generation using GANs
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4.2: Example of supervised and unsupervised learning. In the left figure, there are
two classes ­ red and blue, where the main goal is to assign the best split to distinguish
between a red and blue class, while in the unsupervised case on the right, classes prior
are unknown, and we try to estimate the classes red and blue [29].
4.5
Discriminative Models
The discriminative model refers to a class of models used in Statistical Classification that
has a direct solution and mainly is used in supervised machine learning problems where
you need to draw boundaries in the data space, for example, classification­based tasks.
Discriminative models don’t make any assumptions about the data points and are used
mainly for discriminating between different kinds of data instances (See Fig. 4.3). Some of
the examples of discriminative models are logistic regression, Support Vector Machines,
Decision Trees, and Random Forests.
4.6
Generative Models
Generative models are a class of statistical models that can generate new data instances.
Generative models are used in unsupervised machine learning for estimating joint prob­
ability and are used for probability and Likelihood estimation, data instance generation,
and class estimation based on these probabilities (See Fig. 4.3). Some examples of
generative models are generative adversarial networks, cluster­based techniques such
as K­means or DBScan, and Bayesian Networks.
8
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4.3: Discriminative models focus on decision boundary, become more powerful
with more samples and mainly is used only for supervised tasks. On the other hand,
generative models create decision boundaries, where one sample becomes more likely,
and naturally is more appropriate with unlabeled samples.[29].
3D face image generation using GANs
9
==PAGE:16==
5
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a class of deep neural networks, most com­
monly applied to analyzing visual imagery but can be used for other problems as well,
such as natural language processing, object detection, and speech recognition. The ba­
sic idea of CNNs was inspired by a concept in biology called the receptive field [30].
Receptive fields are a feature of the animal visual cortex that act as detectors that are
sensitive to certain types of stimulus, for example, edges. This biological function can be
approximated in computers by using the convolution operation hierarchically. CNN’s are
comprised of neurons that self­optimize through learning. Each neuron will receive input
and perform operations on the data, and in the end, will output results (See Fig 5.1 and
5.4).
Figure 5.1: Example of typical CNN architecture. It consists of multiple convolution and
sub­sampling layers and fully connected layer. Before fully connected layer it flattens the
output of previous layer and connects it to the prediction output [31].
5.1
ResNet
Deep Residual Networks (ResNet) [32] is arguably the most groundbreaking work in the
deep learning community in the last few years. This model was the winner of the Ima­
geNet [33] challenge in 2015. The fundamental breakthrough with ResNet (Fig 5.2) was
that it allowed the training of extremely deep neural networks with 150 + layers success­
fully. Very deep neural networks were difficult to train due to the problem of vanishing
gradients, but ResNet proposed residual layers, which help to deal with this as the depth
of the network deepens. ResNet architecture provided outstanding results of struggle with
vanishing gradient problems compared to other architectures.
10
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5.2: Example of 34 residual layer Resnet architecture at the top of the figure.
Folded lines are the skip connections, while the dashed folded lines are the skip con­
nections with downsampling. Middle figure is a plain 34 layer CNN and bottom figure is
VGG19 CNN [34] architecture. Each architecture takes image input and outputs 1000
classes [35].
5.1.1
Residual Blocks
In a network with residual blocks, the output of each layer is fed into the input of the next
layer and directly into subsequent layers of the CNN, which is called skip connections.
(Fig. 5.3).
Figure 5.3: Example of single residual block, where the skip connection is shown ­ input
x is added to residual F(x). Compared to basic residual block (left of the figure) which is
used up to ResNet34 on the left, bottleneck residual block (on the right) is used in deeper
ResNet architectures, as it reduces number of feature maps before using 3x3 convolution
and afterwards resizes back to orignal feature map size [32].
Residual blocks try to learn the difference between the input and true output, not like
traditional CNN architectures, where it tries to learn the true output from the input. The
difference is defined as
R(o) = H(o) −o,
(5.1)
where
• H(o) is the true output of the layer,
3D face image generation using GANs
11
==PAGE:18==
• R(o) is the difference between the input and output,
• o is the input to the residual block
and rearranging it, we get the output defined as
H(o) = R(o) + o.
(5.2)
It has also been observed that it is easier to learn the residual between the output and input
rather than only the input. As an added advantage, the model can learn identity function by
simply setting residual as zero, which helps to deal with the vanishing gradients problems.
Figure 5.4: Example of feature extraction using CNN. First the network learns features
such as lines and edges. Afterward it learns some form of shapes and finally object
representation that is used to classify the object, in this case car [31].
12
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:19==
6
Generative Adversarial Networks
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are an exciting innovation in the machine learn­
ing field, first proposed by Goodfellow et. al. [3] in 2014. He introduced model training via
an adversarial process. It means that GANs simultaneously train two models, a generative
model that generates new data instances and a discriminative model that discriminates
between different kinds of data instances, and both models compete with each other. For
example, the generative model tries to generate realistic images, and the discriminator
tries to distinguish if the generated image is real or not (See Fig 6.1). More formally, a
generative model tries to capture data distribution that it tries to mimic, and a discrimina­
tive model tries to estimate the probability that the sample data came from the training
data distribution, where G tries to maximize the probability of D misclassification and is
defined as:
min
G max
D
Ex∼pdata(x)[log D(x)] + Ez∼pz(z)[1 −log D(G(z))]
where D(x) is the discriminator’s estimate of the probability that real data instance x
is real. G(z) is output of generator and D(G(z)) is the discriminator’s probability that
generators output is real.
Figure 6.1: Overview of GAN structure. Given some input noise from a normal distribution
or uniform distribution, the generator tries to generate realistic samples from the training
distribution. The discriminator tries to classify either if the generated data comes from
training distribution or not. Based on discriminators output generator and discriminator
are updated accordingly. [36]
6.0.1
Discriminator
The discriminator in GANs is a classifier, and its task is to distinguish between fake sam­
ples that are created by a generator and real samples that come from training data. Typ­
ically it can be any network architecture that is appropriate for the data type. It classifies
both real data and fake data from the generator. The discriminator loss penalizes the
discriminator for misclassifying a real sample as fake or a fake sample as real and ac­
cordingly updates its weights (See Fig. 6.2)
3D face image generation using GANs
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 6.2: Overview of GAN discriminator. It classifies both real data and fake data and
updates it’s weights accordingly. [36]
6.0.2
Generator
The generator task is to create fake data from training distribution. It tries to learn training
distribution to make the discriminator classify generator output as a real sample. Given
some input noise from a normal distribution or uniform distribution, it tries to generate re­
alistic data from training distribution. The generator weight update is through the discrim­
inator. The generator output is fed into the discriminator, and the discriminator produces
the output if either the generated sample is fake or real. The generator loss penalizes the
generator for producing a sample that the discriminator network classifies input as fake.
(See Fig. 6.3).
Figure 6.3: Overview of GAN generator. First, the generator generates some sample
data, given the noise of normal or uniform distribution. Afterwards, the generated fake
sample is fed to a discriminator, which tries to classify it as real or fake. Based on the
discriminator output, it penalizes the generator if the sample is classified as fake. [36]
6.0.3
Training
GANs are usually trained by alternating between discriminator and generator training
phases. For the discriminator training phase, we first keep the generator constant, and the
discriminator tries to learn to distinguish between fake and real data. The same applies
14
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:21==
to the generator training phase. We keep the discriminator constant during the generator
training phase. The generator tries to generate samples from the same distribution as
training samples and fool the discriminator. It’s overall an adversarial game of generator
and discriminator competing with each other until convergence. As the generator sample
creation improves, the discriminator accuracy gets lower and lower until it can’t tell the
difference between fake and real samples.
GANs are hard to train, and even now, there is wide research to find optimal solutions for
some of the problems GAN training is dealing with. For example, as the GANs start to
converge, the discriminator feedback gets less meaningful over the period of time, and if
the training continues past the convergence point and the discriminator is giving uncertain
results it can degrade the overall generator model generation results, or even it fails to
converge and generates some output that’s not within the training distribution. Mode
collapse is also another problem that GANs are dealing with when GAN doesn’t produce
a wide variety of samples but only produces a small fraction of the same output, which is
caused by the discriminator getting stuck in a local minimum and in each iteration of the
generator over­optimizes for particular discriminator iteration. (See Fig. 6.4)
In order to deal with the above problems, there are several approaches suggested how to
improve overall training results, such as training for more iterations generator or discrimi­
nator. Also, several loss functions are proposed and data preprocessing techniques, such
as aligning data before training or augmentation steps, such as rotation and translation
included within training, to improve convergence and reduce the risk of mode collapse.
Figure 6.4: Output of Vanilla GAN generator where the generator is mode collapsing.
MNIST dataset has 10 classes, but generator generates two numbers ­ 1 and 8. Further
in the training generator collapses on generating only number 1 [37].
6.1
Pix2Pix
A conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN) called pix2pix [38] is a generative
adversarial network learning image­to­image translation using paired image samples,
mapping input images from a source domain to a target domain. It can be applied to
a wide range of domains, such as synthesizing photos from segmentation maps, gen­
erating colourized photos from black and white images, turning map photos into aerial
images, and even transforming sketches into photos. (See Fig 6.5)
There are two core components of Pix2Pix:
• U­Net [39] based generator. U­Net is an encoder­decoder­based architecture that
additionally introduces skip connections between encoder blocks and decoder blocks
and is a widely used architecture for segmentation­based tasks and serves as a ba­
sis for further advancements in different domains and in this case, it is used for
3D face image generation using GANs
15
==PAGE:22==
generation purposes.
• A discriminator is represented by a convolutional PatchGAN classifier. Rather than
predicting if the generated image is real or fake, it tries to predict if the patches of
the image are real or fake.
Figure 6.5: Example of Pix2Pix usage. It can be used in wide variety of domains and for
different problems. One of the most notable usages are generating realistic images from
segmentation maps. [38].
The Pix2Pix model generation of the output image is conditional on input, in this case, a
source image. The discriminator is provided both with a source image and the target im­
age and must determine whether the patches of the target are a plausible transformation
of the source image, (See Fig. 6.6)
Figure 6.6: Overview of Pix2Pix architecture. In this case scenario segmentation map
is input to U­Net network generator, which tries to generate realistic output. Afterwards
concatenating generated output with the real input it’s passed to Patch wise discriminator
which generates classification matrix ,which discriminates if each patch is real or fake.
[40].
16
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:23==
The model uses L1 loss defined as
L1 =
D
∑
i=1
|xi −yi|
between real and generated image, additionally it uses Adverserial loss defined as
L (G, D) = Ex,y [log D (x, y)] + Ex,z [log(1−D (x, G (x, z))]
conditional GAN objective for observed images x , output images y and the random noise
vector z.
6.2
CycleGAN
CycleGAN [41] is a generative adversarial network that aims to solve the image­to­image
translation problem where the model tries to learn this mapping without requiring paired
input­output images, using cycle­consistency and can be applied to a wide range of do­
mains. One of the most notable usages is transforming horse to zebra within image and
summer scenes to winter scenes and vice versa. (See Fig. 6.7)
Figure 6.7: Example of CycleGAN usage. It can be used in wide variety of domains and
for different problems, such as transforming horse to zebra, or camera photos to paintings,
or even summer to winter and can be applied to wide variety of problems where you have
unpaired data. [41].
The overall CycleGAN architecture consists of two generator models: one generator
(Generator A), which generates first domain images (Domain A) and the second genera­
tor (Generator B), which generates second domain images (Domain B). Both generators
are based on U­net architecture. Mapping can be defined as :
• Domain B ­> Generator A ­> Domain A
• Domain A ­> Generator B ­> Domain B
Each domain has a corresponding discriminator model, Discriminator A, and Discriminator
B, which predicts if the generated images are real or fake from the domain A or domain
B. (See Fig. 6.8)
3D face image generation using GANs
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 6.8: Overview of CycleGAN architecture. It consists of 2 encoder­decoder­based
generators where it maps from domain A to domain B and vice versa. Discriminators are
as in traditional GANs where it takes both fake and real images for domain A and B and
classifies if the generated images are fake or real. [42].
CycleGAN has introduced in the training several loss functions in order to get viable results
for an unpaired image to image generation. The overall loss of training CycleGAN consists
of adversarial loss for both of the generators predicting if the translation between A to B
domain and B to A domain generates real or fake images, which is the classical GAN
approach. However, in order to get translation between unpaired images additionally,
it introduces Cycle Consistency loss. The main idea of Cycle consistency loss is if we
translate an image between domains and then try to translate back the generated image
to its original domain, we should have the original image back. Mapping for forward and
backward cycle consistency can be defined as:
• Domain B ­> Generator A ­> Domain A ­> Generator B ­> Domain B
• Domain A ­> Generator B ­> Domain B ­> Generator A ­> Domain A
More formally the forward cycle consistency can be defined as L1 loss between original
image B and mapped image B
Bloss = ||B −GB(GA(B))||1
and backward cycle consitency loss is the same as for backward one but for A domain
Aloss = ||A −GA(GB(A))||1
Finally, it introduces Identity loss, which helps to preserve colours, and the main idea
is that if we pass the same domain image to the generator, it should produce the same
image. (See Fig. 6.9).
• Domain A ­> Generator A ­> Domain A
• Domain B ­> Generator B ­> Domain B
And the L1 loss is calculated between the original and generated image.
18
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:25==
Figure 6.9: Example of CycleGAN image generation with and without identity loss. Cy­
cleGAN without identity loss doesn’t preserve overall image colors compared to using
identity loss within training. [41].
6.3
StyleGAN
StyleGAN [43] is an extension to GAN architecture that proposes large changes to the
generator model. While traditional GAN architectures can generate photorealistic images,
one of their main hurdles is controlling specific parts of features, for example, in the face
generation case, face shape, hairstyle, or even pose. StyleGAN authors have proposed
latent space disentanglement as a way to manipulate features while trying to preserve
other features within the image. (See Fig. 6.12).
The overall StyleGAN architecture consists of two parts (See Fig. 6.10)
• A style Network whose purpose is to translate the latent input vector z ∈Z to the
corresponding intermediate style vector w ∈W
• A synthesis network or a generator, which generates the images.
• A discriminator, which classifies if the generated image is real or fake.
3D face image generation using GANs
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 6.10: Overview of StyleGAN architecture. The left image is traditional generator
which takes as an input noise from normal distribution and generates an image. On the
right is the StyleGAN architectue, which first maps noise vector z to w and afterwards
generates images, by injection styles using AdaIN layers and is trained by progressive
growing [43].
6.3.1
Style Network
Style network or mapping network maps the latent input vector z within the intermediate
vector w whose features control various visual attributes. This helps to provide feature
control and disentanglement. It consists of several linear layers with non­linear activa­
tions. Afterwards, the style vector w is injected by using adaIN layers within the synthesis
network.
6.3.2
Synthesis Network
Synthesis networks generate photorealistic images. There are major changes compared
to traditional progressive, growing GAN architectures. First of all, the input to the network
is a constant. The image generation is based on mapping that is acquired from the style
network and AdaIN layers.
AdaIN or adaptive instance normalization is a normalization method that aligns the mean
and variance of the feature map with those of the style features. W vector is passed
through two linear layers with non­linear activations to acquire scale µ(y) and shift pa­
rameters σ(y) for the specific layer.
AdaIN(x, y) = σ(y)
(x −µ(x)
σ(x)
)
+ µ(y)
x is a feature map, which is normalized, and afterward, style scale and shift parameters
are applied.
In order to increase fidelity within the generated images, Gaussian noise is added to each
activation map before the AdaIN layers. The noise is based on the scaling factors of that
layer.
Progressive growing is introduced. As the name suggests, progressive growing means
that the network is trained on different scales iteratively, starting from very low­resolution
images and trained on high­resolution images. By using progressive growing, it stabilizes
network training and convergence. (See Fig. 6.11).
20
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:27==
Figure 6.11: Example of progressive growing, The network is first trained on very low
resolution, afterwards iteratively it is stacked up until reached specific image size. [43].
6.3.3
Style Manipulation
Style changes depend on if the injection is on low, middle, or high­level feature maps. By
injecting style in low­level feature maps, it’s possible to change course details such as
pose, general hairstyle, and face shape, While injection on middle­level features changes
smaller­scale features, such as hairstyle or open/closed eyes. Finally, by injecting in high­
level features, we can change fine­grained features, such as hair colour or skin colour.
(See Fig. 6.12). Style manipulation is also introduced in training, where part of the network
styles is changed in order to generate a wider variety of images.
Figure 6.12: Example of StyleGAN image generation, It generates high resolution pho­
torealistic images and depending in which level (low, middle or high level) feature maps
the styles are injected to. It’s possible to manipulate specific attributes, such as hair, hair
color, pose, or skin color and other attributes [43].
3D face image generation using GANs
21
==PAGE:28==
6.4
StyleGAN2
StyleGAN2 [44] is a generative adversarial network that is based on StyleGAN with sev­
eral advancements and further improved in StyleGAN2­ADA [45], where the improve­
ments are based on training on limited data. StyleGAN generates high­quality realistic
images. It is easily distinguishable if the image is generated by a StyleGAN or not by find­
ing an artefact effect that can be used to distinguish StyleGAN­generated images. (See
Fig. 6.13).
Figure 6.13: Example of artefact effect generated by StyleGAN, The artefact that is gener­
ated is because of adaIN layers in StyleGAN. The artefact looks like a water droplet within
the image, and because of this single artefact, it is easily distinguishable if the image is
generated by StyleGAN network or not. [46].
StyleGAN2 changes can be listed as follows:
• Adaptive instance normalization layers are redesigned with a normalization tech­
nique called weight demodulation
• New training scheme without changing overall network architecture upon progres­
sive growth is introduced.
• Lazy regularization is used in training.
• Path length regularization is added to the generator training.
• R1 regularization is added to the discriminator training.
• Augmentation techniques for training on a limited amount of data are introduced
with adaptive discriminator augmentation.
6.4.1
Weight Demodulation
The first and foremost change in StyleGAN2 architecture is replacing adaIN layers with
weight demodulation seeks to remove these water droplets from generated images. (See
Fig. 6.14). By removing adaIN layer, it’s possible to fix the generation artifacts, but by
completely removing adaIN magnitudes changes for the feature maps, which makes the
overall training procedure unstable since they are no longer kept in check by the normal­
ization operation. The demodulation operation is a substitution, for instance, normaliza­
tion for scaling down the magnitude of each feature map, which doesn’t introduce water
droplet artefacts. Both adaIN and weight demodulation work in a similar manner for nor­
malization purposes, but adaIN works directly on feature maps, while weight demodulation
works directly on layer weights, which preserves the overall magnitude between feature
maps.
22
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:29==
Figure 6.14: On the left is StyleGAN architecture and on the right is StyleGAN2 architec­
ture for generator. The adaIN layers are replaced by weight demodulation, which normal­
izes the convolution layer weights, and helps with dealing with the generated artifacts.
[44].
6.4.2
Progressive Growing
Using progressive growing in StyleGAN results in artefacts, where there are location pref­
erences for facial features, such as teeth position when the pose changes for the image
(See Fig. 6.15).
Figure 6.15: Issues related using progressive growing. Overall teeth location preference
are somewhat static, when pose is changing. This issue is related that generated is learn­
ing location preferences within the image. [44].
StyleGAN2 changes overall architecture where you don’t need to iteratively train the model
in order to get high­resolution images and also fixes the location preference issues, by
introducing residual blocks within the architecture and utilizing multiple­scale generation
with a single end­to­end architecture. It uses different resolution features maps generated
in the architecture by connecting low­level feature maps with high­level feature maps by
using skip connections. (See Fig. 6.16)
3D face image generation using GANs
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 6.16: StyleGAN2 skip connections compared to residual networks. StyleGAN2
uses skip connections by connecting feature maps together by upsampling the lower­level
features and connecting to higher­level features. StyleGAN2 is learning in each scale a
difference between an input and output, and it helps with location preference of features.
[44].
6.4.3
Lazy Regularization
Lazy regularization is introduced in StyleGAN2 training. Lazy regularization means that
not every iteration regularization technique is applied. StyleGAN2 incorporates path length
regularization for generator and R1 regularization for discriminator every n steps. That
helps speed up training, and based on the author’s results, it is not necessary to incorpo­
rate regularization techniques in every iteration.
6.4.4
Path Length Regularization
Path length regularization (PLR) is introduced every n iteration in training. It encourages
better mapping between changes in the style vector w and the generated image. The
overall idea is that a fixed­size step in feature space or, in this case, style space results in
a non­zero, fixed magnitude change in the image. What that means is that a small step in
style space results in small changes in image space, helps improving the disentanglement
properties of the latent space and facilitates smooth interpolations between latent vectors.
6.4.5
R1 Regularization
R1 regularization is used in discriminators every n iteration.
It incorporates gradient
penalty for training networks on real data alone. It penalizes the discriminator from de­
viating and ensures that the discriminator can’t produce non­zero gradients, which helps
with generator training and mode collapsing.
6.4.6
Adaptive Discriminator Augmentation
Adaptive discriminator augmentation is introduced in a later version of StyleGAN2. It
helps to train a StyleGAN2 network with a limited amount of data. It incorporates train­
ing augmentation techniques, such as rotation, translation, colour transformation, noise,
and other augmentation techniques. It weakens or strengthens augmentation based on
the overall results of StyleGAN2 training. As the augmentation power is controlled, the
network can be trained on a limited amount of data.
24
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:31==
7
Computer Graphics
Computer graphics is referred to as a sub­field of computer science, a broad and diverse
field of creating computer­generated imagery. Computer graphics is used in creating dig­
ital 3D models, texturing, rendering, and lighting 3D models, and displaying renderings
on a screen or scene. Computer Graphics was first created as a visualization tool for sci­
entists and engineers in government and corporate research centers in the 1950s. Later,
graphics tools were developed further, and the development efforts broke into broadcast
video graphics and then major motion pictures. Nowadays, computer graphics are widely
used in entertainment and production, such as games, computer­generated imagery in
movies and television, and science (see Fig. 7.1). Technology is constantly redefined
in order to present the world with a new synthetic digital reality, which has a big focus
nowadays from companies such as Google, Meta, Epic Games, and Unity.
Figure 7.1: Example of computer graphics. On the left is an image of the Unity game
engine, where the 3D model is rendered to the game scene. In the middle is an image
of a highly realistic scene rendered with Unreal Engine 5. And on the right is a CGI from
Pirates of the Caribbean of Davy Jones.
7.1
Meshes
Meshes, or so­called polygon meshes, are one of the oldest forms of geometry repre­
sentation used in computer graphics. It is a collection of vertices, edges, and faces that
defines the shape of an object but varies based on different applications and goals (see
Fig. 7.2). Meshes stores different kind of elements and, in the simplest form, consists of:
• Vertices, which are 3D points within the mesh space
• Edges, a connection between two vertices.
• Faces. It is a planer shape, which is defined by connecting a series of 3D points or
series of edges.
3D face image generation using GANs
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 7.2: Overview of mesh structure in the simplest form. Mesh consists of 3D points,
two connected points form an edge, and multiple points or multiple edges form a face, and
it usually consists of triangles, quadrilaterals, or other simple convex polygons. Finally, a
combination of vertices, edges, and faces represents the 3D object [47].
7.2
Texture Mapping
UV mapping or texture mapping is a process of projecting a 2D image to a 3D model’s
surface in order to create repeating textures, patterns, or special visual effects. It can
be used for defining specific details like skin, hair, clothing, or any other information in
order to enhance the visual effect of the 3D model. The main idea is that UV mapping
allows for 3D meshes to be painted with colour or other visual effects from a 2D image.
The image is called a UV map or texture map. It assigns for each vertex within the 3D
mesh additional U and V coordinates, which corresponds to the texture map coordinate
system, which usually can be considered as copying a polygon piece of the image map
and pasting it onto a triangle on the 3D object. (See. Fig 7.3)
Figure 7.3: Example of UV texture assigment on 3D pyramid. 3D pyramid consists of x,
y, z coordinates additionally for each vertex it gets assigned additional coordinates u and
v, which corresponds in to texture image space and can be mapped back [48].
7.3
Normal Mapping
There are several ways to add additional detail to 3D meshes. One way is to introduce
different faces to the mesh in order to construct fine­grained details but with a high com­
putational cost, or you can try to fake detail with lighting conditions and add artificial depth
26
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:33==
without introducing extra geometry. Normal mapping is a texture mapping technique in
order to make a 3D object appear to have more detail without introducing supplementary
polygons. Normal mapping is used to add smaller details such as wrinkles and other de­
tails that need lots of triangles to model. Normal maps are represented similarly to texture
maps but in tangent space. It introduces normals per textile and is based on the normal
direction of textile with respect to a lighting source direction. It is possible to manipulate
some parts of an object to have darker or lighter areas, which gives artificial depth. (See
Fig. 7.4)
Figure 7.4: Example of normal map usage. On the left side is a normal map in tangent
space, in the middle image without normal mapping in the rendering process, and on the
right image with normal mapping in the rendering process. Comparing the middle and
right images, we can clearly see that there are more fine­grained details within the right
image that correspond to normal maps in the left image without introducing additional
geometry [49].
7.4
Displacement Mapping
Displacement mapping is another way to add additional detail to 3D meshes without in­
troducing extra geometry. Displacement mapping is a texture mapping technique in order
to make a 3D object appear to have more detail. While Normal mapping doesn’t modify
overall 3D geometry and fakes the depth by manipulating lighting, displacement mapping,
in contrast, manipulates 3D geometry by moving textiles in the rendering process based
on the displacement map values (See Fig. 7.5).
Figure 7.5: Example of displacement map usage. Each textile in the rendering process is
translated by displacement maps value in positive or negative direction along the surface
normal direction. [50].
3D face image generation using GANs
27
==PAGE:34==
7.5
Linear Blend Skinning
Rigging is a technique used in animation for representing a 3D character model using a
series of interconnected digital bones or joints, called skeletons, and is used to manipulate
the 3D model. One way to manipulate a 3D model is to use Linear Blend skinning that
assigns weight to each vertex within the 3D model with respect to the skeleton joint. When
we have found weights with the respect to joints, we can move freely joints of the 3D
model, which corresponds to changes in vertices, and can be used for animation and CGI
purposes.
7.6
Blendshapes
Blendshapes are a simple linear model of 3D geometry and are widely used in realistic
facial animation. The blendshape is based on linear facial models in which the individual
basis vectors are not orthogonal but instead represent individual facial expressions, but
over the years, blendshapes are not just applied to facial expressions but to other cases
as well. It can be expressed as
B = EW
where B is the final 3D model, E is a matrix including the basis vectors of facial models
in the form 3V × K where V is a number of vertices, and K number of facial expressions
and W is the weight parameter to produce the final 3D model. The basis vectors can be
thought of as morph targets that are influenced by the weighting parameter that produces
the final 3D model. All 3D models need to have point correspondence.
7.7
Rendering
Rendering is a process of a computer taking information from a 3D scene, which consists
of vertices, polygons, materials, and lighting information, and calculating the final 2D out­
put, which usually results in a single image or a series of images rendered and compiled
together. We see it nowadays everywhere, in movies, tv­shows, on computers, in mobile
games, and in many other domains.
The overall rendering pipeline is visualized in Fig. 7.6 and consists of 4 steps.
• Vertex processing
• Rasterizing
• Fragment processing
• Output merging
Figure 7.6: Overview of 3D rendering pipeline. Rendering pipeline consists of 4 steps
where each previous step is fed to the next step, going from 3D scene to 2D image or
sequence of images [51].
28
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:35==
7.7.1
Vertex Processing
The first step in the rendering pipeline is the vertex processing step. It consists of trans­
forming vertices from 3D scene space onto the 2D display space, and consists of 4 trans­
formations
• World transformation. Transformation of the 3D meshes from model space to
world space where the objects are arranged.
• Camera transformation. Transformation of the 3D meshes from the world space
to camera space which is influenced by the position and orientation of the camera.
• Projection transformation. Transformation of the 3D mesh from the camera space
to clipping space where the camera’s parameters such as zoom factor are set, and
the field of view is restricted.
• Viewport transformation. Transformation of the transformed mesh from clipping
space to display space and are passed to the rasterizer.
7.7.2
Rasterization
Transformed vertices and other information such as polygons and displacement maps are
passed to the rasterizer step. As the previous step only was processing vertices of the
3D scene, which are usually represented in a float type, in rasterization, each polygon
is defined by one or more vertices are raster­scanned in order to obtain a set of pixels
enclosed within the polygon, and aligned to pixel grid called fragments.
7.7.3
Fragment Processing
The rasterization step output is passed to fragment processing which focuses on texture
and lighting. It first assigns texture from the texture maps if the 3D scene provides one.
Additionally, it calculates shading values based on lighting sources and normal maps pro­
vided by the 3D scenes.
7.7.4
Output Merging
Finally, the output merging step combines all the fragments from the 3D scene into a 2D
colour pixel for the display. For example, it removes hidden surfaces (surfaces that are
blocked by other surfaces). Blending the fragment colours with the pixel colours if the
fragment has a smaller depth than the pixel in the colour buffer and is translucent.
3D face image generation using GANs
29
==PAGE:36==
8
3D Morphable Models
A 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) is a generative model of the 3D shape and texture vari­
ations within some object class. These generative models can be applied to wide use
cases, such as human body [52], head and face generation [53] and are even applied in
the generation of animals [54]. 3DMMs have since been widely applied in different do­
mains such as computer vision, computer graphics, human behavioural analysis, large­
scale facial phenotyping, and many other domains that may benefit from the information
represented by these models. In this section, we will focus on head and face generative
3DMM models.
It has been over 20 years since 3DMM was first proposed, and over the years, there
has been wide interest and research done on this topic [4]. In the past few years, 3D
Morphable Face Models have been widely used in face analysis and are incorporated in
many other state­of­the­art solutions, for example, deep fakes, face reconstruction, reg­
istration and manipulation methods. 3D morphable face models are a mapping between
a low­dimensional feature space and a high­dimensional space of textured 3D models.
Due to dense point­to­point correspondence between 3D models, which is established
by registration methods, it is possible to acquire mapping between feature space and 3D
model space, producing morphologically realistic faces. It also separates facial shape
and texture in order to disentangle these from external factors such as illumination and
camera, and research has taken even a step further to disentangle 3D shape from facial
expressions and also person­specific details.
8.1
Flame
One of the proposed 3DMM models which are widely used in face analysis tasks is FLAME
Model [6]. FLAME is a rigged 3DMM model that adapts the SMPL body model formulation
[55] and uses standard vertex­based linear blend skinning with blendshapes, corrective
blendshapes, and expression blendshapes which are learned from 4D scanned data. Be­
cause of this formulation, it is possible to generate a wide variety of disentangled pose,
shape, and expression 3D head models. Additionally there have been proposed texture
spaces for the FLAME model as well [56] [57].
The FLAME mapping from feature to model space is described by the following function:
M(β, θ, γ) : R|β|×|θ|×|γ| ⇒R3N
that takes coefficients describing shape β ∈R|β|, pose θ ∈R|θ|, expression θ ∈R|θ| and
returns N vertices. which are displacement from template mesh T ∈R3N with neutral
pose, shape and expression. (See Fig. 8.1), Low dimensional feature space is acquired
by performing Principal component analysis of registered samples.(See Fig. 8.3)
30
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:37==
Figure 8.1: Parametrization of the FLAME model. The model consists of 5023 vertices
with four joints (neck, eyeballs, and jaw), which are visualized in the rightmost image.
Flame uses shape and expression blendshapes which are completely independent and
provides the generation of a wide variety of shapes and expressions with different poses.
On the left figure, activation of the first three shape components and on the right, activation
of the first three expression components between −3 and +3 standard deviations. In the
middle pose, parameters actuate four of the six neck and jaw joints. [6]
8.1.1
Registration
In order to find a mapping between a low­dimensional feature space, and a high­dimensional
space of 3D models, first all 3D meshes need to be registered so that there is a dense
point­to­point correspondence between all of the meshes. In order to find full vertex cor­
respondence of scan and template mesh, FLAME optimizes first model only parameters
such as shape, expression, pose, and 2D landmarks on each identity without deforming
the initial model mesh. Afterwards, when the best pose, shape, and expression param­
eters are estimated next step is to deform the fitted mesh to all 3d scans by minimizing
scan­to­mesh distance, and finally, Flame optimizes photometric error between individual
texture maps and 3D scans to get better correspondence. (See Fig. 8.2).
Figure 8.2: Overall registration pipeline to get vertex correspondence. First, 3D scans are
acquired for each person. Afterwards, the best parameters are estimated for each scan
from the initial model. Next, the best­fitted mesh is deformed and finally, the photometric
error is minimized between textures. [6]
8.1.2
Shape Blendshapes
Shape blendshapes are modelled by computing the average template for each identity
within the dataset, removing the effects of pose and expression when computing template
meshes T. After computing template meshes for each identity, linear blendshapes are
3D face image generation using GANs
31
==PAGE:38==
acquired by applying PCA to the registered template meshes and are modelled by:
BS(β, S) =
|β|
∑
n=1
βnSn
where β are shape coefficients and S denotes orthonormal shape basis vectors.
8.1.3
Expression Blendshapes
Similar to shape blendshapes, expression blendshapes are calculated by removing the
influence of pose and shape. By removing the influence of pose and shape, we acquire
residual, which contains a pure expression. After computing, expression residual linear
expression shapes are acquired by applying PCA to the registered template meshes and
are modelled by:
BE(γ, ε) =
|ε|
∑
n=1
γnεn
where γ are expression coefficients, and ε denotes orthonormal expression basis vectors.
8.1.4
Pose
The joint positions and blendweights are learned locally, which means that for each sub­
ject, the joint positions and blendweights are learned individually and by alternating be­
tween learning global parameters between all subjects.
Additionally, pose corrective
blendshapes are learned that cannot be explained by linear blend skinning, i.e. person­
specific deformation.
8.1.5
Texture
Initial flame texture space is taken from the Basel face model. [53], which provides face­
only texture. Full texture space is acquired by fitting in the wild images to the 3D FLAME
model by minimizing a loss function based on FLAME parameters. Occluded or invisible
regions of the texture are filled using an in­painting network, and linear texture shape
space is acquired by applying PCA to the newly acquired texture maps.
Figure 8.3: Overview of the face registration and model training. For training, CEASER
and D3DFACS and self­captured data were used. First, the 3D scans were registered
to the initial FLAME model. Afterwards, shape and expression and pose parameters
were estimated. The above steps are repeated for several iterations until the 3DMM
model converges. After training, 3DMM can be used to register new samples that can be
modifiable. [6]
32
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:39==
9
2D to 3D Registration and
Reconstruction
2D to 3D registration and reconstruction is a useful computer vision tool which can be
used for a wide variety of domains. The overall goal is finding the 3D scene represen­
tation from RGB images (i.e. 3D reconstruction) and localizing the camera frames (i.e.
registration) are two long­standing problems in computer vision. One of the most used
approaches using 3D reconstruction and registration is for synthetic data generation and
data augmentation. The purpose of synthetic data generation is to add additional gen­
erated fake data to increase overall dataset size, and recent advancements show that it
is on par with real data [58]. Also, the overall annotation process on 2D data is a very
time­consuming process, especially in keypoint and segmentation­based tasks [59], and
by manually annotating 3D models, we can generate a vast amount of data while only
annotating a single 3D model, as it is possible to acquire 2D to 3D correspondence within
the image, which saves a lot of manpower and time. Also, it is possible to use 3D mod­
els for animation purposes that can be incorporated into the game engines. We can use
the 3D registration and reconstruction approach for human model generation [52] or face
generation [60], where we generate a wide variety of identities within a short period of
time, which in contrast, could take days or even weeks for a 3D graphics designer to cre­
ate, and includes tedious tasks such as rigging, skinning, to make realistic 3D models.
Another approach that’s started to incorporate 3D models is Deepfakes, which uses 3D
models to change the overall person’s shape and texture within the image [61].
9.1
Detailed Expression Capture and Animation
Detailed Expression Capture and Animation (DECA) [62] is a 3D registration and recon­
struction method of a 3D FLAME head model with detailed facial geometry from a single
in­the­wild 2D input image. (See Fig, 9.2)
It provides the following features:
• Reconstruct head pose, shape, detailed face geometry, and lighting information from
a single image with weak perspective camera information.
• Animate the face with realistic wrinkle deformations.
• Robust approach tested on facial images in unconstrained conditions. The method
is robust to various poses, illuminations, and occlusions.
• Most accurate state­of­the­art 3D face shape reconstruction on the NoW Challenge
benchmark dataset.
The overall DECA models architecture is described in Figure 9.1, and it consists of 2 parts:
First, it estimates 3D FLAME model parameters, such as shape, pose, expression, and
texture parameters, to generate a 3D model that closest resembles a 2D image. Addi­
tionally, it introduces camera and illumination parameters that the FLAME model doesn’t
provide. Finally, displacement map generation adds fine­grained features of an individ­
ual’s face on a 3D model. It is done by using differential rendering, calculating loss within
2D space, and backpropagating to 3D space.
3D face image generation using GANs
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 9.1: DECA architecture, It consists of 2 parts. First part estimates FLAME pa­
rameters and additionally to that it estimates pose and lighting approximations. And it
estimates displacement maps that models fine grained person specific details of the face
[62].
9.1.1
FLAME Model Parameter Estimation
DECA uses the Resnet50 model to estimate the coarse reconstruction of the 3D FLAME
model. Given a 2D image as input, it encodes the image into a latent code. It estimates
pose, shape, expression, camera, illumination, and albedo parameters. Estimated pa­
rameters are used in order to synthesize a 2D image of the 3D model by using differential
rendering, and the loss is minimized between the synthesized image and the original one.
More specifically, the coarse geometry uses the first 100 FLAME shape parameters, 50
expression parameters and 50 albedo parameters, including camera and illumination pa­
rameters. It estimates a 236­dimensional latent code.
9.1.2
Displacement Map Generation
DECA learns a geometric detail model that generates a UV displacement map from a
low­dimensional representation given an input image. It uses a simple generator based
on transposed convolutions. Overall displacement map provides fine­grained person­
specific details that can be used in the animation process and can be swapped between
the identities, as DECA is based on the same 3D model topology.
9.1.3
Training
Overall training can be divided into two parts: First, it estimates 3D FLAME model param­
eters and camera and lighting parameters which provides coarse reconstruction. Finally,
displacement map generation generates fine­grained features of a person’s face on a
3D model. All 2D face images are aligned based on 68 landmarks. Additionally, for the
training, facial region segmentation is applied.
The coarse reconstruction branch is trained by minimizing following loss function:
Lcoarse = Llmk + Leye + Lpho + Lid + Lse + Lreg
where Llmk landmark loss , Leye is eye closure loss , Lpho is photometric loss, Lid is
identity loss, Lse is shape consistency loss and Lreg is regularization loss. The landmark
loss measures the difference between ground­truth face landmarks and the correspond­
ing landmarks on the FLAME model. The eye closure loss computes the relative offset
34
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:41==
of landmarks of the upper and lower eyelid and measures the difference in the offset of
the corresponding landmarks on FLAME’s surface. Photometric loss computes the error
between the input image and rendered 3D flame model. Identity loss computes the sim­
ilarity error between embeddings. The loss encourages the rendered image to capture
fundamental properties of a person’s identity, ensuring that the rendered image looks like
the same person as the input identity. Shape consistency loss minimizes the error be­
tween the same identity FLAME model parameter estimation from 2 different images of
the same subject. Finally, regularization loss regularizes shape, expression, and albedo
parameters. [62]
The detail expression branch is trained by minimizing loss function:
Ldetail = LphoD + Lmrf + Lsym + Ldc + LregD
where LphoD is photometric detail loss, Lmrf is ID­MRF loss, Lsym is soft symmetry loss,
and LregD is detail regularization loss. Detail photometric loss recovers fine­grained de­
tails of the image, as DECA uses only the first 50 principal components, which recov­
ers only coarse reconstruction without including fine­grained details. ID­MRF minimizes
extracted feature patches from different layers of the network, which minimizes the dif­
ference between corresponding nearest neighbour feature patches as L1 losses are not
able to recover the high­frequency information in the data. Soft symmetry loss regularizes
non­visible face parts that add robustness to self­occlusions. Finally, regularization loss
regularizes the detail parameters. [62]
Figure 9.2: Example of deca registration method, It automatically estimates 2D and 3D
keypoints of the 2D image. And registers and reconstructs 3D model (FLAME) from 2D
image, estimating overall shape, expression, pose, camera and illumination parameters,
that can be used for animation and other purposes. Additionally it estimates albedo map
of 2D image. [62].
3D face image generation using GANs
35
==PAGE:42==
10
Proposed Approach
In this thesis, a pipeline for generating controllable 2D head samples from 3D Morphable
Models (3DMMs) is developed, with different head poses, head shapes and expressions,
and lighting conditions, and additionally, we try to minimize the domain gap between real
and fake facial images. (See Fig. 10.1).
Figure 10.1: Overview of our aim. Given the 3DMM FLAME model, we can manipulate
different parameters, such as pose, expression, and head shape, and generate a wide
variety of identities. As the FLAME texture space is quite unrealistic, we try to minimize
the realism gap between 3DMM rendered images and real images.
We try to minimize the realism gap, as the FLAME models look quite unrealistic compared
to real images (See Fig. 10.2). While we can acquire quite good­looking samples there
is still quite a considerable realism gap that comes from that the FLAME model gets the
overall shape of the human head but doesn’t include fine­grained details such as wrin­
kles and person­specific details. Additionally, the albedo map even with different lighting
conditions, looks unrealistic and doesn’t capture fine­grained details as well. The overall
purpose of our approach is to evaluate face recognition systems in different and extreme
scenarios in order to understand what is the overall drawbacks of each recognition sys­
tem that we are evaluating. Also can be used for data augmentation to improve face
recognition system performance.
Figure 10.2: Example of rendered 3DMM FLAME images with different poses, and
shapes, and with different colored backgrounds. Focusing on only the head model within
the image, it’s visible that it lacks the realism within the image.
The overall development flow of how we improved the pipeline can be divided into several
36
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:43==
steps, where we iteratively updated our pipeline based on previous iteration results, and
it can be divided into four steps.
• Unpaired 2D to 2D translation between rendered 3DMM model and real face images
using CycleGAN.
• Paired 2D to 2D translation between rendered 3DMM model and real face images
using Pix2Pix.
• Paired 2D to 2D translation between rendered 3DMM model and real face images
using CycleGAN.
• Paired 3D to 2D translation between 3DMM model and face images using modified
DECA pipeline with StyleGAN2 texture map generator.
10.1
Unpaired 2D to 2D Translation Using CycleGAN
In the first iteration, we used 2D to 2D translation between rendered FLAME 3DMM
model samples, with random shapes, poses, expressions, and illumination parameters
and FFHQ face images [43] using CycleGAN architecture. The main idea of using an
unpaired image to image translation was that the FFHQ dataset provides a wide variety
of in­the­wild images, with different identities, poses, expressions, and lighting sources,
where there is no reference between the 3DMM model and the 2D images. Inspired by
the latest advancement from unpaired image to image translation, where the main pur­
pose is to transfer styles of one domain to another that provides awe­inspiring results, we
decided to try out using CycleGAN for this purpose. Overall pipeline can be visualized in
Fig. 10.3.
Figure 10.3: We rendered a 3D FLAME model with random poses, shapes, and expres­
sions, where there is no correspondence between fake and real images. And input the
input to the cycleGAN is the fake and real images, and by using an unpaired image to im­
age translation, we try to minimize the realism gap by transferring styles from real images
to rendered images, and that is defined by minimizing generator loss cycle consistency
loss and identity loss. Blue figures are inputs/outputs. Red figures are transformations.
Yellow figures are loss functions.
We trained a CycleGAN model that tries to transfer styles from 3DMM rendered image to
real image. (See Fig. 10.4). Overall the transfer between the domains doesn’t generalize
well. We can see that quite a lot of images look unrealistic and don’t try to reconstruct
details that make the images look realistic. Also, there are misalignments between facial
features, such as the mouth or nose, in different positions. This issue could be because
the domain gap between rendered images and real images is too wide, and the networks
can’t converge properly.
3D face image generation using GANs
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 10.4: Results of using an unpaired image to image translation with CycleGAN. On
the left side is the 3DMM rendered image, in the middle domain translated image, and on
the right real images. it’s visible that the domain translation doesn’t generalize well, there
are misalignments of facial features, and the images has lack of realism.
10.2
Paired 2D to 2D Translation Using Pix2Pix
In the second iteration, we used 2D to 2D translation between rendered FLAME 3DMM
model samples that are aligned by 3D to 2D registration framework DECA and FFHQ face
images. As we have quite good pixel correspondence between two images, we decided
to use a paired image to image translation network Pix2Pix. Reflecting on the first iteration
results, one of the problems, as we stated before, is that there is too big of a domain gap
between rendered images and real images. So in order to minimize the domain gap and
to get better transfer results we decided to use the registration framework DECA, which
acquires a correspondence between rendered images and real images from FFHQ. We
focused only on facial region generation, as that could decrease the overall generalization
issue results from the first iteration. Overall pipeline can be visualized in Fig. 10.5.
We trained a Pix2Pix model that tries to transfer styles from 3DMM rendered image that
is registered with DECA to a real image, which provides quite a good pixel­to­pixel corre­
spondence. (See Fig. 10.6). As the pixel correspondence is not perfect, we decided to
only include the facial region within the loss calculation, and in the end, we calculate L1
loss between masked faced regions both in the rendered image and real image and ad­
versarial loss. Overall compared to the first iteration the results have improved drastically,
while there are some issues, for example, identity preservation and details within the eye
region is lost, that can be improved by including additional loss, such as identity loss and
replacing L1 loss, with some other loss function that gives more emphasis to fine­grained
details. Additionally, as Pix2Pix is a paired image to image translation network DECA
framework doesn’t provide full pixel­to­pixel correspondence within the render and real
image, which has slight misalignments that are impacting the overall results.
38
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:45==
Figure 10.5: We pass the real image through DECA in order to get a registered 2D sample.
Afterwards, we pass the reconstructed image and real image through the Pix2Pix network
and calculate L1 loss between a masked region of the face and additionally, we calculate
the adversarial loss. Blue figures are inputs/outputs. Red figures are transformations.
Yellow figures are loss functions.
Figure 10.6: Results of using paired image to image translation with Pix2Pix. On the left
side is the 3DMM rendered image, in the middle domain translated image, and on the
right real images. Only facial region is included as there isn’t full pixel correspondece.
10.3
Paired 2D to 2D Translation Using CycleGAN
In the third iteration, we used 2D to 2D translation between rendered FLAME 3DMM model
samples that are aligned by 3D to 2D registration framework DECA and FFHQ face im­
3D face image generation using GANs
39
==PAGE:46==
ages. In the previous iteration, we saw that using Pix2Pix on regions that are not included
in the 3DMM model samples, such as hair, overall results seemed to be much worse
compared to using just the facial region. The first issue we saw was that there is not a
perfect pixel­to­pixel correspondence within both images. The second issue is that we
don’t have any information about hair regions in rendered images, and Pix2Pix has to
have a quite good pixel­to­pixel correspondence in order for the model to generalize well.
We concluded that using CycleGAN on paired image samples could resolve it. In the first
iteration, the issue was that the domain gap between rendered images and real images
was too wide, and the networks couldn’t converge. By applying background subtraction
to real images and having the alignment between real images from FFHQ and rendered
images, we could improve the overall results using CycleGAN. Overall pipeline can be
visualized in Fig. 10.7.
Figure 10.7: We aligned 3D FLAME model rendered samples with real images using
DECA. The input to the cycleGAN is the fake and real images, and by using a paired
image­to­image translation, we solved the issue with the generalization. We try to min­
imize the realism gap by transferring styles from real images to rendered images, and
that is defined by minimizing generator loss, cycle consistency loss, and identity loss.
Blue figures are inputs/outputs. Red figures are transformations. Yellow figures are loss
functions.
By using CycleGAN with paired image samples from 3DMM rendered images and the
FFHQ dataset, we acquired significantly better results compared to the first iteration.
Comparing the second iteration with the current one, we can generate much better sam­
ples that also generates hair and other features that the second iteration lacks. (See Fig.
10.8). Overall the main issue with the first iteration using unpaired samples was that the
domain gap was too wide, which couldn’t produce any good results. While the third itera­
tion results aren’t perfect, there are some issues with fine­grained details and clothing and
hair regions seem to be distorted. Also, the identity is not kept, but overall paired image­
to­image translation using the CycleGAN network generates quite realistic 2D samples
compared to the previous two iterations.
40
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:47==
Figure 10.8: Results of using a paired image­to­image translation with CycleGAN. On the
left side is the 3DMM rendered image, in the middle domain translated image, and on the
right real images. Overall using paired images proves to deliver better results compared to
the two previous iterations and doesn’t need perfect pixel­to­pixel correspondence, unlike
the second iteration.
10.4
Paired 3D to 2D Translation
While 2D to 2D paired image translation generates realistic face images with different
poses and expressions, the one problem that it has with this approach is that the general
information that we acquire from 3D space is lost. For example, lighting and texture infor­
mation are entangled and are not independent anymore, Same goes for shape informa­
tion, and expression information is entangled and not independent. Rendering it directly
and then passing 2D images to the networks causes to lose this valuable information,
while other approaches try to reconstruct it for this purpose. The recent advancements in
3D deep learning have provided a lot of resources to preserve this information by bridging
the gap between 2D and 3D by allowing 2D image pixels to be related back to 3D space.
Paired 3D to 2D translation uses DECA model that provides already registration and re­
construction method of a 3D FLAME head model. While DECA provides state­of­the­art
registration and reconstruction, one thing that it lacks is a lack of realism in texture space.
We intend to focus on replacing the original FLAME texture space with a style­based
texture map space that we learn directly from in the wild images using StyleGAN2 while
keeping the overall DECA pipeline in place. The overall pipeline can be visualized in Fig.
10.9.
3D face image generation using GANs
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 10.9: Modified DECA pipeline. We replace the albedo map generator in DECA
with a styleGAN2 generator that directly works on texture maps and learns the texture of
the 3D FLAME model from 2D in the wild images. We keep the estimated parameters
for the 3D FLAME model the same and use a displacement map in order to reduce fine­
grained details embedded within the texture maps. We minimize adversarial loss, identity
loss, and MSE loss for StyleGAN2 training. Blue figures are inputs/outputs. Red figures
are transformations. Yellow figures are loss functions. Green figures are additions to the
existing pipeline.
We first generate a texture map with StyleGAN2. Afterwards, we render the reconstructed
and localized 3D model, which provides the 3D to 2D correspondence within the 2D im­
age, and we replace the facial region with the rendered one. We do this because DECA
only provides 3D reconstruction and localization of 3D models, but no information about
background and hair and any other accessories in the image. If we don’t replace the
facial region, texture map generator training will be unstable as the domain gap will be
too large, and based on previous attempts, it will mode­collapse or won’t generalize at all.
We are minimizing adversarial loss, MSE loss between the real and fake image, and iden­
tity loss, which we calculate by using the face recognition model and default StyleGAN2
regularization methods. The training pipeline is visualized in Fig. 10.10.
The overall results of the training can be seen in Fig. 10.11. Rendered images of facial
region are generated well, but occluded regions, such as regions that have clothes, or hair,
are not well reconstructed. Additionally, incorrect lightning parameter estimation from the
DECA pipeline adds noisy and white regions within the texture map. Comparing replaced
facial regions with original images are reconstructed very well, and it’s barely visible that
the facial region is swapped with the rendered region. Even though the facial regions are
well reconstructed, there are some issues, such as lack of fine­grained details, eye colour
in some samples being different, and also the eye orientation is different, which could be
explained that DECA is not estimating pose parameters of eyes, which is included in the
original FLAME model.
42
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:49==
Figure 10.10: Training pipeline for StyleGAN2. We use differential rendering to minimize
the loss in 2D space and backpropagate back to 3D space. First, we generate a UV
map, then we replace the facial region of the real image and pass it to the discriminator
to determine if the image is real or fake. Additionally, we add MSE and identity loss.
Figure 10.11: Results of using StyleGAN2 texture map generator. On the left side is the
3DMM rendered image with generated StyleGAN2 texture, in the replaced face region
with styleGAN2 texture, and on the right real images. Overall, replaced facial regions
are very similar to the original face but lack some details such as wrinkles, and some
reconstructed images have different eye directions and eye colours.
3D face image generation using GANs
43
==PAGE:50==
11
Analysis
We evaluated our approach for performance testing of face recognition systems. The
motivation for doing this is to estimate what influences the face recognition systems and
find the cases that could influence overall face recognition system results, such as pose,
expression, or lighting conditions. Additionally, we estimate the domain gap between real
and fake samples. By doing that, we can use these results to estimate what is needed to
improve overall face recognition systems, such as what kind of data needs to be acquired.
For analysis, we used FEI dataset [63], and FFHQ dataset [43] (See. Fig 11.1), and for
comparison purposes, we used data generated from our and DECA approach that uses
FLAME texture space. We did the following evaluations:
• Comparing neutral pose and expression with different poses and expressions of the
same identity person within the images from the same domain using FEI dataset.
• Comparing same pose and expression and lighting conditions images of the same
identity from different domains using FEI dataset.
• Comparing reconstruction of a facial region using FFHQ dataset.
Figure 11.1: Example of FFHQ and FEI datasets. FEI dataset consists of 14 images per
identity in semi­controlled domain, and each ID corresponds to specific pose, expression
and lighting conditions.
Additionally we used several widely used open­source state of the art face recognition
models available such as VGG­Face [21], Facenet [22], Facenet512 [22], OpenFace,
[23], DeepFace [24], DeepID [25], ArcFace [26]
11.1
In­Domain Face Image Comparison
For the first comparison, we are using the FEI dataset, where we compare neutral pose
and expression (ID 12), with 13 other poses and expressions and lighting conditions of
the same identity individual within the images. (See Fig. 11.2). We use FLAME texture
space rendered images and our texture generator rendered image using StyleGAN2 and
compare between the same domain samples.
44
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:51==
Figure 11.2: Example of comparison of real images, FLAME texture images and our
StyleGAN2 texture images. All the images have same pose and expression and light­
ing conditions, where we compare neutral pose and expression image with other poses
and expressions and lighting conditions.
In Fig. 11.3 we visualize density plots of our comparison between the same domains using
seven face recognition models. In most cases, except for ArcFace and FaceNet512 all
domains follows a similar distribution. While on ArcFace, StyleGAN2 generated samples
follow more closely to FLAME generated samples distribution, and on the other hand,
FaceNet512 real samples follow more closely to StyleGAN2 generated samples.
In Fig. 11.4 we visualize the average cosine distance score between the neutral pose
and expression (ID 12) and the rest of the samples. It seems that in most cases, ID 5 and
ID 10 have the lowest cosine distance, which means that it matches the best with ID 12
image. There seems to be a slight difference between each domain’s prediction, which
could be caused by the noise outside the facial region for StyleGAN2 rendered images.
But overall, it follows the same pattern in each domain, even if the scores are slightly
different ranges for each domain.
Table 11.1 is the overall statistics of each face recognition model using real, FLAME, and
StyleGAN2 rendered images for comparison. Based on the statistics, DeepID shows the
lowest overall scores among all the FR systems, while ArcFace shows the highest overall
scores. ArcFace, DeepFace, FaceNet, and FaceNet512 show the lowest overall score for
StyleGAN2. On the other hand, DeepID OpenFace shows the lowest score for FLAME
texture samples, and finally, VGG­Face shows the lowest score for real samples.
3D face image generation using GANs
45
==PAGE:52==
Min
Max
Mean
STD
Median
Count
FR system
Data
ArcFace
Real
0.00
1.00
0.39
0.29
0.28
2552
FLAME
0.00
0.99
0.44
0.26
0.37
2552
StyleGAN2
0.00
1.00
0.41
0.24
0.35
2552
DeepFace
Real
0.01
0.73
0.27
0.17
0.21
2579
FLAME
0.01
0.61
0.23
0.15
0.19
2579
StyleGAN2
0.01
0.62
0.21
0.14
0.18
2579
DeepID
Real
0.00
0.46
0.09
0.06
0.07
2579
FLAME
0.00
0.26
0.07
0.06
0.06
2579
StyleGAN2
0.00
0.39
0.08
0.07
0.07
2579
Facenet
Real
0.00
1.00
0.37
0.26
0.28
2467
FLAME
0.00
1.00
0.39
0.24
0.34
2467
StyleGAN2
0.01
0.99
0.33
0.22
0.28
2467
Facenet512
Real
0.00
1.00
0.25
0.18
0.21
2465
FLAME
0.02
1.00
0.40
0.22
0.36
2465
StyleGAN2
0.01
0.97
0.28
0.17
0.26
2465
OpenFace
Real
0.01
0.99
0.25
0.19
0.19
2557
FLAME
0.01
0.93
0.22
0.15
0.18
2557
StyleGAN2
0.00
1.00
0.27
0.21
0.20
2557
VGG­Face
Real
0.00
0.83
0.21
0.15
0.16
2579
FLAME
0.01
0.80
0.26
0.17
0.21
2579
StyleGAN2
0.01
0.75
0.23
0.14
0.20
2579
Table 11.1: Statistics of each face recognition model, for each domain. We calculate co­
sine distance results and take the minimum, maximum, mean standard deviation, median
and overall number of samples used in statistics calculation. Each FR system uses a
different detection algorithm, and a smaller sample count means that some faces were
not found in the images.
46
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:53==
Figure 11.3: Density plots of our comparison between the same domains using 7 face
recognition models. Y axis is the density and x axis is the cosine distance (the lower the
better match), where we visualize densities of real sample, FLAME sample and Style­
GAN2 texture generator sample comparison.
3D face image generation using GANs
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 11.4: Average cosine distance of each FEI ID images using 7 face recognition
models. Y axis is the cosine distance (the lower the better match) and x axis is the sample
ID of the same identity we compare to, which we compare with ID 12 images.
48
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:55==
11.2
Cross­Domain Face Image Comparison
For the second comparison, we are using the FEI dataset, where we compare samples
between the domains of the same pose and expression and lighting conditions. (See Fig.
11.5). We use FLAME texture space rendered images and our texture generator rendered
image using StyleGAN2 and compare between the domains. We do this in order to see
how big of a domain gap is between generated data and real data and between FLAME
and StyleGAN2 texture data. That can give us insight into if the data generated can be
used not just to test face recognition systems but also if it’s viable to use these data for
augmentation purposes, which can improve overall face recognition system performance.
Figure 11.5: Example of comparison of real images, FLAME texture images, and our
StyleGAN2 texture images. All the images have the same pose and expression, and
lighting conditions, where we compare samples between the domains to see how big of
a domain gap is there.
In Fig. 11.6 we visualize the comparison scores between the domains. Based on den­
sity plots, we can see that the smallest domain gap is between FLAME and StyleGAN2
texture­rendered images in all of the face recognition systems. It seems that scores be­
tween ”real and FLAME” generated data and ”real and StyleGAN2” follow a very similar
distribution. That could be because we are generating only the head region and not in­
cluding hair or any background.
Table 11.1. is the overall statistics of each face recognition model using real, FLAME
and StyleGAN2 rendered images for comparison between the domains. Based on the
statistics, once again, DeepID shows the lowest overall scores among all the FR systems,
while ArcFace shows the highest overall scores. The smallest domain gap is between
FLAME and StyleGAN2 generated images, but comparing real distribution with FLAME
and StyleGAN2 textures we can see that there is a smaller domain gap between real and
FLAME data, but by a small fraction, except for VGG­Face.
3D face image generation using GANs
49
==PAGE:56==
Min
Max
Mean
STD
Median
Count
FR system
Data
ArcFace
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.01
1.00
0.66
0.18
0.67
2747
Real ­ FLAME
0.00
1.00
0.64
0.20
0.65
2747
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.00
1.00
0.58
0.21
0.59
2747
DeepFace
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.07
0.66
0.26
0.14
0.20
2779
Real ­ FLAME
0.05
0.63
0.25
0.15
0.20
2779
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.04
0.61
0.17
0.12
0.12
2779
DeepID
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.00
0.51
0.14
0.10
0.12
2779
Real ­ FLAME
0.00
0.45
0.13
0.09
0.12
2779
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.00
0.29
0.03
0.04
0.02
2779
Facenet
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.01
1.00
0.49
0.19
0.48
2620
Real ­ FLAME
0.01
1.00
0.46
0.20
0.43
2620
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.01
1.00
0.43
0.20
0.40
2620
Facenet512
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.05
1.00
0.54
0.16
0.53
2685
Real ­ FLAME
0.03
1.00
0.51
0.17
0.50
2685
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.03
1.00
0.49
0.18
0.47
2685
OpenFace
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.03
0.97
0.29
0.18
0.24
2777
Real ­ FLAME
0.03
0.89
0.24
0.16
0.19
2777
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.02
0.91
0.22
0.15
0.17
2777
VGG­Face
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.08
0.81
0.36
0.11
0.34
2779
Real ­ FLAME
0.05
0.90
0.37
0.13
0.35
2779
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.02
0.84
0.32
0.12
0.30
2779
Table 11.2: Statistics of each face recognition model, between domains. We calculate
cosine distance results and take the minimum, maximum, mean standard deviation, me­
dian and overall number of samples used in statistics calculation. Each FR system uses
a different detection algorithm, and a smaller sample count means that some faces were
not found in the images.
50
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:57==
Figure 11.6: Density plots of our comparison between the different domains using 7 face
recognition models. Y axis is the density and x axis is the cosine distance (the lower the
better match), where we visualize densities of real sample, FLAME sample and Style­
GAN2 texture generator sample comparison.
3D face image generation using GANs
51
==PAGE:58==
11.3
Reconstruction
For the final comparison, we are using the FFHQ dataset, where we are reconstructing
the facial region of the identity within the image (see Fig. 11.7). We use FLAME texture
space rendered images, and our texture generator rendered images using StyleGAN2,
and by replacing the facial region with the generated one, we compare how well the facial
regions are generated and how well it preserves the overall identity.
Figure 11.7: Example of comparison of real images, FLAME texture images and our Style­
GAN2 texture images, where we are replacing the facial region of real image with our
generated ones.
In Fig. 11.8 we visualize the cosine distance score between the domains. Based on
density plots, we can see that the smallest domain gap is between real and StyleGAN2
texture­rendered images in all of the face recognition systems. The domain gap between
FLAME and StyleGAN2 generated data is higher, but in overall comparison, real and
FLAME perform the worst in most of the cases. In DeepID, OpenFace, and DeepFace,
the domain gap is lowest in all seven distribution comparisons.
Table 11.3. depicts the overall statistics of each face recognition model using real, FLAME
and StyleGAN2 reconstructed images for comparison between the domains. Based on
the statistics, once again, DeepID shows the lowest overall scores among all the FR sys­
tems, while ArcFace shows the highest overall scores. The smallest domain gap is be­
tween real and StyleGAN2 generated images, except for DeepFace and OpenFace face
recognition model, where a comparison between FLAME and StyleGAN2 reconstruction
has the best score.
52
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:59==
Min
Max
Mean
STD
Median
Count
FR system
Data
ArcFace
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.01
1.00
0.57
0.23
0.55
279
Real ­ FLAME
0.01
1.00
0.68
0.24
0.68
279
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.01
1.00
0.60
0.22
0.59
279
DeepFace
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.02
0.67
0.23
0.17
0.16
300
Real ­ FLAME
0.03
0.67
0.28
0.17
0.21
300
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.03
0.69
0.22
0.17
0.15
300
DeepID
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.00
0.37
0.03
0.05
0.01
300
Real ­ FLAME
0.00
0.35
0.04
0.05
0.02
300
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.00
0.36
0.03
0.04
0.01
300
Facenet
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.02
1.00
0.42
0.24
0.37
275
Real ­ FLAME
0.09
1.00
0.54
0.22
0.50
275
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.01
1.00
0.45
0.20
0.42
275
Facenet512
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.08
0.91
0.41
0.20
0.37
283
Real ­ FLAME
0.09
1.00
0.55
0.18
0.54
283
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.02
0.99
0.47
0.18
0.45
283
OpenFace
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.02
0.97
0.28
0.22
0.20
299
Real ­ FLAME
0.03
0.92
0.32
0.20
0.26
299
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.03
0.93
0.26
0.19
0.19
299
VGG­Face
Real ­ StyleGAN2
0.04
0.78
0.28
0.17
0.22
300
Real ­ FLAME
0.02
0.82
0.37
0.16
0.34
300
FLAME ­ StyleGAN2
0.05
0.76
0.31
0.14
0.28
300
Table 11.3: Statistics of each face recognition model, between domains. We calculate
cosine distance results and take the minimum, maximum, mean standard deviation, me­
dian and overall number of samples used in statistics calculation. Each FR system uses
a different detection algorithm, and a smaller sample count means that some faces were
not found in the images.
3D face image generation using GANs
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 11.8: Density plots of our comparison between the different domains using 7 face
recognition models. Y axis is the density and x axis is the cosine distance (the lower the
better match), where we visualize densities of real sample, FLAME sample and Style­
GAN2 texture generator sample comparison.
54
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:61==
12
Conclusion
The purpose of the thesis was synthetic face data generation for performance testing of
existing face recognition systems and synthetic data usage for data augmentation. We
first investigated approaches to generating 2D mated samples with different poses, facial
shapes, and facial expressions, and afterwards, we investigated ways to minimize the
domain gap between rendered images from 3D models and real images in order to answer
the following questions:
• Is it possible to use synthetic face images to benchmark the biometric performance
of face recognition systems?
• Is there still a domain gap between synthetic and real facial images?
• Is it possible to find vulnerabilities/weaknesses in pre­trained face recognition sys­
tems in terms of single factors of variation, such as head pose?
• Is it possible to use synthetic face images for data augmentation during the training
of face recognition systems?
Synthetic data can be used in testing face recognition systems. Based on the analysis,
while there is a domain gap between generated mated samples and real images, because
of the preprocessing steps of face recognition systems, of cropping and aligning facial
regions, face recognition systems only focus on the facial part. While there are slightly
different scores for real and generated data, overall, all the data we used in the analysis
followed the same distribution in most cases.
We did several evaluations to determine the domain gap between synthetic and real facial
images. Based on the results, our approach has a smaller domain gap between FLAME
rendered images. That can be explained because we are using the FLAME topology, and
we don’t include hair generation and background generation. Compared to real images,
our approach is on par with FLAME or even, in some cases, has a smaller domain gap
compared to FLAME.
Based on the section 11.1 results, face recognition systems start to struggle with more ex­
treme rotations starting from a 30­degree rotation from a neutral pose and are influenced
by lighting conditions. It should be mentioned that more in­depth testing should be done
with a wider variety of combinations of different poses, jaw angles and expressions, and
lighting conditions in order to determine exactly what kind of data is needed to improve
the face recognition systems.
Finally, our approach could be used for data augmentation to improve the face recognition
systems. While there is a domain gap between real and fake samples, it is proven [58]
that synthetic data can be used for improving models, even if there is a domain gap that
is on par with real data. With some improvements in hair and background generation, our
approach would be viable in using for data augmentation purposes.
12.1
Future Work
The overall future work can be divided into three possible paths. 3DMMs are a viable ap­
proach for controlling 2D mated sample generation, so one of the directions is improving
3DMM topology and reconstruction, for example, incorporating fine­grained details within
3D face image generation using GANs
55
==PAGE:62==
the 3DMM space and making it more expressive and error­prune in pose and expres­
sion manipulations, which could increase overall 3D to 2D registration accuracy, without
introducing too much computational cost.
Another direction of our approach is to decrease the overall domain gap between real im­
ages and generated samples, which means specifically working on texture maps. FLAME
texture topology should be reconsidered as it provides some artefacts in the occluded re­
gion, but overall there are several approaches that can be used for inspiration, such as [5],
which uses a texture generator and background generator and uses a controlled dataset
but do not provide any camera or lighting parameter estimation. [7] provides disentangled
face generation, and lighting and camera parameters can be controlled but have some
limitations, as fine­grained details are embedded in texture maps. [64] could be used to
increase high­frequency details into 3DMM model, or [13] generating high­quality texture
maps. Additionally, based on the overall results DECA network should be retrained with
the StyleGAN2 texture map generator, as it could provide better approximations of light­
ing parameters and improve the texture generation quality. Additionally, an inpainting
network could be used for generating occluded regions within the texture map. ’
Future work could be focused on disentangled texture map generation, similar to [65]
could be used to manipulate texture maps that could have a wide variety of use cases.
By incorporating disentangled texture map generation, we can manipulate fine­grained
details of texture maps, such as eyes colour, lip colour, or skin shade, which could be
useful for face recognition system data augmentation. In recent years face tattoos have
come into popularity which could impact face recognition system accuracy and would be
a useful asset in the generation of large­amount of tattooed face data to improve overall
accuracy.
Finally, our work could be used in order to improve border intelligence for detection and
prevention, in order to generate a wide variety, both good and bad samples, to improve
pose recommendation systems. That could possibly improve the overall accuracy of the
automatic border control identification systems and make it more convenient for travellers
if it estimates incorrect poses and prevents more false positives.
56
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
ISO/IEC JTC1. ISO/IEC 2382­08:2012 Information Technology ­ Vocabulary ­ Part
08: Security. International Organization for Standardization. 1998.
[2]
European Council. Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on
the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on
the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation). Apr. 2016.
[3]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial nets”. In: Advances in neural informa­
tion processing systems 27 (2014).
[4]
Bernhard Egger et al. “3d morphable face models—past, present, and future”. In:
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39.5 (2020), pp. 1–38.
[5]
Richard T Marriott, Sami Romdhani, and Liming Chen. “A 3D GAN for Improved
Large­pose Facial Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2021, pp. 13445–13455.
[6]
Tianye Li et al. “Learning a model of facial shape and expression from 4D scans.”
In: ACM Trans. Graph. 36.6 (2017), pp. 194–1.
[7]
Safa C Medin et al. “MOST­GAN: 3D Morphable StyleGAN for Disentangled Face
Image Manipulation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01048 (2021).
[8]
Ayush Tewari et al. “Stylerig: Rigging stylegan for 3d control over portrait images”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog­
nition. 2020, pp. 6142–6151.
[9]
Partha Ghosh et al. “GIF: Generative interpretable faces”. In: 2020 International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). IEEE. 2020, pp. 868–878.
[10]
Luan Tran and Xiaoming Liu. “On learning 3d face morphable model from in­the­
wild images”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
43.1 (2019), pp. 157–171.
[11]
Alon Shoshan et al. “Gan­control: Explicitly controllable gans”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2021, pp. 14083–
14093.
[12]
Facial Image Inpainting with Semantic Control. github.com/WN1695173791/Controllable-
Face-Inpainting. URL: github.com/WN1695173791/Controllable-Face-Inpainting.
[13]
Myunggi Lee et al. “Styleuv: Diverse and high­fidelity uv map generative model”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12893 (2020).
[14]
Jiankang Deng et al. “Uv­gan: Adversarial facial uv map completion for pose­invariant
face recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2018, pp. 7093–7102.
[15]
Aysegul Dundar et al. “Fine Detailed Texture Learning for 3D Meshes with Genera­
tive Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09362 (2022).
[16]
A. K. Jain. “Biometric authentication”. In: Scholarpedia 3.6 (2008). revision #91064,
p. 3716. DOI: 10.4249/scholarpedia.3716.
[17]
Aleix M. Martinez. “Face Recognition, Overview”. In: Encyclopedia of Biometrics.
Ed. by Stan Z. Li and Anil Jain. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2009, pp. 355–359. ISBN:
978­0­387­73003­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_84. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-0-387-73003-5_84.
[18]
Ihab Amer Abdullah and Jane Jaleel Stephan. “A Survey of Face Recognition Sys­
tems”. In: Ibn AL­Haitham Journal For Pure and Applied Science 34.2 (2021), pp. 144–
160.
3D face image generation using GANs
57
==PAGE:64==
[19]
George Toderici et al. “UHDB11 Database for 3D­2D Face Recognition”. In: vol. 8333.
Nov. 2013. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-53842-1_7.
[20]
Yassin Kortli et al. “Face recognition systems: A survey”. In: Sensors 20.2 (2020),
p. 342.
[21]
Omkar M. Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. “Deep Face Recogni­
tion”. In: BMVC. 2015.
[22]
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. “Facenet: A unified em­
bedding for face recognition and clustering”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2015, pp. 815–823.
[23]
Tadas Baltrusaitis et al. “Openface 2.0: Facial behavior analysis toolkit”. In: 2018
13th IEEE international conference on automatic face & gesture recognition (FG
2018). IEEE. 2018, pp. 59–66.
[24]
Yaniv Taigman et al. “Deepface: Closing the gap to human­level performance in
face verification”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2014, pp. 1701–1708.
[25]
Sara Shahsavarani, Morteza Analoui, and Reza Shoja Ghiass. “M^ 2 Deep­ID: A
Novel Model for Multi­View Face Identification Using Convolutional Deep Neural
Networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07871 (2020).
[26]
Jiankang Deng et al. “Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recogni­
tion”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2019, pp. 4690–4699.
[27]
Davis E. King. “Dlib­ml: A Machine Learning Toolkit”. In: Journal of Machine Learn­
ing Research 10 (2009), pp. 1755–1758.
[28]
Ai, Machine learning, Deep learning. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AI-
ML-DL.svg/. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AI-ML-DL.svg.
[29]
Bin Qian et al. Orchestrating the Development Lifecycle of Machine Learning­Based
IoT Applications: A Taxonomy and Survey. Oct. 2019.
[30]
Kunihiko Fukushima. “Neocognitron: A hierarchical neural network capable of visual
pattern recognition”. In: Neural networks 1.2 (1988), pp. 119–130.
[31]
Convolution neural networks. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_
network/. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network.
[32]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[33]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large­scale hierarchical image database”. In: 2009 IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009, pp. 248–255.
[34]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large­Scale Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1409.1556 (2014). URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[35]
Residual blocks —Building blocks of ResNet. https : / / towardsdatascience . com /
residual-blocks-building-blocks-of-resnet-fd90ca15d6ec/. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/residual-blocks-building-blocks-of-resnet-fd90ca15d6ec.
[36]
Generative adverserial networks. https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/
gan/gan_structure. 2019.
[37]
Generative adverserial networks. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ktxhiKhWoEE.
2019.
[38]
Vladimir A Knyaz, Vladimir V Kniaz, and Fabio Remondino. “Image­to­voxel model
translation with conditional adversarial networks”. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops. 2018.
58
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:65==
[39]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­net: Convolutional net­
works for biomedical image segmentation”. In: International Conference on Medi­
cal image computing and computer­assisted intervention. Springer. 2015, pp. 234–
241.
[40]
Pix2pix architecture. https : / / www . haikutechcenter . com / 2020 / 10 / pix2pix - gan -
architecture-for-image-to.html/. URL: https://www.haikutechcenter.com/2020/10/
pix2pix-gan-architecture-for-image-to.html.
[41]
Jun­Yan Zhu et al. “Unpaired image­to­image translation using cycle­consistent ad­
versarial networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on com­
puter vision. 2017, pp. 2223–2232.
[42]
Cyclegan architecture. https://developers.arcgis.com/python/guide/how-cyclegan-
work. URL: https://developers.arcgis.com/python/guide/how-cyclegan-works.
[43]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. “A style­based generator architecture for
generative adversarial networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2019, pp. 4401–4410.
[44]
Tero Karras et al. “Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2020, pp. 8110–8119.
[45]
Tero Karras et al. “Training Generative Adversarial Networks with Limited Data”. In:
Proc. NeurIPS. 2020.
[46]
Water droplet stylegan architecture. https : / / towardsdatascience . com / stylegan2 -
ace6d3da405d/. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/stylegan2-ace6d3da405d.
[47]
Polygon mesh. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon_mesh/. URL: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon_mesh.
[48]
Geert Verhoeven and Stefaan Missinne. “Unfolding Leonardo da Vinci’s globe (AD
1504) to reveal its historical world map”. In: ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Re­
mote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences IV­2/W2 (Aug. 2017), pp. 303–310.
DOI: 10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-303-2017.
[49]
Normal mapping. https://learnopengl.com/Advanced- Lighting/Normal- Mapping.
URL: https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Normal-Mapping.
[50]
Displacement mapping. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Displacement_mapping. URL:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Displacement_mapping.
[51]
Rendering. https://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/opengl/CG_
BasicsTheory.html. URL: https://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/
opengl/CG_BasicsTheory.html.
[52]
J Yang et al. “Kanazawa, A., Black, MJ, Jacobs, DW, Malik, J.: End­to­end recov­
ery of human shape and pose. In: CVPR (2018) Loper, M., Mahmood, N., Romero,
J., Pons­Moll, G., Black, M.: SMPL: a skinned multi­person linear model. In: SIG­
GRAPH (2015) Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, GE: ImageNet classification
with deep con”. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2018: 15th European Conference, Mu­
nich, Germany, September 8–14, 2018, Proceedings, Part VII. Vol. 11211. 4. Springer.
2018, p. 35.
[53]
Thomas Gerig et al. “Morphable face models­an open framework”. In: 2018 13th
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018).
IEEE. 2018, pp. 75–82.
[54]
Yifan Sun and Noboru Murata. “CAFM: A 3D morphable model for animals”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision
Workshops. 2020, pp. 20–24.
[55]
Matthew Loper et al. “SMPL: A Skinned Multi­Person Linear Model”. In: ACM Trans.
Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) 34.6 (Oct. 2015), 248:1–248:16.
3D face image generation using GANs
59
==PAGE:66==
[56]
Photometric FLAME Fitting. https://github.com/HavenFeng/photometric_optimization.
2019.
[57]
William A. P. Smith et al. “A Morphable Face Albedo Model”. In: Proc. of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2020, pp. 5011–
5020.
[58]
Erroll Wood et al. “Fake It Till You Make It: Face analysis in the wild using syn­
thetic data alone”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision. 2021, pp. 3681–3691.
[59]
Jason Kugelman et al. “Dual image and mask synthesis with GANs for semantic
segmentation in optical coherence tomography”. In: 2020 Digital Image Computing:
Techniques and Applications (DICTA). 2020, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/DICTA51227.
2020.9363402.
[60]
Yu Deng et al. “Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly­supervised learning:
From single image to image set”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. 2019.
[61]
Yuhan Wang et al. “HifiFace: 3D Shape and Semantic Prior Guided High Fidelity
Face Swapping”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09965 (2021).
[62]
Yao Feng et al. “Learning an animatable detailed 3D face model from in­the­wild
images”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40.4 (2021), pp. 1–13.
[63]
Carlos Eduardo Thomaz and Gilson Antonio Giraldi. “A new ranking method for
principal components analysis and its application to face image analysis”. In: Image
and vision computing 28.6 (2010), pp. 902–913.
[64]
Jiangke Lin et al. “Towards high­fidelity 3d face reconstruction from in­the­wild im­
ages using graph convolutional networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con­
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020, pp. 5891–5900.
[65]
Darko Filipovski and Sonja Gievska. “SemanticStyleGAN: Generative Image In­
painting Using Style­Based Generator”. In: International Conference on ICT Inno­
vations. Springer. 2022, pp. 38–51.
60
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:67==
A
Software Framework
The appendix provides references to the framework developed as part of this thesis.
The framework can be accessed at https://github.com/Nomow/PIMGAN
In order to run the training follow the jupyter notebooks in numeric order at the start of
each file.
The overall framework is divided into different sub­modules.
• datasets : PyTorch custom dataset loaders.
• dnnlib : custom layers.
• metrics : evaluation metrics.
• models : trained model.
• networks : used network architectures.
• third part : third party libraries used.
• torch utils : utility methods for training.
In the thesis we used several external frameworks and libraries, which we would like to
give acknowledgements to:
• DECA : https://github.com/YadiraF/DECA (06/15/2022)
• StyleGAN2­ada : https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan2-ada-pytorch (06/15/2022)
• InsightFace : https://github.com/deepinsight/insightface (06/15/2022)
• DeepFace : https://github.com/serengil/deepface (06/15/2022)
• CelebAMask­HQ segmentation : https://github.com/switchablenorms/CelebAMask-
HQ (06/15/2022)
• CycleGAN and Pix2Pix : https://github.com/junyanz/pytorch-CycleGAN-and-pix2pix
(06/15/2022)
3D face image generation using GANs
61
==PAGE:68==
B
FFHQ Dataset Reconstruction Results
The appendix summarizes the overall results of FFHQ reconstruction. Each column cor­
responds in order of real, FLAME, and StyleGAN2 reconstruction.
62
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:69==
3D face image generation using GANs
63
==PAGE:70==
C
FEI Dataset Results
The appendix summarizes the overall results of the FEI dataset. FEI dataset consists of
14 poses in total, and we visualize the first real examples from the FEI dataset and the
next row corresponds to fake samples of the same identity.
64
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:71==
3D face image generation using GANs
65
==PAGE:72==
66
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:73==
D
Network Summary
Appendix summarizes some of the network summaries, which includes each layer inputs
and outputs and learnable parameters.
D.0.1
StyleGAN2 Generator
1
2
Generator
Parameters
Buffers
Output shape
Datatype
3
---
---
---
---
---
4
mapping.fc0
26112
-
[1, 512]
float32
5
mapping.fc1
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
6
mapping.fc2
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
7
mapping.fc3
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
8
mapping.fc4
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
9
mapping.fc5
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
10
mapping.fc6
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
11
mapping.fc7
262656
-
[1, 512]
float32
12
mapping
-
512
[1, 14, 512]
float32
13
synthesis.b4.conv1
2622465
32
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
14
synthesis.b4.torgb
264195
-
[1, 3, 4, 4]
float32
15
synthesis.b4:0
8192
16
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
16
synthesis.b4:1
-
-
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
17
synthesis.b8.conv0
2622465
80
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
18
synthesis.b8.conv1
2622465
80
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
19
synthesis.b8.torgb
264195
-
[1, 3, 8, 8]
float32
20
synthesis.b8:0
-
16
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
21
synthesis.b8:1
-
-
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
22
synthesis.b16.conv0
2622465
272
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float32
23
synthesis.b16.conv1
2622465
272
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float32
24
synthesis.b16.torgb
264195
-
[1, 3, 16, 16]
float32
25
synthesis.b16:0
-
16
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float32
26
synthesis.b16:1
-
-
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float32
27
synthesis.b32.conv0
2622465
1040
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
28
synthesis.b32.conv1
2622465
1040
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
29
synthesis.b32.torgb
264195
-
[1, 3, 32, 32]
float16
30
synthesis.b32:0
-
16
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
31
synthesis.b32:1
-
-
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float32
32
synthesis.b64.conv0
1442561
4112
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
33
synthesis.b64.conv1
721409
4112
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
34
synthesis.b64.torgb
132099
-
[1, 3, 64, 64]
float16
35
synthesis.b64:0
-
16
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
36
synthesis.b64:1
-
-
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float32
37
synthesis.b128.conv0
426369
16400
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
38
synthesis.b128.conv1
213249
16400
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
39
synthesis.b128.torgb
66051
-
[1, 3, 128, 128]
float16
40
synthesis.b128:0
-
16
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
41
synthesis.b128:1
-
-
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float32
42
synthesis.b256.conv0
139457
65552
[1, 64, 256, 256]
float16
43
synthesis.b256.conv1
69761
65552
[1, 64, 256, 256]
float16
44
synthesis.b256.torgb
33027
-
[1, 3, 256, 256]
float16
45
synthesis.b256:0
-
16
[1, 64, 256, 256]
float16
46
synthesis.b256:1
-
-
[1, 64, 256, 256]
float32
47
---
---
---
---
---
48
Total
24530914
175568
-
-
3D face image generation using GANs
67
==PAGE:74==
D.0.2
StyleGAN2 Discriminator
1
2
Discriminator
Parameters
Buffers
Output shape
Datatype
3
---
---
---
---
---
4
b256.fromrgb
256
16
[1, 64, 256, 256]
float16
5
b256.skip
8192
16
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
6
b256.conv0
36928
16
[1, 64, 256, 256]
float16
7
b256.conv1
73856
16
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
8
b256
-
16
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
9
b128.skip
32768
16
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
10
b128.conv0
147584
16
[1, 128, 128, 128]
float16
11
b128.conv1
295168
16
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
12
b128
-
16
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
13
b64.skip
131072
16
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
14
b64.conv0
590080
16
[1, 256, 64, 64]
float16
15
b64.conv1
1180160
16
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
16
b64
-
16
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
17
b32.skip
262144
16
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float16
18
b32.conv0
2359808
16
[1, 512, 32, 32]
float16
19
b32.conv1
2359808
16
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float16
20
b32
-
16
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float16
21
b16.skip
262144
16
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
22
b16.conv0
2359808
16
[1, 512, 16, 16]
float32
23
b16.conv1
2359808
16
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
24
b16
-
16
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
25
b8.skip
262144
16
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
26
b8.conv0
2359808
16
[1, 512, 8, 8]
float32
27
b8.conv1
2359808
16
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
28
b8
-
16
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
29
b4.mbstd
-
-
[1, 513, 4, 4]
float32
30
b4.conv
2364416
16
[1, 512, 4, 4]
float32
31
b4.fc
4194816
-
[1, 512]
float32
32
b4.out
513
-
[1, 1]
float32
33
---
---
---
---
---
34
Total
24001089
416
-
-
D.0.3
DECA Flame Parameter Encoder
1
2
3
----------------------------------------------------------------
4
Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
5
================================================================
6
Conv2d -1
[-1, 64, 112, 112]
9,408
7
BatchNorm2d -2
[-1, 64, 112, 112]
128
8
ReLU -3
[-1, 64, 112, 112]
0
9
MaxPool2d -4
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
10
Conv2d -5
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
4,096
11
BatchNorm2d -6
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
12
ReLU -7
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
13
Conv2d -8
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
36,864
14
BatchNorm2d -9
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
15
ReLU -10
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
16
Conv2d -11
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
16,384
17
BatchNorm2d -12
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
512
18
Conv2d -13
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
16,384
19
BatchNorm2d -14
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
512
20
ReLU -15
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
0
21
Bottleneck -16
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
0
22
......................................................................
23
Conv2d -153
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,048,576
68
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:75==
24
BatchNorm2d -154
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,024
25
ReLU -155
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
0
26
Conv2d -156
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
2,359,296
27
BatchNorm2d -157
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,024
28
ReLU -158
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
0
29
Conv2d -159
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
1,048,576
30
BatchNorm2d -160
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
4,096
31
ReLU -161
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
0
32
Bottleneck -162
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
0
33
Conv2d -163
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,048,576
34
BatchNorm2d -164
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,024
35
ReLU -165
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
0
36
Conv2d -166
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
2,359,296
37
BatchNorm2d -167
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,024
38
ReLU -168
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
0
39
Conv2d -169
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
1,048,576
40
BatchNorm2d -170
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
4,096
41
ReLU -171
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
0
42
Bottleneck -172
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
0
43
AvgPool2d -173
[-1, 2048, 1, 1]
0
44
ResNet -174
[-1, 2048]
0
45
Linear -175
[-1, 1024]
2,098,176
46
ReLU -176
[-1, 1024]
0
47
Linear -177
[-1, 236]
241,900
48
================================================================
49
Total params: 25,848,108
50
Trainable params: 25,848,108
51
Non-trainable params: 0
52
----------------------------------------------------------------
53
Input size (MB): 0.57
54
Forward/backward pass size (MB): 286.58
55
Params size (MB): 98.60
56
Estimated Total Size (MB): 385.76
57
----------------------------------------------------------------
D.0.4
DECA Detail Parameter Encoder
1
----------------------------------------------------------------
2
Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
3
================================================================
4
Conv2d -1
[-1, 64, 112, 112]
9,408
5
BatchNorm2d -2
[-1, 64, 112, 112]
128
6
ReLU-3
[-1, 64, 112, 112]
0
7
MaxPool2d -4
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
8
Conv2d -5
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
4,096
9
BatchNorm2d -6
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
10
ReLU-7
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
11
Conv2d -8
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
36,864
12
BatchNorm2d -9
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
13
ReLU -10
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
14
Conv2d -11
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
16,384
15
BatchNorm2d -12
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
512
16
Conv2d -13
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
16,384
17
BatchNorm2d -14
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
512
18
ReLU -15
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
0
19
Bottleneck -16
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
0
20
Conv2d -17
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
16,384
21
BatchNorm2d -18
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
22
ReLU -19
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
23
Conv2d -20
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
36,864
24
BatchNorm2d -21
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
3D face image generation using GANs
69
==PAGE:76==
25
ReLU -22
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
26
Conv2d -23
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
16,384
27
BatchNorm2d -24
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
512
28
ReLU -25
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
0
29
Bottleneck -26
[-1, 256, 56, 56]
0
30
Conv2d -27
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
16,384
31
BatchNorm2d -28
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
32
ReLU -29
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
33
Conv2d -30
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
36,864
34
BatchNorm2d -31
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
128
35
ReLU -32
[-1, 64, 56, 56]
0
36
......................................................................
37
Conv2d -163
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,048,576
38
BatchNorm2d -164
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,024
39
ReLU -165
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
0
40
Conv2d -166
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
2,359,296
41
BatchNorm2d -167
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
1,024
42
ReLU -168
[-1, 512, 7, 7]
0
43
Conv2d -169
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
1,048,576
44
BatchNorm2d -170
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
4,096
45
ReLU -171
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
0
46
Bottleneck -172
[-1, 2048, 7, 7]
0
47
AvgPool2d -173
[-1, 2048, 1, 1]
0
48
ResNet -174
[-1, 2048]
0
49
Linear -175
[-1, 1024]
2,098,176
50
ReLU -176
[-1, 1024]
0
51
Linear -177
[-1, 128]
131,200
52
================================================================
53
Total params: 25,737,408
54
Trainable params: 25,737,408
55
Non-trainable params: 0
56
----------------------------------------------------------------
57
Input size (MB): 0.57
58
Forward/backward pass size (MB): 286.58
59
Params size (MB): 98.18
60
Estimated Total Size (MB): 385.34
61
----------------------------------------------------------------
70
3D face image generation using GANs
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
