==PAGE:1==
Improving bioreactor scale-up
through mixing characterization
using an experimentally validated
CFD model
Master Thesis
Author: Antonia Ursula Griesz
Processing Period: 01.02.2022-31.07.2022
Course of studies: Master of Engineering in Biotechnology
Main supervisor: John M. Woodley
Co-supervisors: Ulrich Krühne
Anders Nørregaard
Maryam Jamshidzadeh
Jesper Wang Jensen
Helena Junicke
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemical and
Biochemical Engineering
PROSYS - Process and Systems
Engineering Center
Novo Nordisk A/S
Microbial Cultivation and Recovery
==PAGE:2==
Preface
The work presented in this study was produced during the spring of 2022 as the final thesis
of my master degree in biotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The
thesis covered 35 ECTS points and was conducted at the Process and Systems Engineering
Center at the Department of Chemical Engineering at DTU. The project was supervised
by Professor John M. Woodley, Associate Professor Ulrich Krühne, Assistant Professor
Helena Junicke, Postdocteral Researcher Maryam Jamshidzadeh and PhD Student Jesper
Wang Jensen, all from DTU. Industrial advice was given from Anders Nørregaard from
the Microbial Cultivation and Recovery Department from Novo Nordisk A/S.
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to John for giving me the opportunity to write
my thesis and conduct research on an exciting topic, as well as his guidance throughout
the project. I am thankful for the support and guidance of my supervisors Maryam and
Ulrich on the CFD modelling part and of Anders, Jesper and Helena in regards to the
experimental work. I appreciate the help of Ingelis and Rasmus with practical issues in
the pilot plant and of the research group for their support during the project. Lastly, I
would like to thank the Novo Nordisk Fonden for the financial support.
Copenhagen, July 31, 2022
Antonia Ursula Griesz
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Upscaling of bioprocesses from laboratory to pilot and industrial scale remains a compli-
cated task. Especially the discrepancy between near optimal mixing in laboratory and
pilot scale and non-ideal mixing in large-scale bioreactors represents a major challenge to
overcome. Mixing is a pivotal bioprocessing operation since bioreactors must provide cells
with access to all substrates, including oxygen in aerobic cultures, to establish the best
environment for fermentation. Simply supplementing nutrient-rich media without equal
distribution in the fermenter is not sufficient, since cells rapidly consume the required
components leading to the formation of nutritional depletion zones. The resulting gradients
in large-scale bioprocesses, e.g. fermentations, lead to challenges in reproducing results
observed at the laboratory scale.
Bioreactor characterization coupled with a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model is
a compelling approach to describe mixing in a large-scale vessel. Process insights obtained
through a validated CFD model can guide the scale-up of bioprocesses to large scales. This
work has the objective of establishing a CFD assisted mixing characterization to optimize
the upscaling of fed-batch fermentations. To achieve this, a CFD model of a 200 L working
volume pilot bioreactor at DTU Chemical Engineering was further developed for different
filling levels and validated with pH tracer experiments. Three liquid volumes, covering one,
two, and three impellers, three impeller speeds and aerated and unaerated conditions were
tested. The pH was measured separately with two different systems to obtain insights into
local pH distribution: A custom-made sensor set-up with ten pH sensors installed on two
baffles at different heights, and flow-following pH sensors from Freesense ApS.
Results show a strong correlation between a decrease in mixing time with higher agitation
and lower volume of liquid. At the highest volume, model predictions of mixing time for
all conditions are in agreement with experimental results which range from 34.78 ± 2.54 s
for 250 rpm and aeration to 17.30 ± 1.83 s at 500 rpm and without aeration. Aeration
significantly increases mixing time in experiments while the model predicts no significant
difference between the aerated and unaerated case at higher stirring speed. The model
predicts the mixing time with low agitation (250 rpm) at 200 L with a maximum error of
8.6 % compared to experiments. Increasing agitation reduces the accuracy of the current
model predictions, thereby increasing the error to 19.2%. In aerated conditions at 150 L
measured mixing times range from 19.43 ± 2.00 s, 12.62 ± 1.25 s and 11.45 ± 1.33 s s at
250 rpm, 413 rpm and 500 rpm, respectively, and the predictions are as accurate as at low
agitation in 200 L. Without aeration the model error decreases from 32.6 % at 250 rpm to
ii
==PAGE:4==
22 % at 500 rpm. In the lowest volume, instant mixing (tmix,95 < 5 s) is presumed. The
flow-following sensor devices could not be used to validate the CFD model as they were
shown to not follow the flow field at this bioreactor scale and set-up. The results of this
work indicate that the CFD model can be used to characterize mixing of aerated fed-batch
fermentation processes while the unaerated case at intermediate volume requires further
investigation.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Opskalering af bioprocesser fra laboratoriet til pilot- og industrielskala er en, stadig,
kompleks opgave. Specielt repræsenterer forskellen mellem næsten perfekt blanding i
laboratorie- og pilotskala og uperfekt blanding i industrielskala en væsentlig problemstilling
der må løses. Blanding er en vital del af bioprocesser da bioreaktorer skal kunne forsyne
cellerne med alle substrater, inklusive oxygen i aerobe kulturer, for at kunne etablere
det bedst mulige fermenteringsmiljø. Udelukkende at tilføre næringsrigt medie uden god
blanding er ikke nok, da cellerne hurtigt forbruger næringen, hvilket resulterer i dannelsen
af næringsfattige zoner. Gradienterne i storskala bioprocesser, for eksempel fermenteringer,
resulterer i udfordringer med at reproducere data fra laboratorieskala.
Karakterisering af bioreaktorer kombineret med computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
modeller er en interessant metode til at beskrive blanding i storskala bioreaktorer. Indsigt
i processer ved hjælp af en valideret CFD model bruges som rettesnor i opskalering
af bioprocesser til storskala. Målet med dette projekt er at udvikle en CFD-assisteret
karakterisering af blanding til at optimere opskalering af fed-batch fermenteringer. I den
forbindelse blev en CFD model af en 200 L arbejdsvolumen pilot bioreaktor, hos DTU
Kemiteknik, videreudviklet med forskellige volumener samt valideret med pH-sporings
eksperimenter. Tre væske volumener der dækker en, to og tre omrører, tre omrøring-
shastigheder samt iltede og ikke-iltede forhold blev undersøgt. To forskellige systemer blev
brugt til at måle pH og opnå indblik i lokale pH fordelinger: En specialfremstillet sensor
opstilling med ti pH sensorer installeret på to afbøjningsplader ved forskellige højder og
strøm-følgende pH sensorer fra Freesense ApS.
Resultaterne viser en stærk korrelation mellem fald i blandingstider ved højere omrøring
og lavere væske volumener. Ved den højeste volumen er blandingstider ved alle forhold,
forudsagt af modellen, i god overensstemmelse med de eksperimentelle resultater, som
spænder fra 34.78 ± 2.54 s ved 250 rpm og iltning til 17.30 ± 1.83 s ved 500 rpm uden
iltning. I forsøgene øger iltning blandingstiderne væsentligt hvorimod modellen forudsiger
ingen væsentlig forskel mellem iltning og ingen iltning ved høje omrøringshastigheder.
Modellen forudsiger blandingstiden ved lav omrøringshastighed (250 rpm) i 200 L med en
maksimal afvigelse på 8.6 % i forhold til forsøgene. En øgning af omrøringshastigheden
reducerer nøjagtigheden af de nuværende forudsigelser af modellen, herved øges afvigelsen
op til 19.2 %. Under iltede forhold i 150 L spændte de målte blandingstider fra 19.43 ±
2.00 s til 12.62 ± 1.25 s og 11.45 ± 1.33 s ved henholdsvis 250 rpm, 413 rpm og 500 rpm, og
forudsigelserne er lige så nøjagtige som ved lav omrøring i 200 L. Uden iltning formindskes
iv
==PAGE:6==
afvigelsen fra 32.6 % ved 250 rpm til 22 % ved 500 rpm. I den mindste volumen antages
blandingen at være øjeblikkelig (tmix,95 < 5 s). De strøm-følgende sensorer kunne ikke
benyttes til at validere CFD modellen da de ikke kunne følge strømmen i den givne
bioreaktor størrelse samt opsætning.
Resultaterne i dette projekt indikerer at CFD
modellen kan bruges til at karakterisere blandingen i en iltet fed-batch fermentering, mens
det ikke iltede tilfælde ved 150 L kræver en dybere undersøgelse.
v
==PAGE:7==
Table of contents
1. Introduction and Aim of this Study
1
2. Literature Review and Theory
3
2.1. Industrial fermentation processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2. Scale-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1.
Geometric Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2.
Constant impeller tip speed or shear
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3.
Constant ungassed or gassed power input per liquid volume
. . . .
6
2.2.4.
Similar impeller Reynolds number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.5.
Constant oxygen uptake rate (OUR), mass transfer coefficient (kLa)
or dissolved oxygen concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.6.
Constant gas flow number, volumetric gas flow rate per unit volume
of liquid (vvm) or superficial velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.7.
Constant mixing time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3. Mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1.
Mixing time characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2.
Gradient Formation and influence on process . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1.
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1.1.
Turbulence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.2.
Turbulence models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.2.1.
Eddy viscosity turbulence models . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.2.2.
k-ϵ, k-ω and SST model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.3.
Multi-phase flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.3.1.
VOF model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.3.2.
Mixture model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.3.3.
Eulerian multi-phase model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.4.
CFD Simulation of the mixing process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3. Materials and Methods
24
3.1. Experimental set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1.
Bioreactor and conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2.
Buffer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
vi
==PAGE:8==
Table of contents
3.1.3.
pH sensor rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.4.
Flow-following sensor devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.5.
Dosing system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2. Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1.
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2.
CFD model definition and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4. Results and Discussion
33
4.1. CFD simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1.
Mixing time simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.2.
Mesh independence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2. Mixing experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.1.
High liquid volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.2.
Intermediate liquid volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2.3.
Low liquid volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3. Comparison of CFD model and experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4. Flow-following sensor devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5. Conclusion and Future Work
69
5.1. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2. Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A. Appendix A: Water velocity profiles of 150 L and 85 L
xiii
B. Appendix B: Air flow simulation
xv
C. Appendix C: Mixing simulation with tracer
xvi
D. Appendix D: Video of surface movement during experiments
xvii
Bibliography
xviii
vii
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ANOVA
analysis of variance
CFD
computational fluid dynamics
DO
disolved oxygen
OTR
oxygen transfer rate
OUR
oxygen uptake rate
QUICK
quadratic upwind interpolation for convection kinetics
RNG
renormalization group
RSM
Reynolds stress model
SIMPLE
semi-implicit method for pressure-linked equation
SST
shear stress transport
VOF
volume of fluid
Greek letters
γ
volume fraction
(-)
ϵ
energy dissipation rate
m2
s3
η
viscosity
Pa s
µ
specific growth rate
h−1
ρ
density
kg
cm3
ρk
probability of presence in compartment k
(-)
ω
turbulent frequency
s−1
Roman letters
C
concentration
g
L
Da
Damkohler number
(-)
Di
impeller diameter
m
viii
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
DT
tank diameter
m
Flg
gas flow number
(-)
Fr
Froude number
(-)
g
gravitational acceleration
m
s2
H
tank height
m
HL
liquid height
m
k
kinetic energy
J
kLa
volumetric mass transfer coefficient
h−1
Ks
substrate affinity constant
g
L
N
agitation speed
rev
s
n
number of impellers
(-)
NF
minimum agitation speed to prevent flooding
rev
s
Np
power number
(-)
P
product concentration
g/L
P
VL
power input per liquid volume
W
m3
Pg
gassed power input
W
Pu
ungassed power input
W
Q
volumetric air flow rate
L
min
Qp
volumetric productivity
g
Ls
qss
specific substrate uptake rate
g
Ls
Re
Reynolds number
(-)
S
substrate concentration
g
L
SM
momentum source
(-)
tcirc
circulation time
s
tmix
mixing time
s
tmix,95
95 % mixing time
s
trxn
substrate uptake time scale
s
U
velocity vector
m
s
Ui
velocity component in the i direction
m
s
VL
liquid volume
m3
Vs
superficial gas velocity
m
s
VT
tank volume
m3
vtip
impeller tip speed
m
s
X
biomass concentration
g
L
YPS
yield of product per substrate consumed
(-)
YXO
yield of biomass per oxygen consumed
(-)
YXS
yield of biomass per substrate consumed
(-)
ix
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction and Aim of this Study
Finding sustainable alternatives to ensure prosperity for billions of people around the world
is one of the greatest challenges of this decade. To ensure that also coming generations have
a future on our planet, alternatives to the polluting fossil-based economy must be found.
A promising and sustainable solution is a bio-based circular economy. Its foundation is the
fermentation process where all kinds of products ranging from detergents to pharmaceuti-
cals are produced by microorganisms. To compete with petroleum-based bulk products,
fermentation must run at large-scale and be cost and time efficient. While the discovery of
new production organisms, their genetic modification as well as new products of interest
are increasing rapidly in laboratory scale, its industrial implementation in vessels as big as
2000 m3 is difficult and slow. One of the main reasons for this is the heterogeneity due to
slow mixing and the resulting gradients which lead to far lower process metrics than those
reached in the laboratory.[1] To easily scale-up and draw conclusions about the full-scale
process an intermediate so called pilot-scale is used.
Fed-batch is the mode of bioreactor operations commonly employed in industrial fermen-
tations since negative effects such as substrate inhibition and catabolite repression can
be evaded which are commonly found in batch processes and therefore higher process
metrics achieved. Additionally, through the controlled addition of defined substrate high
levels of reproducibility and predictability become feasible while the possibility of genetic
drift of the population is reduced.[2] However, fed batch fermentation inherit several
challenges. Since substrate is constantly added, the volume constantly increases while the
concentration of biomass and substrate changes over time. Therefore, it is important to
characterize different stages of the process.
The aim of this study is to widen the understanding of mixing in industrial fed-batch
fermentation processes. The mixing knowledge obtained can help to adjust other parameters
like feeding and aeration rate, substrate concentration and agitation speed to optimize the
process. Numerical modelling in form of a CFD model is used as the main tool to simulate
mixing at different filling levels, agitation speeds and aeration rates mimicking a fed batch
fermentation. The specific objectives of this thesis are the following:
• To further develop a CFD model which resembles a 200 L working volume pilot scale
bioreactor and can simulate its flow and mixing in form of tracer experiments at
different conditions which resemble an industrial fed-batch fermentation process.
1
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction and Aim of this Study
• To obtain empirical flow and mixing data of the pilot scale bioreactor by conducting
pH tracer experiments and obtaining local pH values with
a) 10 stationary pH probes at different axial positions inside the bioreactor.
b) two flow-following sensor devices.
• To compare and validate the CFD model with the data obtained from experiments
so that the model can be used in the scale-up of fed-batch fermentation processes.
2
==PAGE:13==
2. Literature Review and Theory
2.1. Industrial fermentation processes
Fermentation, from a process engineering point of view, is defined as a chemical process
induced by microorganisms for the sustainable manufacturing of a wide array of products
such as pharmaceuticals, enzymes and biomass.[3],[4] Fermentation processes have been
used in the production of beverages and foods for hundreds of years, for example in wine,
beer and kimchi. In today’s industrial fermentation different microorganisms such as
bacteria, yeast and filamentous fungi and also mammalian cells are used for the transfor-
mation from substrate to valuable products such as pharmaceuticals. Due to advances in
molecular biology the renewable bio-catalyst (i.e. the microorganism) can be altered in
almost limitless ways to broaden the spectrum of new products and enhance process metrics.
Fermentation processes can be divided into aerobic (requires the presence of oxygen) and
anaerobic (no oxygen required) processes. Aerobic processes, such as the production of
penicillin by Penicillium chrysogenum [5], can lead to higher product titers compared
to anaerobic processes as they provide additional energy and can reach higher biomass
concentrations. Anaerobic processes (e.g. ethanol production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae
[6]), however, use the carbon source more efficiently and therefore lead to higher yield.
Fermentation processes can further be divided by the method of substrate addition into
batch, fed-batch and continuous processes. In a batch process, the total amount of sub-
strate is added at the beginning while in a fed-batch process substrate is fed over the
whole duration of the fermentation. In a continuous fermentation, substrate is added while
fermentation broth is continuously discharged into the downstream process.
Fed-batch processes are shown to be the most efficient way of achieving high-cell-density
cultures by minimizing by-product formation and the effects of substrate inhibition.[7, 8]
However, fed-batch processes are dependent on appropriate substrate feeding strategies to
control key nutrient concentrations (typically the carbon source) and therefore need more
complex process monitoring.[9] During continuous fermentation, volumetric productivity
can be maximized by constantly operating at optimal production rates. Nevertheless,
this process form can cause issues regarding contamination of the medium, function loss
of microorganism due to mutations after many cell divisions and operation of down-
stream equipment which is traditionally operated batch wise and affected by low product
concentration.
3
==PAGE:14==
2. Literature Review and Theory
Compared to the traditional chemical industry, fermentation brings the capability of
producing more complex biological products while using bio-based raw materials instead of
fossil fuels. Milder process conditions and a reduced usage of hazardous chemicals further
add to the sustainability benefits of fermentation-based biomanufacturing. Because of the
reduced environmental impact and the need to find alternatives to the fossil based industry,
the interest in bio-production increased tremendously over the last decades and has a
promising future. For example, it is forecast that 30 % of the total European chemical
production will be bio-based by 2030 and that the global biotechnology market is expected
to grow at a CAGR of 8.57 % until 2026.[10, 11]
To strengthen the transition towards fermentation-based biomanufacturing an integrated
approach of microbial and process engineering is needed.
With the development of
recombinant DNA technology new microbial strains can be developed which can thrive
even in harsh process conditions. However, also this technology has its limitations. Not
every product can be produced at any condition and the process of strain engineering is
time intensive and expensive. Therefore, a good collaboration between bio- and process
engineers right from the beginning of the development is indispensable to guarantee
final process metrics which are economical. To compete with the established chemical
process the bio-process has to be at the same economical level because commonly the most
economical solution to a given synthetic problem will be implemented, no matter which
technology is employed.[12]
2.2. Scale-up
To be able to compete with the traditional chemical industry for bulk chemicals the
fermentation process must produce large amounts of product in a time and cost efficient
manner. Therefore, production in big scale is necessary. However, geometric differences in
different sized reactors from laboratory scale to full scale lead to spatial gradients in culture
parameters due to poor mixing.[13] When the microorganism is transported through the
stirred vessel by the flow of the liquid, it is exposed to an oscillating environment which
can affect its metabolic and physiologic behavior. As the cells are forced to adapt to
these changing conditions process metrics which were achieved in the laboratory seem to
be unreachable in industrial scale.[14, 15] Therefore, the attempt is made to recreate an
environment inside the lab-scale reactor as similar as possible to that used at production.
Different systematic approaches for scale-up exist which are explained in the following
sections.[16] Table 2.1 shows some of these strategies and how they influence other important
fermentation parameters. When the power input per volume ( P
VL) is maintained constant
over scales also the power input cost can be kept at an adequate level. However, with larger
volume the mixing time will increase substantially which might lead to gradients which
can induce cell stress and therefore low process metrics. With constant agitation speed
the power input cost can be too large for an economical process and large cells can be
4
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Scale-up
damaged due to high shear in the impeller region. Cell damage of delicate microorganisms
can be circumvented when impeller tip speed is kept constant across scales. This, however,
leads to high mixing times, high cell stress and too low oxygen transfer rates which limits
the process productivity. Maintaining the Reynolds number constant when scaling up is
not an appropriate approach as only the power input cost can be kept at an adequate level
and not enough energy input can be provided.
Tab. 2.1.: Influence of scale-up strategies constant power input per volume, stirring speed,
impeller tip speed and Reynolds number of important process parameters. Green
gauge indicates adequate values. Red gauge represents values either too low or too
high for optimal process results. The last column is only relevant for large cell size
such as mammalian cells.
Scale-up strategy
Power input
cost
Mixing
time
Oxygen
transfer rate
Cell stress
Cell
physical
damage
Power input per volume
Stirring speed
Impeller tip speed
Reynolds number
2.2.1. Geometric Similarity
Geometric similarity is expressed as follows:
DT2
DT1
=
VT2
VT1
 1
3
(2.1)
where DTi is the tank diameter and VTi is the total tank volume of vessel i. It is assumed
that impeller diameter and number of impellers stays reasonably constant. Although
geometric similarity is essential for applying scale-up relationships it is rarely obtainable
in practice. Therefore, ranges of accepted equivalency were introduced:
Di
DT
= 0.3 −0.45
(2.2)
which is the ratio of the impeller diameter Di to tank diameter DT and
HL
DT
<= 2
(2.3)
5
==PAGE:16==
2. Literature Review and Theory
which is the ratio of the liquid height HL in the vessel to the tank diameter. This is valid
for two or three impellers.[16] Companies like Sartorius are trying to maintain the same
height to diameter ratio over all the scales so that important fermentation parameters such
as the volumetric mass transfer coefficient kLa and growth rate are maintained constant
between scales.[17]
2.2.2. Constant impeller tip speed or shear
Constant impeller tip speed in combination with geometric similarity can be expressed as:
N2
N1
= DT1
DT2
=
VT2
VT1
 1
3
(2.4)
where N is the agitation speed and assuming that impeller tip speed is
vtip = πNDi
(2.5)
This strategy is used for scale-up when there are not enough insights into the interaction
between shear and morphology for mycelial cultures. It is said that cell damage can occur
at tip speeds above 3.2 m
s .[18] However, this value is highly dependent on broth rheology
and is considered as a rule of thumb. For production tanks, tips speeds are usually larger,
typically 5-7 m
s . A disadvantage of this scale-up approach is that the ratio of aerated
power input over liquid volume ( Pg
VL) is lowered which negatively affects aeration efficiency.
To account for this deficiency, additional impellers can be included to maintain both Pg
VL
and ITS constant.[16]
2.2.3. Constant ungassed or gassed power input per liquid volume
When scaling up fermentation processes the volumetric power input is a crucial key
parameter. One example is that the shear rates introduced by the stirrer increase with
power input, which may lead to cell damage or death. This is especially critical for animal
cell cultures.[19, 20] Also the mixing time is dependent on the power input.
Ungassed impeller power input Pu can be simply predicted from the power number of the
impeller NP and is defined as:
Pu = NpN 3D5
i ρ
(2.6)
The power number relates the resistance force to inertia force and is constant under
turbulent conditions. For multiple impeller configurations with an adequately large inter-
impeller clearance (≥2Di) the power number can be calculated as the sum over the power
number of one impeller divided by the number of impellers.
6
==PAGE:17==
2.2. Scale-up
The scale-up rule is:

Pu
VL

2

Pu
VL

1
=
VL1
VL2
c
(2.7)
where c was found to be -0.37 by Einsele et al. (1978).[21]
Several correlations exist for the gassed power input Pg.[22, 23] However, most are not
transferable to other systems as they have not been validated for multiple-impeller systems,
not more than one impeller type and were only obtained in water and small scale.
Typical Pu
VL values of 1 - 3 kW
m3 for working volume up to 300,000 L were proposed by
Einsele et al. (1978) while Kossen et al. (1985) suggested values between 2 - 4 kW
m3 with no
volume range given.[24] If scale-up is performed with geometric similarity and constant
Pu
VL, circulation time, mixing time and impeller tip speed increase.[25] The Pu
VL required to
provide a certain oxygen transfer rate (OTR) decreases with scale.[26]
It is important to note that scale-up based on constant Pu
VL can result in a large motor size
which brings practical limitations at large scale.[16]
2.2.4.
Similar impeller Reynolds number
This scale-up strategy is based on a constant impeller Reynolds number:
NRe = ρND2
i
η
(2.8)
For the same broth viscosity η and density ρ the equation simplifies to:
N2
N1
=
Di1
Di2
2
(2.9)
This scale-up approach has not worked well for fermentation processes as the effect of
aeration on the process is not included [26] and the impeller Reynolds number normally
rises for successful scale-up design.[21]
Other dimensionless groups have also been investigated for scale-up, with conflicting find-
ings, frequently resulting in technically impractical equipment and operating settings.[16]
2.2.5. Constant oxygen uptake rate (OUR), mass transfer coefficient
(kLa) or dissolved oxygen concentration
This strategy assumes that the oxygen uptake rate of the microorganism is equal to the
oxygen transfer rate (OTR) from the gas phase to the liquid phase:
OTR = kLa (S∗
O −SO) = OUR = µX
YXO
(2.10)
7
==PAGE:18==
2. Literature Review and Theory
where S∗
O is the oxygen concentration of the liquid at the interface between gas and liquid
phase and SO is the oxygen concentration in the bulk liquid, µ is the specific growth rate,
X is the measured biomass concentration and YXO is the calculated cell yield per amount
of oxygen consumed. KLa correlations have the general form:
kLa = f2
Pg
VL
a
V b
s
(2.11)
where the exponents a and b depend on the working scale and f2 is a proportionality
constant. Likewise, the dependence of kLa on Vs (gas superficial velocity) decreases with
scale-up, but more significantly between pilot and production scale. Values of kLa range
from 400 to 800 h−1 for industrial scale up to 100,000 L.[27] In general, scale-up based on
kLa is difficult as this value depends on broth viscosity and is influenced by surface aeration.
This means that kLa is process-specific and changes in course of the fermentation.[28] An
alternative could be to base the scale-up on dissolved oxygen (DO) values. The necessary
minimal DO value can be easily obtained in laboratory studies. Usually the critical DO
level is 30-70 % for viscous mycelial growth and 10-30 % for microbial and yeast broth.[16]
2.2.6. Constant gas flow number, volumetric gas flow rate per unit
volume of liquid (vvm) or superficial velocity
The gas flow or aeration number FlG is defined as:
FlG =
Qg
ND3
i
(2.12)
where Q is the volumetric air flow rate.
Typical values for the gas flow number in
production scale ranges from 0.1 to 0.15.[24] Scale-up based on the volumetric gas flow rate
per unit volume of liquid ( Q
VL or vvm) should be investigated to ensure that the resulting
superficial velocity values are reasonable. If the air flow rate is too high foaming and a
higher gas hold-up in the vessel can occur. If the volumetric gas flow rate per unit volume
of liquid is kept constant, Vs may rise to a level which causes flooding. Flooding occurs if
the air flow rate is too high for the agitation conditions and the air flow dominates the
bulk flow pattern so that the air is poorly dispersed.[29] This condition is to be avoided.
A balance needs to be found to avoid flooding and reduce foaming as much as possible.[16]
2.2.7. Constant mixing time
Another approach to scale-up is to keep the estimated mixing time between different
sized bioreactors constant. This can be estimated with correlations as in this example for
multiple impellers:
tmix = 3.3
 1
N
  1
PO
 1
3  Di
HL
−2.43
(2.13)
8
==PAGE:19==
2.3. Mixing
In reality, however, it is very challenging to keep the mixing time similar or at a sufficiently
low level across scales, as there may be practical limitations in the agitation speed, power
input, motor size, etc. Thus, mixing limitations can lead to the occurrence of gradients in
relevant reactor conditions.[16]
As it can be seen from the above, different methods for scaling up bioprocesses exist.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution but each process needs to be assessed separately. The
applicability of one method over another is process specific and often a combination of
the equations and principals described above is necessary: Generally, it can be said that
successful scale-up most often depends on the reliability of empirical scale-up correlations
and the integrity of small-scale data. A successful scale-up starts "with the end in mind",
meaning that already at laboratory scale data of the behavior of the microorganism in the
large-scale environment should be obtained.
2.3. Mixing
Paul et al. (2004) defines mixing as the reduction of inhomogeneity to realize a desired
process result. This inhomogeneity can be due to differences in temperature, concentration
or phase.[13] Failure to achieve necessary homogeneity by correct mixing may result in
decreased process outcome and thereby leading to hundreds of millions of US Dollars cost
for the company. Mixing plays a key role in a wide range of industries: from pharmaceutical
to petrochemical, food, cosmetics and wastewater treatment. In general, mixing can be
divided into different scales: Macromixing, Mesomixing and Micromixing where turbulence
is central in all scales. Macromixing is mixing due to fluid motion e.g. impeller and
gas/liquid interaction. Mesomixing is mixing driven by molecular and viscous diffusion
which is most noticeable at the feed point, also called feed mixing. Micromixing is described
as film and intra-pellet mixing and is mixing at the Kolmogorov and Batchelor scales.
The Kolmogorov microscales describe the smallest scales of turbulence before viscosity
dominates and the Batchelor scale describes the smallest length scales of fluctuations in
scalar concentration that can exist before being dominated by molecular diffusion.[13][30]
In fermentation processes, inadequate mixing can lead to incomplete liquid/liquid blending
of feed substrate, control additives as well as insufficient transfer of gases. Accumulation
of dissolved CO2 and by-products and depletion of dissolved O2 in the fermentation
broth has been shown to be detrimental to cell growth and therefore productivity of the
process.[27, 31]
To achieve mixing, the agitator in a stirred tank must provide bulk circulation. More
than one impeller might be necessary for tanks with high aspect ratio (H/D > 1.5) and
additional baffles on the tank wall can help to increase axial mixing. Different types
9
==PAGE:20==
2. Literature Review and Theory
of impellers were built and characterized over the past decades.[13] The most common
impeller for aerobic fermentation processes is the Rushton disk turbine as it secures good
gas dispersion. Combining a radial flow impeller, like a Rushton disk turbine, with suitable
baffles, the flow towards the tank wall gets converted to strong top-to-bottom flows both
above and below the impeller consisting of four circulation loops as seen in Figure 2.1.
Fig. 2.1.: Flow pattern with four circulation loops of one Rushton disk turbine in a baffled
vessel. Adapted from [32].
When using multiple impellers in a vessel, spacing between the impellers influences the
flow patterns fundamentally as seen in figure 2.2.[33] When the impellers are separated
more than 0.385 times the tank diameter, parallel flow patterns occur (figure 2.2 a)). This
means that the single flow patterns of each Rushton disk turbine is independent from the
others leading to the characteristic flow patterns as seen in figure 2.1.[34] At an impeller
spacing smaller than 0.385 times the tank diameter, a merging flow pattern occurs (figure
2.2 b)) where the impeller streams merge at an elevation midway between the impellers to
form two big ring vortices.[34, 35]
Fig. 2.2.: Flow pattern of two Rushton disk turbines. a) parallel flow, b) merging flow, c)
diverging flow. Adapted from [34].
10
==PAGE:21==
2.3. Mixing
If the distance of the lowest impeller from the bottom is chosen to small (≤0.15D) a
diverging flow develops (figure 2.2 c)). The lower impeller only produces one large ring
vortex while the upper impeller produces two well-defined ring vortices, one below and
one above the impeller.[34]
Aeration increases the mixing efficiency of the process since the gas bubbles mix the liquid
on their way up through the fermentor. However, aeration also decreases the power input
of the impellers, especially for the bottom impeller, leading to longer mixing times.[36]
At a too high aeration rate together with too low impeller speed flooding of the impeller
occurs which decreases mixing greatly (figure 2.3 a)). During flooding, the impeller is
not able to disperse the gas and break down the gas bubbles into smaller ones as a result
of the immense amount of gas accumulating in the area around the impeller.[37] When
increasing the impeller speed while aerating at a low rate, loading regime occurs (figure
2.3 b)). The impeller disperses the gas towards the reactor wall while the lower part of
the fluid is practically only occupied by the liquid phase.[29] Hence, to obtain desired full
dispersion (figure 2.3 c)) the right combination of stirring speed and aeration rate needs
to be found.
Fig. 2.3.: Flow regimes in a stirred aerated vessel. a) flooding, b) loading, c) complete dispersion.
Qg is the gas flow rate, N the agitation speed. Adapted from [29].
The minimum agitation speed required to prevent flooding NF can be calculated through
the following correlation [29]:
NA = 30( Di
DT
)3.5(Fr)F
(2.14)
where FlG is the gas flow number, Di the impeller diameter, DT the tank diameter, and
Fr the Froude number. The gas flow number is defined as
Flg =
Qg
ND3
(2.15)
11
==PAGE:22==
2. Literature Review and Theory
where Qg is the volumetric gas flow rate and N the impeller rotational speed.[38] The flow
number takes into account all the effects of gas flow rates, impeller speed and impeller
diameter, but it does not account for the blade number and the blade width effects.[29]
The Froude number is the ratio of inertial forces to gravitational forces (g) [38] and is
defined as
Fr = N 2D
g
(2.16)
2.3.1. Mixing time characterization
In an industrial bioreactor only a few variables can be measured accurately. The mixing
time tmix, which is the key variable evaluating mixing efficiency in a given bioreactor
set-up, however, can be easily determined with tracer experiments. The mixing time
measurement can offer important information regarding the performance of mechanically
stirred tanks. While it can give insights on the occurrence of gradients (see section 2.3.2)
it can also help to optimally design a bioreactor and fermentation. For example, a too
long mixing time can be caused by too large impeller spacing, a wrong choice of impeller
type or dosing point. The mixing time can be used as a comparative measure between
different impeller types and reactor configurations and therefore help optimize fed-batch
fermentation processes.
Since a complete elimination of concentration gradients (complete homogeneity) is an ideal
situation, a degree of homogeneity must be set. The mixing time is therefore defined as
the required time to achieve the defined degree of homogeneity, in this work 95%, starting
from the complete segregated state.
Fig. 2.4.: Concentration response measured at a fixed point in a stirred vessel. Adapted from
[4].
12
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Mixing
Mixing time can be empirically characterized with tracer experiments. In a tracer exper-
iment, a pulse of tracer is injected and the response is monitored. If a tracer is added
to a stirred tank containing the tracer at a concentration of Ci, the tracer concentration
measured with a fixed probe yields a response curve similar to Figure 2.4. At the beginning
of the mixing process, each circulation loop brings high concentrations of tracer to pass by
the measuring point leading to concentration peaks. The distance between those peaks is
called the circulation time tcirc. With each new circulation, the peaks decrease and 95 %
mixing is achieved when the concentration differs less than 5 % from the final concentration
Cf. At tmix the tracer concentration is relatively steady.[4]
An approximate relationship between tcirc and tmix of a single phase liquid in a baffled
stirred tank with small impellers can be given by:[39]
tmix = 4tcirc
(2.17)
Mixing time depends on variables such as the size of the tank and impeller, impeller type
and configuration, stirrer speed, broth viscosity and aeration.
To obtain the mixing time empirically different methods can be used. The simplest and
most illustrative monitoring method is to add a pH based indicator like bromo-phenol blue
or methyl red to the liquid in the tank and then dose pulses of acid or base. This color
change is only observable in transparent reactor systems and only gives qualitative insights
and therefore is quite limited in its application. To obtain a quantitative understanding of
the mixing time conductivity and pH tracer experiments can be conducted. In both cases,
the mixing time is obtained as described above.
In the conductivity method the tracer is a concentrated salt solution which is added
in a short pulse to the vessel content while one or more conductivity probes measure
the response. This method is only useful in anaerobic conditions since gas bubbles can
enter the space between the electrode and can lead to noise. However, if the electrodes
are covered with a fine mesh, the noise level can be reduced significantly as shown by
Otomo et al. (2003).[40] Another drawback of conductivity probes is that the sensitivity
of measurement decreases as the conductivity level increases with every measurement
round. Since cultivation broth already contains high amount of salts, this study cannot be
performed during a fermentation process.[9]
The pH method has a similar set-up as the conductivity method but the tracer is highly
concentrated acid or base which is measured inside the tank with pH probes. Performing
a tracer experiment using pH probes gives data with less noise as gas bubbles have
no influence on the measurement and the amount of salts formed is so small that the
experiment can be conducted during fermentation. Even if the fermentation produces acids,
the time scale of production is much smaller than the mixing time so that no influence on
the process can be assumed. It needs to be considered, however, that most cultivation
13
==PAGE:24==
2. Literature Review and Theory
media possess a large buffer capacity so that rather large pulses of acid and base are
necessary.[9] In both experiments and especially in small vessels (< 1m3) it is important
to keep in mind the response time of the sensors because the measurement delay might be
of the same order of magnitude as the time constant of the tracer dynamics.[41, 42]
2.3.2. Gradient Formation and influence on process
High mixing time and a high rate of reaction results in differential distribution of variables
such as concentrations, pH and temperature in a fermentor and thereby leads to gradient
formation. The competition between mixing and reaction expressed by the Damköhler
number (equation 2.18) causes heterogeneity, whereas mixing is scale-dependent and
reactions are microbe-dependent.
Da = tcirc
trxn
(2.18)
with tcirc being the circulation time scale and trxn the uptake time scale of substrate.[30]
When Da > 1 the circulation time scale is higher than the reaction time scale. In this
case the substrate is rapidly consumed before being mixed, resulting in the formation
of concentration gradients.[43] The Damköhler number is a quantitative approach to
determine the occurrence of gradients and makes comparison between processes and scales
possible.
Significant gradients can affect cell physiology and thereby cell productivity leading to de-
creased process performance and therefore significantly decreasing process profitability.[14,
44, 45] The most studied gradients are substrate concentration gradients in aerobic
fed-batch fermentation processes due to their industrial relevance. Bacterial and yeast
fermentation processes have a high probability to develop significant substrate gradients as
they are operated with high cell densities and the strains used show high specific substrate
uptake rates. This promotes rapid assimilation of substrate at the feeding point and does
not provide sufficient time for the substrate to travel down the vessel, thereby leading to
zones with high and low substrate concentration. In general, it can be said that substrate
gradients are likely to occur if the circulation time time is larger than the reaction time
trxn :
trxn = Ks
qSX
(2.19)
where Ks is the substrate affinity constant and qS is the biomass-specific rate of substrate
uptake and X the biomass concentration.[46]
An industrial study of a 22 m3 S. cerevisiae fermentation has shown that the glucose
concentration between feeding position and bottom of fermentor can differ by one order of
magnitude.[47]
The fermentation performance is directly influenced if meaningful gradients negatively
influence cell physiology. The cell is moved through the fermentor and crosses these areas
of different concentration. The resulting stress and starvation can lead to the utilization
14
==PAGE:25==
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics
of less energy-yielding metabolic pathways than respiration, leading to reduced yield of
biomass (YXS), product on substrate (YPS), concentration of cells (X) and products (P),
and volumetric productivity (Qp), as observed during overflow metabolism.[9] Changes in
these process metrics can severely affect the economy of the process. Also, morphological
changes and effects on the motility and cell membrane integrity can be observed, leading
to a decreased process performance compared to process metrics achieved at laboratory
scale.[47]
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is the application of numerical methods to solve
systems of partial differential equations to investigate fluid flows.[48] Numerical methods
are necessary since the set of equations is complex and would only be analytically solvable
for simple flow problems. Fluid dynamics is based on conservational laws such as the laws
of conservation of mass, energy and linear momentum in a system. From those partial
differential equations have been derived which provide an extremely high level of detail
of all types of flow variables (e.g. temperature, velocity, pressure and density) in a fluid
and the behavior of chemicals in it. Once the CFD model is constructed and validated,
it provides the possibility to characterize and optimize any system involving fluid flow.
Since CFD models can also be combined with physical, chemical, and biological methods,
CFD allows to model processes and systems that are difficult to run or access, such as
large-scale bioreactors. In these cases, the use of CFD simulation becomes economically
advantageous compared to empirical methods. However, due to the numerous complex
equations to solve high computational power is required and if a descent level of detail
is desired the computing time can take up a high amount of time. Especially, when
single cells and their lifelines are to be simulated the computational power accessible
today reaches its limitations. AI and quantum computing will hopefully soon provide
remedy. Furthermore, even though user-friendly commercial software with predefined
numerical settings has increased the popularity of CFD simulations, expert knowledge in
fluid dynamics is required to set-up, solve and analyze a meaningful CFD case study.[48]
Different CFD simulation software packages are available, which are either open source or
commercial software. The exact solution method differs between different software so that
slightly different results can be obtained. The principal steps most programs share are:
geometry and mesh generation, a pre-processor to define the CFD problem, a solver and
a post-processor to analyse, visualize and further calculate variables of interest.[48] The
most commonly used solver is the finite volume method. When this method is used, first,
the geometry of the fluid domain is defined. Next, the fluid domain is divided into smaller
non-overlapping domains, also called control volumes, which consist of the cells in the grid
or mesh. For each of these mesh elements all flow equations are solved. Hence, the degree
15
==PAGE:26==
2. Literature Review and Theory
of fineness of the mesh is a trade-off between the spatial resolution of sensitive quantities
and the computational cost of the simulation. In the pre-processor, the physical, chemical
and biological phenomena to be modelled can be defined as well as the fluid properties and
boundary conditions for the out-most mesh elements. Initially, the governing equations of
the flow are integrated over all finite control volumes (mesh elements) of the fluid domain.
These equations are conservation equations for all flow variables, as described above. In a
multi-phase system, the Euler-Euler approach is commonly used to formulate gas-liquid
flow equations for species, mass, and momentum.[49] A volume fraction value for each
phase is defined, which is continuous in space and time and the sum of all volume fraction
values is equal to 1.[50] The rate of change of mass, momentum and species depend on
convection, diffusion and transfer for both liquid and gas phase. Once the CFD model is
solved, the first step of post processing is to subject the results to an expert analysis to
ensure that they are meaningful. If they pass this examination, the result can be visualized
in contour or vector plots, domain geometry and grid displays, among others.
2.4.1. Theory
The most important theory behind CFD are explained in the following. For a more
profound study it is referred to the literature.[48, 51]
The most fundamental equations in the fluid dynamics are the continuity equation (eq.
2.20) and the momentum equation (eq. 2.21), also known as the Navier Stokes equation.
The continuity equation expresses the law of conservation of mass at each point in a fluid
and must therefore be satisfied at every point in a flow field.[52] The momentum equation
formulates the law of conservation of momentum. It describes that the rate of change in
linear momentum of a volume moving with a fluid is equal to the surface forces and the
body forces acting on a fluid.[53]
∇∗U = δUx
δx + δUy
δy + δUz
δz = 0
(2.20)
ρDU
Dt = ρ
 δU
δt + (U ∗∇) U
!
= −∇p + µ∇2U + SM
(2.21)
where U is a velocity vector, ρ the density, µ the molecular viscosity and SM a momentum
source.
The continuity equation is derived from mass conservation. It basically says that the sum
of all flows entering and leaving a volume or point in space must cancel out if the flow is
incompressible. The momentum equation consists of three equations (eq. 2.22 - eq. 2.24)
in a three dimensional space. The momentum source SM describes the sum of all external
forces acting on a fluid. The most common momentum source is gravity and if it is the
only momentum source acting on a fluid SM can be replaced with ρg.
16
==PAGE:27==
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics
ρ
 δUx
δt + Ux
δUx
δx + Uy
δUx
δy + Uz
δUx
δz
!
= −δp
δx + µ
 δ2Ux
δx2 + δ2Ux
δy2 + δ2Ux
δz2
!
+ Sx
(2.22)
ρ
 δUy
δt + Ux
δUy
δx + Uy
δUy
δy + Uz
δUy
δz
!
= −δp
δy + µ
 δ2Uy
δx2 + δ2Uy
δy2 + δ2Uy
δz2
!
+ Sy
(2.23)
ρ
 δUz
δt + Ux
δUz
δx + Uy
δUz
δy + Uz
δUz
δz
!
= −δp
δz + µ
 δ2Uz
δx2 + δ2Uz
δy2 + δ2Uz
δz2
!
+ Sz
(2.24)
For a Newtonian, incompressible fluid, the first term on the left hand side in the momentum
equations represents the change of velocity over time inside a volume. The other terms on
the left hand side account for change in velocity, or momentum, due to convection. The
first term on the right hand side describes the change in pressure, a force pushing fluid
from region with higher pressure to region with lower pressure. The second term on the
right hand side defines the change in velocity due to viscous effects. The more viscous
a fluid, the less easily can momentum be spread throughout. The source term SX is an
additional term for modelling additional forces such as electromagnetic forces, centrifugal
forces or gravity.
The continuity and momentum equation are everything needed to define a Newtonian,
single phase and laminar flow in a three dimensional space. To simulate turbulent fluid
problems with multiple phases additional equations are needed.
2.4.1.1. Turbulence
The Reynolds number describes whether a flow is laminar or turbulent. The Reynolds
number of the impeller flow is defined as: [54]
Re = ρND2
i
µ
(2.25)
A low Reynolds number (for stirred liquids: Re < 10) means that the flow is laminar,
the viscous forces are dominant, while a high Reynolds number (Re > 104) means that
the flow is turbulent and the inertial forces have the highest impact on the process.[13]
The range between 10 to 104 is a transient regime where the flow is not considered fully
turbulent. This depends on the flow and geometry.[4]
At laminar flow, all velocity vectors are streamlined parallel to each other. Thus, mixing
between the fluid particles is minimal. With an increasing Reynolds number the flow will
become more and more disordered. The velocity vectors will begin to oscillate and become
unstable. With even higher Reynolds number, a fully turbulent flow is developed where
17
==PAGE:28==
2. Literature Review and Theory
motions are chaotic and in all directions of the flow, while the main flow on average is still
directed. An illustration of laminar and turbulent flow can be seen in Figure 2.5. Eddies
are developed in turbulent flow, which are fully turbulent swirling and rotating units of
flow with different length and time scales moving in all three dimensions in space and
are not steady over time. They even interact with each other and split into increasingly
smaller eddies.[55] Due to eddies momentum is transferred in all directions leading to
better mixing. Not only an increased Reynolds number can lead to the formation of eddies
but also certain geometries. For example, the usage of baffles in a stirred tank not only
leads to elimination of vortex formation but also initiates formation of eddies by working as
an obstacle for the fluid. Thus, improved mixing is the consequence.[56] Different models
can be found which describe turbulence. In the following section the most common models
are described.
(a) laminar flow
(b) turbulent flow
Fig. 2.5.: Illustration of laminar and turbulent flow in a pipe.
2.4.2. Turbulence models
2.4.2.1. Eddy viscosity turbulence models
Boussinesq et al. (1877) proposed to describe the unknown Reynolds stresses by the
eddy viscosity model.[57] The foundation of this model is the correlation between the
Reynolds stresses and the rate of deformation of a fluid. The resulting model equation is
similar to the momentum equation (eq. 2.21). It only differs by the addition of the energy
term and the addition of the turbulent viscosity. Since the turbulent viscosity and the
kinetic energy are unknown they need to be modelled. This is the purpose of the eddy
viscosity model: trading three unknown Reynolds stresses per dimension to two unknown
variables, the eddy viscosity and the kinetic energy.[48] Different eddy viscosity turbulence
models are available to use in commercial CFD software. One commonly used class is the
two-equations models: Examples of this are the k −ϵ model, the k −ω model and SST
model.
18
==PAGE:29==
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics
2.4.2.2. k-ϵ, k-ω and SST model
The most commonly used turbulence model is the standard k −ϵ model. The model is
based on the turbulent kinetic energy k (eq. 2.26) and the turbulent energy dissipation
rate ϵ (eq. 2.27). The dissipation rate describes the rate of the conversion from kinetic
energy to thermal energy in m2
s3 .[58]
k = 1
2u2
i
(2.26)
ϵ = ρ
µ
 δui
δxj
!2
(2.27)
Many variations of the standard k −ϵ model exist. Jaworkski and Zakrzewska (2002)
analysed and compared the ReNormalisation Group (RNG) k −ϵ model, Realizable k −ϵ
model, Che-Kim k −ϵ model, Optimized k −ϵ model and Reynolds Stress model (RSM) in
a stirred tank reactor. The testing showed that the standard k−ϵ model and the optimized
Che-Kim k −ϵ model predicted the mean velocity best but still with some inaccuracy close
to the tank wall while the tangential mean velocity was predicted well by all models with
only minor deviations. The kinetic turbulence energy was under-predicted by all models
where the standard k −ϵ model showed the smallest deviation from experimental result. In
general, the k −ϵ model is advantageous because of the simplicity of the model. However,
anisotropic turbulence cannot be predicted which makes these results less sufficient.[59]
From k and ϵ a turbulent frequency ω with the unit s−1 can be defined as proposed
by Wilcox et al. (1988):[60]
ω = ϵ
k
(2.28)
The k −ω model is best suited for near the wall boundary region, where adverse pressure
gradients are developed. In these regions near the wall, the eddy viscosity is significantly
smaller than the molecular viscosity. Thus, this model is applied when only near wall flow
regimes are to be studied while k −ϵ should be used if the bulk flow away from the wall
is of interest. As can be seen from equation 2.28, if two of the three variables ω, ϵ, or k
are known the third one can be calculated. This means no matter which model, k −ϵ or
k −ω, is used, the turbulent energy dissipation rate ϵ and the turbulent frequency ω can
be found.
The shear stress transport (SST) turbulence model can be interpreted as a combination of
the k −ω and the k −ϵ model. It is developed to behave as the k −ω model near the wall
and as the k −ϵ model in the free stream away from walls.[59, 61, 62] Compared to other
turbulence models, it properly predicts the kinetic energy and dissipation at the zone near
the impeller in a stirred tank.
19
==PAGE:30==
2. Literature Review and Theory
2.4.3. Multi-phase flow
A multi-phase flow is defined as a flow consisting of two or more phases that do not mix
on a microscopic scale, like water and air for example. It is also possible that the two
phases have the same state of matter (e.g. oil and water are both liquid but do not mix on
a molecular scale). The only multi-phase flow which is part of this project is a two-phase
flow of water and air without any phase changes.
Adding a second phase to a CFD model adds a new layer of complexity as all equations
have to be solved for the second phase as well. Additionally, the simulations of interfacial
areas and mass transfer between phases and various bubble sizes makes the modelling of
multiphase systems difficult and slow.
There are two essentially different approaches to model multi-phase flows: the Euler-Euler
and the Euler-Lagrange method.
In the Euler-Lagrange method, the Lagrangian frame of reference is used to represent the
droplets or particles, whereas the carrier-phase flow field is represented in an Eulerian
frame.[63] In the Lagrangian flow field specification the control volume is a fluid parcel
which moves through the fluid domain, always containing the same fluid particles.[64]
When plotting over time, the pathline of the parcel through the liquid, also called the
"Lagrangian trajectory", becomes visible.
Apart from modeling water as a continuous phase with bubbles as particles, the Euler-
Lagrange method can also be used for the assessment of gradients in fermentation
processes.[65, 66] Cells are modelled as single particles which collect data of physical,
chemical and biological variables as a function of time. Here, it is referred to further
literature on the topic as the Euler-Lagrange method is not part of this study.[65, 66, 67, 68]
In the Euler-Euler method, only the Eulerian frame of reference is used. The control
volume is a parallelepiped. Its position is fixed relative to the coordinate axes. This
specification of the fluid flow focuses on specific locations in the space through which the
fluid flows as time passes.[64]
In the Euler-Euler method, all phases are accounted for everywhere in the geometry. That
means that every node contains a volume fraction for each phase and relevant flow equations
are solved everywhere. Due to the fact that momentum and continuity equations have to
be solved everywhere in the geometry, the method is equally computational demanding
regardless of the distribution of the phases.
In the following, models of the Euler-Euler method are presented.
2.4.3.1. VOF model
In the Volume of Fluid (VOF) method a scalar indicator function between zero and one,
known as volume fraction, is used to distinguish between two immiscible fluids.[69] Because
of the immiscible properties of the fluid mixture, the volume fraction γ can take one of
20
==PAGE:31==
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics
three different states:
• γ = 1 ⇒control volume consists of pure phase 1
• γ = 0 ⇒control volume consists of pure phase 2
• 0 < γ < 1 ⇒interface present
The flow equations are volume averaged using a mean volume smaller than the bub-
bles/drops of the dispersed phase.[70] The VOF model is advantageous when interfaces
between fluids are to be tracked while interactions between the fluids cannot be resolved.[71]
One critical problem with this method is the discretization of the advection term. Lower
order schemes like the first order upwind method blur the interface due to numerical
diffusion and higher order schemes are unstable and result in numerical oscillation. Thus,
several volume advection techniques have been proposed [69, 72, 73, 74] which keep the
interface sharp and prevent oscillations.
2.4.3.2. Mixture model
The Mixture model is a simplified multi-phase model which can be used in different
ways. First, it can be used to model multi-phase flows where the phases move at different
velocities, but local equilibrium over short spatial length scales is assumed. Second, it
can be used to model homogeneous multi-phase flows with very strong coupling and
phases moving at the same velocity and third, the Mixture model is used to calculate
non-Newtonian viscosity. Different phases, either fluid or particulate, are modelled by the
Mixture model solving the momentum, continuity and energy equations for the mixture,
the volume fraction equation γ for the secondary phase and algebraic expressions for the
relative velocities.[50] The Mixture model can be a good substitute for the full Eulerian
multi-phase model since it is simplified and a smaller number of variables has to be solved.
As the VOF model, the Mixture model uses a single-fluid approach, but differs in two
regards. The Mixture model allows the phases to be interpenetrating. That means that
the value for γ can be equal to any value between 0 and 1. Unlike the VOF model the
Mixture model allows the phases to move at different velocities, using the concept of slip
velocities.[75]
2.4.3.3. Eulerian multi-phase model
The Eulerian multi-phase model is a sub-model of the Euler-Euler method and is used
for two or more interpenetrating fluids describing an inhomogeneous multi-phase system.
It is one of the more complex sub-models as it can predict the interactions between
the phases using individual sets of momentum and continuity equations for each fluid.
Momentum transfer between the phases is included through the use of exchange terms
21
==PAGE:32==
2. Literature Review and Theory
in the momentum equation. Exchange terms are also used in the energy and continuity
equation when heat and mass transfer occurs.
Whereas other models work best for low-volume fraction mixtures (< 10 %), the Eulerian
multiphase model is general enough that any volume fraction of any phase is feasible.[13]
However, a full multiphase model may not be feasible when there is a wide distribution of
the particulate phase or when the interphase laws are unknown or their reliability can be
questioned.[50] In these cases it is advised to use a simplified model.
2.4.4. CFD Simulation of the mixing process
CFD models for simulating mixing problems have become more popular during the last
three decades. It is a useful tool to model mixing in a stirred tank including single-phase,
two and multi-phase systems as well as laminar, transitional and turbulent flow regimes.
Additionally, interactions between walls, baffles and rotating impellers can be investigated.
Many studies have been performed to better understand the phenomena and complexity
of the flow motion in agitated vessels to better control mixing processes.[76, 77, 78] With
CFD, the mixing system efficiency for small-to-large agitated vessels under real conditions
can be assessed. CFD simulation can calculate a broad range of variables where mixing
time, power consumption, flow field pattern, the concentration of phases and flow types
being the most investigated. Since three-dimensional multi-phase transient simulations
have become feasible [79, 80], also gas hold-up, the volumetric oxygen transfer coefficient
kLa and reaction rates can be calculated. These are variables of particular interest for
fermentation processes. The efficiency [81] as well as the power characteristics [82] are
fundamentally influenced by the impeller geometry in reference to the vessel geometry.
Due to the scale problem and the physical complexity, mixing process optimization
remains a complicated problem. CFD simulations can help with process design and
optimization including complex hydrodynamics analysis, chemical reactions and heat and
mass transfer.[32] Current literature also states the integration of CFD with various widely
used optimisation algorithms such as genetic algorithm and neural networks to further
enhance mixing system optimization.[83, 84, 85]
A crucial aspect of simulating mixing problems in CFD is the way of modeling rotating
impeller(s) inside the vessel. It is a challenge because some parts or whole domains
are moving relative to the tank. The first approach to account for this problem was
impeller boundary condition [86] and imposed source or sink terms. In the past, a so called
’black box’ approach was used where the impeller area was removed or excluded from the
domain.[86] However, in order to obtain detailed information for boundary conditions of
velocity and turbulence experiments had to be executed. Consequently, a new approach
which does not require practical experimentation was developed. Currently, the most
common method for an agitated vessel is the sliding mesh technique where the mesh around
the impeller rotates at the same speed as the impeller while the rest of the vessel mesh is
22
==PAGE:33==
2.4. Computational Fluid Dynamics
stationary (in ANSYS Fluent referred to as Mesh Motion).[87] The technique can only
be used in transient mode and is computational very demanding. A less computational
expensive approach is called the Multiple Reference Frame technique (MRF) [88], or Frame
Motion in ANSYS Fluent. The tank is divided into stationary and moving frames where
the moving frame only includes the impeller and the flow enclosed in this area. With this
technique, interactions between impeller and baffles can be accounted for while, due to its
steady-state consideration, computational time can be reduced by one order of magnitude
compared to Mesh Motion.[89]
In order to simulate mixing time, the expansion of a scalar (i.e. an additional variable)
in a frozen velocity turbulence field is modeled. Usually, the momentum and turbulence
equations are solved in a first simulation, which can be either steady-state or transient.
The spread of the scalars is then simulated in a second transient run where velocity,
pressure and turbulence fields are frozen and values from the first simulation are used. The
additional variable can be initialized by different methods. The most common approaches
are to either initialize it to a limited region of the fluid, or to add it from a virtual source
point for a finite number of time steps. Also the definition of the mixing time varies
between publications. Allonneau et al. (2015) modeled a 10 mL bioreactor with one
monitoring point and defined the mixing time as the time needed for the concentration in
the monitoring point to settle within the ±5 % interval from the final value. In another
publication [90], the mixing time is specified based on the time it takes for 95 % of the
finite volumes in a reactor to reach within the ±5 % interval of the final additional variable
value. Elsewhere [91] the mixing time is defined as the time needed for the fraction between
the lowest and highest values of the additional variable in the fluid to reach the value
0.985. Johnson et al. (2014) used monitoring surfaces instead of monitoring points. They
defined mixing time as the time needed for the surface concentrations to reach within the
±5 % interval of their final value following a pulse addition of a tracer compound.
23
==PAGE:34==
3. Materials and Methods
3.1. Experimental set-up
3.1.1. Bioreactor and conditions
The mixing experiments were performed in a BIOSTAT® D-DCU system (Sartorius,
Germany) with a curved bottom, a working volume of 200 L (total volume: 300 L) and
a height to diameter ratio of 3:1 (figure 3.1). Three six-bladed Rushton impellers with
a diameter of 0.2 m were installed 0.170 m, 0.535 m and 0.900 m from the bottom of
the tank. The stirring shaft is entering the vessel from the bottom. Four baffles are
symmetrically distributed on the vessel wall. Impeller speeds of 250 rpm, 413 rpm and
500 rpm were tested with and without aeration through a ring sparger with 33 holes each
of 3 mm diameter. The experiments were conducted in liquid heights from the bottom of
the tank of 0.43 m, 0.82 m and 1.16 m which are based on liquid volumes of approximately
70 L, 150 L and 200 L. Due to gas hold up and vortex formation the liquid level can
increase as much as 15 cm between conditions. To guarantee no splashing, the overall
volume was kept constant between conditions. Splashing occurs when an impeller is only
partly covered by liquid. With the chosen liquid heights, one, two or three impellers are
completely submerged.
Fig. 3.1.: Schematic drawing of bioreactor with measurements in m. The dashed lines mark
the tested liquid volumes. The curved bottom of the vessel is not shown.
24
==PAGE:35==
3.1. Experimental set-up
The aeration was maintained constant at 200
L
min which corresponds to 1 vvm at the
highest volume of 200 L. The lowest stirring speed to prevent flooding was calculated as
stated in section 2.3 and found to be 149.5 rpm. It was decided for 250 rpm as lowest
stirring speed to secure industrial relevance. More than 500 rpm is not possible due to
equipment limitations. The middle stirring speed was chosen as to obtain equal power
input spacing in an ungassed system. This was achieved by first calculating the power
input per volume for 250 rpm and 500 rpm in an ungassed system using this formula:
Po
V = NpN 3D5
i ρ
V
(3.1)
where Np is the power number specific for the impeller type, N is the stirring speed in
revolutions per second, Di is the diameter of the impeller in meter, ρ is the density of the
liquid in kg per cubic meter. In scale-up processes, power numbers are often determined
without gassing. However, depending on the impeller type, aeration can greatly reduce
impeller torque, therefore having a significant impact on the impeller power number as
well as the results of aerobic processes.[92] It has been shown that a reduction on power
input of up to 70 % is possible, though in practice it is most often between 40-50 %.[4]
The power number of the system was provided by Sartorius. For one, two and three
submerged Rushton turbines they found power numbers of 3.9, 7.9 and 11.3, respectively.
For 200 L and a stirring speed of 250 rpm and 500 rpm the power input per volume (Po
V )
in an ungassed system was calculated. The middle of these two power input values was
then found and its stirring speed calculated to ensure equal power input spacing between
conditions. All calculated Po
V values can be found in table 3.1.
Tab. 3.1.: Ungassed power input per volume in W
m3 for all tested conditions. A power number
of 3.9 was used for 70 L, 7.9 for 150 L and 11.3 for 200 L.
Volume (L)
Stirring speed (rpm)
70
150
200
250 rpm
1286.13
1215.77
1304.26
413 rpm
5796.23
5479.16
5877.96
500 rpm
10285.27
9722.66
10434.1
3.1.2. Buffer
The reactor was filled with a buffer solution composed of 2 mM malonic acid (Lot:
BCCG7464, ReagentPlus®, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and 2 mM succinic acid (Lot:
BCCG6017, ACS Reagent, ≥99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) to obtain a linear response
between pH 3 to 6 as proposed by Poulsen et al. (1997).[93] The linearity of the buffer
was tested and could be proven. Furthermore, 0.25 M Sodium chloride (Lot: SLCG5098,
25
==PAGE:36==
3. Materials and Methods
ReagentPlus®, ≥99%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added to account for salt created during
acid/base dosing.
3.1.3. pH sensor rig
10 pH probes (model: CPS471D-721, Endress+Hauser, Switzerland) were placed in the
reactor vessel with the help of two self-designed and manufactured baffle replicates with
integrated probe holders (7 on each baffle) to ensure flexible experimental designs (see
figure 3.2). The probe holders are slightly tilted and adjustable in height so that the
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.2.: In-house manufactured baffle replicates with pH probes a) outside and b) mounted
inside the bioreactor. The blue caps were coupled to cables connected to pH trans-
mitters.
sensor tip is in the bulk liquid flow. The probe holders are installed on the downstream
side of the baffle to minimize additional turbulence and to mimic a normal process as
much as possible. It was decided to place 6 and 4 sensors on the two baffles giving a
measurement point above and below each impeller, in the middle between impellers and
above the highest and below the lowest impeller (see figure 3.3). This results in 10 pH
probes measuring in the highest liquid volume, 7 probes in the intermediate volume and 4
probes in the lowest volume. Each probe was calibrated once a day and connected to a
transmitter (Liquisys M CPM223/253, Endress+Hauser, Switzerland) and all transmitters
are connected to a data logger (MW100 Data Aquisition Unit, Yokogawa; Japan) which
logs the measured pH on a connected PC with one data point each 0.2 s. The 95% response
time of the pH sensors was determined experimentally with a step change of approximately
5 s.
26
==PAGE:37==
3.1. Experimental set-up
Fig. 3.3.: Schematic drawing of installation of pH probes and dosing location in reactor vessel.
Dosing point 1 was used at highest and intermediate volume and dosing point 2 at
lowest volume.
3.1.4. Flow-following sensor devices
The liquid level of 116 cm was additionally examined using two similar pH measuring flow-
following sensor devices (Freesense ApS, Denmark) (figure 3.4). The spherical polyether
ether ketone (PEEK) capsules measure 43 mm in diameter and had their density adjusted to
that of water (ρ = 998.2 kg
m3). They contain a pressure and a pH sensor and a thermocouple,
all with a response time < 1 s. The sensor devices were configured to collect and store
measurements at a sampling rate of 2 Hz.
Fig. 3.4.: Schematic drawing of flow following sensor devices.[94]
3.1.5. Dosing system
An acid/base dosing system as proposed by Bisgaard et al. (2021) was used (figure 3.5).
Two pumps of type Flojet RLF122002C (Xylem INC., USA) were used to pump 50 %wt
H2SO4 (Lot: 21L074008, VWR International, USA), in the following referred to as acid,
27
==PAGE:38==
3. Materials and Methods
and 50 %wt NaOH (Lot: 21K104022, VWR International, USA), in the following referred
to as base, through a tubing system into the bioreactor. The deviation of the pumps was
found to be 1.5 %. The containers of acid and base were placed in spillage trays. The
material used for the sulphuric acid tube was marprene (Watson Marlow, Cornwall) while
the tube material used for pumping sodium hydroxide was verderprene (Verderflex, United
Kingdom) as to ensure chemical compatibility. The tubing is encased by an armoured PVC
hose. At the end of each tube non-return valves (Bürkle GmbH, Germany) were installed
to prevent reflux of water into the hose. Inside the reactor the tubing was attached to
the sensor cables so that the acid/ base hits the liquid surface directly without touching
the reactor wall. At the liquid height of 0.43 m, the tubing was extended and attached
to a baffle to prevent splashing caused by the impeller above liquid height (dosing point
2 in figure 3.3). Three pulses of each acid and base per condition were dosed just above
liquid height. The size of the pulses was empirically determined to obtain a pH change of
approximately 1. At the maximum liquid volume 38 g acid and 40 g base were dosed, at
the intermediate volume 37 g acid and 38 g base, and at the lowest tested liquid volume
18 g acid and 20 g base were added. The pumps were placed in an in-house manufactured
plastic box made from polystyrene and polycarbonate to contain spillage. They were
controlled over a micro controller and a simple software so that one condition runs fully
automated.
Fig. 3.5.: Schematic drawing of the pumping set-up. The tubing was introduced to the tank
vessel trough an opening in the tank lid and attached to sensor cables. At the lowest
tested volume the tubes were prolonged and fixed to one baffle just above the liquid
level (not shown).
28
==PAGE:39==
3.2. Methods
3.2. Methods
3.2.1. Data analysis
To analyse the data from the pH sensor rig, a Python script (Version 3.9.7) was written
which reads in the time stamps from the pumps as well as the logged pH from the sensors.
The pH for each probe was then normalized according to the following equation:
pHnormalized = pHraw −pHstart
pHend −pHstart
(3.2)
so that the steady state before the dosing is 0 and the steady state after the dosing is 1.
The mixing time is calculated as the time between the first sensor measures a signal and
the time that all sensor signals are in the range of ± 5 % from the final steady state, in
case of 95 % mixing time.
To better compare mixing time results between different conditions, single factor Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) was performed in Microsoft Excel. ANOVA presents a statistical
test to examine if the mean between two or more populations differentiate. If they are
significantly different a P-value of ≤0.05 is obtained. More information on this statistical
analysis can be found in the literature.[95]
To analyse the mixing time from the CFD simulations, the report file containing the
measured tracer concentration at the five measuring points over time was imported into
Microsoft Excel and the final steady state value obtained. The mixing time was found as
the time when the data points stay in the ± 5 % range from this value. It is worth noting
that contrary to the experimental data where each pH probe takes on a slightly different
steady state value, the simulated data gives one steady state value for all probes since
noise and differences in probes are not simulated.
To analyse the data from the Freesense sensor devices the data was first cleaned for outliers
due to pH measurement in the air phase and pressure spikes when hitting the tank wall
or impeller. The remaining pressure data was correlated to find the axial position of
the sensors in the tank. The axial velocity was calculated from the axial position and
considered constant in between measuring points. The liquid height was divided into
compartments of 5 cm height and the data points for each of these compartments were
averaged.[96]
3.2.2. CFD model definition and setup
The CFD simulation software ANSYS Fluent 2021 R1 was used for all simulations. Post
processing of the results were done in both ANSYS Fluent 2021 R1 and ANSYS CFD-Post
2021 R1. The computational meshes used were created in ANSYS ICEM CFD 2021. The
29
==PAGE:40==
3. Materials and Methods
(a) Geometry
(b) Mesh
Fig. 3.6.: a) Geometry and b) mesh of the 200 L volume in the bioreactor characterized in this
study.
geometry of the simulated reactor resembles the 200L BIOSTAT® D-DCU system from
Sartorius as described in section 3.1.1 (see figure 3.6a).
The number of impellers simulated depends on the liquid height HL and was obtained
using this formula [97]:
HL −Di
Di
> n > HL −2Di
2Di
(3.3)
where Di is the impeller diameter, and n the number of impellers. The liquid height
was 1.05 m for 200 L, 0.777 m for 150 L and 0.51 m for 85 L and was based on the
drawings available of the vessel. In experiments the lowest volume had to be adjusted
to 70 L to prevent splashing of the middle impeller. These volumes were chosen so that
three, two and one impeller are completely submerged. The gas inlet pipe, the rectangular
window and a supporting structure which holds the shaft, were omitted. The sparger was
simplified as a ring structure at the bottom of the tank. The geometry was set to be
of zero thickness for the baffles and impellers to simplify the system while not affecting
the flow significantly in the simulations. This allowed for better prediction of the energy
dissipation rate.[98, 99, 100, 101] A structured hexahedral mesh with 245,936 cells for
85 L, 397,936 cells for 150 L and 550,164 cells for 200 L was used (see figure 3.6b). Due to
the higher velocity in the regions around the central impellers, a smaller mesh size was
chosen.
It is important to assure that simulation results are not dependent on the mesh size.
Therefore, a mesh independence test was performed. Two meshes with approx. half and
30
==PAGE:41==
3.2. Methods
double of the elements of the 200 L and 150 L volume were created and velocity magnitude
and computational time compared. Results of the mesh independence analysis can be seen
in section 4.1.2
The bioreactor was divided into a stationary tank domain and three rotating impeller
domains. The shaft and the three central impeller domains were set as rotational zones
with central impeller speeds. The interfaces of these domains were modelled as interfacial
boundary conditions. To model the rotation of all impellers, the sliding mesh technique was
employed, linking the stationary and the moving domains with interface zones to capture
unsteady interactions in the flow field between impellers.[102] The degassing boundary
condition was set to type wall and specified shear and was defined as the liquid surface on
top of the reactor. All other walls except for the shaft were stationary walls.
Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equation (SIMPLE) scheme was used for
solving the continuity and momentum equations and the pressure-velocity coupling. For
the momentum fraction second-order upwind and for the volume fraction quadratic upwind
interpolation for convection kinetics (QUICK) was used in spatial discretization. The
residual limit for convergence of the continuity equation, velocity fields of the air and
liquid, and volume fraction was set to 10−6. The time step was set to 0.001 s for transient
flow simulations.
For multi-phase simulations the Eulerian-Eulerian two fluid model was used with a drag
coefficient from Ishii and Zuber (1979), turbulent dispersion from Burns et al.(2004), and
constant surface tension coefficient at 0.073 N
m. The gas inlet was defined as the sparger
region with a mass flow rate of 0.00408 kg
s air and turbulence intensity was set to 3 %.
The bubbles simulated had a constant bubble size of 3 mm.
The setup of the mixing analysis is similar to the experiments. However, instead of 10
sensors, 5 measuring points were distributed throughout the tank as exemplified for the
highest volume in figure 3.7. Simulations have shown that the same mixing time is obtained
with this setup as with 10 measuring points at the exact same location as the sensors in
the experiments. Therefore, it was decided for this simplification. Another simplification
is that tracer concentration instead of pH was simulated which gives similar mixing time
results. The velocity and turbulence fields were frozen during mixing simulation and only
species transport modelled. The species was set to have the same properties as water and
emerged from a region defined between impeller and wall at the top of the liquid. The
time step for mixing simulations was set to 0.01 s.
31
==PAGE:42==
3. Materials and Methods
Fig. 3.7.: Schematic drawing of the simulated maximum volume. The blue stars mark the
measuring point of tracer in mixing time simulations.
Changing the measuring
location does not influence the mixing time significantly as long as they are distributed
throughout the volume.
32
==PAGE:43==
4. Results and Discussion
To make the description of the tested conditions more straightforward an abbreviation
system is introduced using the size of the liquid volume (H, I or L), the state of aeration
(N or G) and the agitation speed (250, 413 or 500) as can be seen in figure 4.1. The first
letter describes the liquid level tested or volume simulated, the second letter symbolizes
the state of aeration and the number depicts the stirring speed. The air flow rate was
chosen so that 1 vvm at 200 L was maintained throughout conditions.
Fig. 4.1.: Three liquid volumes, three agitation speeds and aerated and non aertaed conditions
were tested which gives a total of 18 experiments. As an example, an experiment
at highest liquid volume, non gassed and at 250 rpm will be called HN250 in the
following sections. At gassed conditions a flow rate of 200
L
min was used. The lowest
volume simulated was 85 L.
4.1. CFD simulation
The bioreactor described previously was modeled and tracer experiments simulated. Three
different meshes were built corresponding to volumes of 70 L, 150 L, and 200 L. Initially,
the flow was simulated for three different agitation speeds in single-phase and multi-phase
(flow rate of 200
L
min). Then tracer experiments were simulated on the obtained flow
33
==PAGE:44==
4. Results and Discussion
pattern and mixing times calculated. The simulated flow patterns inside the bioreactor
with a liquid volume of 200 L are shown in figure 4.2 where figure 4.2a presents the
unaerated cases while 4.2b shows the aerated cases for three stirring speeds.
(a) Single-phase flow
(b) Multi-phase flow
Fig. 4.2.: Vector plots of velocity magnitude for single and multi-phase flow for highest simulated
liquid volume after 1 s of flow for agitation speed of 250 rpm, 413 rpm and 500 rpm.
34
==PAGE:45==
4.1. CFD simulation
(a) Single-phase flow
(b) Multi-phase flow
Fig. 4.3.: Simulated velocity magnitude on a axial line through the bioreactor after 1 s of flow.
The black dashed lines mark the lower edge of each impeller. a) single-phase and
b) multi-phase simulations are shown for agitation speed of 250 rpm, 413 rpm and
500 rpm.
35
==PAGE:46==
4. Results and Discussion
The observable flow pattern is expected for three Rushton impellers. Each impeller creates
four circulation loops with highest velocity in radial direction away from each impeller.
Since the impellers are reasonably spaced, the circulation loops are merging and good
mixing can be expected. Increasing agitation speed only scales the velocity without
changing the flow pattern for both aerated and unaerated cases. The difference between
single-phase and multi-phase flow is not strongly pronounced because aeration does not
influence the flow pattern. A slight difference however can be observed: the flow velocity
especially around the impellers is slightly higher in the unaerated case as air bubbles
reduce the power input of the impeller on the flow. This effect is most strongly pronounced
at the lowest impeller as the sparger is located just underneath it. For 150 L and 85 L,
the flow pattern looks similar to figure 4.2, but for two and one impeller, respectively (see
appendix A).
A numerical comparison of the velocity magnitude along the axial direction of the vessel
is presented in figure 4.3. It confirms the observations from figure 4.2. Highest velocity
occurs at the impeller regions where velocities up to 3.36 m
s are reached and flow velocity
increases with higher agitation speed at all axial heights. At the lowest impeller, aeration
decreases flow velocity by approx. 19 % for all agitation speeds.
In figure 4.4 the development of the air flow over time for condition HG413 is demonstrated
as an example as it looks similar for all conditions. The air flow develops from the sparger
region at the bottom of the tank. Therefore, airflow is first seen at the bottom impeller,
then develops at the middle and finally at the top impeller. Similar to the water velocity
in figure 4.2b, the typical flow pattern of the Rushton turbine also appears in the air phase
after a few seconds of flow simulation and higher velocities can be observed at the impellers
in radial direction. After a few seconds the velocity vectors are more equally distributed,
the flow is completely developed and has reached a steady state. An animation of this can
be found in appendix B.
36
==PAGE:47==
4.1. CFD simulation
Fig. 4.4.: Vector plots of the development of the air flow over time exemplified for condition
HG413.
37
==PAGE:48==
4. Results and Discussion
4.1.1. Mixing time simulation
Fig. 4.5.: Simulated tracer concentration on a XY plane over time exemplified for condition
HG500. After 22.5 s the tracer concentration is equally distributed throughout the
tank. tmix,95 is reached after 18.7 s.
Mixing times were obtained by simulating tracer experiments in the model. The progress
of the tracer concentration over time throughout the reactor can be seen in figure 4.5. The
tracer is added from the top so that at the beginning the tracer concentration is higher
near the top impeller. Then the tracer advances down into the middle compartment and
38
==PAGE:49==
4.1. CFD simulation
subsequently into the lowest compartment. After 22.5 s the tracer concentration is equally
distributed throughout the tank. An animation of this can be found in appendix C.
The 95 % average mixing time of single-phase simulations is shown in table 4.1 and of
multi-phase simulations in table 4.2.
Tab. 4.1.: Simulated average 95 % mixing time for all tested conditions without aeration.
Volume
Stirring speed (rpm)
L
I
H
250
4.94
21.09
29.11
413
3.06
13.35
20.03
500
2.28
11.34
19.54
Tab. 4.2.: Simulated average 95 % mixing time for all tested conditions with aeration.
Volume
Stirring speed (rpm)
L
I
H
250
5.64
18.61
38.07
413
2.67
13.71
20.1
500
2.14
11.94
18.72
The model predicts faster agitation and smaller volume lead to shorter mixing time. Figure
4.6a illustrates how simulated mixing time decreases with higher agitation speed. The
simulation of condition HG250 shows the longest mixing time with 38.07 s. The difference
to the single-phase case at same agitation speed is much more pronounced (24 %) than
at lower volumes. At the two higher volumes at 413 rpm and 500 rpm the results of
single-phase and multi-phase can be considered almost identical (difference < 5 %). At
the lowest volume the mixing time at all tested agitation speeds is so small that it can
be considered as instant mixing. When increasing the agitation speed from 250 rpm to
413 rpm the decrease in mixing time is more pronounced than between 413 rpm and
500 rpm. At the highest volume, the mixing time declines by 47 % in multi-phase and by
31 % in single-phase simulation when increasing the stirring speed from 250 rpm to 413 rpm.
At intermediate volume this difference is 26 % (multi-phase) and 37 % (single-phase) and
for the lowest volume 53 % (multi-phase) and 38 % (single-phase).
In figure 4.6b the mixing time over power input per volume is depicted to allow for an
easier comparison between processes. Higher P
V at lower volume leads to shorter mixing
time. Additionally, at similar P
V values mixing times are lower in the aerated system
compared to the unaerated one.
39
==PAGE:50==
4. Results and Discussion
(a) Simulated mixing time over agitation speed
(b) Simulated mixing time over power input per volume
Fig. 4.6.: Simulated mixing time over agitation speed (a) and power input per volume (b) for
three volumes (High. Intermediate, Low) and Non-gassed and Gassed conditions.
40
==PAGE:51==
4.1. CFD simulation
Figure 4.7 demonstrates how mixing time increases with higher volume. At all volumes
and stirring speeds of 413 rpm and 500 rpm, the mixing time does not change significantly
with aeration. This also applies to the lowest volume and lowest agitation speed. At
intermediate volume and 250 rpm the mixing time in the unaerated case is predicted
longer than with aeration. This result is different compared with the other volumes at
same stirring speed and should therefore be investigated further (see 4.3).
At intermediate and highest volume, the difference between aerated and unaerated cases
is most pronounced at 250 rpm. At the highest volume, mixing in the gassed case takes at
this stirring speed longer than in the non-gassed one. This can be explained by the power
input. The total torque of the impellers can be calculated from the pressure and viscous
forces on impeller blades and shaft to 7.03 Nm for non-gassed condition and 4.34 Nm
for gassed condition. The power draw is then calculated by the product of torque and
impeller speed (2πN).[103] The ratio of gassed to non-gassed power input then is:
Pg
Pu
= 0.6173
(4.1)
with Pg being the gassed power input and Pu the ungassed power input. The power input
drops by approx. 40 % in the aerated case leading to higher mixing times.
Fig. 4.7.: Simulated mixing time over liquid volume for three agitation speeds (250 rpm, 413 rpm,
500 rpm) and Non-gassed and Gassed conditions.
41
==PAGE:52==
4. Results and Discussion
4.1.2. Mesh independence analysis
Tab. 4.3.: Average velocity magnitude and computational time for three different mesh sizes of
the highest volume and the computational time for 5 s of flow simulation is shown.
Mesh elements
Volume-weighted average
velocity magnitude (m/s)
Computational time
(h)
221,540
0.556
4
550,164
0.593
14
1,253,676
0.626
56
Tab. 4.4.: Average velocity magnitude and computational time for three different mesh sizes of
the intermediate volume and the computational time for 5 s of flow simulation is
shown.
Mesh elements
Volume-weighted average
velocity magnitude (m/s)
Computational time
(h)
170,224
0.449
3.5
397,936
0.538
12
823,400
0.532
33.5
A mesh independence test was performed analyzing the influence of the mesh size on
numerical results. Table 4.3 and 4.4 show the volume average liquid velocity and the
computational time for 5 s of flow for three compared mesh sizes for the highest and
intermediate tested volume, respectively. Haringa et al. (2018) have shown that when
using sliding mesh the mixing time is not significantly influenced by the mesh size, therefore
the mixing times were not considered here.[102] The volume average liquid velocity was
calculated by dividing the summation of the product of the velocity and cell volume by
the total volume of the cell zone. The used size of the mesh (550,164 elements for highest
volume and 397,936 elements for intermediate volume) shows satisfying results since the
velocity magnitude differs only by 5.3 % and 1.1 % from the fine mesh while the coarse
mesh shows a difference over 11.1 % and 15.6 % for the highest and intermediate volume,
respectively.
Because the computational expense enlarges strongly with a finer mesh it is recommended
to find a compromise between accuracy and computational expense. At the highest volume,
it takes 14 times longer to compute 5 s of flow of the finer mesh compared to the coarse
mesh. The same flow time takes in the used mesh just 3.5 times longer. The same relation
applies to the mixing time simulation. Therefore, it was concluded that the medium size
mesh represents the best trade-off between accuracy and computation time.
42
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Mixing experiments
4.2. Mixing experiments
To validate the CFD model, mixing experiments as described in section 3.1 were per-
formed. Six alternating pulses of acid and base were dosed per replicate per condition
and the response measured with 10 sensors at the highest liquid volume, 7 sensors at the
intermediate liquid volume and 4 sensors at the lowest volume.
Figure 4.8 exemplifies the pH recording of one condition at the highest liquid volume.
Fig. 4.8.: Measured pH response of one condition (HN250). Probes 1-10 are measuring simulta-
neously six alternating pulses of acid and base.
The six alternating pulses of acid and base are visible in the pH response of the 10 probes.
Pulse size was set to obtain a pH change of approx. 1 and starting pH was approx. 4.5.
Each pulse resulted in an initial overshoot of the pH which is generally higher for probes
closer to the dosing point as illustrated in Figure 4.8. This overshoot is greater when
base is dosed since the difference in pH is higher between the tracer and the pH of the
vessel content. For each pulse the mixing time was obtained according to section 3.2.1.
An example of a normalized pH response for one pulse is shown in figure 4.9a.
The 10 pH sensors give different response curves according to their location in the vessel
(see figure 4.9b). It can be observed that probe 1 and probe 7 show an overshoot in pH
response at first followed by probe 2 and probe 8. This observation is in agreement with
43
==PAGE:54==
4. Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.9.: The measured pH correlates with the location of the probes inside the vessel. Probes
located at the top measure earlier a more pronounced pH signal than probes located
towards the bottom. (a) Normalized pH response of one pulse at condition HN250.
The black dashed line marks the mixing time, the red lines the 95 % interval. (b)
Location of probes inside the bioreactor. The blue dashed lines mark liquid height of
116 cm, 82 cm and 43 cm.
the positioning of the probes and the dosing point. Because the concentrated pH pulse is
dosed approximately from the middle at the top of the vessel, the sensors located closer to
the top show a fast and strong response of extreme pH leading to the observed overshoot.
Because of the movement of the liquid the pulse reaches probes further down in the vessel
after a time delay and at a lower concentration leading to the lower response. Even though
probe 1 and 7 are located approximately at the same height, probe 7 measures a higher
pH response faster. The reason could be that the dosing point is not located exactly in
the middle over the shaft, but slightly to one side. Due to the direction of the flow, the
pulse is first observed by probe 7.
When agitation speed is increased, flow velocity increases so that sensor 1 and 7 observe
the pulse approx. at the same time and concentration as exemplified in figure 4.10. The
overshoot is smaller than at lower stirring speed, because the pulse is diluted faster due of
to the high flow velocity. The findings are similar for the other cases not presented here,
but with fewer active probes at lower volumes.
In this study, the 95 % mixing time had been chosen as it is the most common degree of
homogeneity used in the literature.[104, 105, 106] However, noise in the probe measurement
could have led to long mixing times not depicting the reality. Therefore, also the 90 % and
85 % average mixing time was calculated and compared to the 95 % average mixing time
(figure 4.11). As expected, the mixing time decreases if the acceptance interval increases
44
==PAGE:55==
4.2. Mixing experiments
from 5 to 15 % and the average standard deviation decreases from 8.97 % for the 95 %
mixing time to 5.18% in 90 % mixing time and to 4.43 % in 85 % mixing time.
Fig. 4.10.: Normalized pH for condition HG500. The dashed line marks the mixing time, the
red lines the interval. At this higher stirring speed the overshoot is smaller and
probes located at the top measure a similar pH signal.
Fig. 4.11.: Comparison of average 95 %, 90 % and 85 % mixing time for all conditions at the
highest liquid volume.
45
==PAGE:56==
4. Results and Discussion
4.2.1. High liquid volume
The first set of experiments was obtained in a liquid height of 116 cm which corresponds
to approximately 200 L of volume and all 10 pH probes being covered by liquid.
The obtained average 95 % mixing times (tmix,95) for each of the 6 conditions can be
seen in table 4.5. During the last run one of the pumps failed, therefore the last run was
excluded and only 12 replicates are considered.
Tab. 4.5.: Average 95 % mixing time and standard deviation for all tested conditions at
maximum liquid volume.
Condition
tmix,95
HN250
30.33 ±2.54
HG250
34.78 ±2.07
HN413
20.77 ±2.69
HG413
23.97 ±2.71
HN500
17.30 ±1.83
HG500
20.78 ±2.04
The mixing time decreases with higher agitation speeds, with and without aeration. The
difference between 250 rpm and 413 rpm is much larger (31.52 % without aeration and
31.08 % with aeration) than between 413 rpm and 500 rpm (16.7 % without aeration
and 13.3 % with aeration). Additionally, the mixing time increases in the aerated case
compared to the unaerated one. As a consequence, the condition HG250 has the longest
average mixing time of 34.78 ± 2.07 s. These mixing time values are in accordance with
mixing times for similar systems found in the literature.[107]
In figure 4.12 the 95 % mixing time for each of the 12 replicates at the 6 different conditions,
including their averages are demonstrated. No significant differences between the first run
(replicates 1-6) and the second run (replicated 7-12) can be observed and no outliers were
identified which promotes the reproducibility of the results.
In general, the mixing time in the unaerated cases (figure 4.12 a, c, e) is shorter than with
aeration (figure 4.12 b, d, f). An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed which
confirms this observation. Since P-values ≤0.05 indicates a significant difference between
the means of tested conditions, the aeration has a significant influence on mixing time
(P-value < 0.002). In a multi-phase process, aeration, on the one hand, facilitates mixing
between compartments due to the movement of the gas bubbles. On the other hand,
aeration simultaneously reduces the power input of the impeller. As a result pumping
capacity of the impellers, especially of the lowest one, is reduced leading to slower mixing.
46
==PAGE:57==
4.2. Mixing experiments
(a) HN250
(b) HG250
(c) HN413
(d) HG413
(e) HN500
(f) HG500
Fig. 4.12.: tmix,95 for 12 replicates for 250 rpm, 413 rpm and 500 rpm for the highest liquid
volume tested. The dashed lines mark the average. The figures on the left represent
the unaerated cases (a, c, e), on the right the aerated cases (b,d,f).
47
==PAGE:58==
4. Results and Discussion
Because of practical limitations it was not possible to measure the power input and
especially the ratio of gassed vs. ungassed power input to obtain further insights. In
the literature, several Pg
Pu correlations exist, however, most of them are for single impeller
configurations only [23] or were obtained in distinct vessel geometries so that no accurate
approximation can be given.[108, 109]
Additionally, the mixing time with and without aeration becomes shorter when the agitation
speed increases. The higher the agitation speed the higher the power input and the impeller
tip speed which in previous studies has also led to shorter mixing time.[110, 111, 107]
The emerging turbulence due to agitation could be a possible explanation. The Reynolds
number describes the flow regime and can be found for the agitation speeds in table 4.6.
Already at 250 rpm the flow is fully turbulent (Re > 104), so that the flow regime does
not change by increasing the agitation speed to 500 rpm.
Tab. 4.6.: Reynolds number for used stirring speeds.
Impeller speed
Reynolds number
250 rpm
2.08e+5
413 rpm
3.46e+5
500 rpm
4.16e+5
Higher speed of the impeller in the liquid however provokes higher flow velocities, causing
faster mixing. Furthermore, higher agitation speed means higher P
V as seen in table 3.1.
The power input increases from 250 rpm to 413 rpm 4.5 fold and from 413 rpm to 500 rpm
1.8 fold. Therefore, a larger variation between mixing times between 250 rpm and 413 rpm
than between 413 rpm and 500 rpm can be noticed.
4.2.2. Intermediate liquid volume
At an intermediate liquid height of 82 cm, which corresponds to a volume of approximately
150 L, the experiments were performed similarly to the high liquid volume. The dosing
point is located in the same position, meaning that dosing takes place further away from
the liquid surface. The major difference is that instead of 10 probes, only 7 probes are
measuring since only these 7 probes are covered by liquid. Three runs of 6 conditions with
6 pulses each were performed where the liquid weight was held constant in the first run
and the liquid height was kept constant in the second and third run.
Table 4.7 shows the obtained 95 % mixing times. Similar to the mixing time results
mentioned in section 4.2.1, also at the intermediate volume, the average 95 % mixing
time decreases with faster agitation while aeration prolongs the mixing process. When
comparing to table 4.5 an overall large decrease in mixing time can be observed. The
mixing time decreases by more than 55 % compared to the high liquid level. The major
difference between the compared liquid heights is that at high liquid volume all three
impellers are submerged while at the intermediate volume the upper impeller is not involved
48
==PAGE:59==
4.2. Mixing experiments
Tab. 4.7.: Average 95 % mixing time and standard deviation for all tested conditions at
intermediate liquid volume.
condition
tmix,95 (s)
IN250
14.23 ±2.12
IG250
19.43 ±2.00
IN413
9.41 ±1.85
IG413
12.62 ±1.25
IN500
8.80 ±1.56
IG500
11.45 ±1.33
in the liquid mixing.
In figure 4.13 the 95 % mixing time of the 18 replicates is shown for stirring speeds of
250 rpm, 413 rpm and 500 rpm. When comparing between the conditions, the same general
observations as at high liquid volume can be made. Detailed examination shows that for
some of the replicates (number 7, 9, 11, 18 without aeration and number 5 with aeration)
the measured mixing time at 500 rpm is higher than the mixing time at 413 rpm. This
could be explained by the experimental error. To find out if a significant difference in
mixing time for stirring speed of 413 rpm and 500 rpm without aeration exists, an ANOVA
was performed which gave a P-value of 0.02. This result is in accordance with the first
observation that agitation decreases the mixing time significantly.
When comparing replicates of even and odd number in the unaerated conditions (figure 4.13
a, c, e) a difference in mixing time is apparent. As acid and base were added alternately,
the odd replicates correspond to acid pulses while the even replicates correspond to base
pulses. To prove this observation, an ANOVA was performed. Table 4.8 clearly reveals a
significant difference between acid and base pulses in the unaerated case. It seems that
the mixing introduced through the movement of the air bubbles overlays the difference of
mixing time of the acid and base pulses in the aerated conditions. This requires further
investigation and is discussed in section 4.2.3 as at the lowest volume this effect becomes
even more pronounced.
49
==PAGE:60==
4. Results and Discussion
(a) IN250
(b) IG250
(c) IN413
(d) IG413
(e) IN500
(f) IG500
Fig. 4.13.: tmix,95 for 18 replicates for 250 rpm, 413 rpm and 500 rpm for the intermediate
volume. The dashed lines mark the average mixing time. The figures on the left
represent the unaerated cases (a, c, e), on the right the aerated cases (b, d, f).
50
==PAGE:61==
4.2. Mixing experiments
Tab. 4.8.: P-values from ANOVA. Mixing time results obtained from acid pulses were compared
with those from base pulses.
condition
P-value
IN250
0.001
IG250
0.106
IN413
0.001
IG413
0.208
IN500
0.001
IG500
0.112
As explained previously for the first 6 replicates the liquid weight was kept constant while
for replicates 7-18 a constant liquid volume was maintained. An ANOVA for each condition
was performed to identify if these two strategies have an influence on the mixing time.
The P-values in table 4.9 indicate that only at the condition with aeration and 500 rpm
stirring speed, a constant liquid weight has a significant influence on the mixing time
as opposed to a constant liquid volume. This is in agreement with observations during
experimentation. Due to gas hold-up and vortex formation at aerated fast agitation the
liquid height increases so that the upper impeller also participates in the mixing process.
This leads to a significant decrease in mixing time in contrast to a liquid level kept below
the impeller.
Tab. 4.9.: P-values from ANOVA. Mixing time results obtained from constant liquid weight
were compared with those from constant liquid height.
Condition
P-value
IN250
0.13
IG250
0.78
IN413
0.16
IG413
0.47
IN500
0.85
IG500
0.01
The volumetric air flow rate was changed to investigate its influence on the mixing time.
To obtain a flow rate of 1 vvm, which is commonly used in industry, this parameter was
changed from 200
L
min to 150
L
min. The average mixing times for the different stirring
speeds are depicted in figure 4.14. Stirring speed instead of power input per volume was
used since the power input could not be measured during experimentation and would only
be an approximation. The average mixing time for 150
L
min and 200
L
min lies in the range
of error.
51
==PAGE:62==
4. Results and Discussion
Fig. 4.14.: tmix,95 for different stirring speeds at intermediate volume. Two aeration rates were
tested which yield similar mixing time results.
An ANOVA has furthermore shown that the mixing times are not significantly different.
Therefore, it can be concluded that changing the aeration rate from 200
L
min to 150
L
min
does not lead to a significant change in mixing time. However, similar to the high liquid
volume, no aeration decreases the mixing time significantly.
4.2.3. Low liquid volume
The lowest liquid height was 43 cm which corresponds to a volume of approx. 70 L. At
this volume the experimental set-up was similar to the other two. However, the highest
agitation speed (500 rpm) was not tested as this does not resemble industrial reality
because the volume of liquid is too small for such a high stirring speed. Furthermore, the
point of dosing was changed. The difference between the dosing point used at high and
intermediate liquid volume and the liquid surface was too high so that the pulses hit the
middle impeller which led to splashing of the pulse against the tank wall. To circumvent
this, the dosing point was moved closer to the liquid surface. Dosing occurred just above
probe 9, resulting in noisy and non-linear responses from probe 9, thus it was excluded
from the mixing time calculations. Due to the time limitation of this study only two runs
were performed with this set-up yielding 12 replicates. Obtained mixing times are shown
in table 4.10 and for each replicate in figure 4.15. Similar to high and intermediate volume,
aeration extends the average mixing time. Higher agitation speed, in contrast, does not
reduce the mixing time as it was seen at maximum and intermediate liquid level.
52
==PAGE:63==
4.2. Mixing experiments
Tab. 4.10.: Average 95 % mixing time and standard deviation for all tested conditions at lowest
liquid level.
Condition
tmix,95 (s)
LN250
13.79 ±9.58
LG250
17.56 ±11.56
LN413
15.09 ±9.07
LG413
16.43 ±9.50
(a) LN250
(b) LG250
(c) LN413
(d) LG413
Fig. 4.15.: tmix,95 for 12 replicates at 250 rpm and 413 rpm for the lowest tested volume.
Because of the high difference between even and odd replicates the average was
omitted. The figures on the left represent the unaerated cases (a, c), on the right
the aerated cases (b, d).
53
==PAGE:64==
4. Results and Discussion
The individual mixing times presented in figure 4.15 display pattern of variation, more
specifically between even and odd numbered replicates representing acid and base pulses,
respectively. Higher liquid volumes did not display the same significant pattern as present
at the lowest liquid volume, indicating that the phenomenon is dependent on the ex-
perimental conditions. Two conditions have been changed compared to the previous
experiments, the dosing point was moved closer to the liquid surface and the liquid height
was lowered. Possible explanations for the variation are rooted in either one of the changed
conditions.
When the dosing point was moved the tubing were extended and attached to one baffle
replicate close to the liquid surface. The acid and base were pulsed from individual tubing,
why the base tubing might have been placed in a poor angle resulting in splashing against
the baffle or sensor leading to longer mixing time.
Another explanation could be the property differences between H2SO4 and NaOH which
are more pronounced due to smaller volume. The base has a three times higher viscosity
(78 mPa s at 20 ◦C) and a 16 % higher density (2.13
g
cm3) than the acid (26.7 mPa s at
20 ◦C and 1.83
g
cm3). Since longer tubing in this set-up was used, this properties could have
become more visible. The base flows slower through the tube, leading to higher mixing
times. In addition to the disparity in viscosity and density, sulfuric acid is a polyprotic
acid, donating two protons, possibly resulting in a more rapid change in pH compared to
sodium hydroxide. When observing the response curve of an acid and a base pulse (figure
4.16), this assumption can be confirmed. The acid curve takes a steeper course than the
base pulse, which leads to the difference in mixing time.
Considering the acid pulses, the response time of the sensors are in line with mixing time,
which reduces the accuracy of mixing time estimations. To rule out any difference in
sensor response between the acid and base a separate response experiment was performed.
It showed no significant discrepancy between acid and base response time.
To conclude, all of the above could simultaneously contribute to the variation in mixing
time, making it difficult to point out one causing factor without additional investigation.
From comparison with the mixing times measured at the previous volumes it can however
be concluded that the mixing times obtained after acid addition resemble more the reality
than after base addition. Since the mixing time between high volume and intermediate
volume has been more than halved a significant reduction in mixing time at low volume is
expected. This applies only to the mixing time obtained after acid pulses. The mixing
times after acid addition for all conditions are shown in table 4.11.
54
==PAGE:65==
4.2. Mixing experiments
Tab. 4.11.: Average 95 % mixing time and standard deviation calculated after acid addition for
all tested conditions at lowest liquid level.
Condition
tmix,95 (s)
LN250
5.33 ±1.34
LG250
7.28 ±1.35
LN413
5.63 ±1.18
LG413
7.73 ±1.02
Fig. 4.16.: Comparison of pH response after a) acid and b) base pulse at lowest volume. Due
to the steeper response curve after acid pulse the mixing time is shorter than after
base addition. The black dashed line marks the mixing time, the red lines the 95 %
interval.
55
==PAGE:66==
4. Results and Discussion
As at the intermediate volume, the aeration was changed from 200
L
min to 70
L
min to obtain
a flow rate of 1 vvm. The resulting mixing times after acid addition were compared with
those obtained with a flow rate of 200
L
min and are shown in figure 4.17. As it is visible
from the figure and an ANOVA has shown, the mean mixing time of all acid pulses is not
significantly different between an aeration of 200
L
min and 70
L
min.
Fig. 4.17.: Comparison of tmix,95 for acid pulses between flow rates of 200
L
min and 70
L
min at
lowest volume.
4.3. Comparison of CFD model and experimental results
To validate the CFD model the simulation results for mixing time were compared with
the empirical results.
Table 4.12 and figure 4.18 reveal the accuracy of the CFD predictions for the highest
liquid volume. The light blue bars in figure 4.18 show the experimentally obtained average
mixing times with standard deviation as discussed in section 4.2.1. The dark blue bars
show the simulated mixing time. Overall, the accuracy of the model is sufficient at this
volume. However, the percentage error between simulated and measured mixing time
increases at 413 rpm and aeration and at 500 rpm for both with and without aeration as
seen in table 4.12.
56
==PAGE:67==
4.3. Comparison of CFD model and experimental results
Tab. 4.12.: Comparison of 95 % mixing time of experiments and simulations at highest tested
volume. The deviation between the simulated and measured mixing time is expressed
by the percentage error.
tmix,95 (s)
HN250
HG250
HN413
HG413
HN500
HG500
Experiments
30.33
±2.54
34.78
±2.07
20.77
±2.69
23.97
±2.71
17.30
±1.83
20.78
±2.04
Simulation
29.11
38.07
20.03
20.1
19.54
18.72
Percentage
error
4.19
8.64
3.69
19.25
11.46
11.00
Fig. 4.18.: Comparison between experimental and simulation results at highest volume for all
six conditions.
The model predictions for conditions HN250, HN413, and HG500 are correct when the
standard deviation for the experiments is taken into consideration. For the other three
conditions the simulated mixing time is very close to the experimental results so that it can
be concluded that the model predicts sufficiently accurate at this volume. However, since
Bujalski et al. (2002) claims that the addition point of the tracer can have a significant
influence on the simulated mixing time, two more dosing regions with the same axial
position were simulated.[112] Their location is shown in figure 4.19. Number 3 shows the
57
==PAGE:68==
4. Results and Discussion
location of dosing as used for all simulations. Number 1 and 2 show the dosing regions
simulated to test its influence on mixing time. Three conditions were chosen to test the
two regions. A comparison of mixing times obtained can be seen in table 4.13. No obvious
correlation between mixing time and dosing position can be observed. The condition also
shows no influence. Therefore, it can be concluded that the dosing region has a negligible
influence on the simulated mixing time.
Fig. 4.19.: Schematic top view of the simulated bioreactor. The interface region around the
impeller is shown. The numbers mark three different simulated dosing regions.
Tab. 4.13.: Comparison of tmix,95 between different simulated dosing regions.
tmix,95 (s)
Region 1
Region 2
Region 3
HN250
30.13
30.22
29.11
HG413
19.92
19.86
20.10
IN500
11.07
11.10
11.34
At the intermediate volume (table 4.14 and figure 4.20) the mixing time is accurately
predicted by the model for the aerated conditions. For the condition without aeration the
model over-predicts the mixing time. This is also reflected by the large deviation between
the simulated and measured mixing times.
Tab. 4.14.: Comparison of 95 % mixing time of experiments and simulations at intermediate
tested volume. The deviation between the simulated and measured mixing time is
expressed by the percentage error.
tmix,95 (s)
IN250
IG250
IN413
IG413
IN500
IG500
Experiments
14.23
±2.12
19.43
±2.00
9.41
±1.85
12.62
±1.25
8.80
±1.56
11.45
±1.33
Simulation
21.09
18.61
13.35
13.71
11.34
11.94
Percentage
error
32.53
4.41
29.51
7.95
22.40
4.10
58
==PAGE:69==
4.3. Comparison of CFD model and experimental results
Fig. 4.20.: Comparison between experimental and simulation results at intermediate volume
for all six conditions.
A possible reason for the difference between simulated mixing time and measured mixing
time is the instability of the liquid surface. During experimentation it was observed that
the liquid level fluctuates over a wide range and shows wave like motions (see video in
appendix D). This can help in the mixing process and can have led to the shorter mixing
times in the experiments than the ones observed in simulations. It is possible that due
to the strong movement the liquid surface touched the upper impeller occasionally so
that splashing decreased the mixing time further. This instability and movement of the
surface was not simulated as it would increase the complexity of the simulation. In a trial
a head space filled with air was simulated using the VOF model. In this simulation a small
movement of the liquid surface has become visible, however with no significant influence
on the mixing time.
The model predicts the aerated case better because the movement of the bubbles in the
simulation decreases the mixing time and therefore accounts for the difference in mixing
time in reality introduced by the movement of the liquid surface. In general, the probes and
probe holders, the sparger and the window of the vessel were omitted in all the simulations
but can introduce more turbulence to the flow which can accelerate the mixing process in
the experiments. Because of the smaller volume their influence is more pronounced.
59
==PAGE:70==
4. Results and Discussion
To further investigate the high predicted mixing times in the ungassed case, the turbulence
model was changed as this is the most important factor affecting mixing time in single-
phase. The Reynolds stress equation model (RSM) was chosen since it is considered the
most complex turbulence model allowing for most accurate predictions. With 7 equations
instead of two in the before used k −ϵ model it also adds a considerable amount of
complexity to the model. The simulation result for the RSM compared with experimental
results are shown in figure 4.21. Changing the turbulence model decreases the mixing
time by 24 % at IN250, 18 % at IN413 and 13 % IN500 and makes predictions closer to
experimental values.
(a) IN250
(b) IG413
(c) IN500
tmix,95(s)
k −ϵ
RSM
Experiments
IN250
21.09
16.07
14.32 ±2.12
IN413
13.35
10.96
9.41 ±1.85
IN500
11.07
9.82
8.79 ±1.56
(d)
Fig. 4.21.: (a-c) Experimentally determined tmix,95 at intermediate liquid volume for each of
the 18 replicates for 250 rpm (a), 413 rpm (b) and 500 rpm (c) without aeration.
The measured mixing times are compared with simulation results of k −ϵ turbulence
model (solid red line) and RSM (dashed red line). (d) Average tmix,95 of simulations
with tested turbulence models and compared to empirical results.
60
==PAGE:71==
4.3. Comparison of CFD model and experimental results
When comparing mixing time results at lowest volume, large differences between experi-
ments and simulation can be observed (see table 4.15 and figure 4.22a). Since 85 L were
simulated but due to practical limitations only 70 L were tested it would be expected to
observe shorter mixing time in experiments compared to the model. However, the empirical
mixing times are much longer with a significant standard deviation. This can be explained
by the long mixing time after base pulse as discussed in section 4.2.3. If simulations are
compared only with mixing time results after acid pulse, the predictions become much
more accurate as demonstrated in table 4.16 and figure 4.22b. Mixing times as obtained
from simulations and after acid pulses agree with the concept that mixing happens faster
in small volumes and should therefore be considered the more accurate results compared
to the results after base addition. The results show that mixing happens so fast inside
this volume and at the tested conditions that it can be concluded that mixing happens
instantly. This makes mixing time characterization at such a small volume redundant at
least in regards to gradients in bioreactors.
Tab. 4.15.: Comparison of 95 % mixing time of experiments and simulations at lowest tested
volume. The deviation between the simulated and measured mixing time is expressed
by the percentage error.
tmix,95 (s)
LN250
LG250
LN413
LG413
Experiments
13.79
±9.57
17.56
±11.56
15.09
±9.07
16.43
±9.50
Simulation
4.94
5.64
3.06
2.67
Percentage
error
179.15
211.35
393.14
515.36
Tab. 4.16.: Comparison of 95 % mixing time of experiments (only acid pulses considered) and
simulations at lowest tested volume. The deviation between the simulated and
measured mixing time is expressed by the percentage error.
tmix,95 (s)
LN250
LG250
LN413
LG413
Experiments
5.44
±1.34
7.08
±1.35
5.63
±1.18
7.73
±1.02
Simulation
4.94
5.64
3.06
2.67
Percentage
error
10.12
25.53
83.99
189.51
61
==PAGE:72==
4. Results and Discussion
(a) Acid and base pulses are included in experimental values.
(b) Only acid pulses are included in experimental values.
Fig. 4.22.: Comparison between experimental and simulation results for the lowest liquid volume
a) including all replicates, b) considering only acid pulses.
Mixing times of up to 35 seconds in a volume of 200 L may seem excessive to industry
professionals. It is difficult to directly compare the mixing times obtained in this study
with the ones found in literature because different volumes, height to diameter ratios,
distinct number of impellers, impeller types and configuration, power input and aeration
rates are used which have significant influence on mixing time. Especially, the case that
three impellers are used is seldom seen in literature. While more Rushton turbines increase
the power input, they also introduce zoning which increases the mixing time. Since
multiple replicates have been conducted and they give coherent results which are mainly
62
==PAGE:73==
4.4. Flow-following sensor devices
also supported by the model, the mixing times recorded in this study can be considered
trustworthy. Additionally, Sartorius claims that the bioreactors of their series are easily
scalable and Schirmer et al. (2017) characterized the same Sartorius D-DCU system
however at different scale.[17, 107] They found mixing times of up to 26 s for the 100 L
bioreactor and which were found to be 16 % to 39 % higher than in the D-DCU 30 L
system. Therefore, it can be concluded that the measured mixing time in this study are
meaningful.
4.4. Flow-following sensor devices
In the largest volume, additional experiments were conducted where flow-following sensor
devices were used to measure pH instead of static probes attached to baffles. The sensor
information consisted of pH, time and pressure data from which the axial position and the
axial velocity were calculated. Only data for 250 rpm and 413 rpm without aeration could
be obtained due to failure of the devices before testing other conditions.
The mixing time cannot be determined in a similar manner as for the probes installed at
the baffle replicates since the Freesense devices move inside the entire tank volume. When
acid/base is dosed from the top, the sensors might be in a location far away from the
dosing point so that the first signal of pH difference is measured with a delay as opposed
to the dosing time. This means that the tracer is already mixed when the first signal is
measured leading to very reduced mixing times. Thus, a different method must be found
which takes the flow pattern which the sensors follow into consideration.
To understand the flow-following behavior of the sensor devices, first, the movement of
the sensors inside the liquid volume was examined. The axial movement of a sensor device
is shown in figure 4.23 over a time span of three minutes. The figure reveals that the
device moves throughout the entire liquid height, however, the extreme locations are rarely
visited. The sensors enter the same circulation loop multiple times but can also skip
circulation loops when traveling through the vessel as seen at around 30 s. A possible
reason could be that the sensor device was hit by the impeller, reached high velocities and
entered a circulation loop at the lowest impeller.
To understand in which heights of the bioreactor the device is more frequently present,
the axial distribution per stirring speed was calculated (figure 4.24).
63
==PAGE:74==
4. Results and Discussion
Fig. 4.23.: An example of the axial movement of one sensor device at condition HN250 rpm.
The dashed lines represent the lower edge of each impeller. Some values are missing
because the measurements were cleaned for pressure spikes due to collision of the
sensors and tank geometry.
The axial distribution is a combination of the frequency of observations of a sensor in a
compartment and the axial velocity measured in the compartment. At 250 rpm the sensor
devices are mostly located around the upper and middle impeller while at 413 rpm above
the middle and in the middle between the lowest and middle impeller. The compartments
furthest above and below are almost not visited. The compartments above the highest
impeller are more visited than the compartments below the lowest impeller because the
distance of the lowest impeller from the bottom of the tank is rather small (17 cm). Thus,
the devices pass through these compartments rarely, but it could also be the case that the
devices are passing through faster than the frequency of measurement so that no values
are recorded.
The axial distribution of the devices further down in the vessel at 413 rpm could be
explained by higher downward pumping of the impellers at higher agitation speed. However,
Bisgaard et al. (2021) has shown that changing the stirring speed does not change the axial
distribution of the devices in the tank significantly.[96] Another fact which casts doubt
about the correctness of the data is that individual devices were shown to exhibit similar
behavior resulting in a small standard deviation.[113] This, as can be seen in figure 4.24, is
only the case for some of the heights but not for all. These two facts emphasize skepticism
on the right functionality of the sensors meaning that the sensors do not distribute evenly
in the reactor as a microorganism is expected to do.
64
==PAGE:75==
4.4. Flow-following sensor devices
(a) 250 rpm
(b) 413 rpm
Fig. 4.24.: Axial distribution of the Freesense sensor devices for (a) 250 rpm and (b) 413 rpm.
ρk is the probability of presence in compartmnet k, each of 5 cm height. The
standard deviation obtained from two devices and over a time of 30 min is shown.
The dashed lines represent the lower edge of each impeller.
According to Barrue et al. (1999), a uniform axial distribution of a perfect tracer throughout
the tank is expected, since it has an equal probability of being found at any point of the
fluid.[114] However, the distribution curve obtained from the sensor devices shows a large
deviation from a uniform distribution. This is in accordance with the concept that due to
their size and associated momentum, the sensors ability to change in the velocity field
of the fluid is limited. Flow tracers with good flow-following capabilities have usually
diameters in the micro-scale range.[114] Thus, the devices do not represent a fluid particle
65
==PAGE:76==
4. Results and Discussion
but can give an estimation of the flow field.[96]
To get insights into the flow field measured by the devices, the average axial velocity per
axial compartment was calculated and compared to CFD results and is displayed in figure
4.25. With higher agitation speed the overall axial velocity increases. This is in agreement
with the simulation results (section 4.1). However, the model predicts more than twice as
high axial velocities at all heights than measured by the devices at both agitation speeds.
(a) 250 rpm
(b) 413 rpm
Fig. 4.25.: Average axial velocities of two devices over the liquid height divided in compartments
of 5 cm for (a) 250 rpm and (b) 413 rpm. Blue curves display the measurements from
the sensor devices, red curves the CFD simulation. The dashed lines represent the
lower edge of each impeller. The lowest compartment was omitted due to extreme
high standard deviation.
66
==PAGE:77==
4.4. Flow-following sensor devices
According to the flow patterns known for Rushton turbines, the highest axial velocity is
expected just below and above each impeller as seen in the CFD results (figure 4.25 red
and orange lines). The typical flow pattern cannot be recognized in the axial velocity
profile of the sensor devices (figure 4.25 blue lines). While at 250 rpm the highest velocities
are seen almost in the middle between impellers, at 413 rpm these compartments show
the lowest axial velocities and the highest just below the impellers.
To rule out that the form of data analysis (average over all velocities in a compartment of
5 cm axial height) had an influence on this outcome, the compartment size was changed
from 5 cm axial height to 1 cm but no significant difference obtained (not shown). Another
possible explanation could be that a flow time of 30 min with a sampling frequency of
2 Hz is not enough to obtain statistically significant flow measurements. At 413 rpm the
device obtains an average velocity of 0.21 m
s leading to a travelled distance of 10.5 cm on
average between measuring points. A sampling time of 30 min gives 216,000 data points
which might not be enough to resolve the whole flow pattern consisting of 12 circulation
loops. Additionally, the diameter of the tank is 48 cm and the distance between impeller
and tank wall is only 14 cm at each side while the device has a diameter of 4.3 cm so
that the devices might be too large to follow the emerging flow patterns. These facts have
led to the conclusion that the sensor devices compared to the volume of the rector are
too large in diameter, too high in velocity and too slow in sampling rate to give valuable
insights into the flow. For this reason, the axial velocity profile does not compare with
the CFD results which are expected for three Rushton impellers. The obtained velocities
are most likely an effect of interaction of the devices with the impellers and the tank wall.
Without knowledge about the flow, mixing time analysis is unfeasible and would not give
meaningful results.
At the condition HN250 the devices got stuck at a height of approx. 0.363 m under a hook
which supports the sparger. This height correlates with the position of sensor 9. The data
points collected by the devices when stuck can be used to calculate a static mixing time
which can be compared with the mixing time obtained from sensor 9. The results are
shown in table 4.17.
Tab. 4.17.: Average 95 % mixing time and standard deviation for flow-following sensor devices
when immobilized at height 0.36 m and sensor 9, located at same axial position.
tmix,95 (s)
Sensor 9
21.1 ±2.10
Flow-following devices
22.6 ±1.95
67
==PAGE:78==
4. Results and Discussion
Even though the flow-following devices have a response time of < 1 s and sensor 9 of
approx. 5 s, the mixing times obtained are comparable. With these results, the mixing
time measured by the static pH probes can be verified. It can also be concluded that with
high probability if the sensor devices are used in a larger tank volume where the circulation
loops are large enough to be followed by the devices and if their sampling frequency is
high enough compared to their velocity the mixing time can be measured accurately.
It is important to note that during experimentation both the devices and the bioreactor
got damaged. The repeated impact of the sensors on the impeller might has untightened
the screw with which the middle impeller was fixed to the shaft so that the middle impeller
dropped on the lowest impeller, displaced the lowest impeller which then damaged the
sparger. Due to this impact, one of the devices stopped recording. This happened only after
a part of the planned experiments could be conducted. For this reason, only two replicates
of only two agitation speeds (250 rpm and 413 rpm) exist. It cannot be ruled out that the
impeller already moved downwards on the shaft or the device already suffered damage
before the fall of the impeller stopped the experiment. Thus, also the measurements
discussed above should be examined with caution.
Due to the damage observed and the incapability of the sensor devices to give insights on
the flow pattern, it was concluded together with Freesense ApS that the sensors in their
free-floating form are not suitable for this bioreactor size and configuration and further
experiments should not be performed.
68
==PAGE:79==
5. Conclusion and Future Work
5.1. Conclusion
This study aimed to characterize mixing in a pilot scale bioreactor to assist scale-up
of a fed-batch fermentation. To achieve this, mixing at three volumes, three stirring
speeds and with and without aeration were simulated in a CFD model and validated
empirically with stationary pH probes and flow-following sensor devices. Mixing times of
all conditions at the highest volume and the aerated condition of the intermediate volume
were predicted accurately by the model. With low agitation the maximum model error lies
by 8.6 % (HG250) and increases up to 19.2 % (HG413) with higher agitation. In unaerated
conditions at 150 L the error decreases from 32.6 % at 250 rpm to 22 % at 500 rpm.
Flow-following sensor devices of this size should not be used in this bioreactor volume and
configuration as they might damage the equipment and not produce trustworthy flow data.
However, despite their incapability to follow the flow field similar mixing times compared
to simulations and other experiments could be obtained when fixed in position.
Significant gradients can have an impact on cell physiology and hence cell productivity,
resulting in lower process performance and thus dramatically reduced process profitability.
Therefore, it is important for any bio-process to be scaled-down to characterize gradients.
When working with fermentations, the reaction rates at low volume which resembles the
start of the fed-batch fermentation are usually known. Thus, the Damköhler number
can be calculated which can then give insights into the occurrence of gradients. With
the mixing time found at the lowest volume, Da < 1 is expected independent of the
microorganisms reaction rates, meaning no gradient formation, making the exact mixing
time determination superfluous. At the two larger volumes however, the duration of mixing
shown will have an influence on the fermentation process because the observed mixing
times (9 s to 35 s) can lead to gradient formation depending on the reaction rates of the
microorganism.
To prove this, as an example the Damköhler numbers for a Pseudomonas puptida fed-batch
fermentation were calculated. P. puptida is a microorganism with increasing interest in
industrial applications.[115]
69
==PAGE:80==
5. Conclusion and Future Work
The Damköhler number was calculated with the circulation time
tcirc = tmix.95
4
(5.1)
and the reaction time
trxn = KS
qSX
(5.2)
The values used in the calculation and the resulting trxn, tcirc and Da are displayed in
table 5.1.
Tab. 5.1.: Parameters of P. puptida fermentation. µmax, KS and YXS were proposed by Davis
et al. (2015), X was obtained from simulations.[116] Damköhler numbers of condition
gassed and 250 rpm are compared between volumes.
Volume
X ( g
L)
µmax(h−1)
KS( g
L)
YXS
trxn(s)
tcirc(s)
Da
LG250
15
0.67
0.072
0.45
0.0032
1.77
0.153
IG250
40
0.0014
4.86
1.12
HG250
50
0.0024
8.70
2.497
At the two larger volumes Da > 1 is observed demonstrating that significant gradients
will most likely be found if a P. puptida fermentation is conducted in the characterized
bioreactor.
The characterization of mixing in the 200 L pilot bioreactor is an important first step
towards scale-up of a fed-batch fermentation. With the knowledge obtained from this study,
guidance for fed-batch fermentations is provided, giving valuable insights into fermentation
metrics at industrial scale. This in turn assists cost-efficient production of sustainable
bio-chemicals which will help in the transitions towards a sustainable future.
5.2. Future work
The unaerated conditions at intermediate volume as well as mixing at 70 L need further
investigation.
• To examine the influence of the surface movement on the mixing time, additional
experiments should be conducted where this movement is reduced as much as possible
by reducing the agitation speed to < 100 rpm and no aeration. Analogous conditions
should be simulated. These conditions would not be of industrial significance but
can be used to understand the influence of surface movement on mixing time. If the
model still over-predicts the mixing time the movement of the surface can be ruled
out as its reason.
70
==PAGE:81==
5.2. Future work
• At 70 L the changed experimental set-up and the properties of the used acid
and base may be responsible for distinct results. Therefore, an additional experiment
could be conducted where the buffer is filled into a beaker and sulfuric acid and
sodium hydroxide are pipetted while one of the sensors measures the pH change
to rule out the influence of the set-up. Different volumes of different types of acid
and base should be tested to rule out the difference in properties such as viscosity.
The effect of viscosity difference on mixing time could also be simulated in the CFD
model. If the obtained response curves are comparable with the ones obtained in
this study the mixing time is too short to be measured since the mixing time is
shorter than the response time of the sensors. pH sensors with shorter response time
should be used if exact mixing time determination is necessary. The mixing time at
a volume of 70 L and with the given reactor and impeller configurations is shorter
than 5 s so that it can be considered as instant mixing.
• Because of the flexibility of the baffle design it is possible to place the sensors at
different heights or at different distributions between the two baffles, which would
give more insights. For example, if the sensors are distributed symmetrically on
both baffles a comparison between the mixing times of the downstream side and the
upstream side would be possible to observe if mixing occurs symmetrically. This
can then also be compared to the mixing time obtained from other impeller types,
spacing, and number to obtain insights on effects of these changes and to optimize
reactor design for lower mixing time. Additionally, not only pH can be measured
this way but the probes could be replaced by oxygen probes so that dissolved oxygen
which is often a limiting variable, can be measured during fermentation.
• By coupling the kinetics of the microorganism to the CFD model insights
for detailed description and prediction of the entire bioprocess can be obtained before
running the actual fermentation. With this approach significant gradients can be
identified which have an impact on cell physiology and hence cell productivity, result-
ing in lower process performance and thus dramatically reduced process profitability.
Using this method, both the strain and fermentor can be designed to serve their
purpose.
• When coupling CFD with a population balance model (PBM) a dynamic
simulation of a heterogeneous cell population in a non-homogeneous environment
can be realized. This CFD–PBM model should be able to forecast locally distributed
cell attributes (e.g. size, composition, growth rates, product formation rates) of
microorganism populations while accounting for variations in the cell physiological
state caused by distinct physical (e.g. local gas bubble size, shear stress) and chemical
(e.g. local substrate concentration, pH) environments. This would give a complete
71
==PAGE:82==
5. Conclusion and Future Work
picture of the process inside the fed-batch fermentation. However, with such a high
level of complexity, the computational bottleneck might be reached.
72
==PAGE:83==
A. Appendix A: Water velocity profiles
of 150 L and 85 L
Fig. A.1.: Vector plots of velocity magnitude for single and multi-phase flow for intermediate
simulated liquid volume after 1 s of flow for agitation speed of 250 rpm, 413 rpm
and 500 rpm.
xiii
==PAGE:84==
A. Appendix A: Water velocity profiles of 150 L and 85 L
Fig. A.2.: Vector plots of velocity magnitude for single and multi-phase flow for lowest simulated
liquid volume after 1 s of flow for agitation speed of 250 rpm, 413 rpm and 500 rpm.
xiv
==PAGE:85==
B. Appendix B: Air flow simulation
Fig. B.1.: Animation of CFD simulation of the development of the airflow for condition HG413.
The air moves from the circulation loops of the lowest impeller to the middle impeller
and finally to the highest impeller. To see the video open the PDF in Adobe Acrobat
Reader and click on the picture.
xv
==PAGE:86==
C. Appendix C: Mixing simulation with
tracer
Fig. C.1.: Animation of CFD simulation of the distribution of the tracer at condition HG500.
To see the video open the PDF in Adobe Acrobat Reader and click on the picture.
xvi
==PAGE:87==
D. Appendix D: Video of surface
movement during experiments
Fig. D.1.: Video of the bioreactor while stirred and aerated at condition HG413. The pronounced
movement of the liquid surface is visible. To see the video open the PDF in Adobe
Acrobat Reader and click on the picture.
xvii
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
[1] J. S. Crater and J. C. Lievense, “Scale-up of industrial microbial processes,” FEMS
microbiology letters, vol. 365, no. 13, 2018.
[2] B. J. Minihane and D. E. Brown, “Fed-batch culture technology,” Biotechnology
advances, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 207–218, 1986.
[3] R. Wright, “Mass spectrometry | gas analysis,” in Encyclopedia of analytical science
(P. Worsfold, ed.), pp. 493–501, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2005.
[4] P. M. Doran, Bioprocess Engineering Principles. Academic Press, 1995.
[5] R. D. Douma, P. J. T. Verheijen, W. T. A. M. de Laat, J. J. Heijnen, and W. M.
van Gulik, “Dynamic gene expression regulation model for growth and penicillin
production in penicillium chrysogenum,” Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 106,
no. 4, pp. 608–618, 2010.
[6] S. H. Mohd Azhar, R. Abdulla, S. A. Jambo, H. Marbawi, J. A. Gansau, A. A.
Mohd Faik, and K. F. Rodrigues, “Yeasts in sustainable bioethanol production: A
review,” Biochemistry and biophysics reports, vol. 10, pp. 52–61, 2017.
[7] D. Riesenberg and R. Guthke, “High-cell-density cultivation of microorganisms,”
Applied microbiology and biotechnology, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 422–430, 1999.
[8] J. Lee, S. Y. Lee, S. Park, and A. P. Middelberg, “Control of fed-batch fermentations,”
Biotechnology advances, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 29–48, 1999.
[9] J. Villadsen, J. Nielsen, and G. Lidén, Bioreaction Engineering Principles. Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2011.
[10] Bio-based Industries Consortium, “The bio-based industries vision: Accelerating
innovation and market uptake of biobased products,” July 2012.
[11] Global Biotechnology Market. 2021.
[12] J. M. Woodley, M. Breuer, and D. Mink, “A future perspective on the role of
industrial biotechnology for chemicals production,” Chemical Engineering Research
and Design, vol. 91, no. 10, pp. 2029–2036, 2013.
xviii
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[13] E. L. Paul, V. A. Atiemo-Obeng, and S. M. Kresta, Handbook of industrial mixing:
Science and practice. Hoboken N.J.: Wiley-Interscience, 2004.
[14] F. Bylund, E. Collet, S.-O. Enfors, and G. Larsson, “Substrate gradient formation
in the large scale bioeactor lowers cell yield and increass by-product formation,”
Bioprocess Engineering, vol. 18, pp. 171–180, 1998.
[15] H. Onyeaka, A. W. Nienow, and C. J. Hewitt, “Further studies related to the
scale-up of high cell density escherichia coli fed-batch fermentations: the additional
effect of a changing microenvironment when using aqueous ammonia to control ph,”
Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 474–484, 2003.
[16] B. H. Junker, “Scale-up methodologies for escherichia coli and yeast fermentation
processes,” Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, vol. 97, no. 6, pp. 347–364,
2004.
[17] L. Nascimento, M. Leupold, J. Rupprecht, A. Rees-Manley, and B. Zoro, “Unveiling
process characterization across scales with sartorius upstream solutions.”
[18] M. C. Flickinger and S. W. Drew, “Encyclopedia of bioprocess technology : fermen-
tation, biocatalysis, and bioseparation,” 1999.
[19] R. Eibl, D. Eibl, R. Pörtner, G. Catapano, and P. Czermak, Cell and Tissue
Reaction Engineering: With a Contribution by Martin Fussenegger and Wilfried
Weber. Springer eBook Collection Biomedical and Life Sciences, Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[20] H. Chmiel, “Bioreaktoren,” in Bioprozesstechnik, pp. 197–236, Spektrum Akademis-
cher Verlag, Heidelberg, 2011.
[21] A. EINSELE, “Scaling-up bioreactors,” Process Biochem, vol. 7, pp. 13–14, 1978.
[22] B. J. Michel and S. A. Miller, “Power requirements of gas-liquid agitated systems,”
AIChE Journal, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 262–266, 1962.
[23] G. A. Hughmark, “Power requirements and interfacial area in gas-liquid turbine agi-
tated systems,” Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 638–641, 1980.
[24] N. W. F. Kossen, N. M. G. Oosterhuis, H. J. Rehm, and G. Reed, “Modeling and
schle-up of bioreactors,” Biotechnology, vol. 2, pp. 572–605, 1985.
[25] D. E. Brown, “Industrial–scale operation of microbial processes,” Journal of Chemical
Technology and Biotechnologz, vol. 32, pp. 34–46, 1982.
xix
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
[26] L.-K. Ju and G. G. Chase, “Improved scale-up strategies of bioreactors,” Bioprocess
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1-2, pp. 49–53, 1992.
[27] W. J. Kelly, “Using computational fluid dynamics to characterize and improve
bioreactor performance,” Biotechnology and applied biochemistry, vol. 49, no. Pt 4,
pp. 225–238, 2008.
[28] B. C. Buckland, “The translation of scale in fermentation processes: The impact of
computer process control,” Bio/Technology, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 875–883, 1984.
[29] A. W. Nienow, “Hydrodynamics of stirred bioreactors,” Applied Mechanics Reviews,
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 3–32, 1998.
[30] C. Haringa, R. F. Mudde, and H. J. Noorman, “From industrial fermentor to cfd-
guided downscaling: what have we learned?,” Biochemical Engineering Journal,
vol. 140, pp. 57–71, 2018.
[31] S. S. Mostafa and X. Gu, “Strategies for improved dco2 removal in large-scale
fed-batch cultures,” Biotechnology Progress, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2003.
[32] M. Jaszczur and A. Młynarczykowska, “A general review of the current development
of mechanically agitated vessels,” Processes, vol. 8, no. 8, p. 982, 2020.
[33] Z. X. Weng, Z. M. Huang, and Y. M. Li, “The effect of the distance between multiple
impellers in the turbulent tank,” Chemical Engineering, 1983.
[34] K. Rutherford, K. C. Lee, S. Mahmoudi, and M. Yianneskis, “Hydrodynamic
characteristics of dual rushton impeller stirred vessels,” AIChE Journal, vol. 42,
no. 2, 1996.
[35] R. Kuboi and A. W. Nienow, “The power drawn by dual impeller systems under
gassed and ungassed conditions,” 1982.
[36] L. Libor, M. Tomáš, J. R. František, and V. Lukáš, “Prediction of power consumption
in mechanically agitated gassed reactor in viscous batch‡,” Chemical Papers, vol. 70,
no. 4, 2016.
[37] K. M. A. Ali, “Parameters influence on mixing time of gas liquid agitation system,”
vol. 22, no. 2, 2014.
[38] G. B. Tatterson, Fluid Mixing and gas dispersion in agitated tanks. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1991.
[39] R. van der Heijden, C. Hellinga, K. Luyben, and G. Honderd, “State estimators
(observers) for the on-line estimation of non-measurable process variables,” Trends
in Biotechnology, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 205–209, 1989.
xx
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[40] N. Otomo, W. Bujalski, A. W. Nienow, and K. Takahashi, “A novel measurement
technique for mixing time in an aerated stirred vessel,” JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL
ENGINEERING OF JAPAN, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 66–74, 2003.
[41] P. A. Vanrolleghem, G. Sin, and K. V. Gernaey, “Transient response of aerobic
and anoxic activated sludge activities to sudden substrate concentration changes,”
Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 277–290, 2004.
[42] Zhang, V. L. Tsang, R. Korke-Kshirsagar, and T. Ryll, “Effects of ph probe lag on
bioreactor mixing time estimation,” Process Biochemistry, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 913–916,
2014.
[43] V. Cappello, C. Plais, C. Vial, and F. Augier, “Scale-up of aerated bioreactors:
Cfd validation and application to the enzyme production by trichoderma reesei,”
Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 229, p. 116033, 2021.
[44] S.-O. Enfors, M. Jahic, A. Rozkov, B. Xu, M. Hecker, B. Jürgen, E. Krüger,
T. Schweder, G. Hamer, D. O’Beirne, N. Noisommit-Rizzi, M. Reuss, L. Boone,
C. Hewitt, C. McFarlane, A. Nienow, T. Kovacs, C. Trägårdh, L. Fuchs, J. Revstedt,
P. C. Friberg, B. Hjertager, G. Blomsten, H. Skogman, S. Hjort, F. Hoeks, H.-Y.
Lin, P. Neubauer, R. van der Lans, K. LUYBEN, P. Vrabel, and Å. Manelius, “Phys-
iological responses to mixing in large scale bioreactors,” Journal of Biotechnology,
vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 175–185, 2001.
[45] B. Xu, M. Jahic, G. Blomsten, and S. O. Enfors, “Glucose overflow metabolism and
mixed-acid fermentation in aerobic large-scale fed-batch processes with escherichia
coli,” Applied microbiology and biotechnology, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 564–571, 1999.
[46] A. Sweere, K. Luyben, and N. Kossen, Regime analysis and scale-down: Tools to
investigate the performance of bioreactors, vol. 9. 1987.
[47] G. Larsson, M. Törnkvist, E. Stahl Wernersson, C. Trägardth, H. Noorman, and S.-O.
Enfors, “Substrate gradients in bioreactors: origin and consequences,” Bioprocess
Engineering, vol. 14, no. 14, pp. 281–289, 1996.
[48] H. K. Versteeg, An introduction to computational fluid dynamics: The finite volume
method. Harlow: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2. ed., [nachdr.] ed., 2007.
[49] D. F. Fletcher, D. D. McClure, J. M. Kavanagh, and G. W. Barton, “Cfd simulation
of industrial bubble columns: Numerical challenges and model validation successes,”
Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 44, pp. 25–42, 2017.
[50] U. Manual, “Ansys fluent 12.0,” Theory Guide, 2009.
xxi
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[51] J. D. Anderson and J. Wendt, Computational fluid dynamics, vol. 206. Springer,
1995.
[52] P. R. Childs, “Laws of motion,” in Rotating flow (P. R. N. Childs, ed.), pp. 17–52,
Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier, 2011.
[53] H. Liu, “Description of single-point wind time series along railways,” in Wind
Forecasting in Railway Engineering (H. Liu, ed.), pp. 69–136, San Diego: Elsevier,
2021.
[54] A. Sommerfeld, Ein Beitrag zur hydrodynamischen Erklaerung der turbulenten
Fluessigkeitsbewegungen. 1909.
[55] Hilde Larsson, Modeling of Mass Transfer Phenomena in biochemical reactor systems
using CFD. PhD thesis, 2015.
[56] W.-M. Lu, H.-Z. Wu, and M.-Y. Ju, “Effects of baffle design on the liquid mixing
in an aerated stirred tank with standard rushton turbine impellers,” Chemical
Engineering Science, vol. 52, no. 21-22, pp. 3843–3851, 1997.
[57] J. Boussinesq, “Theorie de l’ecoulement tourbillant,” Mem. Acad. Sci., vol. 23, p. 46,
1877.
[58] B. E. Launder and D. B. Spalding, “The numerical computation of turbulent flows,”
Numerical Prediction of Flow, Heat Transfer, Turbulence and Combustion, pp. 96–
116, 1974.
[59] F. R. Menter, “Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering
applications,” AIAA Journal, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1598–1605, 1994.
[60] D. C. Wilcox, “Reassessment of the scale-determining equation for advanced turbu-
lence models,” AIAA Journal, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1299–1310, 1988.
[61] F. R. Menter, “Performance of popular turbulence model for attached and separated
adverse pressure gradient flows,” AIAA Journal, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 2066–2072, 1992.
[62] F. R. Menter, “Improved two-equation k-omega turbulence models for aerodynamic
flows,” Tech. Rep. A-92183, 1992.
[63] S. Subramaniam, “Lagrangian–eulerian methods for multiphase flows,” Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science, vol. 39, no. 2-3, pp. 215–245, 2013.
[64] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics. Cambridge: Univ. Press, 6th ed., repr., transf. to digital
printing ed., 1993.
xxii
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[65] M. Kuschel, F. Siebler, and R. Takors, “Lagrangian trajectories to predict the
formation of population heterogeneity in large-scale bioreactors,” Bioengineering,
vol. 4, no. 2, p. 27, 2017.
[66] F. Siebler, A. Lapin, M. Hermann, and R. Takors, “The impact of co gradients on c.
ljungdahlii in a 125 m3 bubble column: Mass transfer, circulation time and lifeline
analysis,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 207, pp. 410–423, 2019.
[67] D. D. McClure, J. M. Kavanagh, D. F. Fletcher, and G. W. Barton, “Character-
izing bubble column bioreactor performance using computational fluid dynamics,”
Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 144, pp. 58–74, 2016.
[68] C. Haringa, H. J. Noorman, and R. F. Mudde, “Lagrangian modeling of
hydrodynamic–kinetic interactions in (bio)chemical reactors: Practical implemen-
tation and setup guidelines,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 157, pp. 159–168,
2017.
[69] C. Hirt and B. Nichols, “Volume of fluid (vof) method for the dynamics of free
boundaries,” Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 201–225, 1981.
[70] V. R. Gopala and B. G. van Wachem, “Volume of fluid methods for immiscible-fluid
and free-surface flows,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 141, no. 1-3, pp. 204–221,
2008.
[71] H. Liu, Z. Qi, and M. Xu, “Numerical simulation of fluid flow and interfacial behavior
in three-phase argon-stirred ladles with one plug and dual plugs,” steel research
international, vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 440–458, 2011.
[72] W. F. Noh and P. Woodward, “Slic (simple line interface calculation),” in Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference on Numerical Methods in Fluid Dynamics June
28 – July 2, 1976 Twente University, Enschede, pp. 330–340, Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 1976.
[73] J. P. Boris and D. L. Book, “Flux-corrected transport. i. shasta, a fluid transport
algorithm that works,” Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 38–69,
1973.
[74] YOUNGS D. L., “Time-dependent multi-material flow with large fluid distortion,”
Numerical Methods for Fluid Dynamics, 1982.
[75] Manninen Mikko, Taivassalo Veikko, and Kallio Sirpa, “On the mixture model for
multiphase flow,” VTT Publications, vol. 288, 1996.
[76] W. Chtourou, M. Ammar, Z. Driss, and M. S. Abid, “Cfd prediction of the turbulent
flow generated in stirred square tank by a rushton turbine,” Energy and Power
Engineering, vol. 06, no. 05, pp. 95–110, 2014.
xxiii
==PAGE:94==
Bibliography
[77] J. B. Joshi, N. K. Nere, C. V. Rane, B. N. Murthy, C. S. Mathpati, A. W. Patwardhan,
and V. V. Ranade, “Cfd simulation of stirred tanks: Comparison of turbulence models.
part i: Radial flow impellers,” The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering,
vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 23–82, 2011.
[78] J. B. Joshi, N. K. Nere, C. V. Rane, B. N. Murthy, C. S. Mathpati, A. W. Patwardhan,
and V. V. Ranade, “Cfd simulation of stirred tanks: Comparison of turbulence models
(part ii: Axial flow impellers, multiple impellers and multiphase dispersions),” The
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering, vol. 89, no. 4, pp. 754–816, 2011.
[79] V. V. Ranade, J. B. Joshi, and A. G. Marath, “Flow generated by pitched blade
turbines ii: Simulation using k-e model,” Chemical Engineering Communications,
vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 225–248, 1989.
[80] S. M. Kresta and P. E. Wood, “Prediction of the three-dimensional turbulent flow
in stirred tanks,” AIChE Journal, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 448–460, 1991.
[81] C.-Y. Ge, J.-J. Wang, X.-P. Gu, and L.-F. Feng, “Cfd simulation and piv measurement
of the flow field generated by modified pitched blade turbine impellers,” Chemical
Engineering Research and Design, vol. 92, no. 6, pp. 1027–1036, 2014.
[82] A. Delafosse, C. Loubière, S. Calvo, D. Toye, and E. Olmos, “Solid-liquid suspension
of microcarriers in stirred tank bioreactor – experimental and numerical analysis,”
Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 180, pp. 52–63, 2018.
[83] A. Buffo, M. Vanni, and D. L. Marchisio, “Multidimensional population balance
model for the simulation of turbulent gas–liquid systems in stirred tank reactors,”
Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 70, pp. 31–44, 2012.
[84] S. Park, J. Na, M. Kim, and J. M. Lee, “Multi-objective bayesian optimization of
chemical reactor design using computational fluid dynamics,” Computers & Chemical
Engineering, vol. 119, pp. 25–37, 2018.
[85] O. Khazam and S. M. Kresta, “A novel geometry for solids drawdown in stirred
tanks,” Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 280–290, 2009.
[86] A. D. Harvey, C. K. Lee, and S. E. Rogers, “Steady-state modeling and experimental
measurement of a baffled impeller stirred tank,” AIChE Journal, vol. 41, no. 10,
pp. 2177–2186, 1995.
[87] A. Bakker, R. D. Laroche, M. H. Wang, and R. V. Calabrese, “Sliding mesh simulation
of laminar flow in stirred reactors,” Chemical Engineering Research and Design,
vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 42–44, 1997.
xxiv
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[88] A. Brucato, M. Ciofalo, F. Grisafi, and G. D. Micale, “Complete numerical simulation
of flow fields in baffled stirred vessels: The inner-outer approach,” in Eighth European
Conference on Mixing (J. Maynard Smith, ed.), EFCE publication, (Rugby), pp. 155–
162, Institution of Chemical Engineers, 1994.
[89] K. Wechsler, M. Breuer, and F. Durst, “Steady and unsteady computations of turbu-
lent flows induced by a 4/45° pitched-blade impeller,” Journal of Fluids Engineering,
vol. 121, no. 2, pp. 318–329, 1999.
[90] S. L. Yeoh, G. Papadakis, and M. Yianneskis, “Determination of mixing time and
degree of homogeneity in stirred vessels with large eddy simulation,” Chemical
Engineering Science, vol. 60, no. 8-9, pp. 2293–2302, 2005.
[91] T. Kumaresan and J. B. Joshi, “Effect of impeller design on the flow pattern and
mixing in stirred tanks,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 173–193,
2006.
[92] M. Doreceus, “Cell culture scale-up in stirred-tank single-use bioreactors,” BioProcess
International, vol. 16, 2018.
[93] B. R. Poulsen and J. J. L. Iversen, “Mixing determinations in reactor vessels using
linear buffers,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 979–984, 1997.
[94] J. Bisgaard, “thesis_jonas_bisgaard,”
[95] L. Ståhle and S. Wold, “Analysis of variance (anova),” Chemometrics and Intelligent
Laboratory Systems, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 259–272, 1989.
[96] J. Bisgaard, M. Muldbak, T. Tajsoleiman, T. Rydal, T. Rasmussen, J. K. Huusom,
and K. V. Gernaey, “Characterization of mixing performance in bioreactors using
flow-following sensor devices,” Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 174,
pp. 471–485, 2021.
[97] R. Z. Davis, Design and scale-up of production scale stirred tank fermentors. PhD
thesis, Utah State University, May 2010.
[98] M. Coroneo, G. Montante, A. Paglianti, and F. Magelli, “Cfd prediction of fluid
flow and mixing in stirred tanks: Numerical issues about the rans simulations,”
Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1959–1968, 2011.
[99] C. Haringa, A. T. Deshmukh, R. F. Mudde, and H. J. Noorman, “Euler-lagrange
analysis towards representative down-scaling of a 22 m 3 aerobic s. cerevisiae fer-
mentation,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 170, pp. 653–669, 2017.
xxv
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
[100] C. Haringa, W. Tang, A. T. Deshmukh, J. Xia, M. Reuss, J. J. Heijnen, R. F. Mudde,
and H. J. Noorman, “Euler-lagrange computational fluid dynamics for (bio)reactor
scale down: An analysis of organism lifelines,” Engineering in life sciences, vol. 16,
no. 7, pp. 652–663, 2016.
[101] O. Gunyol and R. F. Mudde, “Computational study of hydrodynamics of a standard
stirred tank reactor and a large-scale multi-impeller fermenter,” International Journal
for Multiscale Computational Engineering, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 559–576, 2009.
[102] C. Haringa, R. Vandewijer, and R. F. Mudde, “Inter-compartment interaction in
multi-impeller mixing. part ii. experiments, sliding mesh and large eddy simulations,”
Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 136, pp. 886–899, 2018.
[103] N. Hashemi, F. Ein-Mozaffari, S. R. Upreti, and D. K. Hwang, “Experimental
investigation of the bubble behavior in an aerated coaxial mixing vessel through
electrical resistance tomography (ert),” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 289,
pp. 402–412, 2016.
[104] C. Allonneau, E. Olmos, S. Guyot, E. Ferret, P. Gervais, and R. Cachon, “Hydro-
dynamic characterization of a new small-scale reactor mixed by a magnetic bar,”
Biochemical Engineering Journal, vol. 96, pp. 29–37, 2015.
[105] A. Nørregaard, C. Bach, U. Krühne, U. Borgbjerg, and K. V. Gernaey, “Hypothesis-
driven compartment model for stirred bioreactors utilizing computational fluid
dynamics and multiple ph sensors,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 356, pp. 161–
169, 2019.
[106] C. Bach, J. Yang, H. Larsson, S. M. Stocks, K. V. Gernaey, M. O. Albaek, and
U. Krühne, “Evaluation of mixing and mass transfer in a stirred pilot scale bioreactor
utilizing cfd,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 171, pp. 19–26, 2017.
[107] C. Schirmer, K. Blaschczok, U. Husemann, M. Leupold, C. Zahnow, J. Rupprecht,
R. Glöckler, G. Greller, R. Pörtner, R. Eibl, and D. Eibl, “Standardized qualification
of stirred bioreactors for microbial biopharmaceutical production processes,” Chemie
Ingenieur Technik, vol. 89, no. 12, pp. 1766–1772, 2017.
[108] Y. Q. Cui and van der Lans, J.M., Luyben, K.Ch.A.M., “Local power uptake in
gas-liquid systems with single and multiple rushton turbines,” Chemical Engineering
Science, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 2631–2636, 1996.
[109] T. Moucha, F. J. Rejl, M. Kordač, and L. Labík, “Mass transfer characteristics of
multiple-impeller fermenters for their design and scale-up,” Biochemical Engineering
Journal, vol. 69, pp. 17–27, 2012.
xxvi
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[110] C. Bach, Modelling of Gradients in Large Scale Bioreactors. PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, April 2018.
[111] S. Ruhl, C. Zahnow, T. Dreher, N. Bargh, and G. Greller, eds., Superior Scalability
of a Single-Use Bioreactor Family from 0.25 to 2000 L, 2017.
[112] J. M. Bujalski, Z. Jaworski, W. Bujalski, and A. W. Nienow, “The influence of
the addition position of a tracer on cfd simulated mixing times in a vessel agitated
by a rushton turbine,” Chemical Engineering Research and Design, vol. 80, no. 8,
pp. 824–831, 2002.
[113] S. Reinecke, A. Deutschmann, K. Jobst, H. Kryk, E. Friedrich, and U. Hampel, “Flow
following sensor particles—validation and macro-mixing analysis in a stirred fer-
mentation vessel with a highly viscous substrate,” Biochemical Engineering Journal,
vol. 69, pp. 159–171, 2012.
[114] H. Barrue, C. Xuereb, P. Pitiot, L. Falk, and J. Bertrand, “Comparison of experimen-
tal and computational particle trajectories in a stirred vessel,” Chemical Engineering
& Technology, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 511–521, 1999.
[115] S. Y. Lee, H. H. Wong, J.-i. Choi, S. H. Lee, S. C. Lee, and C. S. Han, “Production of
medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoates by high-cell-density cultivation ofpseu-
domonas putida under phosphorus limitation,” Biotechnology and bioengineering,
vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 466–470, 2000.
[116] R. Davis, G. Duane, S. T. Kenny, F. Cerrone, M. W. Guzik, R. P. Babu, E. Casey,
and K. E. O’Connor, “High cell density cultivation of pseudomonas putida kt2440
using glucose without the need for oxygen enriched air supply,” Biotechnology and
bioengineering, vol. 112, no. 4, pp. 725–733, 2015.
xxvii
