==PAGE:1==
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber
amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine
learning
Master Thesis
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed maВӯ
chine learning
Master Thesis
July 2022
By
Kamil Czerniak
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Denny MГјller on Unsplash, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Photonics Engineering, Гҳrsteds Plads, building 343,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Communication TechВӯ
nologies, Department of Photonics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of physics and matheВӯ
matics.
Kamil Czerniak Вӯ s173033
Signature
Date
ii
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Erbium doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) are critical for the amplification and operation of
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) optical fiber communication systems. They alВӯ
low for simultaneous amplification of the entire CВӯband of the spectrum, which is shared
by many users communicating on different wavelengths. The gain spectrum of EDFAs
is nonВӯflat, nonlinear and highly dependent on the input power spectral density. AnalytВӯ
ical models for the gain spectrum frequently cannot be used due to lack of information
regarding physical properties of amplifiers. In this project, we will use machine learning
techniques, such as stochastic gradient descent and mean squared error as loss funcВӯ
tion, to create an algorithm that can infer physical parameters of EDFAs that can be used
in analytical models. We will then apply this model to an artificially generated dataset in
order to show the algorithm can infer certain general parameters from artificial data.
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kamil Czerniak, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Metodi Plamenov Yankov, Researcher, DTU Fotonik
Thesis supervisor.
Rasmus Thomas Jones, Postdoc, DTU Fotonik
Thesis supervisor.
Francesco Da Ros, Senior Researcher, DTU Fotonik
Thesis supervisor.
iv
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related work
3
2.1
вҖқModelling of gain in erbiumВӯdoped fiber amplifiersвҖқ, Saleh et al., 1990 . . .
3
2.2
вҖқMachine learningВӯbased EDFA Gain Model Generalizable to Multiple PhysВӯ
ical DevicesвҖқ, da Ros et al., 2020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Inferring Physical Properties of Amplifiers From Data
25
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Discussion and future steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
A Appendix: Saleh method gain calculation code (numerical.py)
39
B Appendix: machine learning gain prediction model code (neural.py)
42
C Appendix: artificial data generation code (artificial_data_generation.py) 45
D Appendix: parameter inference algorithm code(param_sgd.py)
47
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Importance of fibreВӯoptic networks
FibreВӯoptic networks form a backbone of global telecommunication networks. Thanks
to their usefulness on long distances, fibreВӯoptic cables spanning countries and oceans
allow us to move data at the speed of light across the world. In order to maximise their
performance, it is important to model how the network will act, so that various parameters
can be adapted to minimise loss of data carried by the fibre. [1]
One of these parameters is the amount of power used in a fibre amplifier. Over the disВӯ
tance, due to various effects, some photons carried over by the cable are lost, weakening
the signal. The role of a fibre amplifier is to increase the number of photons that corВӯ
respond to photons carrying the data, so that the data carried by the cable can reach
further.
At this point, it is important to note how data is carried in a fibreВӯoptic network. The core
idea is to use light as a carrier that can be modulated to represent ones and zeros of a
digital signal. This concept can be further expanded to carry multiple signals at the same
time. Recall that light can be described as a wave, with its own frequency. In order to carry
more data through a fibre, wavelengthВӯdivision multiplexing (WDM) is used. WDM divides
the range of wavelengths into smaller subranges of wavelengths (passbands) that carry
data, divided by larger ranges of wavelengths that do not (stopbands) in order to separate
these ranges and avoid signals mixing.
ErbiumВӯdoped fibre amplifiers
Figure 1.1: Basic block diagram of an erbiumВӯdoped fibre amplifier. Figure source: [2]
Principles of operation
The type of amplifiers we will be looking into in this thesis are called erbiumВӯdoped fibre
amplifiers, or EDFAs. EDFAs function by capturing energy in a form of light whose waveВӯ
length is far from dataВӯcarrying wavelengths. This power is used to bring erbium ions to
an excited state. In this state, they provide some of the newlyВӯgained energy as photons
in dataВӯcarrying wavelengths, before returning to ground level. This way, energy of select
light wavelengths becomes stronger. While there are other types of amplifiers (like RaВӯ
man amplifiers, which uses simulated Raman scattering phenomenon to provide energy),
EDFAs are preferred as they need relatively low pump power to achieve amplification [3].
Noise and impact on generated gain
However, it is important to note that this amplification is not perfect and various factors
can reduce power gains. One type of noise is called amplified spontaneous emission: due
to physical imperfections, excited ions may give energy not just to passing photons, but
also emit photons spontaneously. These photons are emitted in all directions, which also
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
1
==PAGE:10==
includes the direction of dataВӯcarrying photons. These emitted photons are then picked up
by other amplifiers and strengthened, creating further noise which in turn makes it more
difficult for receiver to detect data.
Modelling erbiumВӯdoped fibre amplifiers
Knowing these effects, it may appear that it is difficult to model behaviour of amplifiers in
realВӯlife scenarios. Fortunately, multiple models have emerged over the years that help
us estimate signal gains created by an amplifier.
Analytical models
Analytical models are based on sets of equations that seek to determine signal gain based
on physical processes happening in the amplifier. The advantage of these models lies in
their clarity (it is easy to note factors that have an impact on amplifier performance) and
low number of data points needed for calculations. However, these equations are often
coВӯdependent or implicit and hence require long computation to obtain the result. They
also may miss other factors, leading to worse modelling performance. Examples of such
models include: Saleh et al. (1990) [4], Giles et al. (1991) [5], Sun et al. (1997) [6]
(for EDFAs), Cantono et al. (2019) [7] (for Raman amplifiers). We will focus on Saleh
paper, as the model described by it is easy to calculate and in many realВӯlife conditions
can deliver a result with a low error in the range of 0.5 dB. A more inВӯdepth look into Saleh
model will be provided in the next chapter.
Machine learning and modelling
Another approach taken in modelling the behaviour of fibre amplifiers is usage of machine
learning models. Unlike in analytical models, which base themselves on mathematical forВӯ
mulas meant to describe physical processes, machine learning models use measurement
data in order to approximate an underlying function that generates them. The advantage
of these models lies in cheap modelling calculation (once model is trained) and ability to
capture factors difficult to measure in analytical models. However, many of these models
are difficult to explain and require a lot of data points to train. Uses of machine learning
in modelling may differ, from simple interpolation of parameters in an analytical model
(Meseguer et al. (2021) [8]), to using neural networks in order to fully describe gain beВӯ
haviour in an amplifier (da Ros et al. (2020) [9], Zhu et al. (2018) [10], You et al. (2018)
[11]). In the next chapter, we will focus on a da Ros paper, as the model it describes
utilises a dataВӯfirst approach, while generalising for multiple EDFAs.
The following chapters will delve into more details of fibre optic amplifying. We will look
into how it can be modelled, using more traditional analytical models and more modern
machine learning models. We will then attempt to apply machine learning methods to
infer physical quantities needed in analytical models based on data from amplifiers. The
goal is to enable modelling of behaviour of amplifiers for whom physical properties are
unknown.
2
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:11==
2
Related work
2.1
вҖқModelling of gain in erbiumВӯdoped fiber amplifiersвҖқ,
Saleh et al., 1990
2.1.1
Introduction
When thinking about behaviour of fibre amplifiers, we may want to approach it from physВӯ
ical standpoint. By representing physical processes, we try to capture the behaviour of
actual amplifiers and hence model it. In the model presented by this paper, authors seek
to describe population inversion phenomenon utilised in amplifiers to strengthen signal in
order to accurately predict how signal is strengthened in an actual amplifier.
2.1.2
Theory
In order to model an erbiumВӯdoped fibre amplifier, it is necessary to understand how it
works. In this section, we will discuss how an amplifier achieves its goal of strengthening
signal, as well as forces that may limit effectiveness of amplification. This section is based
on [3].
Amplification principles
The basic model used to describe an amplifier is a threeВӯlevel atomic system, where levВӯ
els describe energy level structure of Er3+ erbium ions that is relevant to amplification
process. We will start with this model, as it is more detailed Вӯ we will later see how we can
simplify it into a twoВӯlevel model. Each level has a population, or number of ions located
on it, denoted as N1, N2, N3 for each of the levels respectively. The first level represents
a ground level, where we have our original signal Вӯ this is what we want to amplify, or in
other words bring to a higher, second, energy level. The goal of an amplifier is to use
energy pumped into the third level to excite ions on ground level to a higher level in high
enough numbers as to cause atom population inversion between first and second level.
Transition rates, representing how many ions are moving between levels, are dependent
on existing populations on given levels, as well as fluxes and crossВӯsections involved. In
this threeВӯlevel model, we can note transitions between levels 1 and 3 (which are proВӯ
portional to populations on these levels and to product of pump flux П•p and pump cross
section Пғs) and transitions between levels 1 and 2 (which are proportional to populations
of these levels and to product of signal flux П•s and signal cross section Пғs).
We can also note that some ions may spontaneously lose energy and drop to lower enВӯ
ergy levels Вӯ these transition rates are marked as О“32 and О“21, representing spontaneous
transition rates from level 3 to level 2 and from level 2 to level 1, respectively. О“21 tranВӯ
sition rate is mostly due to radiative factors, hence О“21 = 1/П„2, where П„2 is the lifetime of
level 2.
Knowing these processes in play, we can write down rate equations for the population
changes:
dN3
dt
= вҲ’О“32N3 + (N1 вҲ’N3)П•pПғp
(2.1)
dN2
dt
= вҲ’О“21N2 + О“32N3 вҲ’(N2 вҲ’N1)П•sПғs
(2.2)
dN1
dt
= О“21N2 вҲ’(N1 вҲ’N3)П•pПғp + (N2 вҲ’N1)П•sПғs
(2.3)
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
3
==PAGE:12==
First parts of rightВӯhand sides of the equations denote loss (or gain, if rightВӯhand side is
positive) of ions from spontaneous emissions. Following parts denote stimulated emisВӯ
sions caused by power being pumped to level 3. We can notice that stimulated emissions
are proportional to both light flux and emission cross section between levels. We will use
this fact to simplify the model later.
Let us remind ourselves that the goal is to achieve population inversion (population on
level 2 is larger than on level 1), meaning higher signal energy level. In order to figure out
when this occurs, we need to consider the end point of the process, i.e. the system is in
steady state and populations are no longer changing. This means that:
dN1
dt
= dN2
dt
= dN3
dt
= 0
(2.4)
while total population N is equal to:
N = N1 + N2 + N3
(2.5)
Knowing this, we can start calculating populations on each level, starting with level 3
(using equation 2.1):
N3 =
1
1 + О“32/П•pПғp
N1
(2.6)
We can note that when О“32 is large compared to effective pump rate into level 3 (П•pПғp),
population at this level is very close to zero, and hence most population is located in levels
1 and 2. LetвҖҷs continue with calculating population at level 1, using equations 2.2 and 2.6:
N2 = (П•pПғp/О“32) + П•sПғs
О“21 + П•sПғs
N1
(2.7)
Then, we can use equation 2.5 to derive populations for levels 1 and 2, as well as popuВӯ
lation inversion N2 вҲ’N1:
N2 вҲ’N1 =
П•pПғp вҲ’О“21
О“21 + 2П•sПғs + П•pПғp
N
(2.8)
Population inversion occurs (assuming no background losses) when N2 вүҘN1.
The
threshold population for this is N2 = N1, and so after calculations we can determine
the following pump flux required to reach this threshold:
П•th = О“21
Пғp
=
1
ПғpП„2
(2.9)
Pump intensity is expressed as Ip = hОҪpП•p, where ОҪp is pump frequency. From this, we
can get threshold pump intensity:
Ith = hОҪpО“21
Пғp
= hОҪp
ПғpП„2
(2.10)
As a side note, equation 2.10 gives us a hint about how threshold pump intensity can be
lowered: either by making the crossВӯsection larger or by extending lifetime of ions on level
2.
4
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:13==
Gain in small signal regime
Having discussed how signal amplification works, we can now discuss how gain achieved
by it can be quantified. Consider N, N1, N2, N3 to now represent densities of populations
per unit volume, rather than full populations themselves. Two types of light travel through
the fibre, interacting with erbium ions, and have intensities Ip (for pump) and Is (for signal).
We can calculate their photon fluxes using following equations:
П•p = Ip
hОҪp
(2.11)
П•s = Is
hОҪs
(2.12)
Although in reality the light can move in all three dimensions, we will simplify the propaВӯ
gation of the signal to a oneВӯdimensional problem, happening along a single direction z
representing the axis of the fibre. In this oneВӯdimensional case, the light intensity at point
z can be defined as:
I(z) = P(z)О“
Aeff
(2.13)
where О“ is the overlap factor (representing how much of fibre crossВӯsection overlaps with
erbium ions) and Aeff is the effective crossВӯsectional area of the distribution of erbium
ions.
Light beams will be attenuated or amplified after some distance dz by combined effect of
absorption that comes from ions in their ground state (N1) and stimulated emission from
ions in the excited state (N2 and N3):
dП•s
dz = (N2 вҲ’N1)ПғsП•s
(2.14)
dП•p
dz = (N3 вҲ’N1)ПғpП•p
(2.15)
After some calculations, we can determine the following equation for signal intensity
change (either amplification or attenuation):
dIs
dz =
ПғpIp
hОҪp вҲ’О“21
О“21 + 2ПғsIs
hОҪs + ПғpIp
hОҪp
ПғsIsN
(2.16)
Based on equation 2.16, it can be noted that gain is achieved for the signal if:
Ip вүҘIth = hОҪp
ПғpП„2
(2.17)
This comes from the fact that О“21 = 1/П„2 and that Ith is pump threshold intensity for
gain at signal wavelength, which is equivalent to population inversion condition derived in
equation 2.10.
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
5
==PAGE:14==
Equations can be simplified further if we define intensities in terms of their relationship
with pump threshold. This way, we obtain:
IвҖІ
p = Ip
Ith
(2.18)
IвҖІ
s = Is
Ith
(2.19)
In addition, we define quantity О·:
О· = hОҪp
hОҪs
Пғs
Пғp
(2.20)
and saturation intensity Isat(z):
Isat(z) = 1 + IвҖІ
p(z)
2О·
(2.21)
Through these quantities and intensities, we can write propagation equations for signal
as:
dIвҖІ
s(z)
dz
=
1
1 + IвҖІs(z)/Isat(z)
IвҖІ
p(z) вҲ’1
IвҖІp(z) + 1

ПғsIвҖІ
s(z)N
(2.22)
Let us remind ourselves that we can get a gain on the signal only if Ip вүҘIth. When
the pump intensity is lower than threshold, the signal is attenuatedНҫ when it is larger, it
becomes amplified. Assuming we seek a small signal gain, where IвҖІ
s << Isat (this is
satisfied when signal is weak and pump is strong) and that pump intensity is uniform
regardless of position of beam, we can integrate the signal propagation equation to get
the signal as a function of position along the fibre:
IвҖІ
s(z) = IвҖІ
s(0)exp(Оұpz)
(2.23)
where we define the gain coefficient Оұp as
Оұp = IвҖІ
p вҲ’1
IвҖІp + 1ПғsN
(2.24)
These equations show that signal grows exponentially, with exponential coefficient proВӯ
portional to signal emission cross section and the rate of population inversion, which in
turn is determined by pump intensity relative to threshold. If this intensity is high enough
(several times above the threshold), we end up with all erbium ions inverted and gain
coefficient becoming approximately:
Оұp = ПғsN
(2.25)
It is important to note, however, that this applies only to low signal situations Вӯ when signal
becomes strong enough, amplification effects become weaker.
6
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:15==
Simplification from threeВӯlevel model to twoВӯlevel model
For now we have operated on an assumption that we model a three level energy system:
a signal level, a gained level and pumping level. However, in reality, we can reduce this
system to a two level system, ignoring the pump level.
In rare earth ions (like Er3+), we can also consider energy levels as being composed of
fairly separated multiplets. Each multiplet is composed of a number of individual levels,
like ones considered previously. We assume that pumping level (level 3) is in a different
multiplet than gained level (level 2) and that there is a rapid relaxation from level 3 to level
2. However, for all practical purposes, the population on level 3 is de facto zero and rate
equations involve only the first two levels, while the third one is involved only using the
value of pump absorption cross section from level 1 to level 3 (ПҖpПғp).
In some cases, level 3 lies in the same multiplet as level 2. This complicates the model
a bit, as due to thermal equilibrium required in a multiplet level 3 may have a finite popВӯ
ulation. Because of that, we will need to use emission and absorption cross sections to
represent thermal population distribution accurately.
Having this in mind, we can move from a threeВӯlevel system to an effective twoВӯlevel
system. Using separate cross sections for absorption and emission, the rate equations in
this new system are as follow:
dN2
dt
= вҲ’О“21N2 + (N1Пғ(a)
s
вҲ’N2Пғ(e)
s )П•s вҲ’(N2Пғ(e)
p
вҲ’N1Пғ(a)
p )П•p
(2.26)
dN1
dt
= О“21N2 + (N2Пғ(e)
s
вҲ’N1Пғ(a)
s )П•s вҲ’(N1Пғ(a)
p
вҲ’N2Пғ(e)
p )П•p
(2.27)
where Пғ(a)
s , Пғ(e)
s , Пғ(a)
p , Пғ(e)
p
represent signal and pump absorption and emission cross secВӯ
tions. We can further expand these equations to obtain equations for populations, signal
propagation and threshold intensity.
Noise sources
For now, we have discussed the theory based on an assumption that there is no noise
involved Вӯ this allowed us to simplify the discussion around how amplifiers work. HowВӯ
ever, in reality, noise can significantly decrease the effectiveness of amplification and for
effective modelling we need to take them into account.
In this particular case, where erbiumВӯdoped fibre amplifiers are involved, we will focus on
one source of noise: amplified spontaneous emission (ASE). All excited ions can sponВӯ
taneously drop from upper state to ground state, losing energy by the means of emitting
a photon. This photon does not carry information, but it is a photon nevertheless and
as such it can be amplified by amplifiers down the fibre. As some of the excited ions in
further amplifiers give their energy to this spontaneously emitted photon rather than to a
signalВӯcarrying photon, this leads to total signal gain being limited.
In order to understand the impact of ASE on gain, we need to first calculate the spontaВӯ
neous emission at a given point in the fibre. For a fibre with signal at frequency ОҪ, the
noise power in a bandwidth вҲҶОҪ which corresponds to a spontaneous emission is equal to
P 0
ASE = 2hОҪвҲҶОҪ
(2.28)
Knowing this, we can then move on to calculating ASE power itself. This power at point
z along the fibre is the sum of ASE powers from previous sections of the fibre and the
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
7
==PAGE:16==
added local noise power P 0
ASE, which will stimulate the emission of photons from excited
erbium ions. This power is proportional to the product Пғ(e)(ОҪ)N2, where Пғ(e)(ОҪ) is the
simulated emission cross section at frequency ОҪ. Thus, propagation equation for ASE
power propagating in a given direction is
dPASE(ОҪ)
dz
= (N2Пғ(e)(ОҪ) вҲ’N1Пғ(a)(ОҪ))PASE(ОҪ) + P 0
ASE(ОҪ)N2Пғ(e)(ОҪ)
(2.29)
When taking ASE into account, population equations also need to change to add ASE
signal to signal population.
2.1.3
Model details
Having discussed the underlying details of amplification process in EDFAs, we can now
move to Saleh model. This analytical model uses monochromatic absorption data to deВӯ
termine achieved gain. According to authors, the results obtained by this model (for both
pump and signal powers) match real measurements within 0.5 dB. The model is based
around EDFAs pumped with light at 1480 nm (or 200 THz), however it is also applicable
for pump wavelength of 980 nm (or 305 THz). The effect of ASE on performance, howВӯ
ever, is ignored as in authorsвҖҷ view it is negligible for amplifiers with less than about 20
dB of gain.
The model [4] is based on a twoВӯlevel system with an arbitrary number of signals involved,
with signals described in terms of wavelength used (О» = c/ОҪ, c вүҲ3 вҲ—108m/s). Consider
an amplifier of length L, with density of active atoms ПҒ within an active volume of crossВӯ
sectional area A. Beams of wavelength О»k and power Pk(z, t) travel through the amplifier
in a direction indicated by uk (1 if a beam enters at z = 0, Вӯ1 if beam enters at z = L. The
rate equation for the fractional population of the upper state is:
ОҙN2(z, t)
Оҙt
= вҲ’N2(z, t)
П„
вҲ’1
ПҒA
N
X
j=1
uj
ОҙPj(z, t)
Оҙz
(2.30)
where П„ is the spontaneous lifetime of the upper level. Since this is a fractional population,
we can obtain fractional population of lower level through equation N1(z, t)+N2(z, t) = 1.
The light in the fibre is subject to absorption or stimulated emission at rates depending on
wavelength Вӯ for wavelength О»k, the crossВӯsections for stimulated emission and absorption
are Пғe
k and Пғa
k respectively. Hence, we can describe the change of power in the kth stream
by position in the fibre as follows:
ОҙPk(z, t)
Оҙz
= ПҒukО“k[(Пғe
k + Пғa
k)N2(z, t) вҲ’Пғa
k]Pk(z, t)
(2.31)
where О“k is the confinement factor of the fibre amplifier at wavelength О»k.
When the amplifier is in a steady state, population densities and optical powers are timeВӯ
independent. By obtaining N2(z, t) by setting ОҙN2(z, t)/Оҙt = 0 in 2.30 and noting that
u2
k = 1, we can rewrite 2.31 as:
uk
Pk(z)dPk = вҲ’
пЈ®
пЈ°Оұk +
1
P IS
k
N
X
j=1
uj
dPj(z)
dz
пЈ№
пЈ»dz
(2.32)
8
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:17==
where Оұk and P IS
k
are absorption constants and intrinsic saturation powers of the kth
beam, which are defined as:
Оұk = ПҒО“kПғa
k
P IS
k
=
A
О“k(Пғe
k + Пғa
k)П„
(2.33)
By integrating 2.32, we can obtain
P out
k
= P in
k eвҲ’ОұkLe(PinвҲ’Pout)/P IS
k
(2.34)
where P in
k
and P out
k
are input and output powers of kth beam, while Pin and Pout are
the sum of input and output powers over all beams, respectively. Powers per beam are
measured at their entry point (z = 0 for uk = 1, z = L for uk = вҲ’1). We can now reduce
2.34 by summing up all beams to get the following:
Pout =
N
X
k=1
AkeвҲ’BkPout
Ak = P in
k eвҲ’ОұkLePin/P IS
k
Bk =
1
P IS
k
(2.35)
By knowing input powers P in
k , as well as absorption constants Оұk and intrinsic saturation
powers P IS
k , we can calculate constants Ak and Bk. From that point, we can solve Pout,
apply it at 2.34 and calculate output power per beam.
2.1.4
Implementation
Having established a model for the amplifier, we can now move to its implementation. For
this, we will use [12], which is a paper based on work done in [4], which in addition tries
to extend modelling to factor in noise sources, such as ASE. However, we will only use
the Saleh part for implementation.
Consider we are provided with Pk, which is input power for kth channel. The photon flux
for this channel and total input photon flux are defined as follow:
Qin
k = Pk
hОҪk
(2.36)
Qin =
K
X
i=1
Qin
k
(2.37)
where ОҪk is the frequency of kth channel. The equations for gain per beam and total
output photon flux are given as such:
Gk = exp
Оұk + gвҲ—
k
О¶
(Qin вҲ’Qout) вҲ’ОұkLEDF

(2.38)
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
9
==PAGE:18==
Qout =
X
k
Qin
k exp
Оұk + gвҲ—
k
О¶
(Qin вҲ’Qout) вҲ’ОұkLEDF

(2.39)
where Оұk is absorption coefficient for kth channel, gвҲ—
k is gain coefficient for the same chanВӯ
nel, rer is the erbiumВӯdoping radius, ВҜnt is erbium ion density, П„ is metastable (secondВӯlevel)
lifetime of an ion, О¶ = ПҖr2
ErВҜnt/П„ is the saturation parameter and LEDF is the length of the
fibre.
We can note that in order to calculate gain (eq. 2.38) we need to first solve 2.39 numeriВӯ
cally to get Qout and then we can compute 2.38. This task was achieved by moving Qout
to the right hand side of the equation and seeking absolute value of both sides, leading
to following equation:
Qout вҲ’
X
k
Qin
k exp
Оұk + gвҲ—
k
О¶
(Qin вҲ’Qout) вҲ’ОұkLEDF
 = 0
(2.40)
We can note that in order to find the value for Qout that solves this equation we need to find
the minimum of left hand side. There are multiple numerical algorithms for doing so and
in this case, PowellвҖҷs algorithm [13] was used. This algorithm for minimisation does not
require for the function to be differentiable, which allows for minimisation of a function as
complex as this one, where finding a derivative is difficult. After calculating the minimum
of the function, we can then apply 2.38 for each of the channels to determine amplifier
gain.
This model was implemented in Python, with PowellвҖҷs algorithm implementation provided
by scipyвҖҷs optimize.optimize(method="Powell") method. Оұk and ОівҲ—
k coefficients of
an EDFA used in simulations for [12] were provided for discrete values of wavelengths
between 1470 nm and 1569 nm, with intermediate values linearly interpolated. Linear inВӯ
terpolationвҖҷs implementation was provided by scipyвҖҷs interpolate.interp1d() method.
Implementation code can be found in the appendix.
2.1.5
Results
The model has been tested using a signal, which consists of 40 unmodulated beams from
1531 nm to 1562 nm. Each signal had power of Вӯ13 dBm, with total power of 3 dBm. We
have considered six pump powers, ranging from 18.1 mW to 114.9 mW. The result of
these calculations are shown on figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1 shows a couple of interesting phenomena happening in the modelled EDFA.
Across all wavelengths we can note that the higher the pump power, the higher the gain.
However, in wavelengths between 1530 nm and 1535 nm, we can see how pump power
can affect the curve of how gain changes over wavelengths: pump power of 18.1 mW
has led to gain going up from less than 4 dB at 1530 nm to 5.5 dB at 1535 nm, while for
higher pump powers the growth in gain goes down, with higher pump powers of 87.2 mW
and 114.9 mW having almost no change in gain (14 dB and 16dB respectively). Then,
between 1535 nm and 1538 nm, gain goes down across all pump powers, with varying
rates of change (the higher the pump power, the sharper the drop), only for gain to start
going up again between 1538 nm and 1560 nm and a slight drop between 1560 nm and
1562 nm. Average gain ranges between 7.45 dB (for 18.1 mW) and 15.30 dB (for 114.9
mW).
10
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: Theoretical gain computed using Saleh method
2.1.6
Discussion
The advantage of this model lies in explainability: by modelling based on physical pheВӯ
nomena, we get an understanding of processes that are behind how amplifiers act. This
can also help us determine what problems may limit the effectiveness of an amplifier.
However, the issue is that the model is fairly simplified and while for lowВӯgain amplifiers
(less than 20 dB) we can ignore ASE, for higher gains this source of noise can make the
model overestimate obtainable gain. It should also be noted that getting gain and absorpВӯ
tion coefficients for a given amplifier is a difficult task, reducing the number of situations
where it can be used.
2.2
вҖқMachine learningВӯbased EDFA Gain Model Generalizable
to Multiple Physical DevicesвҖқ, da Ros et al., 2020
2.2.1
Introduction
In the section above, we have discussed a model that took a physicsВӯbased approach,
trying to use our knowledge of physical phenomena used in amplification to model them
and as such get an accurate prediction of amplifierвҖҷs expected behaviour. However, it
may also be interesting to look at data first and let it be a guide to how to interpret previВӯ
ously unseen measurements. The authors of this paper have taken this approach, using
machine learning to build the model using collected data to learn patterns that appear in
amplifiersвҖҷ use.
2.2.2
Overview
Machine learning is a part of artificial intelligence domain of computer science that seeks
to find ways in which an algorithm can adapt to provided data to accurately predict value
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
11
==PAGE:20==
on previously unseen data. In other words, we want for a machine to вҖқlearnвҖқ from provided
data, find patterns in it and apply these patterns so that we can make right decisions on
new data. This approach of learning from data differs from more traditional approaches,
where we try to use human knowledge of processes in order to model future behaviour Вӯ
the computer has no concept of these processes, as it only tries to find patterns in data
regardless of what was behind them.
We can distinguish two types of machine learning tasks: regression and classification.
In regression, we seek to train the model to estimate a function so that when provided
with previously unseen input, we can predict the output with a great accuracy. On the
other hand, classification seeks to divide the input space (all potential inputs) into areas
that represent a given class. Both approaches require different tools (what architecture to
use, how to train the model) and different assessments of how well the model is doing (a
soВӯcalled loss function). The task of modelling gain based on inputs is a regression task,
so we will focus on regression.
Having decided on a task, we need to consider a couple of factors. The first is data:
how the data is collected and how much we have it can impact the performance of model
training. What is also important is what a given data point consists of, what is known as
features. While in many ways features depend on how we collect data, we can also use
alreadyВӯcollected features and transform them (e.g., by squaring them) in order to get
more features.
The second is what architecture will be used, or how the model will function. One of
the easier model architectures is the linear model, where we assume there is a linear
relationship between input and output. In this situation, the model is just a list of weights of
inputs and a bias term (if necessary). A more advanced architecture is a neural network,
which takes linear regression further by using layers and activation functions, such as
sigmoid function or rectified linear unit (ReLU).
The next decision is about how to train the model. For that, we first need to decide how to
assess modelвҖҷs performance. This is usually done by selecting a soВӯcalled loss function,
which has a high value when the modelвҖҷs performance is bad and low when it is good. In
regression, we mostly consider two possible cost functions: mean squared error (MSE) or
mean absolute error (MAE). This cost function is usually a comparison between obtained
output and desired output and while both cost functions have their own special features,
what makes them appealing is that they are symmetric around 0 (so we donвҖҷt distinguish
between overВӯestimation and underВӯestimation) and that they are convex (a line joining
any two points of a function does not intersect with a function at any other points).
These two properties are important, as they make it easier to calculate cost function graВӯ
dient (derivatives per input feature). As the function is convex, the gradient points to
direction of cost functionвҖҷs largest growth Вӯ so, if we want to reduce cost functionвҖҷs value,
we should take a step in the opposite direction, which is known as gradient descent.
Finally, we need to consider how to apply this gradient to our model and improve its perВӯ
formance. In case of linear regression the situation is simple: gradient can be directly
applied to weights. In neural networks, however, layers make it more difficult to calculate
gradients and weight updates correctly. For that reason, neural networks frequently use
backpropagation algorithm for improving the model.
The following subsections will be devoted to going into more detail regarding these topics.
12
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:21==
2.2.3
Architecture
Having looked into the general overview of machine learning, we can now take a closer
look at the model described by the paper and the techniques behind it.
Neural network
One of the more popular types of machine learning architecture is called a neural network
[14]. A neural network can be split into three parts: an input layer, hidden layers and
an output layer. An input layer, whose size is equal to number of features used, takes
features from a data point, weighs them and passes to the first hidden layer. In a hidden
layer, each node (also referred to as a neuron) takes all values from previous layer, weighs
them and passes to the next layer. Hidden layers can be of differing sizes, but for the sake
of simplicity we will focus on a case where each hidden layer l is of size K(l). Finally, after
L hidden layers, the values from the last hidden layer are passed to an output layer, which
then transforms them to a model output. The output of a node j in layer l is calculated as
follows:
x(l)
j
= П•(
K(lвҲ’1)
X
i=1
x(lвҲ’1)
i
w(l)
i,j + b(l)
j )
(2.41)
where w(l)
i,j is a weight of value passed from node i in layer l вҲ’1 to node j in layer l and
b(l)
j
is a bias term of node j in layer l.
A function П• is called an activation function. Activation functions in neural networks are
used to obtain desired properties, such as limited output range. If an activation function
is nonВӯlinear, the neural network using it can approximate other nonВӯlinear functions. The
choice of an activation function has an impact on training, as in some cases for very large
values the derivative of an activation function may be close to zero. There are various
activation functions used in neural networks, such as sigmoid function or rectified linear
unit (or ReLU). Sigmoid function is one of the more popular activation functions in neural
networks and is defined as follows:
Пғ(x) =
1
1 + eвҲ’x
(2.42)
This activation function is often preferred, as it is continuously differentiable everywhere,
i.e. the derivative of the function is continuous. However, for very large values or very
small values of x, the derivative of sigmoid function is close to 0, making learning slower.
Another popular activation function, rectified linear unit (ReLU) [15], is defined as follows:
П•(x) = max{0, x}
(2.43)
The advantage of this particular activation function is that its derivative is nonВӯzero for
values above 0, which is a useful property for training. However, ReLU has derivative
equal to zero for negative values and no derivative if value is 0, which can make it difficult
to train the node when its input is either zero or negative.
We can consider a neural network to be divided into two units: representation and task.
Representation part, which includes the input layer and all hidden layers, is responsible
for transforming input into a representation that is useful for machine learning task. This
part can be described as a function from Rd to RK(L), defined by weights and biases that
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: A graphical overview of a neural network. Figure from [16]
are learned, as well as activation function used. Task part, which consists of an output
layer, uses this learned representation to perform the actual machine learning task Вӯ either
regression (in which case the sum of weighted outputs of last hidden layer is the result) or
classification (in which case the sign of the sum of weighted outputs of last hidden layer
is the result).
Loss function
In order to train a network, it is important to decide how we measure its performance. This
is done using a loss function, which measures how well the model is doing.
For realВӯvalued models, we often seek two statistical properties for the loss function. The
first property is that the loss function should be symmetric around zero. This means that
the loss function penalises positive errors and negative errors similarly and as such we
donвҖҷt show a preference towards any type of error. The second property is that the function
should be immune to outliers, i.e., if an outlier is present in the dataset, its error value
should not be significantly larger compared to other, nonВӯoutlier, data points.
As the loss function is used in order to train the model, we also want to make sure that it
has properties that make it easy to optimise the model. These properties are referred to
as computational properties. The first property is that we want the loss function to have a
sufficiently large gradient. This way, we can reach the minimum of the error more quickly.
The second property is that the loss function is convex, i.e. considering a function graph, a
line going through any two points of a function never intersects with the function anywhere
else. Thanks to this property, every local minimum is a global minimum (if the function
is strictly convex, there is only one global minimum) and as such minimising a function
requires only following the function gradient.
Unfortunately, some of these properties are in contradiction to one another. Penalising
large and very large errors similarly means that for large and very large errors the gradiВӯ
ent of a loss function is very low, which is in opposition to seeking a large gradient. Thus,
when deciding on a loss function to choose we face a tradeВӯoff: either we seek statistiВӯ
cal properties and end up with worse computational performance or seek computational
properties at the cost of statistical ones.
In many models, mean squared error[17] is used as a loss function. This loss function is
defined as follows:
MSE(w) := 1
N
N
X
n=1
[yn вҲ’fw(xn)]2
(2.44)
14
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:23==
where yn is the actual value of nth observationвҖҷs label in dataset and fw(xn) is a value
computed by the model based on nth observation. This cost function is symmetric around
0, has a sufficiently large gradient and is convexНҫ however, it is sensitive to outliers causing
very large errors.
An alternative loss function frequently used for training is called mean absolute error
(MAE)[17], which can be described as:
MAE(w) := 1
N
N
X
n=1
|yn вҲ’fw(xn)|
(2.45)
MAE is less susceptible to outliers compared to mean squared errorНҫ however, due to its
derivative not being susceptible to level of error involved, it may make training the model
more difficult.
Model optimisation
Knowing how well the model is performing, we can use this knowledge to optimise the
model. A model is optimised through modifying its parameters, in our case weights and
biases, so that the error function value decreases. This can be achieved by following a
gradient of a cost function. A gradient is the slope of the tangent of a function. In case
of multiВӯvariate functions (like in this case), it is a vector showing tangent with respect
to each of the variables (or, in our case, parameters). Gradient points to direction of
functionвҖҷs highest growth, so in order to get to the minimum we need to take a step in the
opposite direction. This is done by gradient descent[18], defined for epoch t + 1 as:
w(t+1) := w(t) вҲ’ОівҲҮL(w(t))
(2.46)
where w(t) is weight vector for epoch t, вҲҮL(w(t)) is a gradient vector of a loss function for
the weight vector and Оі is a step size, also known as a learning rate. For mean squared
error as a loss function of linear model, its gradient can be defined as:
вҲҮL(w(t)) = вҲ’1
N XT e
(2.47)
e = y Вӯ Xw
(2.48)
where N is the number of data points, y is expected output and X is a matrix of all data
points.
In many cases, X can be very large at times, making gradient calculation difficult. HowВӯ
ever, we can notice that in a lot of cases a cost function is an averaged sum of cost function
over data points. If we pick one of the endpoints at random, the expected value of gradiВӯ
ent should be the same as full gradient itself. We can use this property to make gradient
calculation cheaper and speed up gradient descent algorithm. This is the idea behind
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm[18], where the step function is defined as
follows:
w(t+1) := w(t) вҲ’ОівҲҮLn(w(t))
(2.49)
where вҲҮLn(w(t)) is a gradient of a loss function for a data point n. In this situation, matrix
X used in gradient calculations is a d Г— 1 matrix containing only a single data point. This
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
15
==PAGE:24==
makes gradient calculation faster, while at the same time being accurate enough to guide
training process.
Backpropagation algorithm
Now it is time to apply this training algorithm to a neural network. Keep in mind that a
neural network has L layers, each with at most Kmax = max(K(1), ..., K(l)) neuronsНҫ each
neuron (except for first hidden layer) x(l)
i
is connected to K(lвҲ’1) neurons from previous
layers. This means that for gradient descent, we need to find gradients for O(K2
maxL)
parameters. For finding these gradients, we will use backpropagation algorithm [19].
To start with backpropagation algorithm, we need to first define how it will treat neural netВӯ
work parameters. For weights, we will consider weights for each layer as being matrices,
where W(l)
i,j is a weight for connection going from node i in layer l to node j in layer l + 1.
Assuming we seek a single output, input is a vector of size d and L hidden layers each of
size K(l), the sizes of weight matrices are as follow:
W(1) вҲҲRdГ—K(1)
W(l) вҲҲRK(lвҲ’1)Г—K(l)for2 вүӨl вүӨL
W(L+1) вҲҲRK(l)
Biases per layer can be represented as vectors, with bias term per node. The sizes of
bias vectors are as follow:
b(l) вҲҲRK(l)for1 вүӨl вүӨL
b(L + 1) вҲҲR
We can note that functions implemented by each layer can be rewritten as:
x(l) = f(l)(x(lвҲ’1) = П•((W(l))T x(lвҲ’1) + b(l))
(2.50)
y = f(L+1)(x(L) = П•((W(L+1))T x(L) + b(L+1))
(2.51)
In other words, the overall function y = f(x(0)) can be treated as a composition of functions
applied at each layer:
f = f(L+1) в—Ұf(L) в—ҰВ· В· В· в—Ұf(2) в—Ұf(1) вҮҗвҮ’f(x) = f(L+1)(f(L)(...(f(2)(f(1)(x)))...))
(2.52)
This fact can be used when considering what the individual cost function for SGD will look
like in this scenario:
Ln = 1
2(yn вҲ’f(L+1) в—ҰВ· В· В· в—Ұf(2) в—Ұf(1)(xn))2
(2.53)
16
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:25==
In order to compute the gradients for all parameters, we need to first calculate a number
of values that we will use later to calculate the gradient. This is what is referred to as a
forward pass. At this stage, we will need two values: layer input before (called z(l) for layer
l) and after applying activation function (called x(l) for layer l. This is needed, as due to
chain rule the derivative of composition of functions depends on derivative of composed
functions. This can be easily calculated recursively by going through each of the layers
and applying data from previous layer. The formulas are as follow:
x(0) = xi вҲҲRd
(2.54)
z(l) = (W(l))T x(lвҲ’1) + b(l)
(2.55)
x(l) = П•(z(l))
(2.56)
Having crossed through the network, we now have enough information to calculate derivaВӯ
tives with respect to z(l). Let:
Оҙ(l)
j
= ОҙLn
Оҙz(l)
j
(2.57)
As forward pass gave us enough information about z(l), we can now easily calculate Оҙ(l)
j
in a backward pass. This can be done by going back through the network and applying
these formulas:
Оҙ(L+1) = (ЛңП•(z(L+1)) вҲ’yn)ЛңП•вҖІ(z(L+1))
(2.58)
Оҙ(L+1) = вҲ’2(yn вҲ’x(L+1))П•вҖІ(z(L+1))(if ЛңП• is MSE)
(2.59)
Оҙ(l) = (W(l+1)Оҙ(l+1)) вҠҷП•вҖІ(z(l))
(2.60)
where вҠҷrepresents pointВӯwise multiplication of a vector. Finally, knowing these values,
we can get to calculating actual gradient:
вҲӮLn
вҲӮw(l)
i,j
= Оҙ(l)
j x(lвҲ’1)
i
(2.61)
вҲӮLn
вҲӮb(l)
j
= Оҙ(l)
j
(2.62)
LetвҖҷs consider the complexity of this algorithm. Consider Kmax = max(K(1), ..., K(l)). In
forward pass, for each of the L layers, we do a multiplication of a matrix of a size at most
KmaxГ—Kmax with a vector of size at most Kmax, then applying to it an activation function.
This means forward pass has complexity of O(K2
maxL). In backward pass, for each of the
L layers, we multiply a matrix of size at most Kmax Г— Kmax with a vector of size at most
Kmax and then do a pointВӯwise multiplication, leading to complexity of O(K2
maxL). Finally,
calculation of all O(K2
maxL) parameters occurs in constant time, leading to complexity of
O(K2
maxL). Thus, the overall complexity of backpropagation algorithm is O(K2
maxL).
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
17
==PAGE:26==
2.2.4
Model details
The model described in the paper is a neural network with two hidden layers of size 256
and 128, while ReLU is selected as an activation function. In the paper, the input consists
of 85 features: 83 features containing input power per channel (in dBm), total input power
(in dBm) and total output power (in dBm). The output, as described in the paper, consists
of 83 values, representing output power per channel (in dBm). According to authors,
based on their data they could reach MSE of 0.04dB2 for same device used for training
and 0.06dB2 for different units of the same type.
2.2.5
Dataset
Before we begin assessing the model, it is important to understand what data has been
used to train and test it: how it was created, what it represents and how it can affect the
modelвҖҷs implementation.
Dataset creation
The dataset has been generated by a procedure described in [20]. The data comes from
an experimental setup rather than being generated artificially. The initial input consists of
40 distributed feedback lasers, whose light is then sent to a programmable optical filter
(POF). In this filter, the signal from lasers is flattened, so that on each input we have
similar power. Then, the filter specifies power profile for each of the channels, generating
a desired profile. Profiles can differ in terms of excursion (difference between minimum
and maximum in all channels), smoothness (how much power changes over channels)
and tilt (whether signal is stronger for lower or higher frequencies). Finally, we modify
power across all channels so that desired total input power is reached. Once we have
input signal prepared, we feed it to three EDFAs alongside desired output power and then
measure both input and outputs of EDFAs using an optical spectrum analyser (OSA).
Through this process, we can experimentally determine data showing how a realВӯlife
EDFA reacts for many types of profiles. This has also allowed authors of the paper to
estimate other metrics, like noise figures or amplified spontaneous emission noise denВӯ
sity. The EDFAs used in the measurements were of type Keopsys KPSВӯSTDВӯBTВӯCВӯ18Вӯ
SDВӯ111ВӯFAВӯFA, while distributed feedback lasers operated in the range from 192.1 THz to
196 THz.
The experimental dataset creation setup is shown in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Experimental EDFA dataset setup. Figure from [20]
Understanding the dataset
The dataset in total consists of 319,651 measurements. Each measurement contains
information which EDFA was used for amplification, what type of profile was used and what
was intended input power. For input purposes, each measurement contains a complete
18
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:27==
input profile for 40 channels (measured in dBm), alongside total input power across all
channels. For output, each measurement contains a complete output profile (also 40
channels, measured in dBm) alongside actual total output power, as well as measured
noise profile and ASE profile. Each datapoint also contains a gain profile (measured
in dB), which is a difference between output profile and input profile. The dataset also
contains a list of 40 frequencies, each corresponding to a measured channel.
LetвҖҷs take a closer look at the measurements from dataset by taking a look at input profiles,
output profiles and gain profiles. For visualisation purposes, all observations for each
amplifier will be represented by their mean and standard deviation on each channel.
(a) EDFA 1
(b) EDFA 2
(c) EDFA 3
Figure 2.4: Input power spectrum for measurements of three EDFAs
As we can note on figure 2.4, the generated input profiles for each of the amplifiers tend to
differ widely, with large standard deviations and equal means across all channels, though
it can be noted that a mean for input profiles in EDFA 1 is Вӯ19 dBm, while for others itвҖҷs
Вӯ17 dBm. This shows us that generated profiles have been differing from one to another
to a large extent, meaning we can see how an amplifier reacts to a wide range of input
profiles.
Figure 2.5 shows how output has looked after going through EDFAs. We can now see a
clear pattern, with mean value going up as wavelength goes up, with reduced standard
deviation. We can again see how results from EDFA 1 are slightly different, with mean
output power being 1 dB higher than for other EDFAs. We can also note that standard
deviation goes down between 1530 nm and 1545 nm, before going slightly up between
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
19
==PAGE:28==
(a) EDFA 1
(b) EDFA 2
(c) EDFA 3
Figure 2.5: Output power spectrum for measurements of three EDFAs
1555 nm and 1562 nm.
Figure 2.6 shows gain profiles, which are differences between output and input profiles
of a measurement. We can note that the mean gain goes up with wavelength, then its
growth slows down (or becomes a drop) on channels around 1535Вӯ1540 nm, then to grow
again until becoming almost constant (or slightly going down) on upper channels.
Consequences for implementation
This dataset is useful for training, testing and validating da Ros model: experimental data
from amplifiers is preferable to artificially created data, as it can help the model train to
be used in realВӯlife scenarios. However, due to the fact the dataset initially used for da
Ros is built differently, this also means that some modifications will have to be made to
fit it into our dataset. In particular, the dataset has 40 channels, rather than 83 provided.
However, input power source operated on similar signal range (from 191.5 THz to 196.25
THz) and used the same type of EDFAs, so the performance should be similar.
2.2.6
Hyperparameters and dataset adaptations
Due to dataset involved, it became necessary to modify both input layer size, from 85
features on input to 42 Вӯ this is due to number of channels changed to 40 (other two
features Вӯ total input and output power Вӯ remain as before). Output layer size has also
been modified from 83 to 40 for the same reason. The dataset has been split 76% Вӯ 24%
between training and testing sets. Learning rate was set to 0.0001, while batch size used
by data module while training is 32 Вӯ these rates have been determined by the process of
20
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:29==
(a) EDFA 1
(b) EDFA 2
(c) EDFA 3
Figure 2.6: Gain spectrum for measurements of three EDFAs
hyperparameter tuning.
2.2.7
Implementation
In order to implement this model, pytorch-lightning library has been used. This library
automatically handles training, testing and validation process, leaving developers to set
up modelвҖҷs architecture and hyperparameters. The implementation has been split into
three parts: a data module (loading data and splitting it into train, test and validation
sets), a data set (transforming data into features and labels to be used by the model) and
the model itself. The model has been trained for 200 epochs, with pytorch-lightning
using checkpoints and Tensorboard to track performance of model per epoch. Training
has been done using Adam algorithm [21], which improves performance of stochastic
gradient descent algorithm. Loss function used for calculating gradient is mean squared
error.
The code used to implement the model can be found in the appendix.
2.2.8
Results
Over the course of training, we can note from figure 2.7 how the model has reduced the
error compared to validation set, reaching 0.02 вҲ’0.03dB2 validation error range. The
model has been trained for 200 epochs, however the graph shows that we could potenВӯ
tially achieve similar levels of performance at 50 epochs (350 thousand steps). We can
note minor validation error growth around epochs 30 (210 thousand steps) and 110 (770
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
21
==PAGE:30==
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
0.055
0.06
0
100k 200k 300k 400k 500k 600k 700k 800k 900k
1M
1.1M 1.2M 1.3M 1.4M
Figure 2.7: Validation error (dB2) per number of steps taken
thousand steps), however over time the error returned to its regular range.
2.2.9
RealВӯlife use example
In order to demonstrate performance of this model after training, the model has been
applied to one of the measurements to get an expected gain per channel. The comparison
with actual gain per channel can be seen on figure 2.8
(a) Example #1 (from EDFA 1)
(b) Example #2 (from EDFA 1)
(c) Example #3 (from EDFA 2)
(d) Example #4 (from EDFA 3)
Figure 2.8: Gain prediction from model (line) vs. actual gain (points)
22
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:31==
As it can be seen in figure 2.8, the calculated gain values more or less match actual
results regardless of amplifier used. It can be seen in figure 2.8c that there were some
minor issues in lower channels (model has underestimated them), but the error itself is
relatively small and other examples do not face the same problem. This, together with
low validation set error, shows that the model trained on our data has good performance.
2.2.10
Discussion
From results we can see that the model handles our data well and predicts output with
low error. However, it is important to note that, unlike with analytical model, we cannot acВӯ
curately state easily what patterns are behind modelвҖҷs decisionВӯmaking. This can reduce
the usability of the model, as it would not be able to provide hints as to why performance
may suffer and what steps could be taken to improve it. ItвҖҷs also important to remember
that neural network models like this one require a lot of training data Вӯ in many realВӯlife
cases data is sparse, which could lead to worse performance.
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:33==
3
Inferring Physical Properties of
Amplifiers From Data
3.1
Introduction
As discussed in previous chapter, it is possible to model amplifiersвҖҷ behaviour either by
analytic or machine learning approach. While both approaches can model an amplifierвҖҷs
nonВӯnoise behaviour well, it is often preferred to use the analytic approach. That is beВӯ
cause analytic approach is explainable: researchers can relate modelling results to physВӯ
ical models, enabling them to take proper steps to improve performance of an amplifier.
However, it is sometimes difficult to establish physical quantities needed to model an amВӯ
plifier. Lack of data from manufacturers or imperfections in an amplifier itself can change
these properties, lowering accuracy and applicability of these models. As such, it may be
a good idea to get these properties from elsewhere.
This project attempts to do that by utilising a dataВӯdriven approach, like one used in maВӯ
chine learning model, to determine not the output behaviour of the amplifier itself, but
physical properties behind this behaviour. By using stochastic gradient descent on mean
squared errorВӯbased loss function, we try to find a combination of physical quantities that
match realВӯlife behaviour of the amplifier. The goal is to infer parameters determining how
an amplifier works and use this knowledge to accurately model future behaviour in a way
that is understandable and that can be used to improve a fibre network setup (even for
data not previously seen by the model).
3.2
Approach
The project seeks to infer physical parameters used in Saleh analytical model that match
the relation between input and output seen in actual data. This is done by using a proper
loss function, calculating difference between calculated output based on current parameВӯ
ters and input and actual output. We then seek to minimise this function, using stochastic
gradient descent algorithm to modify currently calculated parameters. This is done until
gradient between parameters is small enough to lead to a low value of loss on data that
were not used for training.
3.2.1
Input parameters
We are given a set of observations, described as inputs P in
k and outputs P out
k
for each of
K channels, which can also be denoted as vectors P in and P out, both of size K. We
assume that these observations come from the same amplifier, i.e., they share the same
parameters.
We randomly divide the dataset into two parts: training set and validation set. Training
set contains observations that may be used in training, while a validation set is used as a
whole to independently assess algorithmвҖҷs performance.
3.2.2
Algorithm parameters
In order to understand whether our parameters predict existing data well, we will need
to evaluate them to get predictions d
Qout and c
Gk. SalehвҖҷs analytical model, described in
section 2.1, can be described by two equations:
c
Gk = exp
Оұk + gвҲ—
k
О¶
(Qin вҲ’d
Qout) вҲ’ОұkLEDF

(3.1)
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
25
==PAGE:34==
d
Qout =
X
k
Qin
k exp
Оұk + gвҲ—
k
О¶
(Qin вҲ’d
Qout) вҲ’ОұkLEDF

(3.2)
where Qin = PK
i=1 Qin
k , Qin
k = P in
k /hОҪk, ОҪk is channel frequency of kВӯth channel.
We can note that two parameters, LEDF and О¶, are used for all K channels, while Оұk and
gвҲ—
k are separate for each of K channels. We can also note that О¶ = ПҖr2
ErВҜnt/П„. Given
the fact that ПҖ and П„ (metastable lifetime of an Er3+ ion) do not differ between various
EDFAs, we can substitute parameter О¶ with two parameters, r2
Er and ВҜnt. This is done in
order to establish physical properties hidden behind О¶: radius of erbiumВӯdoping section
of amplifier and erbium ion density. Altogether, the model consists of 2K + 3 parameters
and we will attempt to establish these parameters.
3.2.3
Loss function
Recall the minimisation goal of an analytical method, needed for calculating gain:

d
Qout вҲ’
X
k
Qin
k exp
Оұk + gвҲ—
k
О¶
(Qin вҲ’d
Qout) вҲ’ОұkLEDF
 = 0
(3.3)
After minimisation, we can use calculated d
Qout to get c
Gk for all channels, which can also
be treated as vector b
G. This can then be used to calculate predicted output profile from
input profile, by a simple calculation:
[
P out = P in + b
G
(3.4)
where P in and [
P out are in dBm, while b
G is in dB.
Predicted output profile can also be described as an output of a model:
M(P in, LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—) = [
P out
(3.5)
where Оұ, gвҲ—are vectors of size K, containing all K parameters Оұk and gвҲ—
k.
As we know the actual output profile P out, we can use it to calculate the error for a single
observation. The error measured will be between modelвҖҷs predicted output [
P out and
actual output P out. We will use in this case mean square error (MSE) loss function:
e = [
P out вҲ’P out = M(P in, LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—) вҲ’P out
(3.6)
MSE = 1
K eT e
(3.7)
This gives us a measure of how the model is doing with respect of one data point, howВӯ
ever we want to know this with regards to more observations. Thus, we extend our loss
function to cover multiple observations. Consider P out
i
to be a vector representing outВӯ
put profile of iВӯth observationНҫ likewise, consider Mi(P in, LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—)) to be a
vector representing predicted output profile of iВӯth observation. The matrix containing N
26
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:35==
predicted output profiles of all observations will be called M. Considering all of this, our
final loss function can be defined as follows:
f(M) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
MSE(Mi(P in, LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—)) =
1
NK
N
X
i=1
eiT ei
(3.8)
where ei is an error vector for iВӯth observation.
3.2.4
Stochastic gradient descent
The advantage of this loss function is that it is differentiable, making it possible to use
stochastic gradient descent. Stochastic gradient descent can significantly speed up search
for proper parameters, attempting to change parameters in a direction that can lead to lowВӯ
est loss. It is also faster compared to regular gradient descent, as it uses only a single
observation for determining the gradient.
In order to use stochastic gradient descent, we first need to determine gradient itself. We
can approximate its value by using finiteВӯdifference approximation on a randomlyВӯselected
observation P in
i , defined as:
вҲӮM
вҲӮLEDF
(P in
i , LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—) =
M(P in
i , LEDF + ПөL, rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—) вҲ’M(P in
i , LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—)
ПөL
(3.9)
where ПөL is an increment used for determining value of gradient of L. This value is choВӯ
sen to limit machine precision issues and should be scaled appropriately to the order of
magnitude of a parameter.
Having calculated approximate gradient, we can then use it for stochastic gradient descent
algorithm. At iteration t + 1, we select a single randomlyВӯselected observation and using
it calculate a gradient for each of parameters. Then, for an arbitrary parameter p, we
calculate its next value with:
p(t+1) = p(t) вҲ’Оі вҲ—вҲӮM
вҲӮp (..., p, ...)
(3.10)
where p(t) is the value of parameter p at iteration t.
3.2.5
Algorithm
Having all tools required to calculate and improve our model, we can now move to deВӯ
scribing the whole algorithm. The algorithm for determining physical parameters of Saleh
model from data is provided in algorithm 1.
3.3
Implementation
This algorithm has been implemented in Python, using a number of libraries for calculaВӯ
tions and multiprocessing. The code is available in the appendixНҫ here, we will discuss a
couple of implementation decisions made in order to improve its performance.
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Algorithm 1 Parameters stochastic gradient descent algorithm
Require: Оі, P in
train, P in
val, P out
val , Оұ, gвҲ—
L вҶҗrandom value вҲҲ[3, 18)
r вҶҗrandom value вҲҲ[0, 10вҲ’6)
n вҶҗrandom value вҲҲ[0, 1025)
M(Q, LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt) = M(Q, LEDF , rEr, ВҜnt, Оұ, gвҲ—)
while MSE(M(P in
val, L, r, n), P out
val ) > 0.01 do
i вҶҗ0
while doi Мё= 100
Prand вҶҗrandom observation from P in
train
gradientL вҶҗ
вҲӮM
вҲӮLEDF (Prand, LEDF , r, n)
gradientr вҶҗ
вҲӮM
вҲӮrEr (Prand, L, rEr, n)
gradientn вҶҗвҲӮM
вҲӮВҜnt (Prand, L, r, ВҜnt)
L вҶҗL вҲ’Оі вҲ—gradientL
r вҶҗr вҲ’Оі вҲ—gradientr
n вҶҗn вҲ’Оі вҲ—gradientn
i вҶҗi + 1
end while
end while
3.3.1
Initialisation points
The first decision related to initialisation points for stochastic gradient descent algorithm.
Stochastic gradient descent algorithm is usually initialised with random values, in order to
avoid being biased towards some parameter values. However, we can notice that there
are natural limitations to values taken by parameters: amplifier length cannot be negative
and is usually in some range, Оұk and gвҲ—
k are usually between 0 and 2, etc. Thus, at
our initialisation we can use these physical boundaries to get initialisation points that are
closer to actual values. In the implementation, we will neglect Оұk and gвҲ—
k and focus on
three values: length of amplifier L, ErВӯdoping radius r and ErВӯion density n. As such, we
will use following boundaries:
вҖў L вҲҲ[3, 18)
вҖў r вҲҲ[0, 10вҲ’6)
вҖў n вҲҲ[0, 1025)
These boundaries are then used generating random initialisation points.
3.3.2
Vector computations
Another step in improving performance relates to how we calculate photon fluxes when
minimising objective function and calculating gain. At first, this part of code used a for
loop when summing up fluxes in a given channel. However, this approach did not utilise
the fact that we can consider the calculations as vector calculations, where results of
calculation for one channel do not depend on the results from another one. Thanks to
this property, libraries can parallelize computations, leading to quicker total computation.
After refactoring the code to use this property, flux calculation time sped up by a factor of
2.5.
3.3.3
Multiprocessing
Finally, in order to fully utilise the performance provided by multiВӯcore processors, the
code has been refactored to use multiprocessing techniques for simultaneous calculation
28
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:37==
of minimum values in error function. This has been achieved by refactoring loss function
into outer loop (calculation of MSE over all provided observations) and inner loop (calcuВӯ
lation of MSE over a single observation). In main part of the code, a pool of processes,
number of which matches the number of cores available, is created. The outer loop of a
loss function takes all observations and distributes them with inner loop function to proВӯ
cesses, where inner loop function is executed on them. It then collects all results for all
observations from processes and calculates their mean. This enables further performance
boost, as we can calculate MSE over multiple observations at the same time. There is
an overhead cost involved with setting up processes at the start and communication with
processes at calculation time, however compared to gains from parallel computations it
is minuscule. Pooling is used for validation part, where we can speedВӯup calculation of
MSE for all values in validation stepНҫ because stochastic gradient descent step uses only
one observation at a time, it becomes unnecessary to use more than one pool worker.
3.4
Results
The implementation has been tested against an artificially created dataset of 1000 obserВӯ
vations, based on experimental data described in section 2.2.5. 1000 input profiles have
been taken from this dataset, while parameters required for analytical model were taken
either from [12] (Оұk, gвҲ—
k, pump power and frequency) or were initialised at random (L, rEr,
ВҜnt). The analytical model, using these parameters, predicts output profiles for provided
input profiles. Finally, a file containing all observations, together with parameters used
and calculated output profile for each of them, is saved to be used in the algorithm. The
code for artificial data generation can be found in the appendix.
TestВӯvalidation split for the dataset was 90% вҲ’10%, step size Оі was set to 10вҲ’3 and each
epoch consists of 100 stochastic gradient descent steps.
3.4.1
Accuracy
The following figures present errors for a run for artificiallyВӯgenerated data where actual
values of parameters were set as follows:
вҖў L = 14.11m
вҖў r = 0.03 вҲ—10вҲ’6m
вҖў n = 0.939 вҲ—10251/m3
Loss function over validation set
As can be seen in the graph 3.1, the function has been able to obtain the required minimum
value of error on validation set (0.01dB2) to stop training. We can notice that in initial
phase, the drop in error has been very fast Вӯ initial gradients are usually very high, as
random starting points tend to be far away from actual value. Over time, the value of
a gradient goes down, leading to a gentler drop in error. However, it can be noted that
loss functionвҖҷs value has halved every four epochs, as can be seen in logarithmic scale
in figure 3.2.
Length of the EDFA
The comparison of inferred length versus actual length in figure 3.3 tells a similar story to
one said by loss function. We can see a similar drop in difference, although a bit gentler.
Still, the error follows a similar pattern of more or less halving every eight epoch, which is
more visible in figure 3.4, utilising logarithmic scale.
ErВӯdoping radius (rEr) of the EDFA
Behaviour shown on figure 3.5 seems similar to one we have seen for length and overall
loss, however what can be noted is that after epoch 22 the error actually starts to inВӯ
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.1: Mean squared error of predicted (using inferred parameters) and actual output
(measured in dB2) per number of epochs
Figure 3.2: Mean squared error of predicted (using inferred parameters) and actual output
(measured in dB2) per number of epochs, logarithmic scale
crease (as we start to underestimate the value). In order to understand this behaviour, it
is important to take a look at the next two figures.
ErВӯion density (ВҜnt) of the EDFA
Figure 3.6 shows something interesting: over epochs, the error increases. This may be
considered as unexpected: we want our parameters to become better, yet in this case
ErВӯion density parameter becomes worse. In order to establish why this is happening, we
need to look at one more parameter, whose error is shown in fig. 3.7.
30
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.3: Difference between inferred and actual length (in m) per number of epochs
Figure 3.4: Difference between inferred and actual length (in m) per number of epochs
О¶Вӯparameter of the EDFA
Recall how the parameter О¶ is calculated:
О¶ = ПҖr2
ErВҜnt/П„
(3.11)
As we can see on figure 3.7, О¶ is correlated with ErВӯdoping radius and ErВӯion density, with
radius being squared. This means that change in radius has bigger impact on overall value
of parameter than a change in density. Because of that, gradient of radius is steeper and
when taking a step, the effects of its gradient will be more significant compared to density
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.5: Difference between inferred and actual ErВӯdoping radius (in m) per number of
epochs
Figure 3.6: Difference between inferred and actual ErВӯion density (in 1/m3) per number
of epochs
gradient. Because of that, when looking for proper О¶, we end up getting closer to actual
value of radius, even at cost of worse result for density.
One more interesting part of this figure is that we reach an almostВӯperfect value at epoch
9, only for the error to start slightly growing in following epochs. This may be caused
by the fact we look for minimisation of all parametersНҫ as such, the algorithm took step
towards minimising the length of the EDFA as well, which caused an error of О¶ to slightly
32
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.7: Difference between inferred and actual zeta per number of epochs
increase.
3.4.2
Performance
An average calculation time for one epoch, consisting of 100 stochastic gradient descent
steps using random observations from training set and a single validation step calculating
mean squared error for all 100 observations from validation set, takes between 15.8 and
18.1 seconds. The execution time depends on initial guess made: better initial guesses
mean shorter time to reach acceptable error rate of 0.01dB2. As seen on figures 3.2
and 3.4, it takes approximately one epoch to halve current error rate, meaning that for
an initial guess leading to double the error rate compared to another guess, one more
epoch is required to reach acceptable error rate. During testing, the calculation has taken
between 36 and 80 epochs, leading to computation time of between 10 and 25 minutes.
Performance has been tested on a base configuration M1 Pro Macbook Pro (2021, 8Вӯcore,
16 GB RAM).
3.5
Discussion and future steps
As we can see, the algorithm is capable of finding desired parameters within reasonable
ranges of time and, when used to model data previously not seen by the algorithm, lead
to a very low error. We can see that the inferred length of the amplifier is close to actual
value. Although inferred values for ErВӯdoping radius and ErВӯion density of the amplifier
have a higher relative error, we can see this error still allows us to model previously unseen
observations with a low level of error (as shown by figure 3.1).
This result is promising, although it should be noted that all calculations have been done
on an artificial data set, generated by using alreadyВӯknown values for perВӯchannel coefВӯ
ficients. As such, it could be interesting to look into how we can determine Оұi and gвҲ—
i
for each of the channels, which could allow us to get all the necessary parameters for
analytical model from data alone. It is also important to note that this algorithm does not
take noise into consideration, which could lead to worse performance in real life. Making
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
33
==PAGE:42==
this algorithm more aware of noise, reducing its impact on calculations, could be another
direction to take this project into.
34
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:43==
4
Conclusion
The importance of fibre optic networks is evident in telecommunication industry and outВӯ
side of it. Wide fibre links spanning continents, countries and neighbourhoods form a
backbone of many services and technologies we take for granted. As such, it is important
to be able to model how such a network will act, helping notice potential problems in the
future and fix them. One of the ways in which such a network can be improved is with
amplifiers, which strengthen signal weakened by loss. It therefore becomes important to
be able to model how such an amplifier will strengthen the signal Вӯ and what issues may
weaken its effect.
In the first part of this thesis, we have looked on how we can approach this topic. We
have seen SalehвҖҷs model for erbiumВӯdoped fibre amplifiers, based around physical pheВӯ
nomena that make amplifying possible. We have gone through physical justifications for
its equations and have seen how this model can be implemented in code, alongside pracВӯ
tical choices that had to be made in implementation period. We have seen that this model
is explainable, helping understand physical properties standing behind an amplifierвҖҷs beВӯ
haviour. However, the accuracy of this model is limited.
We have also seen a dataВӯdriven approach, where a neural network through a process
of learning can predict future output profiles based on input profiles and additional data
alone. We have gone through the architecture of neural network, explaining how it is built,
trained and evaluated. We have also seen how this model can be implemented in code,
using libraries that reduce the complexity of neural network building process to easyВӯtoВӯ
read commands. We have seen that this model is capable of predicting future output with
low error on realВӯlife data. However, it has also become clear that such a model serves
as a black box, meaning we cannot say why we get an output we get. This reduces the
usefulness of the model, as it cannot help in determining which physical property is limiting
the amplifierвҖҷs performance.
In the second part of the thesis, after taking a look into these two models, we have been
considering how we could apply the knowledge of these models and other techniques to
improve them. The result was an idea of figuring out physical properties of an amplifier
to be modelled with an analytical approach. This was meant to enable more amplifiers
to be modelled, since many of the information needed for modelling them is missing.
The approach taken, building on a optimisation technique known as stochastic gradient
descent algorithm, has yielded promising results in determining general parameters of an
amplifier, while also taking a reasonable time to determine these parameters. Still, the
algorithm can be improved in a couple of ways, as discussed at the end of Chapter 3.
This project can be considered as a starting point of discussion on how dataВӯdriven apВӯ
proaches can help in using physicsВӯbased models. Through a combination of input and
output data, we have been able to expand knowledge about an amplifier, allowing it to be
modelled in a way that can be understood by researchers and other who seek to design
and develop fibre optic networks. The parameters discovered through the algorithm are
spectrumВӯwide and lack information about perВӯchannel parameters, which can be particВӯ
ularly interesting for modelling purposes. However, this project is a proof that using data
and analytical models we can guide our modelling process to make it more understandВӯ
able, and as such making model output more actionable Вӯ this could include swapping
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
35
==PAGE:44==
amplifiers based on model output or being able to predict how it will behave outside of its
regular range, helping users understand potential consequences of such behaviour.
36
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Yichen Liu et al. вҖңModeling EDFA Gain: Approaches and ChallengesвҖқ. In: Photonics
8.10 (2021). ISSN: 2304Вӯ6732. DOI: 10.3390/photonics8100417. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/2304-6732/8/10/417.
[2]
Yichen Liu et al. вҖңModeling EDFA Gain: Approaches and ChallengesвҖқ. In: Photonics
8.10 (2021). ISSN: 2304Вӯ6732. DOI: 10.3390/photonics8100417. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/2304-6732/8/10/417.
[3]
P.C. Becker, N.A. Olsson, and J.R. Simpson. вҖңChapter 5 Вӯ ErbiumВӯDoped Fiber
AmplifiersвҖ”Amplifier BasicsвҖқ. In: ErbiumВӯDoped Fiber Amplifiers. Ed. by P.C. Becker,
N.A. Olsson, and J.R. Simpson. Optics and Photonics. San Diego: Academic Press,
1999, pp. 131вҖ“152. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012084590-3/50007-7. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780120845903500077.
[4]
A.A.M. Saleh et al. вҖңModeling of gain in erbiumВӯdoped fiber amplifiersвҖқ. In: IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters 2.10 (1990), pp. 714вҖ“717. DOI: 10.1109/68.60769.
[5]
C.R. Giles and E. Desurvire. вҖңModeling erbiumВӯdoped fiber amplifiersвҖқ. In: Journal
of Lightwave Technology 9.2 (1991), pp. 271вҖ“283. DOI: 10.1109/50.65886.
[6]
Y. Sun, J.L. Zyskind, and A.K. Srivastava. вҖңAverage inversion level, modeling, and
physics of erbiumВӯdoped fiber amplifiersвҖқ. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics 3.4 (1997), pp. 991вҖ“1007. DOI: 10.1109/2944.649527.
[7]
Mattia Cantono et al. вҖңPhysical Layer Performance of MultiВӯBand Optical Line SysВӯ
tems Using Raman AmplificationвҖқ. In: Journal of Optical Communications and NetВӯ
working 11 (Jan. 2019), A103. DOI: 10.1364/JOCN.11.00A103.
[8]
Alexis Meseguer et al. вҖңHighly Accurate MeasurementВӯBased Gain Model for ConstantВӯ
Pump EDFA for nonВӯFlat WDM InputsвҖқ. In: Jan. 2021, p. M5C.4. DOI: 10.1364/OFC.
2021.M5C.4.
[9]
Francesco da Ros, Uiara Celine de Moura, and Metodi P. Yankov. вҖңMachine learningВӯ
based EDFA Gain Model Generalizable to Multiple Physical DevicesвҖқ. In: 2020
European Conference on Optical Communications (ECOC). 2020, pp. 1вҖ“4. DOI:
10.1109/ECOC48923.2020.9333297.
[10]
Shengxiang Zhu et al. вҖңMachine Learning Based Prediction of ErbiumВӯDoped Fiber
WDM Line Amplifier Gain SpectraвҖқ. In: 2018 European Conference on Optical ComВӯ
munication (ECOC). 2018, pp. 1вҖ“3. DOI: 10.1109/ECOC.2018.8535323.
[11]
Yuren You, Zhiping Jiang, and Christopher Janz. вҖңMachine LearningВӯBased EDFA
Gain ModelвҖқ. In: 2018 European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC).
2018, pp. 1вҖ“3. DOI: 10.1109/ECOC.2018.8535397.
[12]
Jose Krause Perin et al. вҖңImportance of Amplifier Physics in Maximizing the Capacity
of Submarine LinksвҖқ. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 37.9 (2019), pp. 2076вҖ“
2085. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831.
[13]
M. J. D. Powell. вҖңAn efficient method for finding the minimum of a function of several
variables without calculating derivativesвҖқ. In: The Computer Journal 7.2 (Jan. 1964),
pp. 155вҖ“162. ISSN: 0010Вӯ4620. DOI: 10.1093/comjnl/7.2.155. eprint: https://
academic.oup.com/comjnl/article-pdf/7/2/155/959784/070155.pdf. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/7.2.155.
[14]
Martin T Hagan, Howard B Demuth, and Mark Beale. Neural network design. PWS
Publishing Co., 1997.
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
37
==PAGE:46==
[15]
Soufiane Hayou, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith Rousseau. вҖңOn the Impact of the AcВӯ
tivation function on Deep Neural Networks TrainingвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Kamalika Chaudhuri and
Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Vol. 97. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR,
Sept. 2019, pp. 2672вҖ“2680. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/hayou19a.html.
[16]
Nicolas Flammarion. Neural Networks: Training, SGD and Backpropagation. 2021.
URL: https://github.com/epfml/ML_course/blob/master/lectures/08/lecture08cd_
slides.pdf.
[17]
T. Falas and A.ВӯG. Stafylopatis. вҖңThe impact of the error function selection in neural
networkВӯbased classifiersвҖқ. In: IJCNNвҖҷ99. International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks. Proceedings (Cat. No.99CH36339). Vol. 3. 1999, 1799вҖ“1804 vol.3. DOI:
10.1109/IJCNN.1999.832651.
[18]
LГ©on Bottou. вҖңLargeВӯScale Machine Learning with Stochastic Gradient DescentвҖқ.
In: Proceedings of COMPSTATвҖҷ2010. Ed. by Yves Lechevallier and Gilbert Saporta.
Heidelberg: PhysicaВӯVerlag HD, 2010, pp. 177вҖ“186. ISBN: 978Вӯ3Вӯ7908Вӯ2604Вӯ3.
[19]
P.J. Werbos. вҖңBackpropagation through time: what it does and how to do itвҖқ. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 78.10 (1990), pp. 1550вҖ“1560. DOI: 10.1109/5.58337.
[20]
Metodi Plamenov Yankov et al. вҖңSNR Optimization of MultiВӯSpan Fiber Optic ComВӯ
munication Systems Employing EDFAs With NonВӯFlat Gain And Noise FigureвҖқ. In:
Journal of Lightwave Technology 39.21 (2021), pp. 6824вҖ“6832. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.
2021.3106163.
[21]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2014. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
38
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix: Saleh method gain
calculation code (numerical.py)
1
from scipy import constants , optimize , interpolate
2
3
import numpy as np
4
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
# Analytical model (from Perin et al., doi: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831)
6
7
# Functions provided by Rasmus Thomas Jones
8
def factor_from_db_type(db_type):
9
db_type = db_type.lower()
10
if db_type == "db":
11
fact = 0
12
elif db_type == "dbm":
13
fact = -30
14
elif db_type == "dbu":
15
fact = -60
16
else:
17
raise ValueError("db_type can only be dB, dBm or dBu.")
18
return fact
19
20
def lin2db(lin, db_type="dBm"):
21
fact = factor_from_db_type(db_type)
22
return 10 * np.log10(lin) - fact
23
24
def db2lin(db, db_type="dBm"):
25
fact = factor_from_db_type(db_type)
26
return 10 ** ((db + fact) / 10.0)
27
28
def total_power(input_profile , input_dbm=True, output_dbm=True, keepdims=False
):
29
if input_dbm:
30
input_profile = db2lin(input_profile , db_type="dbm")
31
32
p = np.sum(input_profile , axis=-1, keepdims=keepdims)
33
34
if output_dbm:
35
p = lin2db(p, db_type="dbm")
36
37
return p
38
39
# Data interpolation functions , depend on values from Perin et al., doi:
10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831
40
# NOTE: this function returns a function
41
def interpolated_absorptions(file_path):
42
absorptions = np.loadtxt(file_path , delimiter=',') # m^-1
43
wavelengths = absorptions[:, 0] * 1e-9
44
alpha = absorptions[:,1]
45
46
return interpolate.interp1d(wavelengths , alpha.astype(np.longdouble))
47
48
# NOTE: this function returns a function
49
def interpolated_gains(file_path):
50
gains = np.loadtxt(file_path , delimiter=',')
# m^-1
51
wavelengths = gains[:,0] * 1e-9
52
g = gains[:, 1]
53
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
39
==PAGE:48==
54
return interpolate.interp1d(wavelengths , g.astype(np.longdouble))
55
56
# Analytical model calculation functions
57
# Calculations from Perin et al., doi: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831
58
def calculate_q_in(pump_power , num_of_wavelengths = 40):
59
pump_wavelength = 980e-9 # m
60
pump_frequency = constants.c / pump_wavelength # Hz
61
signal_wavelengths = np.linspace(1531, 1562, num_of_wavelengths) * 1e-9 #
m
62
signal_frequencies = constants.c/signal_wavelengths # Hz
63
64
signal_power_in_dbm = -13 * np.ones_like(signal_frequencies) # dbm
65
signal_power_in = db2lin(signal_power_in_dbm , db_type='dbm') # W
66
67
power_in = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(pump_power , 0), signal_power_in)
)
68
freq = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(pump_frequency , 0),
signal_frequencies))
69
70
# Calculated values
71
Q_in = power_in.astype(np.longdouble) / (constants.h * freq)
72
return Q_in
73
74
def calculate_photon_flux(Q_in, alpha, g, zeta, L, Q_out): # power in mW
75
# Calculated values
76
Q_in_sum = np.sum(Q_in)
77
Q_out = Q_out.astype(np.longdouble)
78
79
# Actual calculation
80
result = np.longdouble()
81
result += np.sum(Q_in*np.exp((Q_in_sum -Q_out) * (alpha+g)/zeta
- alpha*L)
)
82
83
return np.abs(Q_out - result)
84
85
def calculate_gain(Q_in, Q_out, alpha, g, zeta, L):
86
# Calculated values
87
Q_in_sum = np.sum(Q_in)
88
89
in_exponent = (Q_in_sum -Q_out) * (alpha+g)/zeta - alpha*L
90
return np.exp(in_exponent) # this is a vector
91
92
# Example calculation , based on example from Perin et al., doi: 10.1109/JLT
.2019.2897831
93
if __name__ == '__main__':
94
pump_powers = np.array([18.1, 31.9, 45.8, 59.6, 87.2, 114.9]) * 1e-3 # W
95
96
wavelengths = np.linspace(1531, 1562, 40) * 1e-9
97
frequencies = constants.c/wavelengths
98
99
# Interpolated functions
100
absorption_func = interpolated_absorptions(file_path="data/absorptions.csv
")
101
gains_func = interpolated_gains(file_path="data/gain_coeff.csv")
102
103
# Constants
104
r = 0.73e-6 # m
105
n = 9.96e24 # 1/m^3
106
tau = 1e-2 # s
107
L = 8 # m
108
109
# Wavelength -specific values
40
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:49==
110
alpha = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(0.96,0), absorption_func(
wavelengths))) # m^-1
111
g = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(0,0), gains_func(wavelengths))) # m^-1
112
zeta = (constants.pi * (r ** 2) * n) / tau
113
114
# Calculate and plot gains per pump power and on all channels
115
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
116
for selected_pump in range(len(pump_powers)):
117
Q_in = calculate_q_in(pump_powers[selected_pump])
118
solveFunc = lambda x: calculate_photon_flux(Q_in, alpha, g, zeta, L, x
)
119
120
Q_in_sum = np.sum(Q_in)
121
Q_out_start = Q_in_sum - 1e9
122
123
result = optimize.minimize(solveFunc , x0 = Q_out_start , method="Powell
")
124
125
# We skip pump gain and move to decibels
126
gain = lin2db(calculate_gain(Q_in, result.x, alpha, g, zeta, L)[1:],
db_type='dB')
127
print(np.mean(gain))
128
ax.plot(wavelengths * 1e6, gain, label = str(pump_powers[selected_pump
] * 1e3) + " mW")
129
130
ax.legend(title = "Pump power (mW)")
131
ax.grid()
132
ax.set_xlabel("Wavelength (nm)")
133
ax.set_ylabel("Gain (dB)")
134
plt.show()
Code/numerical.py
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
41
==PAGE:50==
B
Appendix: machine learning gain
prediction model code (neural.py)
1
from typing import Optional
2
import scipy.io as sio
3
import pytorch_lightning as pl
4
from torch.utils.data import random_split , DataLoader
5
import math
6
import os
7
8
import torch
9
import torch.nn as nn
10
11
# Neural network model (from daRos et al., doi: 10.1109/ECOC48923
.2020.9333297)
12
13
class Neural(pl.LightningModule):
14
def __init__(self, learning_rate = 1e-2):
15
super().__init__()
16
self.layer_1 = nn.Linear(42, 256)
17
self.layer_2 = nn.Linear(256, 128)
18
self.layer_3 = nn.Linear(128, 40)
19
self.learning_rate = learning_rate
20
self.loss = nn.MSELoss()
21
22
def forward(self, x):
23
x = x.float()
24
x = self.layer_1(x)
25
x = torch.relu(x)
26
x = self.layer_2(x)
27
x = torch.relu(x)
28
x = self.layer_3(x)
29
return x
30
31
def configure_optimizers(self):
32
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(), lr=self.learning_rate)
33
return optimizer
34
35
def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
36
x, y = batch
37
y_hat = self(x)
38
loss = self.loss(y_hat, y)
39
return loss
40
41
def validation_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
42
x, y = batch
43
y_hat = self(x)
44
val_loss = self.loss(y_hat, y)
45
self.log("val_loss", val_loss)
46
47
def test_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
48
x, y = batch
49
y_hat = self(x)
50
test_loss = self.loss(y_hat, y)
51
self.log("test_loss", test_loss)
52
53
class MatDataModule(pl.LightningDataModule):
42
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:51==
54
def __init__(self, data_dir: str = "data/kamil_dataset.mat", batch_size:
int = 100, test_ratio = 0.24, val_ratio = 0.10, manual_seed = False):
55
super().__init__()
56
self.data_dir = data_dir
57
self.batch_size = batch_size
58
self.test_ratio = test_ratio
59
self.val_ratio = val_ratio
60
self.manual_seed = manual_seed
61
62
def setup(self, stage: Optional[str] = None):
63
self.data = MatDataSet(self.data_dir)
64
if (self.manual_seed):
65
self.rng = torch.Generator().manual_seed(42)
66
else:
67
self.rng = None
68
self.val, full = random_split(self.data, [math.floor(len(self.data)*
self.val_ratio), \
69
math.ceil(len(self.data)*(1-self.val_ratio))], self.rng)
70
self.test, self.train = random_split(full, [math.floor(len(full)*self.
test_ratio), \
71
math.ceil(len(full)*(1-self.test_ratio))], self.rng)
72
73
def train_dataloader(self):
74
return DataLoader(self.train, batch_size=self.batch_size)
75
76
def val_dataloader(self):
77
return DataLoader(self.val, batch_size=self.batch_size)
78
79
def test_dataloader(self):
80
return DataLoader(self.test, batch_size=self.batch_size)
81
82
def teardown(self, stage: Optional[str] = None):
83
# Used to clean-up when the run is finished
84
...
85
86
class MatDataSet(torch.utils.data.Dataset):
87
def __init__(self, data_path , transform=None, target_transform=None):
88
self.data = sio.loadmat(data_path)
89
90
self.data['input_profile'] = torch.from_numpy(self.data['input_profile
'])
91
self.data['output_profile'] = torch.from_numpy(self.data['
output_profile'])
92
self.data['total_pin'] = torch.from_numpy(self.data['total_pin'])
93
self.data['total_pout'] = torch.from_numpy(self.data['total_pout'])
94
95
self.transform = transform
96
self.target_transform = target_transform
97
98
def __len__(self):
99
return len(self.data['output_profile'])
100
101
def __getitem__(self, idx):
102
input = self.data['input_profile'][idx]
103
input = torch.cat((input, self.data['total_pin'][idx].float()))
104
input = torch.cat((input, self.data['total_pout'][idx].float()))
105
106
label = self.data['output_profile'][idx].float()
107
if self.transform:
108
input = self.transform(input)
109
if self.target_transform:
110
label = self.target_transform(label)
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
43
==PAGE:52==
111
return input, label
112
113
# Run model and fit it for 200 epochs
114
# Statistics are generated by the model, use tensorboard with directory "<
currentdirectory >/neutral" as log directory
115
if __name__ == '__main__':
116
data = MatDataModule(batch_size=2**5)
117
model = Neural(learning_rate=1e-3)
118
119
trainer = pl.Trainer(default_root_dir = os.getcwd() + '/neural',
max_epochs = 200)
120
trainer.fit(model, datamodule=data)
Code/neural.py
44
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:53==
C
Appendix: artificial data generation
code (artificial_data_generation.py)
1
import scipy.io as sio
2
import pandas as pd
3
import random
4
from numerical import *
5
# Artificial data creation
6
7
# Parameters
8
NUM_OF_DATAPOINTS = 1000
9
DATASET_FILEPATH = "data/kamil_dataset.mat"
10
ALPHA_FILEPATH = "data/absorptions.csv"
11
G_FILEPATH = "data/gain_coeff.csv"
12
RESULT_FILEPATH = "data/artificial_data.pickle"
13
14
# Get profiles from data file
15
data = sio.loadmat(DATASET_FILEPATH)
16
# Datapoints we will use for data generation
17
input_profiles = data['input_profile'][:NUM_OF_DATAPOINTS]
18
19
# Frequencies used are in data
20
signal_frequencies = data['channel_frequencies'][0]
21
signal_wavelengths = constants.c/signal_frequencies
22
23
# Interpolated functions (from Perin et al., doi: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831)
24
absorption_func = interpolated_absorptions(file_path = ALPHA_FILEPATH)
25
gains_func = interpolated_gains(file_path = G_FILEPATH)
26
27
# Pump information (from Perin et al., doi: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831)
28
pump_wavelength = 980e-9 # m
29
pump_frequency = constants.c / pump_wavelength # Hz
30
pump_power = 18.1 * 1e-3
31
#r = 0.73e-6 # m
32
#n = 9.96e24 # 1/m^3
33
tau = 1e-2 # s
34
35
# Calculate parameters (including parameters for pump; from Perin et al., doi:
10.1109/JLT.2019.2897831)
36
alpha = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(0.96,0), absorption_func(
signal_wavelengths))) # m^-1
37
g = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(0,0), gains_func(signal_wavelengths))) # m
^-1
38
39
# Frequencies measured in dataset
40
frequencies = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(pump_frequency , 0),
signal_frequencies))
41
42
# Generate a random value of L, r, n
43
L_random = 3 + random.random() * 15
44
print(f"Generating dataset for length: {L_random}")
45
r_random = random.random() * 1e-6
46
print(f"Generating dataset for doping radius: {r_random}")
47
n_random = random.random() * 1e25
48
print(f"Generating dataset for ion density: {n_random}")
49
50
# Calculate zeta from randomly generated r, n
51
zeta = (constants.pi * (r_random ** 2) * n_random) / tau
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
45
==PAGE:54==
52
53
# For each combination of P_in per channel and parameters , use numerical
method to calculate P_out per channel and total P_out
54
results = list()
55
for input_profile in input_profiles:
56
# Expand input profile with pump power
57
signal_power_in = db2lin(input_profile)
58
power_in = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(pump_power , 0), signal_power_in)
)
59
Q_in = power_in.astype(np.longdouble) / (constants.h * frequencies)
60
61
solveFunc = lambda x: calculate_photon_flux(Q_in, alpha, g, zeta, L_random
, x)
62
63
Q_in_sum = np.sum(Q_in)
64
Q_out_start = Q_in_sum - 1e9
65
66
optimize_result = optimize.minimize(solveFunc , x0 = Q_out_start , options={
"disp": False}, method="Powell")
67
Q_out = optimize_result.x
68
69
# If one of calculations fails for the dataset , it may mean parameters
provided are far away from reasonable , making it hard to calculate
70
if not optimize_result.success:
71
raise Exception("One of the optimizations failed , check if values
provided in files, parameters are correct")
72
73
gain = calculate_gain(Q_in, Q_out, alpha, g, zeta, L_random)
74
75
results.append({
76
"input_profile": input_profile ,
77
"output_profile": input_profile + lin2db(gain[1:], db_type='dB'), #
Skip gain for pump
78
"L": L_random ,
79
"alpha": alpha,
80
"g": g,
81
"r": r_random ,
82
"n": n_random ,
83
"zeta": zeta,
84
"pump_power": pump_power ,
85
"pump_frequency": pump_frequency ,
86
"frequencies": frequencies[1:] # Pump measurement already in
pump_frequency
87
})
88
89
# Write them to a new file
90
pd.DataFrame(results).to_pickle(RESULT_FILEPATH)
Code/artificial_data_generation.py
46
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:55==
D
Appendix: parameter inference
algorithm code(param_sgd.py)
1
import numpy as np
2
from numerical import *
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import pandas as pd
5
import random
6
from multiprocessing import Pool
7
import timeit , os
8
9
# L. r, n stochastic gradient descent algorithm
10
# Known quantities: alpha, g, pump_power , frequencies
11
DATA_FILE = "final_code/data/artificial_data.pickle"
12
MSE_STOP_CONDITION = 0.01
13
STEP_SIZE = 1e-3
14
EPOCH_SIZE = 100
15
16
# Loss function for a single observation
17
def loss_function_internal(measurement , pump_power , frequencies , alpha, g,
zeta, L):
18
input_profile = measurement['input_profile']
19
output_profile = measurement['output_profile']
20
21
# Calculate parameters we need for minimization
22
signal_power_in = db2lin(input_profile)
23
power_in = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(pump_power , 0), signal_power_in)
)
24
Q_in = power_in.astype(np.longdouble) / (constants.h * frequencies)
25
26
# Create initial point for search
27
Q_out_start = np.sum(Q_in) - 1e9
28
29
# Calculate gain
30
solveFunc = lambda x: calculate_photon_flux(Q_in, alpha, g, zeta, L, x)
31
optimize_result = optimize.minimize(solveFunc , x0 = Q_out_start , options={
"disp": False}, method="Powell")
32
result_local = optimize_result.x
33
34
# Stop calculations if it becomes impossible to calculate minimum
35
if not optimize_result.success:
36
raise Exception("Stopped calculation due to failed minimization , check
if provided parameters are correct")
37
38
# Calculate total output
39
gain_local = calculate_gain(Q_in, result_local , alpha, g, zeta, L)[1:]
40
output_profile_local = input_profile + lin2db(gain_local , db_type='dB')
41
42
# Calculate error for an observation
43
return np.mean(np.square(output_profile_local - output_profile))
44
45
# Loss function for observations provided in the loop
46
def loss_function(group_measurement , pump_power , frequencies , L, r_nonexp ,
n_nonexp):
47
# r = r_nonexp * 1e-6 # m
48
# n = n_nonexp * 1e25 # 1/m^3
49
# tau = 1e-2 # s
50
# Skip raising values to exponent to avoid machine precision issues
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
47
==PAGE:56==
51
# zeta = (constants.pi * (r ** 2) * n) / tau
52
zeta = (constants.pi * (r_nonexp ** 2) * n_nonexp) * 1e15
53
54
# Keep track of obtained errors
55
local_errors = list()
56
57
# Prepare measurements to be distributed across pool workers
58
measurements_params = [(measurement , pump_power , frequencies , alpha, g,
zeta, L) for _, measurement in group_measurement.iterrows()]
59
60
# Assign each measurement to pool worker and wait for results
61
local_errors.extend(pool.starmap(loss_function_internal ,
measurements_params))
62
63
# Calculate MMSE error
64
return np.mean(local_errors)
65
66
if __name__ == '__main__':
67
# Measure total execution time
68
start = timeit.default_timer()
69
70
# Load data
71
data = pd.read_pickle(DATA_FILE)
72
# Split data between validation data (10%) and training data (90%)
73
validation_data = data.sample(frac=0.1)
74
training_data = data.iloc[~data.index.isin(validation_data.index)]
75
76
# Use multiprocessing pool for calculations
77
pool = Pool(os.cpu_count())
78
79
# Keep track of MSE losses over each epoch
80
epoch = 0
81
mse_losses = list()
82
L_losses = list()
83
r_losses = list()
84
n_losses = list()
85
86
# Get actual parameters from data (file has same data for every
measurement)
87
L_actual = data.L.values[0]
88
alpha = data.alpha.values[0]
89
g = data.g.values[0]
90
r_actual = data.r.values[0]
91
n_actual = data.n.values[0]
92
pump_frequency = data.pump_frequency.values[0]
93
pump_power = data.pump_power.values[0]
94
signal_frequencies = data.frequencies.values[0]
95
frequencies = np.concatenate((np.expand_dims(pump_frequency , 0),
signal_frequencies))
96
97
# Calculate starting points at random from a given range
98
L = 3 + random.random() * 15 # (0, 18] m
99
r_nonexp = random.random() # (0, 1e-6) m
100
n_nonexp = random.random() # (0, 1e25) 1/m^3
101
102
# Epsilon for approximating f'(x)
103
eps = np.sqrt(np.finfo(float).eps)
104
105
while True:
106
# Count epochs
107
epoch += 1
108
# Measure epoch time
48
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
==PAGE:57==
109
iter_start = timeit.default_timer()
110
111
for i in range(EPOCH_SIZE):
112
# Get a random value from data
113
random_measurement = training_data.sample()
114
# Prepare functions for which we seek stochastic gradient (for L,
r, n)
115
loss_func_l = lambda l, r, n: loss_function(random_measurement ,
pump_power , frequencies , l, r, n)
116
loss_func_r = lambda r, l, n: loss_function(random_measurement ,
pump_power , frequencies , l, r, n)
117
loss_func_n = lambda n, l, r: loss_function(random_measurement ,
pump_power , frequencies , l, r, n)
118
119
# Calculate stochactic gradient
120
gradient_L = optimize.approx_fprime(L, loss_func_l , eps, r_nonexp ,
n_nonexp)
121
gradient_r = optimize.approx_fprime(r_nonexp , loss_func_r , eps, L,
n_nonexp)
122
gradient_n = optimize.approx_fprime(n_nonexp , loss_func_n , eps, L,
r_nonexp)
123
124
# Apply stochastic gradient
125
L = L - STEP_SIZE * gradient_L
126
r_nonexp = r_nonexp - STEP_SIZE * gradient_r
127
n_nonexp = n_nonexp - STEP_SIZE * gradient_n
128
129
# Print epoch calculation time
130
iter_end = timeit.default_timer()
131
print(f"Execution time per epoch: {iter_end - iter_start}")
132
133
# Calculate error for validation data after epoch
134
current_mse = loss_function(validation_data , pump_power , frequencies ,
L, r_nonexp , n_nonexp)
135
print(f"Current error: {current_mse}")
136
137
# Keep track of errors (for graphs)
138
mse_losses.append(current_mse)
139
L_losses.append(L - L_actual)
140
r_losses.append(r_nonexp * 1e-6 - r_actual)
141
n_losses.append(n_nonexp * 1e25 - n_actual)
142
143
# Stop the search if error is low enough
144
if (current_mse < MSE_STOP_CONDITION):
145
print("Found spot with low MSE, leaving...")
146
break
147
148
# Print final errors measured for parameters
149
print(f"Difference between found and expected L: {abs(L - L_actual)}")
150
print(f"Actual value: {L_actual}, calculated value: {L}")
151
print(f"Difference between found and expected r: {abs(r_nonexp * 1e-6 -
r_actual)}")
152
print(f"Actual value: {r_actual}, calculated value: {r_nonexp * 1e-6}")
153
print(f"Difference between found and expected n: {abs(n_nonexp * 1e25 -
n_actual)}")
154
print(f"Actual value: {n_actual}, calculated value: {n_nonexp * 1e25}")
155
156
# Print total execution time
157
stop = timeit.default_timer()
158
print(f"Total execution time: {stop - start}")
Code/param_sgd.py
Approximate models for erbium doped fiber amplifiers using physicsВӯinformed machine learning
49
==PAGE:58==
Abstract
Erbium doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) are critical for the amplification and operation of wavelength
division multiplexing (WDM) optical fiber communication systems. They allow for simultaneous amВӯ
plification of the entire CВӯband of the spectrum, which is shared by many users communicating on
different wavelengths. The gain spectrum of EDFAs is nonВӯflat, nonlinear and highly dependent on
the input power spectral density. Analytical models for the gain spectrum frequently cannot be used
due to lack of information regarding physical properties of amplifiers. In this project, we will use
machine learning techniques, such as stochastic gradient descent and mean squared error as loss
function, to create an algorithm that can infer physical parameters of EDFAs that can be used in
analytical models. We will then apply this model to an artificially generated dataset in order to show
the algorithm can infer certain general parameters from artificial data.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Гҳrsteds Plads, building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
