==PAGE:1==
The Limits of Haplotype-Based Approaches:
Exploring the Applicability of the Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying
Model to Ancient Samples
Master’s Thesis
Author:
Isabel D´ıaz-Pin´es Cort
s202406
Supervisors:
Internal: Assoc. Prof. Gabriel Renaud
External: Assoc. Prof. Fernando Racimo,
PhD Student Joshua D. Rubin
Hand-in date: 12th August 2022
ECTS: 32.5
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In the era of next-generation sequencing, ancient human genomes are becoming readily
available. However, issues like postmortem degradation or contamination from modern-day
human DNA still pose a barrier in its analysis. Many computational methods have surged
to deal with these challenges; recently, some do so within the framework of the Li and
Stephens haplotype-copying model. Well-known to population geneticists, this framework
provides a way to reconstruct a target haplotype as an imperfect mosaic of a set of
reference haplotypes in a copying process dictated by a hidden Markov model. This project
investigates the applicability of the model to ancient target haplotypes, as no previous
extensive research supports it.
The model’s robustness was evaluated on simulated genetic variation data at the
population level, using a reference panel of modern haplotypes and sampling ancient target
haplotypes at different time points. Estimates of the model parameters were obtained for
each target haplotype through a maximum likelihood approach. The model’s performance
was then compared to that of a baseline model with the freedom to copy from any reference
haplotype at any locus.
The results point to good model performance for target haplotypes as old as 900,000
years in the simplest-case scenario of constant-sized continuous populations. Although
this suggests the model’s applicability to ancient DNA from anatomically modern humans,
a more definitive answer should be reached by considering scenarios that reflect the
complexity of the demographic history of humans. Nevertheless, this work provides a
starting point for assessing the haplotype-copying framework when applied to ancient
DNA data.
I
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
I
List of Abbreviations
IV
Acknowledgements
V
1
Introduction and Theory
1
1.1
Ancient DNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Overview of the Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Challenges and Motivation for the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Hidden Markov Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Formal Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Statistical Inference in HMMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
The Forward Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.4
The Viterbi Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.5
Parameter Estimation via Direct Maximization of the Likelihood . .
11
1.3
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.1
Recombination, Linkage Disequilibrium and Genetic Distance
. . .
12
1.3.2
The Hidden Markov Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.4
Applications of the LS model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.4.1
Copying Modern from Modern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.4.2
Copying Modern from Ancient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4.3
Copying Ancient from Modern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.5
Simulation of Genetic Variation Data at the Population Level
. . . . . . .
20
II
==PAGE:4==
2
Methodology
23
2.1
Forward-Time Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.1.1
Demographic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.1.2
Simulation Engines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2
Haplotype-Copying Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4
Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Model parameters
. . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5
Viterbi Decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.6
Model Evaluation Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Results
29
3.1
African population
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.1
MLEs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.2
Comparison to a Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.3
Distribution of Divergences from the Reference Haplotypes . . . . .
33
3.2
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
MLEs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2
Comparison to a Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.3
Distribution of Divergences from the Reference Haplotypes . . . . .
38
4
Discussion
41
4.1
Comparison to Previous Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
African Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Limitations and Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
References
52
Appendices
58
A
59
A.1 Transition Probabilities in the Haplotype-Copying Model . . . . . . . . . .
60
III
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
aDNA:
Ancient DNA
DNA:
Deoxyribonucleic Acid
HMMs:
Hidden Markov Models
LD:
Linkage Disequilibrium
LS:
Li and Stephens
ML:
Maximum Likelihood
MLE:
Maximum Likelihood Estimate
MRCA:
Most Recent Common Ancestor
NGS:
Next Generation Sequencing
ROH:
Runs of Homozygosity
SNP:
Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism
IV
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor Gabriel for sharing his knowledge
with me and for all his invaluable feedback and encouragement during the thesis. I am
also extremely grateful to my co-supervisor, Josh, for his patience and dedication; this
endeavour would not have been possible without you both. I want to thank my parents
for instilling the curiosity that has led me to pursue a scientific career and for their
unconditional support. Lastly, I want to thank Lukas for the moral support he provided
when I needed that extra motivation.
V
==PAGE:7==
VI
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND THEORY
1
Chapter
Introduction and Theory
Page 1 of 60
==PAGE:9==
Ancient DNA
1.1
Ancient DNA
1.1.1
Overview of the Field
The advancement of current methods in genomics has allowed the extraction and sequencing
of DNA from various ancient sources. Starting in the decade of the 1980s with the
sequencing of mitochondrial DNA of the quagga, an extinct zebra-like species [1], and
the cloning of genetic material from a 2,400-yr-old Egyptian mummy [2], the field of
ancient DNA (aDNA) has experienced rapid development in the advent of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) technologies, leading to over 1100 genomes available for hominins
and anatomically modern humans today [3]. This availability of genome-wide data at a
population level has given novel insights into the evolutionary history of humans. For
example, we now have genetic evidence of interbreeding between extinct hominins and
anatomically modern humans [4]. Moreover, the out-of-Africa event and human dispersal
across the continents are increasingly well understood [5]. However, the advances are not
limited to archaeology and anthropology; animal and plant aDNA studies are enabling
researchers to document domestication processes, track the history of invasive species or
inform ecological restoration efforts, among other applications [6].
1.1.2
Challenges and Motivation for the Project
NGS methodologies have improved the reliability of the results, and previously unimagin-
able tasks, such as drafting entire genomes of extinct organisms that lived thousands of
years ago, are now achievable [7]. However, the analysis of aDNA still poses challenges.
Firstly, the amount of endogenous DNA found in ancient samples is typically low, making
sequencing multiple samples at a high coverage depth infeasible or costly [8]. In addition,
aDNA molecules are highly fragmented. Studies of postmortem degradation patterns of
aDNA have shown a tendency for fragmentation to occur after purine residues, which
could result in biased coverage patterns. Moreover, deamination of cytosine residues into
uracils (an analogue of thymine) tends to occur near fragment ends, leading to GC →
AT misincorporations during amplification in the sequencing workflow [9]. Altogether,
these intrinsic characteristics of aDNA can confound read mapping, genome assembly and
variant calling, thereby increasing the degree of uncertainty in the data [8].
Page 2 of 60
==PAGE:10==
Hidden Markov Models
Another issue that must be considered, particularly when dealing with human aDNA
samples, is contamination from modern DNA. Any extraneous DNA present in an ancient
sample will be amplified together with the endogenous DNA. In human samples, where the
DNA from the researchers handling the sample will align to the human reference genome
along with the endogenous reads, this may confound variant calling and influence down-
stream analyses, like phylogenetic reconstructions or calculation of population divergence
times [10].
Researchers have put much effort into developing new computational methodologies to
overcome these problems and reliably reconstruct ancient genomes. Some recent attempts
to deal with these issues do so within the Li and Stephens (LS) haplotype-copying
model framework. In the LS model, a Hidden Markov model (HMM) that accounts for
recombination and mutation is used to reconstruct a test or target haplotype by copying
haplotypes from a reference panel [11].
Li and Stephens proved the relevance of their model for copying modern haplotypes
from modern haplotypes. Later, its use was successfully adapted for the case where
the haplotypes in the reference panel are ancestral to the target haplotype [12]. Now,
applications where the target haplotype is ancient and the reference panel comprises modern
haplotypes are surging in trying to estimate contamination rates in ancient samples [13],
identify runs of homozygosity (ROH) [14], or phase and impute missing data in ancient
genomes [15]. However, there is no extensive research supporting the reliability of this
framework as we go back in time and the target haplotypes become more ancient. Hence,
this project aims to establish a protocol to test the performance of the LS model when
copying ancient from modern haplotypes and hopefully shed some light on the model’s
applicability in this use case scenario.
1.2
Hidden Markov Models
Before diving into the specifics of the LS model, some background information on HMMs
needs to be provided. This section covers the basic theory of HMMs, including a formal
definition and the statistical inference procedures used in this project.
Page 3 of 60
==PAGE:11==
Hidden Markov Models
1.2.1
Formal Definition
HMMs are a class of statistical models which aim to capture unobservable information
about the state of a system from a sequence of observable symbols. As such, an HMM
consists of two stochastic processes: a series of underlying states hidden to the observer,
and a sequence of observations whose probability distributions depend on the hidden states
[16].
According to Zucchini et al. [17], the hidden states in the first building block of an
HMM form a Markov chain or process, formally defined as a sequence of discrete random
variables {Ct : t ∈N}, that takes on values from a set of possible states S = {1, 2, . . . , m}
and, for all t ∈N 1, satisfies the Markov property:
P(Ct|Ct−1, ..., C1) = P(Ct|Ct−1).
(1.2.1)
Meaning that the probability of being in a certain state at time t, only depends on the
state the system was in at time t −12.
The conditional probability of transitioning from state i to state j is known as the
transition probability [17], denoted by
γij = P(Ct = j|Ct−1 = i),
i, j ∈S.
(1.2.2)
The transition probabilities for the m possible hidden states can be described by a
transition matrix Γ, defined as the square matrix of dimensions m × m and row sums
equal to 1 [17]:
Γ =













γ11
. . .
γ1m
...
...
...
γm1
. . .
γmm













.
(1.2.3)
1This is true for a homogeneous Markov chain.
2This property holds for first-order Markov chains.
Page 4 of 60
==PAGE:12==
Hidden Markov Models
The unconditional probabilities of being in a certain state at time t are denoted by the
row vector u(t) = (P(Ct = 1), . . . , P(Ct = m)),
t ∈N. Of particular interest is the initial
distribution of the Markov process u(1)3, oftentimes referred to in the literature as π [17].
Zucchini et al. then go on to define the second building block of HMMs, i.e. the sequence
of observed symbols {Xt : t ∈N}, in which the distribution of Xt depends only on the
current state Ct, hence
P(Xt|X1, X2, . . . , Xt−1, C1, C2, . . . , Ct) = P(Xt|Ct).
(1.2.4)
In this work, we are concerned with the case where the observations take on a value from
a set of discrete symbols O = {O1, O2, . . . , On}. As Zucchini et al. note, the probability of
observing a certain symbol given that the system is in a certain state is called emission
probability, denoted by
σi(x) = P(Xt = x|Ct = i),
x ∈O,
i ∈S.
(1.2.5)
Similarly to the transition probabilities, the emission probabilities can be stored in an
emission matrix Σ, with row sums equal to 1, and dimensions m × n, where m is the
number of possible hidden states and n is the number of possible realizations of each
observation:
Σ =













σ1(O1)
. . .
σ1(On)
...
...
...
σm(O1)
. . .
σm(On)













.
(1.2.6)
Figure 1.2.1 shows a schematic representation of the architecture of an HMM with two
possible hidden states and an alphabet of three symbols which the observations can take
values from.
3The initial distribution of the Markov chain π will be used in the forward and the Viterbi algorithms,
described in 1.2.3 and 1.2.4, respectively.
Page 5 of 60
==PAGE:13==
Hidden Markov Models
Figure 1.2.1: Architecture of an HMM with two hidden states and three possible
observation values. In this example, the set of hidden states corresponds to S = {S1, S2},
and the observations can take on values from the alphabet O = {O1, O2, O3}. The grey arrows
denote the probabilities of starting the Markov process from either the red or the green hidden
state, which are given by the initial distribution π. The transition probabilities are represented
by the black arrows. As an example, γ12 denotes the probability of transitioning from state S1
to state S2. Completing the architecture of the HMM, the red and green arrows denote the
probabilities of emitting each possible observation symbol from the red (S1) or the green state
(S2), respectively. For example, the probability of emitting symbol O1 from state S2, is given by
σ2(O1).
1.2.2
Statistical Inference in HMMs
In a notorious tutorial on HMMs from 1989 [18], Rabiner established the notion that
once the architecture of any HMM has been defined, there are three basic problems that
characterize HMMs and that need to be solved in most settings where HMMs are used.
Problem 1. Given an HMM and a sequence of observations, what is the probability of
observing that particular sequence?
Page 6 of 60
==PAGE:14==
Hidden Markov Models
Problem 2. Given an HMM and a sequence of observations, what is the most probable
path of hidden states that generated that sequence?
Problem 3. Given a sequence of observations and a set of hidden states, what are the
model parameters that best account for the data?
For clarity, the answers to these questions will be presented in the following subsections.
1.2.3
The Forward Algorithm
This section answers the question posed by Problem 1 (section 1.2.2), referred to as
the evaluation problem by Rabiner, where a given model is evaluated in terms of the
probability that a sequence of observations was produced by the model in question.
Formally, we wish to calculate the probability of a sequence of observed symbols
X = X1, X2, . . . , XT given the model λ = (Γ, Σ, π),
P(X|λ).
Rabiner begins by considering a specific sequence of hidden states C = c1, c2, . . . , cT.
The probability of observing the sequence of symbols X, assuming it was generated by
the state sequence C is given by
P(X|C, λ) =
T
Y
t=1
P(Xt|ct, λ)
(1.2.7)
or
P(X|C, λ) = σc1(X1) · σc2(X2) . . . σcT (XT)
(1.2.8)
since an observation only depends on the current state of the system [18].
On the other hand, Rabiner defines the probability of the state sequence C as
P(C|λ) = πc1γc1c2γc2c3 . . . γcT −1cT .
(1.2.9)
The product of equations 1.2.8 and 1.2.9 gives us the probability of the observation
sequence X and the state sequence C occurring simultaneously under the studied model
[18]:
P(X, C|λ) = P(X|C, λ)P(C|λ).
(1.2.10)
Page 7 of 60
==PAGE:15==
Hidden Markov Models
By marginalizing over all possible sequences of hidden states, Rabiner obtains the
probability of observing X under the specified model λ:
P(X|λ) =
X
C
P(X|C, λ)P(C|λ).
(1.2.11)
For an HMM with m hidden states and an observation sequence of T observations,
there are mT possible state sequences, meaning that, although straightforward, computing
probability 1.2.11 requires on the order of mT calculations. Even for relatively small values
of m and T this task becomes computationally infeasible [18].
Luckily, a more efficient method that relies on dynamic programming exists, namely
the forward algorithm. Rabiner starts by introducing the concept of forward probability
αt(i), defined as
αt(i) = P(X1, X2, . . . , Xt, ct = Si|λ).
(1.2.12)
This is the probability of the observation sequence X until time t and state Si at time
t, given the model λ. As Rabiner describes, 1.2.12 can be solved recursively, by storing
intermediate values for each partial observation sequence, in three steps:
1. Initialization:
α1(i) = πiσi(X1),
1 ≤i ≤m.
(1.2.13)
2. Recursion:
αt+1(j) =
h m
X
i=1
αt(i)γij
i
σj(Xt+1),
1 ≤t ≤T −1
1 ≤j ≤m.
(1.2.14)
3. Termination:
P(X|λ) =
X
i=1
mαT(i).
(1.2.15)
In the first step the forward probabilities are initialized as the joint probability of state
Si and initial observation X1. Next, in the recursion step (illustrated in Figure 1.2.2), the
joint probability of emitting observation Xt+1 and being in state Sj at time t + 1 after
seeing X1, X2, . . . , Xt is computed. The probability of the partial observation sequence
up until time t is stored in αt(i) and the probability of arriving at state Sj from state
Si is given by γij, thus by summing over the product of these two quantities over all the
Page 8 of 60
==PAGE:16==
Hidden Markov Models
possible previous states i, the probability of the partial observation sequence up until time
t + 1 is obtained. Once we are in state Sj, the probability of observing Xt+1 is simply
σj(Xt+1). Lastly, αT(i) corresponds to the terminal forward variable, i.e. the probability
of the entire observation sequence and ending up in state Si. Therefore, the algorithm
is terminated by summing αT(i) over all possible hidden states, finally obtaining P(X|λ)
[18].
Figure 1.2.2: Recursion step of the forward algorithm. The forward probability αt+1(j)
is computed by summing all the previous forward probabilities (αt) weighted by their transition
probabilities γ. This operation yields the probability of being in state Sj at time t + 1 after
having seen the observation sequence X1, X2, . . . , Xt. Lastly, the observation Xt+1 is accounted
for by multiplying by the emission probability σj(Xt+1). Thus, we obtain the joint probability
of the partial observation sequence X1, X2, . . . , Xt+1 and being in state Sj at time t + 1. This
diagram was adapted from [19].
With a time complexity of O(m2T), where m is the number of states and T the length
of the observation sequence, the forward algorithm presents a far more efficient alternative
to the brute-force computation of P(X|λ) [18].
Page 9 of 60
==PAGE:17==
Hidden Markov Models
1.2.4
The Viterbi Algorithm
Since in most settings HMMs are applied in order to infer information about the underlying
properties of a system, it is oftentimes of interest to find the optimal sequence of hidden
states, C = c1, c1, . . . , cT, that generated the observed data X = X1, X2, . . . , XT. That is,
the state sequence that maximizes P(C|X, λ) [18]. This is known as the decoding task
[20], and it answers the question posed by Problem 2 (section 1.2.2).
In order to find such sequence, Rabiner begins by defining the variable
δt(i) =
max
c1,c2,...,ct−1
P(c1, c2, . . . , ct−1, X1, X2, . . . , Xt, ct = i|λ)
(1.2.16)
which corresponds to the highest probability along a single path, at time t, that accounts
for the first t observations and ends in state Si. Through recursion we get
δt+1(j) = [max
i
δt(i)γij] · σj(Xt+1).
(1.2.17)
In order to construct the state sequence, we have to keep track of the state that
maximizes 1.2.17 at each timepoint t. For this we have an additional array ψt(j) [18]. As
described by Rabiner, the algorithm therefore consists of the following steps:
1. Initialization:
δ1(i) = πiσi(X1),
1 ≤i ≤m
(1.2.18a)
ψ1(i) = 0.
(1.2.18b)
2. Recursion:
δt(j) = max
1≤i≤m [δt−1(i)γij] σj(Xt),
2 ≤t ≤T
1 ≤j ≤m
(1.2.19a)
ψt(j) = argmax
1≤i≤m [δt−1(i)γij],
2 ≤t ≤T
1 ≤j ≤m.
(1.2.19b)
3. Termination:
P∗= max
1≤i≤m [δT(i)]
(1.2.20a)
c∗
T = argmax
1≤i≤m [δT(i)].
(1.2.20b)
Page 10 of 60
==PAGE:18==
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model
4. Backtracking:
c∗
t = ψt+1(c∗
t+1),
t = T −1, T −2, . . . , 1.
(1.2.21)
The initialization is similar to that of the forward algorithm, however during the recursion
step, instead of summing over all possible states, we record the state which maximizes
the probability of the observation sequence. When the recursion ends, 1.2.20a yields the
posterior probability of the optimal hidden state path. Lastly, in the backtracking step we
make use of the backpointers stored in 1.2.19b to reconstruct such path [18].
1.2.5
Parameter Estimation via Direct Maximization of the Like-
lihood
In sections 1.2.3 and 1.2.4, the model parameters were assumed known. However, oftentimes
we will be in the situation where we have a new sequence of observations and we want
to find the parameter set that maximizes its likelihood given a model architecture of
interest (Problem 3, section 1.2.2). In the literature, this is referred to as the training
task [16], and although there is no optimal way of estimating the model parameters for
any given finite observation sequence X = X1, X2, . . . , XT, we can choose the parameter
set λ = (Γ, Σ, π) that locally maximizes P(X|λ) through an iterative procedure [18].
Since we defined P(X|λ) as the sum of the terminal forward probabilities over all possible
hidden states (section 1.2.3), the maximum likelihood estimates (MLEs) of the model
parameters, i.e. the parameter values that maximize the likelihood of the data, correspond
to those that maximize said sum [17].
1.3
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model
Biological data can, in many cases, be regarded as a sequence of discrete observations
taking values from a finite alphabet of symbols (4 nucleotides in the case of nucleic acids
and 20 amino acids in the case of proteins). Thus it is no surprise that after their popularity
in the field of speech recognition in the 1980s [18][21], HMMs began drawing the attention
of molecular biologists a few years later [22]. By modelling protein or nucleic acid sequences
as HMMs, information about underlying biological processes can be extracted. For this
purpose, HMMs have been applied in a wide variety of scenarios, including alignment of
Page 11 of 60
==PAGE:19==
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model
DNA sequences [16], detection of protein domains [23], gene finding [24] or prediction of
protein secondary structure [25].
Li and Stephens also exploited this property of biological sequence data when they
applied an HMM to genetic variation data in order to elucidate patterns of Linkage
Disequilibrium (LD)4 across the human genome, with the particularity that the hidden
states of the model consisted of other sequences [11].
In the LS model, the sequence of observed symbols corresponds to a haplotype, which is
no other than the ordered genetic variants present in an individual’s chromosome. Generally,
when we speak of haplotypes, we refer to those sequences made up of genetic variants
that are significantly present in a population, known as single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) [26]. Thus information about the population can be inferred from such haplotypes.
More precisely, Li and Stephens used their model to obtain estimates of the recombination
rate in a human population [11].
1.3.1
Recombination, Linkage Disequilibrium and Genetic Dis-
tance
Humans are eukaryotic diploid organisms, and their haploid gametes are produced in
a specific type of cell division called meiosis. During meiosis, crossovers between the
homologous pairs of maternal and parental chromosomes can occur, giving rise to the
exchange of genetic material. This process is known as recombination, and it increases
the genetic diversity in a population by ensuring that the offspring will inherit genetic
information from each of its four grandparents [27].
The further apart that two genes on the same chromosome are, the more likely they
will undergo recombination. By the same token, this means that genetic variants that are
physically close will tend to be inherited together. When two alleles are inherited together,
we say they are linked, and when this phenomenon extends to the population level, we say
the two variants are in LD [28].
The concepts of linkage and LD are illustrated in Figure 1.3.1. A mutation occurs in the
first generation. During meiosis, recombination takes place, and one of the chromosomes
that the offspring inherits is a mosaic of the chromosome that contained the mutation and
4Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is the non-independence, at a population level, of the alleles carried at
different positions in the genome [11].
Page 12 of 60
==PAGE:20==
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model
the one that did not. Some of these mosaic chromosomes will contain the mutation, and
others will not. If the mutation is inherited, it will appear surrounded by the alleles that
were present in the same parental chromosome, and thus we say they are linked. This is
true only for those individuals in the population that are closely related, as it is unlikely
that the same mutation occurred simultaneously in many families.
Many generations after, the mutation is present in a significant portion of the population.
Subsequent recombination events have shortened the chromosomal segment that contained
the mutation, but still, alleles that are physically close tend to appear together with the
mutation. We say these alleles are in LD with the mutation. Thus, information about
ancestral recombination events and recombination rates across the genome can be inferred
by studying LD patterns in a population sample.
Figure 1.3.1: Illustration of the concepts of linkage and Linkage Disequilibrium. A
mutation (denoted by a star) occurs on the dark chromosome in the first generation. The light
chromosome carries a common allele. Due to recombination, the chromosomes transmitted to
subsequent generations are mosaics of the two (dark and light) parental chromosomes. When the
mutation is present, it appears surrounded by a chunk of the dark chromosomal background,
shortened in subsequent generations due to crossover events. The first three rows represent
closely related individuals and thus illustrate the concept of linkage. The last row shares a
common ancestor many generations in the past and thus illustrates the concept of LD. This
figure is adapted from [28].
Page 13 of 60
==PAGE:21==
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model
Another essential concept in the LS model is that of genetic distance. While the physical
distance between two SNPs measures how many base pairs apart they are located, the
genetic distance measures the relative positions of two loci on a chromosome in terms
of the expected number of crossovers between them [28]. The unit of genetic distance is
Morgans, where 1 Morgan corresponds to the distance between chromosome positions for
which the average number of crossovers in a single generation is 1 [29].
1.3.2
The Hidden Markov Model
In the model that Li and Stephens originally described, k + 1 haplotypes are sampled from
a population. The first k haplotypes will serve as the set of hidden states, from now on
referred to as the reference panel, and the k + 1th haplotype is the observation sequence.
Each observation consists of a biallelic SNP, therefore it takes values from the alphabet
{0, 1}, 0 and 1 meaning that the variant is absent or present at a given position in a
haplotype, respectively.
The test or target haplotype, i.e. the observation sequence, can then be reconstructed as
an imperfect mosaic of the other k sampled haplotypes in the reference panel in a copying
process that follows an HMM [11].
In this HMM, the initial probability distribution (π in section 1.2.1) is given by
P(X1 = x) = 1/k,
x ∈1, 2, . . . , k
(1.3.1)
where X1 represents the reference haplotype from which the target haplotype copies off at
the first SNP [11].
Li and Stephens captured the effects of recombination in the model’s transition proba-
bilities, defined as
P(Xj+1 = x′|Xj = x) =









e−ρdj/k + 1
k(1 −e−ρdj/k)
if
x′ = x;
1
k(1 −e−ρdj/k)
otherwise
(1.3.2)
where Xj is the haplotype that hk+1 copies from at site j, dj is the physical distance in
base pairs between SNPs at sites j + 1 and j, k is the size of the reference panel, and ρ
is the population-scaled recombination parameter that Li and Stephens estimate. More
Page 14 of 60
==PAGE:22==
The Li and Stephens Haplotype-Copying Model
precisely, ρ = 4Nec, where Ne corresponds to the effective diploid population size and c to
the recombination rate in average crossovers per base pair per generation.
From this definition it follows that the probability of zero crossovers between sites j
and j + 1 is e−ρdj/k and the probability of at least one crossover is 1 −e−ρdj/k. Given a
recombination, there is probability 1/k of recombining to any of the k reference haplotypes,
including the haplotype copied at the previous SNP [30].
Further, recombination events happen according to a Poisson process with rate ρdj/k
[30]. As ρdj decreases, the probability of copying from the same haplotype as in the
previous SNP becomes much higher than the probability of switching to a different state,
capturing the fact that the higher the genetic distance5 between two adjacent SNPs, the
more likely a recombination event is. Li and Stephens hypothesize that due to a decrease
in the probability of seeing an entirely novel haplotype, the rate should decrease as the
sample size k increases. Thus, the division by k.
In order to account for mutation, Li and Stephens allow errors in the copying process
with probability ˆθ/(k + ˆθ). On the other hand, the probability of the copy being exact is
k/(k + ˆθ). Specifically, if hi,j denotes the allele (0 or 1) at site j in haplotype i, then, given
the copying process X1, . . . , XS, the alleles hk+1,1, hk+1,2, . . . , hk+1,S are independent, with
P(hk+1,j = a|Xj = x, h1, . . . , hk) =









k
k+ˆθ + 1
2
ˆθ
k+ˆθ
, hx,j = a
1
2
ˆθ
k+ˆθ
, hx,j ̸= a
(1.3.3)
These are the emission probabilities of the model and they arise from the idea that if
h1, . . . , hk+1 are randomly sampled from a neutrally-evolving, randomly-mating, constant-
sized population, the probability that hk+1 is separated by at least one mutation from the
other k haplotypes at a given site is θ/(k + θ), where θ = 4Nµ, and µ is the mutation rate
per base pair per generation and N is the size of the population [11]. Li and Stephens
avoid estimating this population-scaled mutation rate and fix the value of ˆθ to
ˆθ =
 n−1
X
m=1
1
m
−1
(1.3.4)
5As the physical distance dj is in base pairs and the recombination rate c is in units of average
crossovers per base pair per generation, dj × c yields genetic distance in Morgans (average crossovers per
generation).
Page 15 of 60
==PAGE:23==
Applications of the LS model
where n is the number of sampled haplotypes.
Lastly, the factor 1/2 ensures that as ˆθ approaches infinity, both alleles are equally
likely [11].
1.4
Applications of the LS model
In this section, representative examples of the three possible relationships in time between
the target and reference haplotypes are presented.
1.4.1
Copying Modern from Modern
The LS model is a model for patterns of LD. As we have covered, LD arises from the
shared history of DNA sequences. Therefore, many of its applications are aimed at gaining
information about the ancestry of DNA sequences, but differ in the approach.
One application that aims at identifying shared ancestry of haplotypes and characterizing
substructure in a population is the tool Chromopainter.
Chromopainter aims to capture the most relevant genealogical information about a
haplotype sample by building a co-ancestry matrix. First, considering a single test or
target haplotype, the LS model, or ‘painting algorithm’ as the authors name it, finds its
closest relative at each position of the genome amongst all the other haplotypes. That
is, the algorithm paints the recipient haplotype from chunks of donor haplotypes (Figure
1.4.1c). Given that at some positions of the genome there may be more than a single
closest relative, the algorithm can produce alternative realizations of the copying process
(Figure 1.4.1d). Additionally, the expectation that a given haplotype acted as a donor
at each position over an infinite number of such paintings is computed (Figure 1.4.1e).
This operation is repeated using each of the sample haplotypes as recipients and the rest
as donors. The expected number of chunks that each test haplotype received from each
donor is recorded in the co-ancestry matrix (Figure 1.4.1f) [31].
The motivation for this approach is the assumption that the most recent genealogical
events capture population substructure well enough. If again we consider a single haplotype,
at each locus, there is a genealogical tree, whose complete information is captured by
the time to the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) with each of the other sample
haplotypes (Figure 1.4.1b). The structure of this tree varies along the genome due to
Page 16 of 60
==PAGE:24==
Applications of the LS model
ancestral recombination events (Figure 1.4.1a). The authors hypothesize that the most
recent genealogical events, meaning finding the closest relative at each locus, is enough to
characterize the current substructure of the population [31].
Figure 1.4.1: Illustration of the painting process. In this example, haplotype 1 acts as the
recipient haplotype that is painted from chunks of all the other sample haplotypes. A) shows
how the local genealogies vary at different loci, in B) the time to MRCA with haplotype 1 is
shown at each position in the genome. In C) Haplotype 1 is painted from its closest relatives
at each position. D) As in the middle of the sequence there are multiple closest relatives, the
algorithm can produce different ‘paintings’. The expectation of the painting process, estimating
the closest relative distribution across the genomic positions is shown in E). F) shows the row of
the co-ancestry matrix for haplotype 1, derived from the expectation of the painting process.
This figure is taken from the original Chromopainter publication [31].
Page 17 of 60
==PAGE:25==
Applications of the LS model
1.4.2
Copying Modern from Ancient
Evolutionary biology focuses on inferring the genealogical history of DNA sequences in
the hopes of shedding light on the events and forces that shape species and populations.
As large genomic datasets are currently available, efficient inference methods are essential
to exploit these resources fully. Tsinfer, a recently proposed method to overcome this
efficiency issue, is based on the LS model. Starting from large datasets of modern genetic
variation data, tsinfer deduces a set of haplotypes ancestral to those in the dataset. Then,
using this set as a reference panel, the LS model is applied to a modern target haplotype,
and the most probable path of hidden states (i.e. ancestral haplotypes) is inferred by
employing the Viterbi algorithm thus reconstructing the genealogy of the modern query
sequence [12].
Given that any extant haplotype must have predecessors moving back in time, the
success of this method is guaranteed as long as the ancestral haplotypes are correctly
inferred.
1.4.3
Copying Ancient from Modern
Recent attempts at dealing with the issues covered in section 1.1.2 use a particular scenario
of the LS model, where the target haplotype corresponds to an ancient individual, and the
reference panel comprises modern haplotypes from present-day individuals.
One example is the tool prophaser. Although NGS technologies have increased the
availability of ancient human genetic data, a large proportion of the available aDNA is
sequenced at low coverage depths (1x or less). One way of maximizing the information
obtained from sequencing such samples is the imputation of genotypes at missing sites
or sites that can not be called confidently. Nevertheless, most genotype imputation tools
are tailored to present-day genetic data, where studies are becoming increasingly large,
and thus, computational efficiency is prioritized over accuracy. For this purpose, recent
methods require phased genotypes as input. However, in aDNA data, it is not always
possible to call genotypes confidently; thus, this approach may introduce errors [15].
Prophaser implements a diploid version of the LS model, where the observed data
consists of genotype likelihoods instead of SNP data. First, using a reference panel of
modern haplotypes, the posterior probabilities for the hidden states given the sequence
Page 18 of 60
==PAGE:26==
Applications of the LS model
of observed data at each position are calculated. Then, phased haplotypes are obtained
by selecting the state with the highest probability and posterior genotype probabilities
by integration over the hidden states. This way, both the phasing of the genotypes into
haplotypes and imputation of missing variants can be performed simultaneously [15].
The results from the preprint show that prophaser outperforms two commonly used
pipelines for phasing and imputation, particularly below 0.5x coverage depths. However,
prophaser was tested on simulated data that consisted of modern genomes from the 1000
Genomes dataset [32], down-sampled in coverage, and on empirical data of 5 ancient
individuals from around 3,000 to 9,000 years ago. Although the individuals used to
simulate the low coverage data were then removed from the reference panel, one could
argue that, even if down-sampled, the target haplotypes will not significantly differ from
those in the reference panel, giving an overestimation of prophaser’s performance at low
coverages. Additionally, the applicability of the tool to older genomes is not proven.
Another recently proposed tool based on the LS model where the target haplotype is
ancient and the reference haplotypes are modern is hapCon. HapCon estimates contami-
nation rates by applying the LS model to ancient male X chromosomes. By incorporating
three error parameters that determine the emission probabilities of the model, the number
of read counts that support either the reference or the alternative allele is modelled at each
marker. The first parameter, ϵg, corresponds to the error rate per base and aims to capture
sequencing errors, characteristic aDNA damage and mismapping. Second, ϵr is the copying
error from the original model, capturing mutation. Lastly, the parameter that hapCon
estimates by maximum likelihood, c, corresponds to the contamination rate. Leveraging
the fact that only mismatches due to contamination correlate with population allele
frequencies, mismatches between the ancient target and the modern reference haplotypes
are modelled either as errors or contamination [13].
The contaminated sequences are simulated by mixing two BAM files from different
individuals. The authors of hapCon report good performance on samples where the
endogenous source is as old as 45,000 years. The endogenous source in this sample belongs
to the Ust’-Ishim individual [33]. Although it is one of the oldest modern human genomes
ever sequenced, it is also significantly drifted with respect to present-day populations [34].
The authors state, ‘When the genetic ancestry of contamination and endogenous sources
are similar, the endogenous source can be closer to the allele frequencies of the specified
Page 19 of 60
==PAGE:27==
Simulation of Genetic Variation Data at the Population Level
contamination source than to the ones of the diverse reference panel [...]. And when the
contaminant allele frequency is a better fit for the endogenous source than the reference
panel, there is a bias toward the contamination source.’ [13]. Conversely, a very drifted
endogenous source means that the allele frequency of the contaminant source will be a
much better fit for the reference panel, making the estimation of the contamination rate a
more manageable task.
1.5
Simulation of Genetic Variation Data at the Pop-
ulation Level
Population simulation plays an essential role in the field of evolutionary biology, allowing
researchers to investigate how different demographic and genetic models affect patterns
of genetic variation and evaluate the performance of various computational tools [35].
In the context of this thesis, it will allow us to test the performance of the LS model
when reconstructing an ancient haplotype as an imperfect mosaic of modern reference
haplotypes.
The two most used approaches to the simulation of population data are backward-time
or coalescent simulation and forward or forward-time simulation, each with its strengths
and weaknesses.
In coalescent simulation, a sample of individuals representing the present generation is
drawn from an idealized population with the desired characteristics. Then, the genealogical
history of the sample is traced back in time until all lineages have coalesced6, thus reaching
the MRCA to all individuals [35].
Hence, any ancient haplotype sampled from this
population will have direct descendants in the present generation.
On the other hand, forward simulation starts from an initial population in the past and
then traces its evolution under the specified demographic scenario over the desired number
of generations [35]. Typically, coalescent simulation is then performed, using the initial set
of individuals as the starting point, in order to provide a prior genealogical history for any
genomic segments that have not yet coalesced. This procedure is known as recapitation
[36].
The general architecture of both coalescent and forward simulation is illustrated in
6A coalescence event is a point in a genealogy where two lineages meet into a common ancestor.
Page 20 of 60
==PAGE:28==
Simulation of Genetic Variation Data at the Population Level
Figure 1.5.1.
Figure 1.5.1: Schematic representation of two populations simulated through the
forward-time and the coalescent approach. A shows the mechanistic of forward-time
simulation, where starting from a set of individuals at generation T1, which in this case is in the
past, the entire history of the population is simulated for T generations. Forward-time simulation
allows the sampling of individuals that did not have any descendants, represented in yellow.
Through recapitation, the MRCA to the initial population is reached. In B the genealogical
history of a sample of individuals at time T1, the present generation in this case, is simulated
through the coalescent approach. The MRCA to all individuals in the present generation is
reached at time T. In both A and B, the initial population is shown in blue.
Since forward simulation allows us to track the entire ancestral information of the
population, it is computationally heavier than coalescent simulation, where we only have
access to the genealogical history of the individuals in the present generation [35]. However,
as an ancient sample from which DNA has been extracted might not have descendants
among modern individuals, forward simulation provides a more realistic scenario to test
Page 21 of 60
==PAGE:29==
Simulation of Genetic Variation Data at the Population Level
the LS model’s applicability.
Furthermore, as shown in Figure 1.5.1, a population simulated through coalescent
simulation is much shallower than one that has been simulated through forward simulation
and then recapitated.
Hence, even if we were to perform coalescent simulation and
then sample an individual who does not have direct descendants included in the modern
reference panel, the MRCA to all modern individuals would be much closer in time than
that of a forward simulation and the divergence between modern and ancient haplotypes
would be lower on average. Thus, to avoid overestimating the LS model’s performance,
forward simulation of genetic variation data at the population level was chosen.
Page 22 of 60
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2
Chapter
Methodology
Page 23 of 60
==PAGE:31==
Forward-Time Simulations
2.1
Forward-Time Simulations
2.1.1
Demographic Model
In order to be able to isolate the effects of mutation and recombination on the performance
of the haplotype-copying model as sample age increases, the simulations were performed
under a simple demographic model consisting of a single continuous population with
constant population size, neutral mutation and random mating. Two different populations
were simulated. The first is intended to emulate the African population of anatomically
and genetically modern humans that is widely accepted to have emerged around 200,000
years ago [37], and so this was the starting time for the simulation.
In light of the results obtained for the African population, it was deemed necessary to
go further back in time to dissect the behaviour of the haplotype-copying model. Thus,
another population starting 1.5 million years ago was simulated. The rest of the parameters
were kept the same as for the African population.
As previously established in the literature, generation time for modern humans is of 30
years [38], recombination rate corresponds to 10−8 crossovers per base pair per generation
[39], and mutation rate is 2 × 10−8 per base pair per generation [40].
In order to choose a value for the population size parameter, Watterson’s estimator
of genetic diversity, θ = 4Neµ, was used, where µ corresponds to the mutation rate and
Ne corresponds to effective population size. Given that the value of θ for the African
population has been empirically determined to be around 1.15 × 10−3 [40], an effective
population size of 14,375 is obtained1.
Lastly, the simulated sequence was 1Mb long.
2.1.2
Simulation Engines
Genomic data at the population level was simulated through the slendr package [42] in
R, choosing the forward-time simulator SLiM [36] as a back-end simulation engine.
1The effective population size Ne is the size that an abstract, idealized population would need to be
to match a given value of a particular metric. That value is typically estimated from an actual population
[41]. In our case, it corresponds to the African population’s empirical estimate of θ. Since our simulated
populations are ideal populations with constant size, random mating and no selection, the chosen size
corresponds to Ne.
Page 24 of 60
==PAGE:32==
Haplotype-Copying Model
The output of SLiM consists of tree-sequence files, a format that allows the compact
storing of the population’s genealogical information and genotypes [36].
Recapitation of the tree-sequences was performed in slendr, using msprime [43] as the
coalescent simulation engine.
2.2
Haplotype-Copying Model
The haplotype-copying model used in this work is a version of the original LS model,
implemented and described by Biddanda et al. [44]. The main difference with the original
model is that the genetic distance between adjacent SNPs is assumed known. Li and
Stephens estimate the population-scaled recombination parameter ρ = 4Nec, where Ne
corresponds to the effective diploid population size, and c corresponds to the recombination
rate [11]. In the work by Biddanda et al., the recombination parameter is assumed known
and set to 10−8 crossovers per base pair per generation. As the physical distance between
adjacent SNPs is also known, the genetic distance in Morgans can then be calculated as
gl = c × dl, where gl and dl are the genetic and physical distances, respectively, between
the SNPs at sites l and l −1.
The transition probabilities between the haplotypes in the modern reference panel,
denoted h1, ..., hk, are then defined as follows:
P(Xl = x′|Xl−1 = x) =









e−λgl + 1
k(1 −e−λgl)
, x′ = x
1
k(1 −e−λgl)
, else
(2.2.1)
where Xl denotes the haplotype from the reference panel that is being copied at site l, k
corresponds to the reference panel size and gl corresponds to the aforementioned genetic
distance [44]. Thus, there is equal probability of jumping to any other haplotype in the
reference panel and this probability increases exponentially with the genetic distance
between the previous and the current SNP. Similarly, the probability of staying in the
current state decreases exponentially as a function of the genetic distance. The λ parameter,
which Biddanda et al. estimate, determines the rate at which the probability of jumping
to any other state increases with the genetic distance, and thus it can be interpreted as a
jump rate parameter in units of average number of jumps per Morgan [44]. The behaviour
of the transition probabilities as a function of genetic distance and for different values of λ
Page 25 of 60
==PAGE:33==
Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Model parameters
is illustrated in Figure A.1.1 (Appendix A.1).
In order to account for mutation, errors in the copying process are allowed as defined in
the model’s emission probabilities:
P(hl = a|Xl = x) =









ϵ
, hxl ̸= a
(1 −ϵ)
, hxl = a
(2.2.2)
where hl and hxl refer to the allelic states (0 or 1) of the test and copied haplotypes at
site l, respectively, and ϵ is the copying error parameter [44].
Lastly, Biddanda et al.
use a uniform initial probability distribution, where the
probability of starting the copying process from any given haplotype is 1/k.
2.3
Datasets
A reference panel of size k = 100 modern haplotypes was randomly selected for each of
the populations.
Target haplotypes were sampled at random every 100 generations for the African
population and every 200 generations for the 1,5 million-year-old population.
2.4
Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Model param-
eters
MLEs of the jump rate and copying error parameters, denoted ˆλ and ˆϵ, respectively,
were obtained via direct maximization of the likelihood (see section 1.2.5). The im-
plementation belongs to Biddanda et al.
[44].
First, ϵ is fixed to 10−2 and profile
MLEs of λ are obtained by numerically minimizing the negative log likelihood us-
ing scipy.optimize.minimize scalar [45].
Then, ˆλ and ˆϵ are jointly estimated by
two-dimensional numerical minimization of the negative log likelihood function, using
scipy.optimize.minimize [45] and the profile MLE of λ and ϵ = 10−2 as initial values for
the parameter space search. Finally, following Biddanda et al.’s implementation, standard
errors for the MLEs were obtained via a finite-difference approximation to the second
derivative of the joint log-likelihood surface.
Page 26 of 60
==PAGE:34==
Model Evaluation Metrics
2.5
Viterbi Decoding
Once MLEs of the jump rate and copying error parameters were obtained, the most
probable path of hidden states and its log posterior probability were computed for each
test haplotype via the Viterbi algorithm (section 1.2.4).
Viterbi decoding was also applied to the data using a baseline model, where all the
transition probabilities are equal to 1/k. This means that the probability of jumping to
any given state and of staying in the same state are equal. The value of the copying error
parameter in this model was still ˆϵ.
The reason for the posterior probabilities of the optimal paths being in the log scale is
that the intermediate path probabilities of the Viterbi algorithm are computed in the log
scale in order to prevent numerical underflow due to multiplication of small values. Hence,
the log probabilities are summed according to the logarithm property
log xy = log x + log y.
(2.5.1)
The Viterbi algorithm was implemented from scratch.
2.6
Model Evaluation Metrics
Three different metrics were employed to evaluate the model’s performance as sample age
increases.
The first metric is the MLE of the jump rate parameter, denoted ˆλ. Biddanda et al.
proposed ˆλ as a proxy for the model’s accuracy if it were to be used in the context of
missing data imputation [44]. ˆλ captures the average number of jumps per Morgan that
occur in the copying process, and thus it is expected to increase with sample age, as
the longer the time separation between the modern and ancient haplotypes is, the more
recombination events can take place.
In addition to ˆλ, two other metrics were used: the divergence between the target
haplotype and the optimal path of hidden states and the log posterior probability of this
path. The optimal path corresponds to the mosaic of modern reference haplotypes with the
highest posterior probability given the model and the observed data. First, it is obtained
via the Viterbi algorithm, and then divergence is calculated as follows:
Page 27 of 60
==PAGE:35==
Code
divergence =
edit distance
total number of SNPs
(2.6.1)
where the edit distance corresponds to the number of mismatches between the two
haplotypes. Normalizing by the total number of SNPs guarantees this metric to be
comparable between haplotypes of different lengths.
The divergence from the optimal path and the optimal path’s log posterior probability
obtained under the maximum likelihood (ML) model, i.e. the model that maximizes the
likelihood of the data, were then compared to those obtained under the baseline model
described in the previous section (2.5).
Lastly, we looked for changes in the distribution of divergences from the modern reference
haplotypes to the target haplotypes as a function of their age, hoping to find an explanation
for the model’s behaviour as the target haplotypes’ age increases.
2.7
Code
The code and data used in this project can be found in the github repository
https://github.com/isadpc/HapCopying.
Page 28 of 60
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3
Chapter
Results
Page 29 of 60
==PAGE:37==
African population
3.1
African population
3.1.1
MLEs
The first step in the evaluation of the model’s performance as a function of sample age
was to obtain MLEs of the jump rate (ˆλ) and copying error (ˆϵ) parameters for target
haplotypes of different ages simulated under a constant population size model (see chapter
2: Methodology).
For the evaluated period, comprising samples from 21 to 6,621 generations ago, the
overall trend is an increase in the MLEs of both parameters as a function of sample age.
(Figure 3.1.1). Very low standard errors were obtained for most data points, excepting ˆϵ
for a target haplotype from 700 generations ago approximately, where the error is large
and the error bars are cut in order for the trend to be visible (Figure 3.1.1b).
Figure 3.1.1: MLEs versus sample age. A jump rate MLE. B copying error MLE. The
vertical lines correspond to the error bars.
Page 30 of 60
==PAGE:38==
African population
3.1.2
Comparison to a Baseline Model
Once the MLEs were obtained, the ML model’s performance, was compared to that of
a baseline model with equal transition probabilities for each haplotype in the modern
reference panel (including the current haplotype). In order to do this, the Viterbi algorithm
was employed to find the optimal path of hidden states, i.e. the most probable mosaic of
modern haplotypes and its log posterior probability. Then, the divergence of the target
haplotype from the optimal path was calculated (see section 2.6).
Comparing the divergence from the optimal path as a function of sample age, we see
that for both the ML model (Figure 3.1.2a) and the baseline model (Figure 3.1.2b), they
increase linearly, with the rate of increase being higher for the ML model. This difference
in increase rates is explained by the fact that the transition probability is the same for each
reference haplotype, and the copying error parameter was kept the same in the baseline
model, meaning that jumps are allowed with higher probability than in the ML model,
whereas copying errors are penalized equally for both models. As a result, the baseline
model copies the target haplotype with fewer errors. However, since the goal is not to
create an exact copy but rather to find regions with shared ancestry, this does not imply
better performance.
The log posterior probabilities of the optimal path also decrease linearly with sample
age, at a similar rate, with a big difference in their scale. For the ML model, the values
stay above -2,000 (Figure 3.1.2c), whereas for the baseline model, we see log posterior
probabilities below -25,000 (Figure 3.1.2d), indicating that the performance of the ML
model far surpasses that of the baseline model.
Page 31 of 60
==PAGE:39==
African population
Figure 3.1.2:
Comparison of the ML model to a baseline model with uniform
transition probabilities. A and B correspond to the divergence of the target haplotype from
the optimal path against sample age for the ML model and the baseline model, respectively. C
and D correspond to the log posterior probabilities of the optimal path against sample age for
the ML model and the baseline model, respectively.
Page 32 of 60
==PAGE:40==
African population
3.1.3
Distribution of Divergences from the Reference Haplotypes
Next, the distribution of divergences from the target haplotype to the modern reference
haplotypes as a function of time was examined and compared to the divergence from the
target haplotype to the optimal path. It was hypothesized that as sample age increased,
said distribution would shift to the right, and its variance would decrease due to the
target haplotype becoming more and equally divergent to the reference panel due to the
accumulation of mutations. At the same time, the divergence from the target haplotype
to the best path was expected to become closer to the mean of the distribution as sample
age increased. These results are divided into five subplots, comprising thirteen to fifteen
time points each for visual clarity (Figure 3.1.3).
There is a slight tendency for the distribution of divergences from target to reference
haplotypes to shift to the right and for their variance to decrease, most prominent when
considering the most recent and most ancient target haplotypes (Figure 3.1.3 top and
bottom).
As previously observed, the divergence from the optimal path increases with sample age.
However, it does not fall close to the mean of the distribution even for the most ancient
target haplotypes, indicating that the model is able to reconstruct the target haplotype
within the examined period.
Page 33 of 60
==PAGE:41==
African population
Figure 3.1.3: Distribution of divergences from target to modern reference haplotypes
as a function of time and comparison to the divergence from the optimal path. The
distributions and the points corresponding to the divergence from the optimal path (denoted
with a cross) are colored by sample age. Plots are ordered by sample age, going from most recent
to most ancient from top to bottom.
Page 34 of 60
==PAGE:42==
African population
In order to get an approximation for when the divergence from the optimal path would
approach the distribution’s mean, the divergences from the optimal path and the mean
divergences from target to reference were plotted against time. Then, linear regression was
fitted using the divergences as the response variable and sample age as the explanatory, and
by extrapolation, it was determined that the lines would meet around 40,000 generations
ago (Figure 3.1.4).
Figure 3.1.4: Extrapolation by linear regression of the time point where the diver-
gence from the optimal path becomes equal to the mean divergence from reference
to target haplotypes. The red points correspond to the divergence from the optimal path to
the target haplotype. The mean divergence from the reference panel is represented with green
crosses.
Page 35 of 60
==PAGE:43==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
3.2
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
Following the results from section 3.1.3, a new population with constant size was simulated,
going 50,000 generations (1.5 million years) back in time. The same metrics were applied
to evaluate the model’s performance.
3.2.1
MLEs
Again, MLEs of the jump rate and copying error parameters were obtained. As can be seen
in Figure 3.2.1a, the MLE of the jump rate parameter, ˆλ, increases monotonically with
sample age. The trend seems linear until a critical point (around 25,000-30,000 generations
ago) after which the relationship with sample age becomes exponential. On the other
hand, the copying error MLE, ˆϵ, maintains a positive linear relationship with sample age
throughout (3.2.1b).
Figure 3.2.1: MLEs versus sample age. A jump rate MLE. B copying error MLE. Only
results until 40,000 generations back in time are shown for the trends to be visible. The vertical
lines correspond to the error bars.
Page 36 of 60
==PAGE:44==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
3.2.2
Comparison to a Baseline Model
After estimating the model parameters, the optimal path of hidden states and its log
posterior probability were obtained via the Viterbi algorithm. Again, the divergences from
the target haplotypes to the optimal paths were computed at each time point. The same
was done for the baseline model, where jumping to any reference haplotype or staying in
the current one is equiprobable.
For the ML model, the divergence from the optimal path increases linearly with sample
age until about 30,000 generations ago, where a slight decrease follows a plateau (Figure
3.2.2a). In the case of the baseline model, the divergence from the optimal path increases
monotonically with sample age, again and as expected, at a slower rate than for the ML
model (Figure 3.2.2b).
When looking at the log posterior probabilities of the optimal paths, we see that for the
baseline model, they decrease linearly with sample age, with values in the range of -30,000
to -35,000 (Figure 3.2.2d). For the ML model, there is a linear decrease as a function of
sample age until about 30,000 generations ago, where the trend becomes exponential. It is
worth noting that the values for some of the oldest samples reach the range of the baseline
model (Figure 3.2.2c), indicating a drop in the model’s performance.
Page 37 of 60
==PAGE:45==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
Figure 3.2.2: Comparison of the maximum likelihood (ML) model to a baseline
model with uniform transition probabilities. A and B correspond to the divergence of the
target haplotype from the optimal path against sample age for the ML model and the baseline
model, respectively. C and D correspond to the log posterior probabilities of the optimal path
against sample age for the ML model and the baseline model, respectively.
3.2.3
Distribution of Divergences from the Reference Haplotypes
Upon comparison of the divergence from the optimal path with the mean divergence from
the modern reference haplotypes, we see that the mean increases linearly with sample
age, staying in the range of 15 to 30% divergence approximately. The divergence from
the optimal path increases linearly until about 30,000 generations ago, with the rate of
increase being higher than for the mean divergence. Starting close to 0% for the more
recent samples and plateauing between 10 to 15% divergence, the optimal path values
never reach the mean from the reference panel. In fact, a slight decrease can be observed
after 40,000 generations (Figure 3.2.3).
Page 38 of 60
==PAGE:46==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
Figure 3.2.3: Comparison of the divergence from the optimal path and the mean
divergence from reference to target haplotypes as a function of sample age. The red
points correspond to the divergence from the optimal path to the target haplotype. The mean
divergence from the reference panel is represented with green crosses.
Since plotting the distribution of divergences from the reference haplotypes would not be
visually informative for so many time points, in this case the variance of said divergences
was computed and plotted against sample age. As can be seen in Figure 3.2.4, there is an
exponential decrease in the variance of the divergence from reference to target haplotypes
as a function of sample age. That is, the target haplotypes become equally divergent from
all modern reference haplotypes at an exponential rate.
Page 39 of 60
==PAGE:47==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
Figure 3.2.4: Variance in the divergence from reference to target haplotypes as a
function of sample age.
Page 40 of 60
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
4
Chapter
Discussion
Page 41 of 60
==PAGE:49==
African Population
4.1
Comparison to Previous Works
This project aims to investigate the robustness of the haplotype-copying model when
modelling an ancient haplotype as a mosaic of modern haplotypes, motivated by the surge
of new computational methods that use this approach to deal with the challenges posed
by aDNA analysis [13][14][15]. Biddanda et al. had previously studied the behaviour
of a haplotype-copying model with genetic distances assumed known when fitted to
time-stratified samples [44]. However, two main caveats were found in their approach.
Firstly, the appearance of populations of anatomically modern humans dates around
200,000 years ago [37], and yet, in Biddanda et al.’s work, the oldest target haplotypes are
500 generations old [44]. Given a generation time of 30 years, the maximum sample age
is 15,000 years, restricting their analysis to a relatively recent portion of the history of
anatomically modern humans.
Further, Biddanda et al. use coalescent simulation to generate their genetic variation
data. As covered in section 1.5, in coalescent simulation, a sample of individuals repre-
senting the present generation is drawn from an idealized population with the desired
characteristics. Then, the genealogical history of the sample is traced back in time until
the MRCA to all individuals is reached [35]. Thus, any ancient haplotype sampled from
this population will have direct descendants in the present generation. However, a real-life
ancient sample does not necessarily have direct descendants among modern populations.
Thus, including these descendants in the modern reference panel could bias the results,
overestimating the model’s accuracy. Moreover, since through the coalescent approach,
only the genealogical history of the present-generation individuals is simulated, the overall
genetic diversity of the population will be lower than in reality.
For these reasons, the first simulated population in this project started 200,000 years
ago. Further, forward-time simulation was chosen to make the experimental setup more
realistic.
4.2
African Population
The jump rate parameter MLE ˆλ was the first chosen metric to evaluate the model’s
performance. This parameter reflects the rate at which jumps occur in the copying process
Page 42 of 60
==PAGE:50==
African Population
in terms of average jumps per Morgan, and as previously stated, Biddanda et al. proposed
it as a proxy for the imputation accuracy. Biddanda et al. hypothesize that ˆλ should
increase with sample age, as the longer the time separation between the ancient haplotype
and modern reference sample, the more recombination events can occur before any of the
lineages coalesce [44]. When looking at the African population, the general trend is indeed
a monotonic increase in the jump rate as a function of sample age.
At the same time, under the ML model, the divergence to the optimal path of hidden
states computed via the Viterbi algorithm increases linearly with sample age, always
staying below 5% divergence. The divergence to the optimal path, calculated under a
baseline model where all transitions are equiprobable, also increases linearly with sample
age, at a lower rate in this case. Since all transitions are equiprobable, the model is
allowed to jump at any moment, restricting the criteria for building the best path to the
emission probabilities. Thus, this linear increase in divergence reflects how the number of
positions at which the ancient haplotype diverges from all the modern reference haplotypes
grows over time. However, as it is likely that the concordant positions are so for many
of the modern haplotypes, many paths could be used in this reconstruction with similar
probability, yielding very low log posterior probabilities for the optimal paths, which
decrease linearly with sample age. On the other hand, the transition probabilities play an
essential role in determining the best path under the ML model, and the number of paths
that can reconstruct the target haplotype with similar probability is likely reduced. This
translates into the scale of the log posterior probabilities of the optimal paths being much
higher under the ML model, confirming that this model does a better job at identifying
regions with shared ancestry between the modern and target haplotypes.
As mutations accumulate, at some point, the target haplotype should be almost equally
divergent from all haplotypes in the reference panel. Hence, the transition probabilities
would become more and more equal. For this reason, the distribution of divergences from
the target to the modern reference haplotypes was investigated. Although the distributions
are quite variable for target haplotypes of different ages, focusing on the most recent and
most ancient ones makes it clear that the variance decreases and the distributions shift to
the right, indicating a larger mean divergence between the target and reference haplotypes.
However, the model can still reconstruct an optimal path whose divergence from the target
haplotype is much lower than the mean of these distributions in the investigated period of
Page 43 of 60
==PAGE:51==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
200,000 years back in time.
If the divergence from the optimal path converges to the mean divergence from the
reference haplotypes, there is an indication that the target haplotypes are becoming so
divergent from the reference panel that the model cannot reconstruct them accurately
anymore. Although, in reality, the divergence from the optimal path will always be lower
than the mean divergence from the reference haplotypes, linear extrapolation of these two
trends was used to find a time point where the model might break down. The extrapolation
results show that if the divergence from the optimal path to the target haplotype kept
increasing linearly over time, it would reach the mean divergence from the reference panel
around 40,000 generations ago (1.2 million years). Hence, a new population starting 50,000
generations (1.5 million years) ago was simulated.
4.3
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
As expected, ˆλ increases monotonically with sample age in this population. However, now
we see that past a sample age of 30,000 generations the trend is exponential.
As seen in section 3.2.2, the divergence from the target haplotype to the optimal path
under the ML model increases linearly until about 30,000 generations ago, after which a
slight decrease follows a plateau, with some values reaching the range of those obtained
for the baseline model (around 10% divergence). This decline in the divergence values is
explained by the fact that beyond a certain genetic distance threshold between adjacent
SNPs, the probabilities of staying in the same state or jumping to any other state become
equal, with the threshold decreasing as ˆλ increases (appendix A.1). Thus, for high values
of ˆλ, the ML model is effectively the same as the baseline model, where all jumps are
equally allowed. Further, past a sample age of 30,000 generations, there is a pronounced
decline in the log posterior probabilities of the optimal paths under the ML model, with
some values even reaching those of the baseline model, meaning there are multiple paths
with very similar probability. That is, the uncertainty in the optimal path is very high for
the most ancient haplotypes.
An explanation for this drop in the model’s performance can be found if we look at
the distribution of divergences from the target to the reference haplotypes. The mean
divergence increases linearly with sample age. However, the variance of the distribution
Page 44 of 60
==PAGE:52==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
decreases at an exponential rate, meaning that the target haplotypes are becoming equally
divergent from all haplotypes in the reference panel while the divergence keeps increasing.
As expected, the values of the divergence from the optimal path never reach those of the
mean divergence from the panel haplotypes. However, this does not indicate a good model
performance; instead, it shows how the reference haplotypes becoming equally divergent to
the target haplotype start confusing the model around 30,000 generations ago. This point
in time (30,000 generations) coincides with the moment when the variance’s exponential
decay starts plateauing close to zero.
Altogether, the results indicate that as the target haplotypes become equally divergent
from the reference haplotypes, the model has no preference of which state to jump
to, yielding high values of λ and low log posterior probabilities of the optimal paths.
Furthermore, the point where the model’s effectiveness started to cease can be pinpointed
to 30,000 generations (900,000 years) ago.
One possible explanation for why the variance in the divergence between target and
reference haplotypes becomes almost zero at this point may be found in coalescent theory,
a population genetics model that underlies coalescent simulation. The coalescent describes
the genealogical history of lineages sampled from a random-mating neutrally-evolving
population. Under these assumptions, the sampled lineages can randomly choose their
parents looking back in time. If two lineages converge to the same parent, they are said to
have coalesced. The MRCA is reached when a single active lineage is left [46].
If recombination is incorporated into the coalescent, instead of a single genealogical
tree relating the sampled haplotypes, each chunk with shared ancestry (or loci in LD)
within the sampled haplotypes will have its own independent genealogy. Each of these
genealogies will find its MRCA at slightly different times, but coalescent theory situates
the expected time until the MRCA of k lineages is reached (or coalescent time) at
E[TMRCA] = 4Ne
k−1
X
i=1
1
i(i + 1)
(4.3.1)
generations. Here Ne corresponds to the effective population size. Thus, the expected
coalescent time of the sample approaches that of the population as the sample size k
increases. Further, except for very small samples, the expected coalescent time of the
sample is close to that of the population [47].
If an ancient haplotype is sampled before the coalescence of all modern lineages, the
Page 45 of 60
==PAGE:53==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
time separation with the modern reference haplotypes will be very variable, both within
a single reference haplotype and among the panel. Without recombination, the time
separation will correspond to the target age for haplotypes that are direct descendants of
the ancient target (blue line in Figure 4.3.1). However, for modern haplotypes that are
not direct descendants of the ancient target, the time separation will correspond to the
length of both branches of the genealogical tree to their MRCA (red lines in Figure 4.3.1).
In our case, recombination creates different genealogies along the genome, to which the
same logic applies, creating even more variability. This variability in the time separation
provides an opportunity for more mutations to occur in some of the lineages, yielding the
higher variances in the divergences from target to reference haplotypes seen in the more
recent samples.
Page 46 of 60
==PAGE:54==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
Figure 4.3.1: Time separation for an ancient target haplotype sampled before the
coalescence of all modern lineages. The genealogy of an ancient target haplotype and two
members of the modern reference panel is represented. For the modern haplotype that is a direct
descendant of the target haplotype, the time separation corresponds to the blue line. For the
modern haplotype that is not a direct descendant of the ancient target, the time separation is
the length of both branches of the genealogical tree to their MRCA, colored in red. This figure
could equally illustrate the genealogy of haplotypes without recombination or the genealogy of a
single chunk in LD if recombinations occur. In the last case, the genealogies of different loci in
LD would be different.
On the other hand, if the target haplotypes are sampled past the expected coalescent
time, the time separation with the modern reference haplotypes will correspond to the
expected coalescent time, plus the time to the MRCA of the ancient target and the MRCA
of the modern haplotypes on both branches of the tree (green lines in Figure 4.3.2). At this
large scale of time separation, one could argue that any minor differences across chunks
in LD have a less appreciable impact on the variance of the divergence from target to
Page 47 of 60
==PAGE:55==
1.5 Million-Year-Old Population
reference haplotypes.
Figure 4.3.2: Time separation for an ancient target haplotype sampled after the
coalescence of all modern lineages. Here k refers to the number of extant modern lineages.
The time separation between the ancient target and the modern reference haplotypes corresponds
to the green line (the time to the MRCA of the ancient target and the MRCA of the modern
haplotypes on both branches of the tree), plus the grey lines (the time from the present to the
expected coalescent time of all modern lineages). Again this figure is applicable to the coalescent
without recombination or to a single chunk in LD in the coalescent with recombination.
Lastly, going back to formula 4.3.1, with an effective population size of 14,375 and
k = 100, the expected coalescent time corresponds to approximately 57,000 generations.
With the point when the model starts breaking down pinpointed to 30,000 generations
ago, the coalescent time might seem a bit far off. However, the rate at which lineages
coalesce depends on the number of active lineages. The more extant lineages, the higher
the chance that two lineages might pick the same parent in the next generation looking
Page 48 of 60
==PAGE:56==
Limitations and Future Perspectives
back in time [46]. This translates into a significant portion of the coalescent time spent on
the last few lineages to coalesce. Thus, it might be possible that 30,000 generations back
in time, a large proportion of modern lineages have coalesced, causing the model to break
down.
4.4
Limitations and Future Perspectives
The first limitation of this project is that a single haplotype per time point was sampled
due to time restrictions. Sampling more than one replicate would allow elucidating the
effects of time separation on the jump rate parameter estimation and the performance
of the model. Further, no way was found to know whether the sampled haplotypes had
any descendants, which, as previously discussed, could have an impact on the model’s
performance even for haplotypes sampled at the same generation. In this respect, it
could be of interest to distinguish between haplotypes that did not have any descendants,
haplotypes that have descendants which are not included in the modern reference panel,
and haplotypes which have direct descendants among the modern reference panel. Then
sample these three types at the same generation and investigate their effects on the value
of ˆλ.
Regarding the haplotype sampling, another factor that could impact the model’s
performance is the panel size k. As stated in equation 4.3.1, the time until the coalescence
of all modern lineages approaches 4Ne as k approaches Ne. With larger reference panel
sizes, the point of coalescence of the reference lineages should be further back in time. If
our hypothesis is correct, the point where the model breaks should also be displaced back
in time. Hence, trying different modern reference panel sizes could shed some light on
whether the model breaks due to the coalescence of the modern reference lineages. In line
with this, trying constant-sized populations with different Ne values could help relate the
breakage of the model to the time to the MRCA of all modern reference haplotypes.
Next, it should be noted that the used demographic model represents the simplest-case
scenario of a continuous constant-sized population, which is not representative of the
demographic history of humans. For example, more realistic simulations may include
admixture between modern humans and archaic hominins [48], the out-of-Africa event
bottleneck [49], or recent explosive growth after the split of the European and Asian
Page 49 of 60
==PAGE:57==
Conclusion
populations [50]. These scenarios should better inform whether the LS model is applicable
to real-life ancient samples and serve as a preceding step to analysing empirical data.
It should not be forgotten that the end goal of this work is to test the applicability of
the LS model to a context where the target haplotype belongs to an ancient individual.
As covered in the introduction, the intrinsic characteristics of aDNA, such as postmortem
degradation, pose an obstacle in its analysis [8]. For this reason, a future step to consider
is simulating aDNA data that includes its characteristic damage patterns or missing data.
Continuing with the characteristics of the simulated sequences, they consist of biallelic
SNPs encoded as a sequence of 0s and 1s. A more realistic sequence would comprise the
four possible nucleotides at each position, leaving room for other genetic variants, such as
triallelic SNPs, to be modelled. Further, the mutation and recombination rates were kept
constant across the simulated sequences in this project. However, the human genome is
known to harbour mutation [51] and recombination hotspots [52]. Therefore, simulating
these hotspots would allow an informed modification of the model’s emission and transition
probabilities that would yield the best results if the model was applied to empirical data.
Lastly, the used model has no restriction on the permitted number of jumps that can
occur in a single sequence. As demonstrated, this results in the model being able to jump
at any position given high enough ˆλ values, which is not representative of the accumulation
of recombination events. Thus, restricting the permitted number of jumps in a way that
takes into account the expected number of crossovers at each generation could perhaps
help find chunks with shared ancestry between the modern reference haplotypes and the
ancient haplotype.
4.5
Conclusion
As human aDNA data is becoming increasingly available, the need for computational tools
that deal with the problems that its analysis poses is more present than ever. A range of
new methods do so within the framework of the LS haplotype-copying model. However, no
extensive research into the robustness of this framework against time has been conducted.
By evaluating its performance on increasingly ancient haplotypes, the model was found
to start breaking down past a sample age of 900,000 years. Since this time point in the
past is beyond the appearance of anatomically modern humans, the model seems robust
Page 50 of 60
==PAGE:58==
Conclusion
in reconstructing ancient human haplotypes as imperfect mosaics of present-day human
haplotypes. However, the demographic scenario under which the model was evaluated is
far from realistic.
With a protocol to test the model’s performance now established, future analysis should
focus on more realistic aDNA data and empirical data, hopefully giving more insight
on whether this framework applies to phasing, missing data imputation or estimation of
contamination rates in ancient human samples.
Page 51 of 60
==PAGE:59==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Russell Higuchi, Barbara Bowman, Mary Freiberger, Oliver A. Ryder, and Allan C.
Wilson. DNA sequences from the quagga, an extinct member of the horse family.
Nature, 312:282–284, 11 1984. ISSN 0028-0836.
[2] Svante P¨a¨abo. Molecular cloning of Ancient Egyptian mummy DNA. Nature, 314:
644–645, 4 1985. ISSN 0028-0836.
[3] Stephanie Marciniak and George H. Perry. Harnessing ancient genomes to study the
history of human adaptation. Nature Reviews Genetics, 18:659–674, 11 2017. ISSN
1471-0056.
[4] Fernando A. Villanea and Joshua G. Schraiber. Multiple episodes of interbreeding
between Neanderthal and modern humans. Nature Ecology Evolution, 3:39–44, 1
2019. ISSN 2397-334X.
[5] Rasmus Nielsen, Joshua M. Akey, Mattias Jakobsson, Jonathan K. Pritchard, Sarah
Tishkoff, and Eske Willerslev. Tracing the peopling of the world through genomics.
Nature, 541:302–310, 1 2017. ISSN 0028-0836.
[6] Nicolas J. Rawlence, Michael Knapp, Michael D. Martin, and Nathan Wales. Editorial:
Applied Uses of Ancient DNA. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 9, 4 2021. ISSN
2296-701X.
[7] Ermanno Rizzi, Martina Lari, Elena Gigli, Gianluca De Bellis, and David Caramelli.
Ancient DNA studies: new perspectives on old samples. Genetics Selection Evolution,
44:21, 12 2012. ISSN 1297-9686.
Page 52 of 60
==PAGE:60==
REFERENCES
[8] Matthew Parks and David Lambert. Impacts of low coverage depths and post-mortem
DNA damage on variant calling: a simulation study. BMC Genomics, 16:19, 12 2015.
ISSN 1471-2164.
[9] Søren Overballe-Petersen, Ludovic Orlando, and Eske Willerslev. Next-generation
sequencing offers new insights into DNA degradation. Trends in Biotechnology, 30:
364–368, 7 2012. ISSN 01677799.
[10] Gabriel Renaud, Viviane Slon, Ana T. Duggan, and Janet Kelso. Schmutzi: estimation
of contamination and endogenous mitochondrial consensus calling for ancient DNA.
Genome Biology, 16:224, 12 2015. ISSN 1474-760X.
[11] Na Li and Matthew Stephens. Modeling Linkage Disequilibrium and Identifying
Recombination Hotspots Using Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism Data. Genetics, 165:
2213–2233, 12 2003. ISSN 1943-2631.
[12] Jerome Kelleher, Yan Wong, Anthony W. Wohns, Chaimaa Fadil, Patrick K. Albers,
and Gil McVean. Inferring whole-genome histories in large population datasets. Nature
Genetics, 51:1330–1338, 9 2019. ISSN 1061-4036.
[13] Yilei Huang and Harald Ringbauer. hapCon: estimating contamination of ancient
genomes by copying from reference haplotypes. Bioinformatics, 6 2022. ISSN 1367-
4803.
[14] Harald Ringbauer, John Novembre, and Matthias Steinr¨ucken. Parental relatedness
through time revealed by runs of homozygosity in ancient DNA. Nature Communica-
tions, 12:5425, 12 2021. ISSN 2041-1723.
[15] Kristiina Ausmees and Carl Nettelblad. Achieving improved accuracy for imputation
of ancient DNA. bioRxiv, 2022. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
2022/04/27/2022.04.26.489533.
[16] Byung-Jun Yoon. Hidden markov models and their applications in biological sequence
analysis. Current Genomics, 10:402–415, 9 2009. ISSN 13892029.
[17] Walter Zucchini, Iain L. MacDonald, and Roland Langrock. Hidden Markov Models
for Time Series: An Introduction Using R. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2nd edition, 7
2016. ISBN 9781315372488.
Page 53 of 60
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
[18] L.R. Rabiner. A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech
recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 77:257–286, 1989. ISSN 00189219.
[19] Daniel Jurafsky James H. Martin. Speech and Language Processing. Chapter A:
Hidden Markov Models. https://web.stanford.edu/˜jurafsky/slp3/A.pdf, 2021.
[Online; accessed 4-August-2022].
[20] Daniel G Brown and Daniil Golod. Decoding HMMs using the k best paths: algorithms
and applications. BMC Bioinformatics, 11:S28, 1 2010. ISSN 1471-2105.
[21] S. E. Levinson, L. R. Rabiner, and M. M. Sondhi. An Introduction to the Application
of the Theory of Probabilistic Functions of a Markov Process to Automatic Speech
Recognition. Bell System Technical Journal, 62:1035–1074, 4 1983. ISSN 00058580.
[22] Gary A. Churchill. Stochastic models for heterogeneous DNA sequences. Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology, 51:79–94, 1 1989. ISSN 0092-8240.
[23] Alex Bateman and Cyrus Chothia. Fibronectin type III domains in yeast detected by
a hidden Markov model. Current Biology, 6:1544–1547, 12 1996. ISSN 09609822.
[24] Anders Krogh, I. Saira Mian, and David Haussler. A hidden Markov model that
finds genes in E.coli DNA. Nucleic Acids Research, 22:4768–4778, 11 1994. ISSN
0305-1048.
[25] Kiyoshi Asai, Satoru Hayamizu, and Ken’ichi Handa. Prediction of protein secondary
structure by the hidden Markov model. Bioinformatics, 9:141–146, 1993. ISSN
1367-4803.
[26] National Human Genome Research Institute. Haplotype. https://www.genome.gov/
genetics-glossary/haplotype, 2022. [Online; accessed 4-August-2022].
[27] Suzanne Clancy. Genetic Recombination. Nature Education, 1(1):40, 2008. URL
https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/genetic-recombination-514/.
[Online; accessed 4-August-2022].
[28] Nan M. Laird and Christoph Lange. The Fundamentals of Modern Statistical Genetics.
Springer New York, 1 edition, 2011. ISBN 978-1-4419-7337-5.
Page 54 of 60
==PAGE:62==
REFERENCES
[29] Yiping Shen and Xiaohong Gong. Chapter 1 - Experimental Tools for the Identification
of Specific Genes in Autism Spectrum Disorders and Intellectual Disability. In Carlo
Sala and Chiara Verpelli, editors, Neuronal and Synaptic Dysfunction in Autism
Spectrum Disorder and Intellectual Disability, pages 3–12. Academic Press, San Diego,
2016. ISBN 978-0-12-800109-7. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128001097000017.
[30] Niall Cardin. Approximating the Coalescent with Recombination. PhD thesis, Corpus
Christi College, University of Oxford, 2006.
[31] Daniel John Lawson, Garrett Hellenthal, Simon Myers, and Daniel Falush. Inference
of Population Structure using Dense Haplotype Data. PLoS Genetics, 8:e1002453, 1
2012. ISSN 1553-7404.
[32] Adam Auton et al. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature, 526:68–74,
10 2015. ISSN 0028-0836.
[33] Qiaomei Fu et al. Genome sequence of a 45,000-year-old modern human from western
Siberia. Nature, 514:445–449, 10 2014. ISSN 0028-0836.
[34] John Hawks.
The genome from Ust´-Ishim.
https://johnhawks.net/weblog/
reviews/ancient-genomes/ust-ishim-fu-2014.html, 2014. [Online; accessed 5-
August-2022].
[35] Xiguo Yuan, David J. Miller, Junying Zhang, David Herrington, and Yue Wang. An
Overview of Population Genetic Data Simulation. Journal of Computational Biology,
19:42–54, 1 2012. ISSN 1066-5277.
[36] Benjamin C. Haller, Jared Galloway, Jerome Kelleher, Philipp W. Messer, and
Peter L. Ralph. Tree-sequence recording in SLiM opens new horizons for forward-time
simulation of whole genomes. Molecular Ecology Resources, 19:552–566, 3 2019. ISSN
1755-098X.
[37] Ryan N. Gutenkunst, Ryan D. Hernandez, Scott H. Williamson, and Carlos D.
Bustamante. Inferring the Joint Demographic History of Multiple Populations from
Multidimensional SNP Frequency Data. PLoS Genetics, 5:e1000695, 10 2009. ISSN
1553-7404.
Page 55 of 60
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
[38] Marc Tremblay and H´el`ene V´ezina. New Estimates of Intergenerational Time Intervals
for the Calculation of Age and Origins of Mutations. The American Journal of Human
Genetics, 66:651–658, 2 2000. ISSN 00029297.
[39] Michael I. Jensen-Seaman, Terrence S. Furey, Bret A. Payseur, Yontao Lu, Krishna M.
Roskin, Chin-Fu Chen, Michael A. Thomas, David Haussler, and Howard J. Jacob.
Comparative Recombination Rates in the Rat, Mouse, and Human Genomes. Genome
Research, 14:528–538, 4 2004. ISSN 1088-9051.
[40] Gabriel Renaud, Kristian Hanghøj, Thorfinn Sand Korneliussen, Eske Willerslev, and
Ludovic Orlando. Joint Estimates of Heterozygosity and Runs of Homozygosity for
Modern and Ancient Samples. Genetics, 212:587–614, 7 2019. ISSN 1943-2631.
[41] B.C. Haller and P.W. Messer. SLiM: An Evolutionary Simulation Framework. http:
//benhaller.com/slim/SLiM_Manual.pdf, 2016. [Online; accessed 6-August-2022].
[42] Martin Petr. slendr: A Simulation Framework for Spatiotemporal Population Genetics,
2022. URL https://github.com/bodkan/slendr. R package version 0.2.0.
[43] Franz Baumdicker, Gertjan Bisschop, Daniel Goldstein, Graham Gower, Aaron P
Ragsdale, Georgia Tsambos, Sha Zhu, Bjarki Eldon, E Castedo Ellerman, Jared G
Galloway, Ariella L Gladstein, Gregor Gorjanc, Bing Guo, Ben Jeffery, Warren W
Kretzschumar, Konrad Lohse, Michael Matschiner, Dominic Nelson, Nathaniel S Pope,
Consuelo D Quinto-Cort´es, Murillo F Rodrigues, Kumar Saunack, Thibaut Sellinger,
Kevin Thornton, Hugo van Kemenade, Anthony W Wohns, Yan Wong, Simon Gravel,
Andrew D Kern, Jere Koskela, Peter L Ralph, and Jerome Kelleher. Efficient ancestry
and mutation simulation with msprime 1.0. Genetics, 220(3):iyab229, 2022.
[44] Arjun Biddanda, Matthias Steinr¨ucken, and John Novembre. Properties of 2-locus
genealogies and linkage disequilibrium in temporally structured samples. Genetics,
221, 3 2022. ISSN 1943-2631.
[45] Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy,
David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan
Bright, St´efan J. van der Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman,
Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J
Page 56 of 60
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
Carey, ˙Ilhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde, Josef
Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris, Anne M.
Archibald, Antˆonio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy
1.0 Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in
Python. Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020.
[46] Noah A. Rosenberg and Magnus Nordborg. Genealogical trees, coalescent theory and
the analysis of genetic polymorphisms. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3:380–390, 5 2002.
ISSN 1471-0056.
[47] Gilean McVean. The coalescent. https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/˜mcvean/notes3.
pdf, 2001. [Online; accessed 2-August-2022].
[48] Aaron P. Ragsdale and Simon Gravel. Models of archaic admixture and recent history
from two-locus statistics. PLOS Genetics, 15:e1008204, 6 2019. ISSN 1553-7404.
[49] Brian P. McEvoy, Joseph E. Powell, Michael E. Goddard, and Peter M. Visscher.
Human population dispersal “Out of Africa” estimated from linkage disequilibrium
and allele frequencies of SNPs. Genome Research, 21:821–829, 6 2011. ISSN 1088-9051.
[50] Jacob A. Tennessen, Abigail W. Bigham, Timothy D. O’Connor, Wenqing Fu,
Eimear E. Kenny, Simon Gravel, Sean McGee, Ron Do, Xiaoming Liu, Goo Jun,
Hyun Min Kang, Daniel Jordan, Suzanne M. Leal, Stacey Gabriel, Mark J. Rieder,
Goncalo Abecasis, David Altshuler, Deborah A. Nickerson, Eric Boerwinkle, Shamil
Sunyaev, Carlos D. Bustamante, Michael J. Bamshad, and Joshua M. Akey. Evolution
and Functional Impact of Rare Coding Variation from Deep Sequencing of Human
Exomes. Science, 337:64–69, 7 2012. ISSN 0036-8075.
[51] Alex V. Nesta, Denisse Tafur, and Christine R. Beck. Hotspots of Human Mutation.
Trends in Genetics, 37:717–729, 8 2021. ISSN 01689525.
[52] Simon Myers, Colin Freeman, Adam Auton, Peter Donnelly, and Gil McVean. A com-
mon sequence motif associated with recombination hot spots and genome instability
in humans. Nature Genetics, 40:1124–1129, 9 2008. ISSN 1061-4036.
Page 57 of 60
==PAGE:65==
Appendices
58
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX A.
A
Appendix
Page 59 of 60
==PAGE:67==
Transition Probabilities in the Haplotype-Copying Model
A.1
Transition Probabilities in the Haplotype-Copying
Model
Figure A.1.1: Behaviour of the transition probabilities of the used LS model as a
function of genetic distance and for different values of λ. A illustrates the probability of
copying from the same reference haplotype as in the previous SNP. B conveys the probability of
jumping to a different haplotype from what was copied in the last SNP. As can be seen, these
two probabilities always sum up to 1. The probabilities in A decrease exponentially with the
genetic distance, and the probabilities in B increase exponentially with the genetic distance.
The value of λ determines the rate of increase or decrease as a function of the genetic distance.
Beyond a certain genetic distance threshold, the probability of copying from the same state or
jumping to any other state becomes equal. The higher the value of λ, the lower the threshold.
The jump rate MLE ˆλ increases with sample age.
Page 60 of 60
