==PAGE:1==
Theory of time­dependent electron
transport in nanosystems
MSc. Thesis
Jakob Kjærulff Svaneborg
July, 2022
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Nanoscale Materials and Devices
(NANOMADE), Department of Physics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
I would like to thank my supervisors Mads Brandbyge and Antti­Pekka Jauho for their guidance
and support throughout the course of this project without which it could not have been completed.
A special thanks also to Aleksander Bach Lorentzen for many fruitful discussions, and for always
being ready to help every time I couldn’t figure out how to make Python behave as I wanted.
Finally I wish to thank Amalie Helena Søndersted for her encouragement and her invaluable help
in the proof­reading and editing of this report.
Jakob Kjærulff Svaneborg ­ s163963
Signature
Date
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Driven by advances in fabrication techniques that have made possible the production of devices in
the nanometer scale, the study of such structures has recently attracted much research interest due
to their many potential applications. The small scales and short times over which nanodevices op­
erate necessitate a theoretical description based in quantum mechanics. However most theoretical
works have focused on device operation under steady­state conditions [1], and theoretical descrip­
tions beyond formal results of non­equilibrium and time­dependent dynamics is lacking. This is
despite the fact that these conditions are highly relevant in experiments. While a formal result to
describe the time­dependent current through a quantum system using the non­equilibrium Green
function (NEGF) formalism has been known since 1994 [2], an efficient and widely applicable
program for numerically solving the resulting equations has not yet been developed, and the study
of numerical schemes to solve this problem has therefore been intensely studied in recent years. In
this thesis, the accuracy of one such efficient numerical scheme, which was introduced by [3], is
investigated. This scheme, which we denote the adiabatic expansion (AE), is valid when the exter­
nal perturbation to the system varies on a much slower time­scale than the internal dynamics of the
device and the device–electrode coupling. To evaluate the performance of this highly efficient but
approximate method, a program implementing the scheme has been developed in Python. Using
the implementation, the time­resolved current through several simplified models for real experi­
mental systems is calculated. The results are compared to calculations by a numerically exact but
computationally expensive method developed by [4, 5]. Issues of convergence and an extension of
the method to non­orthogonal bases is discussed. The latter may allow the solution to the transport
equations to be efficiently paired with electronic structure calculations using density functional
theory (DFT) for more accurate modeling of real systems. We find that the first­order dynamical
correction to the current, obtained through the AE, gives a computationally inexpensive and often
quite accurate prediction of the time­resolved current through a noninteracting nanosystem. The
method is capable of dealing with a wide range of experimental conditions, and works well when
the system under investigation does not contain long­term correlations on the time­scale of the
external pulse.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Table of Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Symbols and abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
5
3
Quantum mechanical modeling
13
3.1
Many­body quantum mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Time­dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Green functions and the transport problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Non­equilibrium Green functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
General expression for particle current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Numerical schemes for quantum transport
33
4.1
Adiabatic expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Propagation (ODE) scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Calculation of current for model systems
43
5.1
Single energy level – Verification of the implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
A simple two­level THz­STM model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion and outlook
63
A Additional theoretical discussion
66
A.1
Contour­ordered Green functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2
Real time formulation – Langreth theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.3
Energy flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.4
Extension to a non­orthogonal basis ­ Löwdin transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
B
Numerical Implementation
73
B.1
Wigner transform of self­energies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2
Zeroth and first orders of the adiabatic expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B.3
Auxiliary mode expansion in the ODE scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B.4
Double quantum dot – verification of the ODE scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C Contour integrals
85
Bibliography
88
Contents
v
==PAGE:6==
Symbols and abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
AE
Adiabatic expansion
AFM
Atomic force microscope
c.c.
Complex conjugate
CF
Commercial foil
DFT
Density functional theory
DOS
Density of states
DQD
Double quantum dot
EOM
Equation(s) of motion
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
GF
Green function
h.c.
Hermitian conjugate
HOMO
Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO
Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
NEGF
Non­equilibrium Green function
ODE
Ordinary differential equation
RMS
Root­mean­square
SC
Single crystal
s­SNOM
Scanning near­field optical microscopy
STM
Scanning­tunneling microscope
TB
Tight binding
TDS
Time­domain spectroscopy
WBL
Wide­band limit
Symbol
Meaning
ω
Energy (frequency) variable
Ω
Frequency of an external perturbation
η
Small positive number that helps ensure convergence
Γ
Level­width function
Σ
Self­energy
Xr/a
Retarded / advanced version of X
X≷
Greater / lesser version of X
G
Green function
g
Free (isolated) Green function
g
Equilibrium (matrix) Green function operator
H
Hamiltonian
V
External potential, perturbation to the system, coupling matrix
H
Hilbert space
ρ
Density operator
σ
Density matrix in the device space
A, B, C
Stand­in symbol for an arbitrary operator
α (subscript)
Electrode label (e.g. left or right)
T
Transmission function. Ch. 3: Time­ordering operator. Ch. 4,5: Central time variable
kBT
Temperature measured in units of energy. kB is the Boltzmann constant.
τ
Ch. 3: Contour­time variable. Ch. 4,5: Difference time variable
U
Time­evolution operator
fα
Fermi­dirac distribution in electrode α
vi
Contents
==PAGE:7==
µα
Chemical potential of electrode α
ε
Energy variable, diagonal entry in a Hamiltonian
k, k’
General quantum state labels (quantum numbers)
N
Number operator
cn, c†
n
Creation­ and annihilation operators in the device space
bαk, b†
αk
Creation­ and annihilation operators in the electrode space
Jα
Total current out of electrode α
eΣ
Wigner transform of Σ
Πα
Current matrix
Tαkn
Coupling matrix element between electrode state αk and device state n
ħ
ħ
∂x
(partial) derivative with respect to x
i
Imaginary unit
n
Index variable in sums, or electron density
∆
External potential, perturbation to the system
ξ
Auxiliary mode wavevector
†
Adjoint operator
∗
Complex conjugate
Contents
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Contents
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Advances in experimental techniques, especially in the field of nanofabrication, have in the last
decades made possible the experimental investigation of materials at the nanometer length scale at
which quantum phenomena dominate. In the last few years, new developments have enabled the
study at this scale of ultra­fast dynamics in the far­from­equilibrium regime, and especially tech­
niques employing strong Terahertz (THz) pulses are rapidly being developed and used to explore
the electron transport properties of atom­thin materials and nano­scale structures. Some promising
technological avenues include THz scanning­tunneling microscopy (THz­STM), which enables the
imaging of materials on the atomic scale, and THz time­domain spectroscopy (THz­TDS) where
short THz pulses are used to probe the electrical and chemical properties of materials [6].
Most real­world applications involve open systems, i.e. quantum systems that are connected to the
rest of the universe in a way such that particles and energy may flow in and out. In contrast, the most
commonly studied models in quantum mechanics are closed; they exist in isolation without inter­
acting with the outside world. The study of open systems is not only very relevant to experiments,
but also poses a significant theoretical challenge, because it is in general not possible to give a fully
quantum mechanical description of the entire surroundings of a system. Despite these challenges,
the theoretical description and numerical simulation of non­interacting open quantum systems in
steady­state, using for instance the Landauer­Büttiker formalism, has become standard practice
[1]. Systems with particle interactions and systems influenced by a time­dependent external per­
turbation, however, remain a challenge. The most promising theoretical avenue for describing
transport in time­dependent systems far from equilibrium is provided by non­equilibrium Green
function (NEGF) theory [7]. This is a first­principles fully quantum mechanical formalism, which
is capable of providing a complete description of the time­resolved dynamics including non­linear
effects and many­body interactions. The NEGF method was developed in the 1960’s by Baym,
Kadanoff [8] and Keldysh [9], and has already been successfully used to model many systems
under steady­state conditions. Achievements in this field include the publications of stand­alone
programs that combine electronic structure calculations using density functional theory (DFT) with
the NEGF formalism to allow for ab initio solutions of the steady­state transport problem for sys­
tems under a wide range of conditions [10, 11]. Time­dependent quantum phenomena in the NEGF
formulation have been studied since the hallmark 1994 paper [2] where a general expression for
the non­equilibrium current through an open system, such as the one illustrated in figure 1.1, was
derived based on the Keldysh formulation of NEGF theory. This theoretical work gave an ex­
pression for the current through a system under very general conditions, experimentally relevant
at frequencies up to tens of THz, with the most restrictive requirement being that particles in the
electrodes must be non­interacting, i.e. described by a Hamiltonian quadratic in the field creation­
and annihilation operators. While the expression derived by [2] is exact within these assumptions,
analytical solutions can only be found in the simplest of cases. This has sparked an intense research
effort to develop methods for obtaining numerical solutions.
In the absence of a standard numerical method for describing time­dependent transport in the com­
plicated configurations typically encountered in experiments, many experimental works in this
field analyze their data in terms of simpler phenomenological models. There is therefore a mis­
match between the models used in many experiments and the formal theoretical tools that have
been developed since 1994. Bridging this gap requires efficient numerical schemes for solving the
equations arising in the time­dependent NEGF formalism, suitable for dealing with experimentally
relevant situations.
Of particular interest in many experimental situations are systems excited by a pulse in the THz
Chapter 1. Introduction
1
==PAGE:10==
Electrode n
Electrode 2
Electrode 1
Device
Figure 1.1: The canonical transport setup. A number of electrodes (typically macroscopic regions;
for instance metal or large sheets of graphene) are connected via a nano­system (the device) such
that particles may move between the electrodes through the device. The system of interconnected
regions may be perturbed by an external, time­dependent potential as illustrated by the wiggly line.
frequency range [12, 13, 14]. The THz regime involves frequencies around atomic vibrational
frequencies, which can typically be considered slow when compared to electronic motion. In this
close­to­adiabatic regime it may be possible to use approximations to the Kadanoff­Baym equa­
tions of motion which can enable efficient computational methods. It is this slow time­dependent
regime that is investigated in this thesis. The primary approach analyzed is a method introduced in
2019 by [3], which we denote the adiabatic expansion (AE), in which the equations of motion are
expanded in an infinite series. This series may be truncated after a finite number of terms under
the assumption that the external time­dependent perturbation varies slowly compared to the time­
scale of the internal dynamics of the system. The resulting equations are local in time and may be
solved for different times in parallel, promising significant computational speed­up compared to
other methods. Furthermore, the method is very flexible in that almost all quantities are allowed
to vary in time. A numerical implementation of the adiabatic expansion has been developed in
Python for this project. Using this implementation, the accuracy of the method in various sim­
plified models for real experimental systems has been investigated, including a highly simplified
model of a charge pump and a THz­STM. The method is evaluated by comparison to results from
a numerical implementation by Aleksander Bach Lorentzen of the propagation scheme described
by [4, 5] which is numerically exact, but computationally expensive. This method is based on
numerically propagating a closed set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), and we therefore
denote this method the ODE scheme. The equations of motion governing both the ODE scheme
and the adiabatic expansion are derived, and the conditions under which they can be applied is dis­
cussed. Furthermore, we discuss how both of these schemes can be extended to describe transport
in a non­orthogonal basis, which is useful for combination with electronic structure calculations
using DFT.
The structure of this thesis is as follows. In chapter 2, an overview of recent experimental de­
velopments in the field of time­dependent transport is presented. In chapter 3, we give a general
introduction to the time­dependent formulation of many­body quantum mechanics and the NEGF
method, including a derivation of the particle current formula from [2]. Subsequently, in chap­
ter 4 we discuss the numerical schemes that have been used and implemented numerically in this
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
==PAGE:11==
project, and derive the equations of motion governing each of these schemes. In chapter 5, results
of calculations using the AE and the ODE scheme are presented for several model systems of in­
terest. Finally, in chapter 6, the conclusions drawn from the project are presented, and we discuss
potential future investigations.
To simplify the notation, we will adopt the convention ħ = 1 throughout this report, which cor­
responds to identifying the dimensions of energy and frequency. The dimension of the various
quantities we will encounter will be in general be different powers of energy, a scale which we
leave unspecified for generality. However for order­of­magnitude estimations in the nano­systems
that we study, one can take the scale of energy to be around 1 eV, and we will use this scale for
illustration several times throughout the report.
Chapter 1. Introduction
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
==PAGE:13==
2
Experimental developments in
time­dependent transport
The interest in time­dependent quantum transport phenomena has largely been driven by the tech­
nological and experimental breakthroughs of recent years. This is especially true in the THz fre­
quency range, where advances in the last 10–20 years have made possible the generation and de­
tection of ultra­short high­intensity THz pulses with durations on the order of tens or hundreds of
femtoseconds, and electric field intensities on the order of 1 V/nm [15]. This frequency range is
particularly interesting as the photon energy of THz waves (ħω ≈10 meV) may couple resonantly
to low­energy vibrational or rotational modes in molecules, and bound electron­hole pairs [12]. In
addition, the high field intensity and short duration of the pulses generated is ideal for the study of
ultra­fast dynamics and non­linear material properties. In this chapter, we give a brief overview
of some recent advances in the experimental study of time­dependent open quantum systems with
an emphasis on the THz frequency range, taking a closer look at a couple of selected articles to
illustrate the novel possibilities in this field. The examples have also been chosen to highlight the
need for new theoretical developments, thereby motivating the present work. Knowledge of this
discussion is not necessary to understand the rest of the report, and the reader may choose to skip
directly to chapter 3 if so desired.
In a 2017 review article [13], three different techniques for mapping of the electrical properties
of large­area graphene were compared. The main emphasis was on a technique demonstrated
by [16] using THz time­domain spectroscopy (THz­TDS). In this technique, the transmission or
reflection amplitude and phase of a THz pulse is measured after interaction with the sample. The
measurements are fitted to a theoretical model from which parameters such as the conductivity,
carrier concentration and electron drift mobility may be calculated. Compared to other methods,
this time­dependent approach is advantageous because it is non­destructive, highly accurate, and
much faster than any other known method [13]. The theoretical model employed in the paper is
the phenomenological Drude­Smith model, where the conductance is modeled as
σ(ω) =
W
1 −iωτ

1 +
c
1 −iωτ

(2.1)
Here τ is the average scattering time, and W and c are fitting parameters. This model takes outset
in the assumption that the sample consists of domains inside of which the carriers behave as a free
plasma. At the domain boundaries, the carriers may be back­scattered with a certain probability,
which is taken into account by including the parameter c ∈[−1, 0]. A sketch of the experimental
setup used in [16] may be seen in figure 2.1. The results reported for graphene sheets grown on
two different copper substrates are shown in figure 2.2.
While the Drude­Smith model gives a
surprisingly good description of the measured conductivity spectrum of the Cu­grown graphene
sheets, it requires the use of experimentally determined fitting parameters and does not explain the
microscopic origins of the conductivity, both of which makes it unfeasible to extend the results in
order to predict the electrical properties of graphene under different experimental conditions [16].
The experiment demonstrates the feasibility of using THz pulses to rapidly and non­destructively
measure the material properties of large graphene sheets. However, to obtain a better interpretation
and extend the range of validity of the results, a more accurate model of the interaction between
the graphene sheet and the THz pulse is required. This indicates that it would be of significant
interest to develop better theoretical tools to describe the interaction of graphene sheets with THz
pulses.
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: A sketch of the experimental setup for THz­TDS of a graphene sample. The figure
illustrates a graphene sheet with grain boundaries (red regions) excited by a THz pulse (black line).
Figure taken from [16].
Terahertz scanning­tunneling microscopy (THz­STM) is another new technique that has been used
to obtain images of surfaces with atomic spatial­ and sub­picosecond time resolution [17]. In
scanning­tunneling microscopy (STM), a small metal tip is placed very close to a sample which
could for instance be a molecule or a sheet of graphene. When a bias is applied between the
sample and metal tip, electrons may tunnel from the molecule to the tip (or vice versa), resulting in
a measurable current. To tunnel to the tip, an electron must cross a potential barrier with a height on
the order of the work function of the molecule and a width determined by the separation between the
molecule and tip. As tunneling probability decays exponentially with barrier width, the magnitude
of current is extremely sensitive to the separation between tip and sample, and tunneling occurs
therefore only locally very near the apex, permitting an image of the local electron density of states
to be obtained by scanning the tip over the molecule surface. In THz­STM, the static bias between
sample and tip is replaced (partially or wholly) by a THz laser pulse. The scanner tip behaves as an
ultrabroadband antenna [17] to which the THz pulse couples, inducing a strong transient bias. This
technique was used by [18] to model the time­resolved motion of a single pentacene molecule. The
experimental setup and principle of operation is illustrated in figure 2.3a. A pentacene molecule is
placed on a layer of NaCl which separates it from a gold substrate. When a bias voltage is applied
between the STM tip and the gold substrate, electrons may tunnel between these structures. For
low bias voltages, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied
molecular orbital (LUMO) in the pentacene molecule are not inside the bias window, and can
therefore not participate in the tunneling process, which means that tunneling must occur directly
from the tip to the substrate in a single step. This situation is illustrated in figure 2.3b, top left.
However, when the bias voltage exceeds a certain threshold, the HOMO or LUMO states become
available which significantly increases the tunneling current, illustrated in the central part of figure
2.3b. When the system is excited by a THz pulse (figure 2.3b, right), the instantaneous voltage
drop caused by the pulse may overcome this threshold resulting in a spike of current. This allows
the current through the structure to be controlled by the excitation THz pulses. Note that the effect
of the THz pulse on the system is treated in the adiabatic limit, i.e. the dynamics associated with the
time­variation of the excitation field are neglected. The validity of this approximation cannot be
assumed a priori, and can only be verified a posteriori by comparison to the experimental results
[18].
By scanning the STM tip over the molecule, an image of the HOMO is obtained in the conduction
spectrum, confirming the interpretation that the participation of these orbitals is responsible for the
large increase in current with bias. These results may be seen in figure 2.4. In 2.4a, the image is
taken with under a constant bias of VDC = −1.7 V while in figure 2.4b, the bias voltage is VDC = 6
mV. The image in 2.4c is taken using a THz pulse as excitation. The characteristic shape of the
HOMO orbitals 2.4f is clearly seen in both the THz and the large DC bias images. The illustrated
shapes of these orbitals have been found from a DFT calculation of the free pentacene molecule. In
6
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Conductance spectra obtained from transmission THz­TDS on graphene sheets grown
on single­crystal (c) and commercial foil (d) copper substrates. The commercial foil contains
defects, which give rise to grain boundaries in the grown graphene. The effect of this on the con­
duction spectra is included in the theoretical model via the back­scattering parameter c of eq. (2.1).
The filled circles and triangles are obtained with the use of ultrabroadband THz pulses whose
waveforms are seen in figures a and b. The empty circles and triangles are results obtained using
conventional THz pulses whose waveforms are shown in the insets of figures a and b. For the
pristine graphene in figure c, the Drude model fit described the conductance spectrum surprisingly
well. For the CF­grown graphene in figure d, fitting to the Drude­Smith model also describes the
spectrum quite well. Figure taken from [16].
the low DC bias image 2.4b, the characteristic shape of the HOMO orbital vanishes from the image,
confirming the interpretation that these orbitals do not participate in the transport under low bias
voltage. The simulated images seen in figures 2.4d and 2.4i are obtained using the Tersoff­Hamann
approximation [19], a common technique for analysis THz­STM systems where the metal tip is
modeled as a spherically symmetric quantum wave function. The time­resolved dynamics of the
molecule were observed by exciting the system with two successive identical THz pulses, separated
in time by a delay τ. When the first (pump) pulse impinges on the system, electrons may be excited
to tunnel between the tip and molecule. This leaves the molecule charged, and potentially excites
molecular dynamics, such as vibrational modes. The total tunneling current induced by the two
pulses is shown as a function of the delay in figure 2.5a. This measurement corresponds to the auto­
correlation function for the pulse. At very small delays on the scale of the pulse length (|τ| < 250
fs), constructive interference between the pulses causes a large current to flow. For larger delays,
the current induced by the first and second pulse may be measured separately. Based on a fit to
the measured auto­correlation, a time resolution of 130 fs is estimated. In the absence of dynamics
and for long delays, the second (probe) pulse should excite the same current as the first pulse.
However by varying the time delay between the pulses, a coherent oscillation in the measured
current with a frequency of about 0.5 THz was observed. This oscillation may be explained by
a vibration of the molecule induced by the first pulse, which causes the tip­molecule distance to
vary periodically in time. Two repeated measurements of the current induced by the second pulse
as a function of the time­delay τ may be seen in figure 2.5b. These measurements therefore give
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: a) The experimental setup used by [18]. A pentacene molecule is placed on top of a
monolayer of NaCl situated on a gold substrate. By focusing THz pulses onto the STM tip, the tun­
neling current may be controlled. b) At low bias voltages, the highest occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in the pentacene are not available for
electrons, and these must tunnel directly from the tip to the gold substrate (or vice versa). This
is illustrated in the left part of the figure. When the bias voltage is sufficiently large so that the
molecular orbitals are included in the bias voltage window, the conductivity increases sharply as
illustrated in the central figure. This voltage window may be accessed for a very short period of
time by the THz excitation pulses as illustrated with the THz pulse waveform in the panel to the
right. c) The measured current shown as a function of the peak electric field amplitude of the THz
pulse. The current is seen to increase sharply when the HOMO is inside the voltage window (blue
shaded region). The figure is taken from [18].
a time­resolved record of the motion of the pentacene molecule. It is notable in this study that the
adiabatic approximation works quite well to describe THz excitation for the system considered.
This confirms the idea that this frequency range may be considered slow on the time­scales of
the electronic dynamics. The validity of the approximation was not known a priori and was only
confirmed by the good agreement between the steady­state and measurements. Furthermore, the
paper does not propose any theoretical models to predict or explain the vibrational behavior of the
molecule, or how the tunneling current depends on this vibration beyond the adiabatic limit. These
observations highlight the need for new theoretical models that can be applied to predict the effects
of molecular and electronic dynamics, and estimate the degree to which standard adiabatic theory
may be used in varying experimental conditions.
A different imaging technique that has garnered much attention in the last few years is scattering­
type scanning near­field optical microscopy (s­SNOM). In this method, a tiny (nm­scale) metal
tip is used to focus an electromagnetic field to an extremely small point. The field scatters from
the device under test, and the reflection is recorded by a detector located in the far­field of the
8
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: a) Constant bias STM image of the pentacene molecule taken at a bias voltage of
VDC = −1.7 V. At this bias, the characteristic shape of the HOMO may be clearly seen in the
resulting image. b) An image taken under the same conditions as in a, but with a small bias
voltage of only 6 mV. The characteristic shape of the HOMO has vanished, confirming the notion
that these orbitals do not participate in the transport at low bias voltages. c) Current induced by
a THz pulse with a peak voltage of ­2.05 V. The shape of the HOMO orbitals is again evident,
and the resolution obtained in fact slightly higher than that observed in the steady­state image of
a. d) Simulation of the THz­STM image based on the Tersoff­Hamann approximation [19]. The
simulation corresponds very well to the measured data. e) A close­up of the three lobes seen in c.
f,g) Contours of the HOMO and LUMO of the free pentacene molecule calculated using density
functional theory (DFT). h) Molecular structure of pentacene. i) Close­up of the three lobes in the
simulated THz­STM image, corresponding to those seen in e. The figure is taken from [18].
scattered wave. The electromagnetic field is typically generated by lasers operating in the GHz–
THz frequency range. The high intensity field is strongly localized on the apex of the tip, and
therefore permits local probing of a sample at a resolution that exceeds the diffraction limit of
the wavelength used. Due to the focusing, the amplitude of the electric field at the tip apex may
be extremely large, making the method well­suited for probing non­linear responses of materials.
However, it is not in general easy to reconstruct an image of the sample from the measured far­
field intensity profile of the radiation [20]. In addition, it is generally assumed that only the local
environment just below the metal tip affects the far­field measurements due to the strong field
confinement around this point. However, in a 2020 study, it was shown that non­local effects can
be significant, especially in the presence of large optically conductive structures on the sample
[14]. In the experiment, s­SNOM measurements were performed on small gold disks of diameters
between 0.3 µm and 5 µm situated on an SiO2 substrate as well as measurements on a rod­shaped
gold structure on the same substrate. The s­SNOM images captured were compared to images
made using an atomic­force microscope (AFM) to assess the performance of the s­SNOM setup.
An illustration of the setup may be seen in figure 2.6.
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: a) Top, the waveforms of the two THz pulses. Individually, the pulses are too weak
to couple to the HOMO or LUMO states (black line), but when they overlap the bias voltage
may exceed the threshold for coupling to the HOMO states (blue line). In the bottom the auto­
correlation function for the two identical THz pulses used in the experiment. This is measured
as the total tunneling current induced by the two pulses. When the pulses overlap, constructive
interference may allow the total instantaneous bias voltage to exceed the threshold for tunneling
through the HOMO, resulting in a marked increase in current. The solid line shows a fit to the
measured data using a sum of two Gaussians. b) The current measured by the second pulse shows
an oscillation with a frequency of about 0.5 THz as a function of the time delay τ. This oscillation
may be explained by a vibration of the pentacene molecule induced by the first pulse. The dark­
and light green curves show data for two identical measurements. The results are shown as the
relative deviation of the current measured by the second pulse compared to that induced by the
first one. The figure is taken from [18].
The s­SNOM and AFM images of an isolated gold island and an island connected by a thin rod to a
larger gold ground plane may be seen in figure 2.7. The AFM technique yields a very good image of
both islands as seen in figure 2.7a, while for the s­SNOM image in figure 2.7b the connected gold
island displays a markedly better contrast than the isolated island. This is qualitatively explained by
the electrons in the connected island redistributing themselves in response to the field and thereby
screening the potential, whereas the isolated islands are too small, i.e. have two few electrons to
screen the potential effectively, thereby eliciting a much weaker response. To study this effect more
closely, isolated gold disks with diameters varying from 1 µm to 5 µm were studied in a similar
experiment. In figure 2.8a and b the AFM and s­SNOM measurements for the different gold disks
are seen. It is evident that the contrast is significantly worse for the smaller disks than for the larger
ones, despite even the smallest disk being much larger than the resolution of the microscope, which
is estimated to be no larger than 200 nm. The effect is quantified in figure 2.8c, where the s­SNOM
intensity profile (red line) and AFM­measured height (black line) across a horizontal line through
the center of all the disks are shown.
These observations were analyzed theoretically by a simplified ”toy­model” [14], where the s­
SNOM tip is modeled as a point charge and the analysis is carried out using classical electrostatics.
Solving the Maxwell equations for a point charge in the presence of a grounded or ungrounded disk
with a varying diameter, analytical solutions for the near­field can be obtained. Figure 2.8d shows
that the measured intensity profiles fit the prediction for the electric field from a point charge in
the presence of an ungrounded disk. However the model is phenomenological and cannot be used
for more complex geometries of effects beyond the electrostatic limit [14].
From the studies described above and the many more like them, it is clear that time­dependent
10
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: Schematic setup for s­SNOM measurements in the experiment by [14]. A small metal
tip probes small gold islands situated on a SiO2 substrate. The tip is excited by laser pulses in the
GHz–THz range. The scattered wave is measured in the far field, and from this data an image of
the specimen may be reconstructed. The figure is taken from [14].
Figure 2.7: a) AFM image of a device consisting of two gold islands on SiO2. One gold island is
electrically isolated, while the other one is connected to a large gold ground plane by a thin rod.
b) s­SNOM image of the same device as in a. With this technique, a markedly different contrast is
observed for the two gold islands. c) The recorded near­field scattered amplitude profiles along the
lines indicated in b. A much stronger response is evident across the line that crosses the connected
island compared to that of the isolated island. The figure is taken from [14].
dynamics in nano­systems is a rapidly developing field with many interesting practical applica­
tions. The approximate, phenomenological and/or static models used in many of these papers also
make clear that theoretical and numerical tools that may be applied in the huge variety of situations
encountered in experiments, are lacking.
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.8: a) AFM image of gold disks of varying diameters. b) s­SNOM image of the same gold
disks. It is clearly seen that the measured contrast is much better for the larger disks. c) AFM­
measured height and s­SNOM­measured near field profiles along a line through all the disks in a
and b. d) Red boxes: Average near­field signal of the disks with different diameters. The blue
and orange curves are the calculated electric fields at the metal tip, treating the metal tip as a static
point charge in the presence of a grounded or ungrounded disk. The figure is taken from [14]
12
Chapter 2. Experimental developments in time­dependent transport
==PAGE:21==
3
Quantum mechanical modeling
In this chapter, we will introduce the mathematical framework which we use to describe the trans­
port properties of open quantum systems. We focus on the Green Function (GF) method, which is
the most promising theoretical avenue for describing these systems, as it is uniquely able to handle
many­body interactions and systems far from equilibrium.
In the first section, the mathematical spaces and quantities that we encounter in the study of many­
body quantum mechanics are introduced. Then, we consider different pictures of time­dependence
and derive the Dyson equation for the time­evolution operator. In section three, we introduce the
concept of (equilibrium) Green functions and define the transport problem in the setting of a single­
particle system without external time­dependence. In section 4, we consider the full formulation
of non­equilibrium Green function (NEGF) theory which in principle may be used to describe any
quantum system of interest, and finally in section 5 we give a derivation of the general expression
for the non­equilibrium current, first derived by [2]. A further discussion of some parts of the
theoretical description is given in appendix A.
3.1
Many­body quantum mechanics
Single­particle quantum mechanics is traditionally formulated in terms of the single­particle wave
function |Ψ⟩, which completely describes the state of a quantum system. Observable (measurable)
quantities are associated with operators acting on the wave function, and the expectation value of
an observable associated with an operator A is ⟨Ψ|A|Ψ⟩, where ⟨·|·⟩is the inner product on the
Hilbert space in which the wave function lives.
In this formalism, a many­particle system is described by a single wave function which depends
on all relevant quantum numbers of the whole collection of particles in the system respecting the
particle symmetries. The rapid growth of the configuration space associated with an increasing
number of particles makes the expression of |Ψ⟩in a coordinate basis extremely unwieldy. Fur­
thermore, the wave function description does not automatically account for the boson and fermion
particle statistics, such that one must explicitly ensure that these symmetries are respected when
expressing a multi­particle state in the wave function formalism. A much more suitable frame­
work for the description of many­body systems is offered by the mathematical setting often called
second quantization [21]. The multi­particle state space H is described as a direct sum of Hilbert
spaces containing a fixed number of particles, 1
H = |0⟩⊕H1 ⊕H2 ⊕· · · .
(3.1)
States that live entirely within a subspace Hn are said to contain n particles, and states with different
numbers of particles are orthogonal in the inner product inherited from the subspaces Hn. The n­
particle subspaces are obtained from the single­particle subspace by taking tensor products of H1
and performing the appropriate symmetrizations. For a fermionic system, for instance, we have
H2 = {v ⊗w −w ⊗v|v, w ∈H1}.
(3.2)
To describe states in the many­body Hilbert space we introduce the creation and annihilation op­
erators c†
s, cs which respectively add a particle to and remove a particle from the state s ∈H1.
1Technically we must also require that states |Ψ⟩∈H are normalizable. This is ensured by defining H more
precisely as the Hilbert space completion of the space V defined as the space of all sets {|Ψ1⟩, |Ψ2⟩, |Ψ3⟩, · · · } where
|Ψn⟩∈Hn and only a finite number of the |Ψn⟩are different from zero.
Chapter 3. Quantum mechanical modeling
13
==PAGE:22==
We may let these operators act on the many­body particle space in a way that respects the particle
symmetry. In doing so, we relieve ourselves of the duty to manually ensure that the symmetry
is respected. This makes the creation­ and annihilation operators extremely useful to express the
action of one­ and two­particle operators in the many­body space. Given an orthonormal basis
{|n⟩}∞
n=1 of H1, we may use the completeness relation P
n |n⟩⟨n| = 1 to express a single­particle
operator A : H1 −→H1 as
A =
X
nm
|m⟩⟨m| A |n⟩⟨n| =
X
mn
Amn |m⟩⟨n| =
X
mn
Amnc†
mcn.
(3.3)
The equivalence |m⟩⟨n| = c†
mcn in the single­particle space may be verified by acting with this
operator on an arbitrary state. Although A was defined only on the single­particle state space, the
expression on the right­hand side of eq. (3.3) is in fact well­defined not only on the single­particle
space H1, but on all of H. We may therefore use this expression to define an extension of A from
H1 to H. We will take this to be the defining expression for the extension of any single­particle
operator to the many­particle space. Operators acting on more than one particle may be similarly
expressed in terms of the creation­ and annihilation operators of a complete set of single­particle
states; their domain can then similarly be extended to all of the multi­particle space. Most com­
monly we encounter two­particle interactions (for instance electron­electron Coulomb repulsion
or electron­phonon interactions) where the number of particles of each species is conserved. The
operator B representing such an interaction (e.g. an electron­electron interaction) would in second
quantization take the form 2
B =
X
ijkl
c†
ic†
jBij,lkckcl.
(3.4)
Although we have introduced creation­ and annihilation operators, the state of a system is still
described by a wave function |Ψ⟩generated by the creation operators. A more general description
in terms of a density operator ρ is also possible, and is necessary for describing the thermodynamic
properties of quantum systems. For a system in the state |Ψ⟩, the density operator is ρ = |Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|.
The expectation value of an operator A in this state is ⟨Ψ|A|Ψ⟩= Tr(ρA), where the trace is
over the entire multi­particle space. All equations describing the quantum system may similarly
be expressed in terms of ρ, and we may therefore take ρ, rather than |Ψ⟩, to be the fundamental
object describing the state of a quantum system. It is clear that for any state |Ψ⟩there is a unique
density operator describing that state. The converse, however, is not true, and the introduction of
the density operator is therefore more than just a change of notation. In particular, it allows us to
describe systems in a statistical mixture of quantum mechanical states, so­called mixed states; to
obtain such a description, we generalize ρ to
ρ =
X
n
pn |n⟩⟨n| ,
(3.5)
This situation corresponds to the generic situation in condensed matter and statistical physics [22,
pp. 48–49]. If {|n⟩} is an orthonormal basis, pn has the direct interpretation of the probability of
observing the system in the state |n⟩, and we require therefore that P pn = Tr{ρ} = 1 and that
pn ≥0 for all n, which implies that ρ is Hermitian and positive semi­definite.
That the difference between a mixed and a pure state is fundamental and not just a matter of choice
of basis, is most easily seen by noting that for pure states (ρ = |Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|) the density operator is a
projection operator, ρ2 = ρ, while this is not the case for a mixed state. We therefore take ρ as the
fundamental quantity in any quantum system and ⟨A⟩= Tr{ρA} as the fundamental definition of
the expectation value of an operator.
2If the interaction were instead between electrons and phonons, for instance, two different species of creation­ and
annihilation operators would appear in eq. (3.4).
14
3.1. Many­body quantum mechanics
==PAGE:23==
Still, wave functions may be useful in many situations, including for some derivations, and we will
therefore encounter them again in the following section.
3.2
Time­dependence
The evolution of a state |Ψ⟩∈H is governed by the Schrödinger equation,
i∂t |Ψ⟩= H |Ψ⟩,
(3.6)
where H is the Hamiltonian operator governing the system. If H is independent of time, the formal
solution to eq. (3.6) is
|Ψ(t)⟩= e−iH(t−t0) |Ψ(t0)⟩.
(3.7)
The operator e−iH(t−t0) is thus a time­evolution operator, which evolves the wave function from
time t0 to t1. Such a time­evolution operator may be defined for any quantum system.
The equation of motion for the density operator introduced in the last section may be found by
differentiation and use of the Schrödinger equation, 3
i∂tρ = i(∂t |Ψ⟩) ⟨Ψ| + i |Ψ⟩(∂t ⟨Ψ|) = H |Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| −|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| H = [H, ρ],
(3.8)
where to find the second term we have expressed the Schrödinger equation in the dual space,
yielding −i∂t ⟨Ψ| = ⟨Ψ| H† = ⟨Ψ| H. We can formally solve the equation of motion for ρ using
eq. (3.7), whereby we find that
ρ(t) = |Ψ(t)⟩⟨Ψ(t)| = e−iH(t−t0)ρ(t0)eiH(t−t0).
(3.9)
The expectation value of a time­independent operator AS at time t in the system described by ρ is
therefore
⟨AS⟩= Tr{ρ(t)AS} = Tr
n
e−iH(t−t0)ρ(t0)eiH(t−t0)AS
o
= Tr
n
ρ(t0)eiH(t−t0)ASe−iH(t−t0)o
,
(3.10)
where we have used the cyclic permutation symmetry of the trace. Equation (3.10) allows for a
different description of quantum mechanics, the so­called Heisenberg picture, where the operators
evolve in time while the system state remains constant. In the Heisenberg picture, we define the
operator A at time t as
A(t) = eiH(t−t0)ASe−iH(t−t0),
(3.11)
and the expectation value is given by ⟨A(t)⟩= Tr{ρ(t0)A(t)}. At the time t = t0 we see that
A(t0) = AS; this time may be chosen arbitrarily and is only relevant when converting expressions
between the Heisenberg picture and the original formulation, which we denote the Schrödinger
picture. We note here that the transformation between the two pictures has the same mathematical
form as a change of basis. One consequence of this is that if an operator is defined from a product
of other operators, e.g. in the Schrödinger picture as AS = BSCS, the corresponding operator in
the Heisenberg picture is simply the same product of Heisenberg operators, AH = BHCH.
In the discussion above, we considered a Hamiltonian operator with no explicit time­dependence.
In this project we are, however, concerned with systems whose Hamiltonian does depend explicitly
on time. In this situation it is customary to separate the Hamiltonian into two terms, H(t) = H0 +
V (t), where H0 is a simple time­independent free­particle Hamiltonian, whose eigenstates may
be found explicitly, and V (t) is a complicated time­dependent term, possibly containing particle
interactions. Defining a state |ϕ⟩= eiH0(t−t0) |Ψ⟩, the Schrödinger equation yields
i∂t |ϕ⟩= eiH0(t−t0)i∂t |Ψ⟩−eiH0(t−t0)H0 |Ψ⟩= eiH0(t−t0)V (t) |Ψ⟩,
(3.12)
3Here we consider for simplicity a pure state, ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|. The result holds also in the general case.
3.2. Time­dependence
15
==PAGE:24==
where the right­hand side is found from the Schrödinger equation for |Ψ⟩. Defining VI(t) =
eiH0(t−t0)V (t)e−iH0(t−t0), we find then that
i∂t |ϕ(t)⟩= VI(t) |ϕ(t)⟩.
(3.13)
This transformation defines the so­called interaction picture. We will also denote this the H0­
picture, referring to the transformation that converts between the Schrödinger picture and this one.
Similarly to V , any operator may be converted between the Schrödinger picture and the interaction
picture by the transformation
AI(t) = eiH0(t−t0)AS(t)e−iH0(t−t0),
(3.14)
where t0 is the (arbitrary) time where the two pictures coincide. We see that in this picture, the
operators evolve with the simple Hamiltonian H0 while the states evolve only with the complicated
interaction V (t). The solution to eq. (3.13) may be given in terms of a time­evolution operator U
defined by its action on state vectors as |ϕ(t1)⟩= U(t1, t2) |ϕ(t2)⟩. Introducing this operator in
eq. (3.13), we find that
i∂tU(t, t0) |ϕ(t0)⟩= VI(t)U(t, t0) |ϕ(t0)⟩.
(3.15)
As this must hold for any initial state |ϕ(t0)⟩, we may express it as an operator equation,
i∂tU(t, t0) = VI(t)U(t, t0),
(3.16)
with the initial condition U(t0, t0) = 1. Keeping t0 constant and integrating eq. (3.16) from t0 to
the later time t, we find
Z t
t0
dt1∂t1U(t1, t0) = U(t, t0) −1 = −i
Z t
t0
dt1VI(t1)U(t1, t0)
U(t, t0) = 1 −i
Z t
t0
dt1VI(t1)U(t1, t0)
(3.17)
Progress to obtain a solution for U can be made by iteration. We substitute U(t1, t0) in the integral
for the entire the right­hand side of the equation, obtaining
U(t, t0) = 1 −i
Z t
t0
dt1VI(t1)

1 −i
Z t1
t0
dt2VI(t2)U(t2, t0)

,
(3.18)
a process which may be repeated indefinitely. The term obtained from the N’th iteration is of order
N + 1 in VI. If VI is a small perturbation to H0 we may therefore truncate the series at the N’th
order to obtain an approximation of U. The term of order n in the series has the form
(−i)n
Z t
t0
dt1
Z t1
t0
dt2 · · ·
Z tn−1
t0
dtnVI(t1)VI(t2) · · · VI(tn).
(3.19)
We note that the order of the operators in the above is according to their time argument, i.e. opera­
tors evaluated at an earlier time stand to the right. We will denote this time­ordering and introduce
the time­ordering operator T such that
T{A(t1)B(t2)} =
(
A(t1)B(t2)
if
t1 ≥t2,
±B(t2)A(t1)
if
t1 < t2,
(3.20)
where a sign is picked up for every interchange of a pair of fermion fields induced by the re­
ordering. Since the Hamiltonian always contains an even number of fermion fields, we will not
encounter such a change of sign in the present analysis.
16
3.2. Time­dependence
==PAGE:25==
The dummy indices t1, . . . , tn may be relabeled at will, resulting in n! possible permutations.
Every possible permutation can be included in eq. (3.19) by setting the upper integration limit to
t in all the integrals. The result must then be divided by a factor 1/n! to compensate for counting
every possible permutation, and we have to explicitly state the time­ordering of the operators. We
obtain then
Z t
t0
dt1
Z t1
t0
dt2 · · ·
Z tn−1
t0
dtnVI(t1)VI(t2) · · · VI(tn)
= 1
n!
Z t
t0
dt1
Z t
t0
dt2 · · ·
Z t
t0
dtnT{VI(t1)VI(t2) · · · VI(tn)},
(3.21)
Inserting this in the expression for the time­evolution operator eq. (3.17) and proceeding by itera­
tion, we find that
U(t, t0) = 1 +
∞
X
n=1
(−i)n
n!
T
Z t
t0
dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
dtnVI(t1) · · · VI(tn)

= T
n
e−i
∫t
t0 dt1VI(t1)o
for
t ≥t0.
(3.22)
Equation (3.22) represents the most general form of the time­evolution operator for t ≥t0. If we
had instead assumed that t < t0 we would have obtained a similar result, but the operators would
be anti­time­ordered instead, with operators evaluated at a later time standing to the right. If an
initial state of a quantum system governed by the Hamiltonian H(t) = H0 + V (t) is known, the
state of the system at all later and earlier times may be found if U is known, and this operator
therefore completely describes the dynamics of the system.
Taking the hermitian conjugate of eq. (3.22), we find that
U†(t, t0) = eT
n
ei
∫t
t0 dt1VI(t1)o
= U(t0, t),
(3.23)
where eT is the anti­time­ordering operator, which places earlier times to the left with a sign change
for every interchange of a pair of fermion fields. The anti­time­ordering appears because taking the
hermitian conjugate of a product of operators reverses their order. Taking the Hermitian conjugate
of the equation of motion for U, eq. (3.16), we find the equation
−i∂tU†(t, t0) = U†(t, t0)VI(t).
(3.24)
We can then find an equation of motion for the product operator U†(t, t0)U(t, t0) by using the
product rule of differentiation, whereby we obtain
i∂t[U†(t, t0)U(t, t0)] = [−U†(t, t0)VI(t)]U(t, t0) + U†(t, t0)[VI(t)U(t, t0)] = 0.
(3.25)
Combined with the initial condition U(t0, t0) = 1 this shows that
U†(t, t0)U(t, t0) = U(t0, t)U(t, t0) = 1.
(3.26)
U is therefore a unitary operator. The physical interpretation of this result is clear; if we evolve a
state from a time t0 to t, and then back to t0 again, we must return to the same initial state. This
fundamental reversibility of time evolution in quantum mechanics has many interesting scientific
and philosophical consequences.
3.2. Time­dependence
17
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Green functions and the transport problem
The concept of a Green function (GF) is well­known from the study of inhomogeneous linear
differential equations, where a Green function is defined as the solution to an equation of the form
L(t)G(t, t′) = δ(t −t′), where L is a differential operator of interest. If L is linear, knowledge
of G allows one to construct the solution to an arbitrary right­hand side of the equation using the
principle of linear superposition. The number G(t, t′), where t > t′ may thus be interpreted as the
response of the system at time t due to the impulse at time t′.
In the GF description of quantum transport, the term Green function is used in a more general
sense to refer to a correlation function between field operators. A connection to the classical sense
of a Green function is made by defining the retarded GF operator gr of a time­independent, non­
interacting system as the solution to the equation
(i∂t −H)gr(t −t′) = δ(t −t′),
(3.27)
A formal solution to eq. (3.27) is gr(t −t′) = −iθ(t −t′)e−iH(t−t′), as may be verified by direct
differentiation. Here, θ is the Heaviside step function which is unity for positive times and zero for
negative times. A feature of a time­invariant system is that the GF depends only on the difference
time τ = t −t′. By insertion, we find that it satisfies the initial condition limτ→0+ gr(τ) = −i
and can be interpreted as a propagator; if the system described by H is initially found in the state
|Ψ(t = 0)⟩= |Ψ0⟩, then the state at a later time t is |Ψ(t)⟩= igr(t) |Ψ0⟩.
The time­invariance of the system makes it convenient to work instead in the frequency domain,
defined through the Fourier transform by
gr(ω) =
Z ∞
−∞
dτgr(τ)ei(ω+iη)τ,
(3.28)
where η is a small positive number which is taken to approach zero at the end of the calculation. Its
inclusion prevents the divergence of the integral in the presence of bound states. 4 Physically, we
can interpret η as introducing a finite particle life­time causing particles to decay out of the energy
eigenstates with a time constant η−1. In eq. (3.28) we have abused the notation slightly to let the
symbol gr refer to the GF in both the time and the frequency domain, distinguishing between the
two only by the argument to the function. From the Fourier transform gr(ω), we can rediscover
the time­domain GF operator by means of the inverse Fourier transform,
gr(τ) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
dωgr(ω)e−iωτ.
(3.29)
Casting the equation of motion of the GF operator , eq. (3.27), in the frequency domain, we obtain
(ω + iη −H(ω))gr(ω) = 1,
(3.30)
as it may be directly verified that the Fourier transform of i∂τgr(τ) is (ω +iη)gr(ω). In numerical
applications, the operators H and g are typically expanded in a finite­dimensional basis |ϕn⟩, n =
1, · · · N. This turns eq. (3.30) into a matrix equation, and the retarded GF matrix operator gr can
then be found from the matrix inversion
gr(ω) = ((ω + iη)I −H(ω)))−1,
(3.31)
where I is the N × N identity matrix.
The transport problem is concerned with describing the properties of an open quantum system, i.e.
a system in which particles may enter or leave the system through a number of transport channels,
4Note that the integrand vanishes for negative τ due to the Heaviside step function in g.
18
3.3. Green functions and the transport problem
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: The typical configuration for transport calculations. A molecular device is coupled
to two electrodes denoted L (left) and R (right), respectively. In the absence of the coupling to
the electrodes, the dynamics in the device is described by the Hamiltonian HD. The effect of the
coupling on the device is described through the self­energies ΣL/R.
which we will refer to collectively as electrodes. In principle, the electrodes could be included
in the quantum mechanical description, but then the problem would become extremely large and
difficult to solve. The challenge is therefore to describe the influence of the electrodes on the
system of interest without having to give a full quantum mechanical description of the electrodes
themselves. This problem has wide real­world applicability, as it is the fundamental tool that allows
us to describe the way that a quantum system interacts with the outside (macroscale) world.
The typical setup for transport calculations is illustrated in figure 3.1. As indicated in the figure,
we focus here on the common situation where the quantum system, which we will call the ’device’,
is connected to precisely two electrodes. By describing each electrode and the device in a finite­
dimensional basis, the Hamiltonian of the full system, containing both electrodes and the device,
may be divided into a block­matrix form
Htot =


HL
VLD
0
V †
LD
HD
V †
RD
0
VRD
HR

,
(3.32)
where HL and HR are the Hamiltonians of the isolated electrodes, HD the Hamiltonian of the
isolated device, and VLD and VRD matrices containing the coupling between electrodes and device.
We assume that there is no direct coupling between the left and right electrodes except through
device. This is the reason for the zero matrices in the upper right and lower left parts of the total
Hamiltonian. Note that HL, HR and HD which appear in the diagonal of H must be square, but
need not have the same size, the relationship between the dimensions of the different matrices being
clear from the structure of the block matrix. The equation of motion for the matrix GF operator
eq. (3.31) takes the form


zI −HL
−VLD
0
−V †
LD
zI −HD
−V †
RD
0
−VRD
zI −HR




gL
gLD
gLR
gDL
gD
gDL
gRL
gRD
gR

= I,
(3.33)
where z = ω + iη, and we have abused the notation slightly to always let I denote an identity
matrix of the appropriate dimension. Multiplying out the matrices results in nine coupled matrix
equations. As we are interested in obtaining the device GF in the presence of coupling, we consider
only the three equations arising from the central column of the total GF matrix, from which we
find the solutions
gLD = (zI −HL)−1VLDgD,
(3.34a)
gRD = (zI −HR)−1VRDgD,
(3.34b)
3.3. Green functions and the transport problem
19
==PAGE:28==
and
gD = (zI −HD −ΣL −ΣR)−1,
(3.35)
where we have defined the electrode self­energies
Σα = V †
αD(zI −Hα)−1VαD,
α ∈{L, R}.
(3.36)
In the absence of the coupling to the electrodes, the self­energies vanish and we recover from
eq. (3.35) the GF operator for the isolated device. The effect of the electrodes on the device is
described entirely by the self­energies, which notably depend only on the GF operator g0α =
(zI −Hα)−1 of the isolated electrodes and the coupling between electrodes and device. By com­
parison to the isolated device GF operator, eq. (3.30) we see that the effect of the self­energy is
two­fold: The real part Re{Σα} shifts the eigenenergies of the system, while the imaginary part
Im{Σα} introduces a finite particle life­time, i.e. a decay rate akin to the effect of η. We can di­
rectly associate this decay rate with particles leaving the device region due to the coupling, and the
imaginary part of the self­energy therefore has particular significance in the discussion of particle
current. Due to this, we define explicitly the imaginary part,
Γα(ω) = −2 Im{Σα(ω)},
(3.37)
where we have again explicitly indicated the energy­dependence. We will denote Γα the level­
width function of electrode α 5. For non­interacting systems in the steady­state, several programs
exist that can calculate the self­energy. In this project, we have used the program TBTrans for this
purpose [10, 11]. For metallic electrodes, the self­energy is generally a slowly varying function
near the Fermi level. In this situation, the level­width function may often be well approximated
as a constant, independent of energy, while the real part of the self­energy vanishes [23]. This
approximation is commonly known as the wide­band limit (WBL) and is often used in the literature.
An expression for the steady­state current through the device can now be found expressed in terms
of the device GF operator and Γα. A derivation can be found in any standard textbook on the
Green function method, see for instance [7]. We will here only state the result, which is
J =
Z ∞
−∞
dω(fL(ω) −fR(ω))T(ω),
(3.38)
T(ω) = Tr{ΓRgDΓLg†
D}(ω),
(3.39)
where J is the total current from the left to the right electrode, T is the transmission function and
fL and fR are the Fermi­Dirac distributions in the left and right electrode respectively. Note that
this factor vanishes identically if the temperature and chemical potentials of the left­ and right
electrodes are the same, which matches our intuition that in steady­state no net current should flow
without the application of some kind of driving ’force’. If an external bias is applied to the system,
the device Hamiltonian will in general change and thus eqs. (3.38) and (3.39) depend parametrically
on the applied bias. A bias will also in general affect the electrode self­energies. In the models
that we consider, however, we assume that the bias is perfectly screened in the electrodes, which
implies that its only effect on the electrode self­energies is to rigidly shift their energy­dependence,
i.e. the argument ω of the self­energies must be replaced by ω −Vα.
This concludes our brief treatment of matrix GF operators under steady­state conditions and in the
absence of particle interactions. In the next section, we discuss how the transport problem can be
described and solved in a more general setting.
5Several texts also use the term self­energy to refer to Γα directly.
20
3.3. Green functions and the transport problem
==PAGE:29==
3.4
Non­equilibrium Green functions
The Green function method described in the previous section is not suitable for describing systems
that are not in equilibrium, have an external time­dependence or contain interacting particles. To
deal with this problem we will need a more general tool, the so­called non­equilibrium Green
function (NEGF) technique.
The observable properties of a quantum system are expressed as expectation values of operators,
and therefore the task is to describe how these expectation values evolve in time. As every single­
particle operator may be expressed in terms of a complete set of creation­ and annihilation op­
erators, the evolution of single­particle observables is governed by the behavior of functions of
the form
D
c†
k′(t′)ck(t)
E
. This observation is the entrance to the definition of single­particle non­
equilibrium Green functions, which are defined precisely as functions of this type. In the rest of the
report we will assume a general non­equilibrium setting and simply use the term Green function
to refer to single­particle NEGFs.
We wish to define a propagator akin to gr from the previous section which can propagate a system
from an initial state ρ(t0) to a later state ρ(t). In a single­particle system, the probability amplitude
that a particle propagates from a state |k′⟩at time t′ to a state |k⟩at a later time t is

k
U(t, t′)
k′
= ⟨0|ckU(t, t′)c†
k′|0⟩= ⟨0|ck(t)c†
k′(t′)|0⟩,
(3.40)
where U is the time evolution operator of the system as introduced section 3.2. On the right­hand
side of eq. (3.40), the operators are represented in the Heisenberg picture, and the equality may be
verified using eq. (3.26) and the fact that the vacuum state is constant in time, U(t, t′) |0⟩= |0⟩.
To realize how such a propagator should be defined in a many­body system, we consider first a
many­body system at zero temperature. In this system, expectation values should be calculated
with respect to the multi­particle ground state |Ψ0⟩. In the case of a non­interacting system, this
ground state is coined the Fermi sea and consists of all the available lowest­energy single particle
states of the system. As before, we will consider a transition from a single­particle state |k′(t′)⟩
to a different single­particle state |k(t)⟩. Such a transition may occur in two ways; if the single
particle state |k′⟩is unoccupied in the ground state, the probability amplitude may be found as
⟨Ψ0|ck(t)c†
k′(t′)|Ψ0⟩, analogously to the situation in the single­particle case. However, this term
will vanish if |k′⟩is occupied in the ground state, and we should, in this case, instead calculate
the probability amplitude as ⟨Ψ0|c†
k′(t′)ck(t)|Ψ0⟩. To account for both cases and for the situation
where the states in question are partially occupied in the ground state, we must sum the amplitudes
for the two processes, leading us to the expression ⟨Ψ0|{c†
k′(t′)ck(t)}|Ψ0⟩in the multi­particle
state space. Using the anti­commutation relation {ck(t)c†
k′(t)} = δk,k′, we also find with this
expression that
lim
t′→t−⟨Ψ0|{c†
k′(t′)ck(t)}|Ψ0⟩= δk,k′,
that is, if observed over an infinitesimal time, the system will remain in the initial state, just as we
would expect.
At non­zero temperatures, the ground state |Ψ0⟩should be replaced with the trace of the density
operator when calculating expectation values. This leads us to defining the retarded single­particle
non­equilibrium Green function
Gr
kk′(t, t′) = −iθ(t −t′)
D
{ck(t)c†
k′(t′)}
E
= −iθ(t −t′) Tr
n
ρ{ck(t)c†
k′(t′)}
o
,
(3.41)
where the presence of the step function makes explicit our assumption that t ≥t′. Note that if |k⟩
and |k′⟩are eigenstates of a time­independent Hamiltonian, we have
ck(t) = e−iεk(t−t0),
c†
k′(t′) = eiεk′(t′−t0),
(3.42)
3.4. Non­equilibrium Green functions
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.2: Contour along which time variables are defined. The contour resides on (or infinitesi­
mally below) the real axis; the displacement from the real axis shown in the figure is for illustrative
purposes only. A time­variable may be placed on either the forward­ or backward branch of the
contour.
and by insertion into eq. (3.41), we recover the matrix elements ⟨k|gr(τ)|k′⟩of the retarded GF
operator introduced in the previous section.
The retarded single­particle Green function is very useful in calculations, however it is rarely pos­
sible to determine it directly, in particular in the presence of interactions. To try and find it, we can
take its derivative to obtain an equation of motion. This leads to the expression
i∂tGR
kk′(t, t′) = δ(t −t′)
D
{ck(t), c†
k′(t)}
E
−iθ(t −t′)
D
{[H(t), ck(t)], c†
k′(t′)}
E
,
(3.43)
where H is the full Hamiltonian governing the system.
If the Hamiltonian contains interactions, the last term in eq. (3.43) will contain terms with more than
two field operators. For the general electron­electron interaction operator in eq. (3.4), for instance,
we would obtain a term containing the expectation value of a product of four field operators. Such a
term we denote a two­particle NEGF as it is a correlation function between two two­particle states
evaluated at different times. Its appearance is highly problematic, as it must be found in order
to determine the single­particle GF which we are interested in; but the EOM for the two­particle
NEGF turns out to contain even higher order correlation functions, leading to an infinite hierarchy
of coupled equations [22, p. 64]. To make matters worse, the trace operation implicit in eq. (3.43)
cannot be evaluated if the initial Hamiltonian of the system, from which ρ is defined, contains
interactions, because the eigenstates of the system even before the time­dependent perturbation
is applied then cannot be found. A different approach is therefore required. A typical method for
making progress is to consider the interaction potential to be a perturbation and make a perturbative
expansion in the interaction picture as introduced in section 3.2. It turns out, however, that to do this
we need to a new type of Green functions that help us handle the time­ordering operator that appears
in the evolution operator U [7, 21, 22]. To address these issues, the concept of contour­ordering
and contour­ordered Green functions Gc are introduced. In this formulation, time variables are
interpreted to reside on a contour c, as illustrated in figure 3.2, which runs along the real line,
stretching from the initial time t0 to a time tmax which is larger than any other time that appears in
the problem. A contour­ordered Green function is then introduced, defined by
Gc
kk′(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
Tc{ck(τ)c†
k′(τ ′)}
E
,
(3.44)
where the contour­ordering operator Tc places operators according to where their time­argument
appears on the contour, with later contour­times standing further to the left, picking up a sign
change for every interchange of a pair of fermion field operators. We remark that in the discussion
of contour­ordered GFs, we will use the symbol τ for time­variables which live on the contour. A
perturbative expansion of the contour­ordered Green function in the interaction potential is possi­
ble and is developed in standard textbooks on non­equilibrium Green functions [7, 21, 22]. This
expansion makes use of Wick’s theorem [22, 24, 25] to evaluate the terms that appear in each order
of the expansion, and express these in terms of Feynman diagrams. The price paid to obtain this
22
3.4. Non­equilibrium Green functions
==PAGE:31==
expansion is necessity of using contour­valued time variables, which is inconvenient in applica­
tions [21]. This issue can be remedied by use of the Langreth theorems, or rules, which are a set of
relations that show how a contour­valued operator may be expressed in term of ordinary time vari­
ables. We discuss these issues further in appendix A.1, where it is shown how the contour­ordered
Green functions may be cast to a form that is suitable for an expansion using Wick’s theorem, and
the Langreth rules mentioned before are given. These rules will be used in the next section to de­
rive a general expression for the current through a nano­system connected to two non­interacting
electrodes. However, in our implementation of the numerical schemes to be presented in chapter
4, particle interactions are not included, and we will therefore not go into further discussion on
Wick’s theorem and the perturbative and diagrammatic techniques required to model interactions.
In the numerical investigations of chapters 4 and 5, knowledge of contour­ordering and the Lan­
greth rules will not be required,. For a more detailed discussion, we refer to any standard textbook
on NEGF theory such as [7, 21, 22, 26].
In the following, it will be useful to define several other single­particle Green functions to accom­
pany the contour­ordered and retarded ones. We denote these the advanced, lesser, and greater
Green functions, and define them as
GA
k,k′(t, t′) = iθ(t′ −t)
D
{ck(t)c†
k′(t′)}
E
,
(3.45a)
G<
k,k′(t, t′) = i
D
c†
k′(t′)ck(t)
E
,
(3.45b)
G>
k,k′(t, t′) = −i
D
ck(t)c†
k′(t′)
E
.
(3.45c)
We note the relations
G>
k,k′(t, t′) −G<
k,k′(t, t′) = GR
k,k′(t, t′) −GA
k,k′(t, t′),
(3.46)
showing that only a set of three of the Green functions (Gr, Ga, G<, G>) is linearly independent.
Once the single­particle Green functions of a system have been found, they can be used to extract
a lot of information about the system.
The equal­time lesser Green function, for instance, is useful for expressing the expectation values
of single­particle operators. In particular,
⟨A(t)⟩=
X
mn
Amn
D
c†
m(t)cn(t)
E
= −i
X
mn
AmnG<
mn(t, t).
(3.47)
Here A could be any single­particle operator. Taking it to be a number operator Nm(t) = c†
m(t)cm(t)
in particular, we find that ⟨Nm(t)⟩= Im(G<
mm(t, t)) such that we can directly interpret the imag­
inary part of the equal­time diagonal elements G<
mm(t, t) as the probability of finding a particle in
the state m at the time t. Similarly, the imaginary part of the equal­time retarded Green function
is related to the density of states of the system as Gr(t, t)k,k′ = −iδk,k′. These relations will be
used several times in the numerical analysis of model systems which is presented in chapter 5.
Now we move on to find an expression for the time­resolved current in the types of systems that
will be analyzed numerically in the latter part of this report.
3.5
General expression for particle current
We consider a device D coupled to two electrodes denoted L (left) and R (right) through which
current may flow. This configuration is similar to the one illustrated in figure 3.1. The electrode
states are assumed to be non­interacting and are described by the Hamiltonian
Hα(t) =
X
k
εαk(t)b†
αkbαk,
α ∈{L, R}
(3.48)
3.5. General expression for particle current
23
==PAGE:32==
where the time­dependent energy is εαk(t) = ε0
αk+∆α(t) and bαk (b†
αk) are annihilation (creation)
operators for electron states in the electrodes. The subscript k is a short­hand notation for a com­
plete set of quantum numbers which uniquely identify states in the electrodes. The time­dependent
variation ∆α(t) represents an external potential applied to the system, which could for instance be
due to an impinging THz pulse or a static bias applied across the electrodes. Note that we assume
that the potential rigidly shifts all states in a given electrode by the same energy. This corresponds
to our assumption that the bias is perfectly screened, i.e. the particles in the electrode immediately
re­distribute themselves to cancel any spatial (or other) dependence of the external potential. For a
metallic electrode, this assumption holds when the frequency of the applied field is well below the
plasma frequency of the metal. For a bulk gold electrode, the plasma frequency is on the order 10
PHz, which shows that the assumption of perfect screening should be very good in the THz range.
The device is described by a time­dependent Hamiltonian
HD(t) =
X
n
εn(t)c†
ncn +
X
n,m
n̸=m
γnm(t)c†
ncm + VI(t),
(3.49)
where VI is the interaction part of the Hamiltonian. The electrodes and device are coupled by a
Hamiltonian of the form
HT =
X
n,αk
Tαkn(t)b†
αkcn + h.c,
(3.50)
where h.c. is short for the Hermitian conjugate of the previous expression. The total Hamiltonian
of the system is thus H = HD + HT + HR + HL. We are interested in obtaining an expression
for the particle current Jα(t) through the left and right electrodes. To this end, we will follow
the treatment in [21, pp. 186–190]. Each electrode is assumed to be coupled to the device, and to
nothing else. The total number of electrons in the electrode may therefore change only on account
of flowing into or out of the electrode through the device. The net current out of electrode α must
therefore equal the rate of decrease of the number of electrons in electrode α, or in other words
Jα(t) = −
dNα(t)
dt

,
(3.51)
where Nα(t) = P
k b†
αk(t)bαk(t) is the electron number operator in electrode α. The time evo­
lution of N is governed by the total Hamiltonian as described by the usual Heisenberg EOM,
i∂tNα = [Nα, H]. As the electrodes are assumed to be non­interacting, the only non­vanishing
commutator is [Nα, HT ] from which we find
Jα(t) = i ⟨[Nα(t), HT (t)]⟩= i
X
nk

Tαkn(t)
D
b†
αk(t)cn(t)
E
−c.c.

= 2 Re

X
n,k
iTαkn(t)
D
b†
αk(t)cn(t)
E

,
(3.52)
where c.c. stands for the complex conjugate of the previous expression. The expectation value of
the field operators has the form of a lesser device­electrode Green function, as introduced in eq.
(3.45b), evaluated at equal times. We here define it explicitly by
G<
n,αk(t, t′) = i
D
b†
αk(t′)cn(t)
E
(3.53)
and introduce it in eq. (3.52) to obtain
Jα(t) = 2 Re

X
n,k
Tαkn(t)G<
n,αk(t, t)


(3.54)
24
3.5. General expression for particle current
==PAGE:33==
We can now obtain an EOM for the current by deriving a corresponding EOM for G<
n,αk. However,
if we try to obtain this in the direct way by taking the time­derivative of G<
n,αk(t, t′) we will run
into trouble because the EOM will contain the complicated device Hamiltonian which contains
interactions. In addition, we will encounter the general issue of evaluating expectation values in
the non­equilibrium setting. To avoid this issue, we consider instead the contour­ordered device­
electrode Green function in place of eq. (3.53), following the approach of [21], which was first
introduced in the 1994 paper [2]. The contour­ordered GF is defined as
Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
Tc{cn(τ)b†
αk(τ ′)}
E
,
(3.55)
where the contour is the one shown previously in figure 3.2. An equation of motion is obtained by
taking a derivative of eq. (3.55) with respect to τ ′, which results in 6
−i∂τ ′Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
Tc{cn(τ)[H(τ ′), b†
αk(τ ′)]}
E
.
(3.56)
The commutator is evaluated to
= [Hα(τ ′), b†
αk(τ ′)] + [HT (τ ′), b†
αk(τ ′)]
= εαk(τ ′)b†
αk(τ ′) +
X
m
T ∗
αkm(τ ′)c†
m(τ ′),
(3.57)
where ∗indicates a complex conjugation. Substituting this expression back into eq. (3.56), we
obtain
−i∂τ ′Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′) = εαk(τ ′)Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′) +
X
m
Gc
nm(τ, τ ′)T ∗
αkm(τ ′),
(3.58)
where
Gc
nm(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
Tc{cn(τ), c†
m(τ ′)}
E
.
(3.59)
The Green functions are only defined in the distributional sense, i.e. by their action on functions
defined through integrals,
G(f)(τ) =
Z
c
dτ ′G(τ, τ ′)f(τ ′),
(3.60)
where f is an arbitrary (sufficiently well­behaved) function. We consider now how the term
(−i∂τ ′ −εαk)Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′) acts on functions. Using integration by parts, we find that
Z
c
dτ ′(−i∂τ ′ −εαk)Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′)f(τ ′) =
Z
c
dτ ′Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′)(i∂τ ′ −εαk)f(τ ′),
(3.61)
Note that we get no boundary terms in the integration by parts as the contour is closed, and such
terms therefore cancel. From the above, we conclude that in the distributional sense, (−i∂τ ′ −
εαk)Gn,αk(τ, τ ′) = Gn,αk(τ, τ ′)(i∂τ ′ −εαk).
The factor (i∂τ ′ −εαk) may be recognized as the inverse free contour­ordered Green function of
electrode α, which we denote gc
αk(t′). By free, we mean the Green function in the absence of
coupling to the device. To see that this is the case, we write the expression for this Green function
explicitly as
gc
αkk′(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
T c{bαk(τ)b†
αk′(τ ′)}
E
= −iδkk′e−i
∫τ
τ′ dτ1εαk(τ1) Tr
n
ρ0(θc(τ −τ ′)bαkb†
αk −θc(τ ′ −τ)b†
αkbαk)
o
,
(3.62)
6Note that the δ(τ −τ ′) term that usually arises in derivatives of the time­ or contour­ordering operators vanishes
here because of the equal­time anti­commutation relation {cn(τ)b†
αk(τ)} = 0.
3.5. General expression for particle current
25
==PAGE:34==
where we have taken advantage of the fact that the time­evolution of the states in the electrodes
may be solved exactly in the absence of coupling to the device. Here, θc denotes a Heaviside step
function of the contour times, i.e. θc(τ −τ ′) = 1 if τ > τ ′ in the contour sense, and zero otherwise.
Taking the derivative of eq. (3.62) with respect to τ, we obtain after some algebra the equation of
motion
i∂tgc
αk(τ, τ ′) = εαkgc
αk(τ, τ ′) + δc(τ −τ ′),
(3.63)
from which we see that (i∂τ −εαk)gc
αk(τ, τ ′) = δ(τ −τ ′). It is in this sense that we may interpret
the operator (i∂τ −εαk) as the inverse free Green function operator of electrode α. We may now
use eq. (3.63) to eliminate the factor (i∂τ −εαk) in eq. (3.58) by acting with gc
kα(τ ′, τ1) from the
right and integrating over the contour to obtain
Z
c
dτ ′ Gc
n,αk(τ, τ ′)δ(τ ′ −τ1) = Gc
n,αk(τ, τ1) =
X
m
Z
C
dτ ′ Gc
nm(τ, τ ′)T ∗
αkm(τ ′)gαk(τ ′, τ1).
(3.64)
From this expression we can use the Langreth rule eq. (A.16) to finally obtain an expression for
the lesser ordinary­time GF in terms of the device GF,
G<
n,αk(t, t′) =
X
m
Z ∞
−∞
dt1 T ∗
αkm(t1)

Gr
nm(t, t1)g<
αk(t1, t′) + G<
nm(t, t1)ga
αk(t1, t′)

,
(3.65)
where we have sent the times t0 and tmax, defining the boundaries of the contour, to ±∞. Expres­
sions for the lesser and advanced free electrode Green functions gαk can be found explicitly from
the electrode Hamiltonian Hα. They are
g<
αk(t, t′) = i
D
b†
αk(t′)bαk(t)
E
= if(ε0
αk) exp
(
i
Z t′
t
dt1 εαk(t1)
)
,
(3.66a)
ga
αk(t, t′) = iθ(t′ −t)
Dn
b†
αk(t′)bαk(t)
oE
= iθ(t′ −t) exp
(
i
Z t′
t
dt1 εαk(t1)
)
,
(3.66b)
where ε0
αk is the energy of state αk at t0, i.e. in the distant past. We have here assumed that the
electrodes are at thermal equilibrium at this time, such that the occupancy of the states follows the
Fermi distribution.
Inserting these expressions into eq. (3.65) and using the result in the expression for the current,eq. (3.54),
we obtain
Jα(t) = 2 Re
"
i
X
nm,k
Z ∞
−∞
dt1 Tαkn(t)T ∗
αkm(t1)×

Gr
nm(t, t1)f(ε0
αk) + G<
nm(t, t1)θ(t −t1)

exp

i
Z t
t1
dt2 εαk(t2)
 #
,
(3.67)
We will assume that the single­particle states in the electrodes form a continuum, and therefore
make the substitution P
k =
R
dεϱα(ε) where ϱα(ε) is the density of states in electrode α. For
notational convenience, we assume that the energy eigenstates of the electrode are non­degenerate.
In the opposite case, an additional sum over all remaining quantum numbers must be included in
the k →ε transformation.
We now define the energy­resolved level­width function of electrode α
Γαmn(ε, t, t′) = 2πϱα(ε)Tαn(ε, t)T ∗
αm(ε, t′) exp
(
i
Z t′
t
dt2 ∆α(t2)
)
,
(3.68)
26
3.5. General expression for particle current
==PAGE:35==
and the self­energies
Σ>
αmn(t1, t) = −i
Z dε
2π(1 −fα(ε))e−iε(t1−t)Γαmn(ε, t1, t),
(3.69a)
Σ<
αmn(t1, t) = i
Z dε
2πfα(ε)e−iε(t1−t)Γαmn(ε, t1, t),
(3.69b)
as well as the advanced self­energy Σa
α(t1, t) = θ(t −t1) (Σ<
α (t1, t) −Σ>
α (t1, t)). Substituting
these back into eq. (3.67), we obtain
Jα(t) = 2 Re
"X
nm
Z ∞
−∞
dt1

Gr
nm(t, t1)Σ<
αmn(t1, t) + G<
nm(t, t1)Σa
αmn(t1, t)

#
= 2 Re Tr
Z t
−∞
dt1
 Gr(t, t1)Σ<
α (t1, t) + G<(t, t1)Σa
α(t1, t)

,
(3.70)
where G and Σ are matrices in the device state space, defined from eq. (3.70) in the obvious way.
In the second line, we have also made use of the fact that the integrand vanishes for t1 > t. Taking
advantage of this again, we can replace the advanced and retarded functions in eq. (3.70) by lesser
and greater functions, employing the identity Gr −Ga = G> −G<, which is also valid for the
self­energies. With this, we find
Jα(t) = 2 Re Tr
Z t
−∞
dt1
 G>(t, t1)Σ<
α (t1, t) −G<(t, t1)Σ>
α (t1, t)

,
(3.71)
Equations (3.70) and (3.71) are our final expressions for the current from electrode α into the
device. They may be written compactly as
Jα(t) = 2 Re Tr{Πα(t)},
(3.72)
with the current matrices Πα(t) defined as
Πα(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt1
 G>(t, t1)Σ<
α (t1, t) −G<(t, t1)Σ>
α (t1, t)

,
(3.73)
or equivalently using the expression in eq. (3.70). Written in this form, an interpretation of each
term in eq. (3.73) becomes clear. The first term, connecting empty states in the device and occupied
states in electrode α describes particles flowing into the device from electrode α. The second term,
with the greater­ and lesser functions swapped, describes particle flowing the opposite way.
With these expressions at hand, the task of determining the current has been reduced to that of
determining the Green functions of the device region in the presence of coupling to the electrodes,
and the self­energies that couple the device to the electrodes. These tasks still represent a significant
challenge, and in the following we will address them under some simplifying assumptions. The
level­width functions Γα which in the equilibrium theory corresponds to the imaginary part of
the retarded self­energy, may be found using released programs such as TBTrans [10, 11]. The
equations for the self­energies, eqs. (3.69), are given in terms of these, but include an integral
over the energy variable which may be difficult to evaluate numerically. We will therefore define
energy­resolved self­energies which in the ODE propagation scheme, to be introduced in chapter
4, will offer a more convenient description.
3.5. General expression for particle current
27
==PAGE:36==
3.5.1
Energy­resolved self­energy
Our definitions of the self­energies and level­width functions include an integral over the particle
energy ε. This integral is typically difficult to evaluate, and it may therefore be of use to introduce
energy­resolved quantities which depend explicitly on the energy. We can then solve the equations
of motion for the energy­resolved quantities, and only at the end of the calculation worry about
obtaining the energy integral.
We will in the following, to simplify the notation, assume that the tunneling matrix elements
Tαkn = Tαn(ε) are time­independent. This is the case typically encountered in experiments, and if
it is not satisfied for a given model of a system this problem may often be resolved by re­defining
the boundaries between what is considered ’device’ and what is considered ’electrode’. With this
assumption, we define the time­independent level­width function,
Γαmn(ε) = 2πϱα(ε)T ∗
αm(ε)Tαn(ε),
(3.74)
such that the total level­width function in eq. (3.68) is written
Γαmn(ε, t1, t) = Γαmn(ε) exp

i
Z t
t1
dt2∆α(t2)

.
(3.75)
We then define the energy­resolved self­energies as
Σ>
αmn(ε, t1, t) = −i(1 −fα(ε))e−iε(t1−t)Γαmn(ε) exp

i
Z t
t1
dt2∆α(t2)

,
(3.76)
such that
Σ>
αmn(t1, t) =
Z dε
2πΣ>
αmn(ε, t1, t).
(3.77)
An energy­resolved lesser self­energy is defined in an analogous manner.
At this point, it is also useful to note a relation between the energy­resolved self­energies and the
non­interacting Green function of the electrodes. By direct comparison with eqs. (3.66), we see
that
Σ>
αmn(t1, t) = T ∗
αm(ε)Tαn(ε)g>
α (ε, t1, t),
(3.78)
where g>
α (ε, t1, t) = 2πϱ(ε)g>
αk(t1, t). Similar expressions hold for the lesser, advanced, and
retarded functions.
This allows us to also write an energy­resolved current matrix,
Πα(ε, t) =
Z t
−∞
dt1G>(t, t1)Σ<
α (ε, t1, t) −G<(t, t1)Σ>
α (ε, t1, t),
(3.79)
with which the current eq. (3.71) may be expressed as
Jα(t) = 2 Re Tr
Z dε
2πΠα(ε, t)

.
(3.80)
From eq. (3.80), we see that we may interpret the real trace of Πα(ε, t) as the current density of
electrons with energy ε.
28
3.5. General expression for particle current
==PAGE:37==
3.5.2
Equations of motion for the device Green functions without interactions
In the absence of particle interactions in the device, equations of motion for the device Green
functions may be obtained. These EOM will be used in the numerical schemes in the next chapter.
This approach may also be used in the presence of interactions if the effect of the interactions can
be described with a correlation self­energy.
For convenience, we reiterate the definitions of the device Green functions,
G>
nm(t, t′) = −i
D
cn(t)c†
m(t′)
E
,
(3.81a)
G<
nm(t, t′) = i
D
c†
m(t′)cn(t)
E
,
(3.81b)
Gr
nm(t, t′) = −iθ(t −t′)
D
{cn(t)c†
m(t′)}
E
,
(3.81c)
Ga
nm(t, t′) = iθ(t′ −t)
D
{cn(t)c†
m(t′)}
E
.
(3.81d)
We will proceed with finding the equation of motion for the lesser GF. Once this has been found,
the remaining ones can be straightforwardly obtained from the result. The Heisenberg equation of
motion gives
i∂tG<
nm(t, t′) = i
D
c†
m(t′)[cn(t), H(t)]
E
.
(3.82)
We need to evaluate the commutator, which is
[cn(t), H(t)] = [cn(t), HD(t)]+[cn(t), HT (t)] = εn(t)cn(t)+
X
l̸=n
γnl(t)cl(t)+
X
αk
T ∗
αknbαk(t),
(3.83)
with which we find
i∂tG<
nm(t, t′) = εn(t)G<
nm(t, t′) +
X
l̸=n
γnl(t)G<
lm(t, t′) +
X
αk
T ∗
αkn(t)G<
αk,m(t, t′).
(3.84)
The last term we can evaluate using eq. (3.65) and the relation G<
αk,m(t, t′) = −G<
m,αk(t′, t)∗.
This results in
G<
αk,m(t, t′) = −
X
l
Z ∞
−∞
dt1 Tαkl(t1)

Gr∗
ml(t′, t1)g<∗
αk (t1, t) + G<∗
ml(t′, t1)ga∗
αk(t1, t)

=
X
l
Z ∞
−∞
dt1 Tαkl(t1)

g<
αk(t, t1)Ga
lm(t1, t′) + gr
αk(t, t1)G<
lm(t1, t′)

.
(3.85)
Inserting this expression back into eq. (3.84) and using eq. (3.78), we obtain
i∂tG<
nm(t, t′) =εn(t)G<
nm(t, t′) +
X
l̸=n
γnl(t)G<
lm(t, t′)
+
X
l,α
Z ∞
−∞
dt1

Σ<
αnl(t, t1)Ga
lm(t1, t′) + Σr
αnl(t, t1)G<
lm(t1, t′)

.
(3.86)
In matrix form, in the device state space, we may also write eq. (3.86) as
i∂tG<(t, t′) = HD(t)G<(t, t′)
+
X
α
Z ∞
−∞
dt1

Σ<
α (t, t1)Ga(t1, t′) + Σr
α(t, t1)G<(t1, t′)

.
(3.87)
3.5. General expression for particle current
29
==PAGE:38==
To gain an understanding of the terms appearing in eq. (3.87), we consider the limit t′ →t and
rewrite the equation in terms of lesser­ and greater functions only. We find then
lim
t′→t i∂tG<(t, t′) = HD(t)G<(t, t)
+
X
α
Z t
−∞
dt1
 −Σ<
α (t, t1)G>(t1, t) + Σ>
α (t, t1)G<(t1, t)

.
(3.88)
By comparison to the current matrix eq. (3.73) and using relations of the form G≷
nm(t, t1)† =
−G≷
mn(t1, t), we see that the term under the integral is −Π†
α(t), and so we can understand this
term as related to the net current flow out of the device through electrode α.
For the greater GF, the Heisenberg equation of motion reads
i∂tG>
nm(t, t′) = −i
D
[cn(t), H(t)]c†
m(t′)
E
,
(3.89)
which contains exactly the same commutator as the corresponding equation for G<
nm. Using the
same manipulations as in the previous derivation, and making use of the fact that the Langreth rule
eq. (A.16) also takes the exact same form for lesser and greater functions, we see that the equation
of motion for G> has exactly the same form as eq. (3.87), just with all lesser functions replaced
by greater functions.
The retarded and advanced Green functions may be found from the lesser and greater functions by
the relation
G>(t, t′) −G<(t, t′) =
(
Gr(t, t′)
t > t′,
−Ga(t, t′)
t < t′,
(3.90)
which we can also write as
Gr(t, t′) = θ(t −t′)(G>(t, t′) −G<(t, t′)),
(3.91)
Ga(t, t′) = −θ(t′ −t)(G>(t, t′) −G<(t, t′)),
(3.92)
Beginning with the retarded function, we see that it must therefore obey the equation of motion
i∂tGr
mn(t, t′) = iδ(t−t′)(G>
mn(t, t)−G<
mn(t, t))+θ(t−t′)i∂t(G>
mn(t, t′)−G<
mn(t, t′)). (3.93)
The first term is simple since (G>
mn(t, t) −G<
mn(t, t)) = −i
D
{cm(t)c†
n(t)}
E
= −iδmn. We
evaluate the second term using the equations of motion for G< and G>, and find in matrix form
i∂tGr(t, t′) =Iδ(t −t′) + HD(t)Gr(t, t′)
+θ(t −t′)
X
α
Z ∞
−∞
dt1

(Σ>
α −Σ<
α )Ga + Σr
α(G> −G<)

,
(3.94)
where we have momentarily suppressed the time arguments for notational convenience. It is simple
to show that the last term of eq. (3.94) may be reduced so that we obtain
i∂tGr(t, t′) = Iδ(t −t′) + HD(t)Gr(t, t′) +
X
α
Z ∞
−∞
dt1Σr
α(t, t1)Gr(t1, t′),
(3.95)
and correspondingly for the advanced function
i∂tGa(t, t′) = Iδ(t −t′) + HD(t)Ga(t, t′) +
X
α
Z ∞
−∞
dt1Σa
α(t, t1)Ga(t1, t′).
(3.96)
Unfortunately, it is only possible to obtain exact solutions for these equations of motion in the
simplest of cases, and we will therefore in general have to resort to numerical methods.
30
3.5. General expression for particle current
==PAGE:39==
3.6
Summary
In this chapter, we defined the mathematical setting for the quantum mechanical description of an
open system. We introduced the Schrödinger equation, which defines how quantum states evolve
in time, and saw how this time­dependence may instead be transferred, partially or wholly, to the
operators in the so­called Heisenberg­ and interaction pictures. Finally, we saw how the time­
evolution operator may be expressed as a time­ordered exponential operator.
Then, we introduced the concept of a Green function in the setting of a non­interacting system in
equilibrium, and showed how these functions can be used to solve the transport problem. We intro­
duced non­equilibrium Green functions, and discussed how these help us solve the same problem
in a more general setting, i.e. far from equilibrium and potentially with interactions in the device
region. In this context, we briefly discussed contour­ordered Green functions, and the Langreth
rules. For more discussion on these topics, we refer to appendix A and standard NEGF textbooks
such as [7, 21, 22, 26]. Finally we derived a general expression for the current through a device
connected to two non­interacting electrodes, and discussed how equations of motion for the device
Green functions may be obtained in the absence of interactions. In the next chapter, we will intro­
duce the two numerical schemes used in this project to solve the equations derived in the present
chapter, and thereby calculate the time­resolved current through an open system.
3.6. Summary
31
==PAGE:40==
32
3.6. Summary
==PAGE:41==
4
Numerical schemes for quantum transport
The numerical schemes take outset in the general expression for the current eq. (3.71) derived in the
last chapter, and use different methods to obtain approximate values for the time­dependent Green
functions in the device region. In this chapter, we assume that the device region is non­interacting,
and thus described by a Hamiltonian that is quadratic in the field operators.
4.1
Adiabatic expansion
The adiabatic expansion scheme was introduced by Honeychurch and Kosov [3] in 2019. The
expansion is based on the assumption that the externally induced variation in the Hamiltonian
occurs on a much slower time­scale than the internal dynamics of the system. Separating these
two time­scales, an expansion in powers of the slow time is obtained. The obtained equations are
in principle exact even without the assumption of slow external time­dependence, but the truncation
of the expansion at a low order of approximation depends on this assumption. We employ a center­
of­mass type coordinate transformation in the time variables, (t, t′) →(T, τ), where the new time
variables are defined by
T = 1
2
 t + t′
,
τ = t −t′.
(4.1)
In a time­independent system, the Green functions and self­energies are functions of the difference
time τ only. Variation with the central time T is therefore related to the externally induced time
dependence, while dependence on the difference time τ is associated to the internal dynamics of
the system. The assumption that the external time­dependence is slow therefore translates to an
assumption that all quantities vary slowly with T.
The fast time­scale τ is transformed to the frequency domain by use of the Wigner transform ([21,
pp. 80–81]). To each two­time function A(t, t′) we introduce an associated function Aa(T, τ)
such that A(t, t′) = Aa(T, τ) whenever (t, t′) and (T, τ) are related as in eq. (4.1). We define the
Wigner transform of A(t, t′) as
eA(T, ω) =
Z ∞
−∞
dτeiωτAa(T, τ),
(4.2)
which corresponds to an ordinary Fourier transform of the associated function Aa(T, τ). From this
observation, it is immediate that the inverse Wigner transform exists and is given by
A(t, t′) = Aa(T, τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
dω
2π e−iωτ eA(T, ω).
(4.3)
We wish to obtain expressions for the equations of motion of the Green functions in the Wigner
representation. The equations of motion derived in section 3.5.2 consist of functions of the form
A(t, t′) =
Z ∞
−∞
dt1B(t, t1)C(t1, t′).
(4.4)
We rewrite this in terms of associated functions as
A(t, t′) =
Z ∞
−∞
dt1Ba
1
2(t + t1), t −t1

Ca
1
2(t1 + t′), t1 −t′

.
(4.5)
Changing the integration variable to s = t1−t′ and using eqs. (4.1), we write the above expression
in terms of s, τ and T to obtain
Aa(T, τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
dsBa

T + s
2, τ −s

Ca

T + s −τ
2
, s

.
(4.6)
Chapter 4. Numerical schemes for quantum transport
33
==PAGE:42==
Under the assumption of slow external time variation, we expect all associated functions to vary
slowly with their first argument. Therefore it is natural to expand the operators Aa and Ba in a
Taylor series in their first argument, obtaining 1
Ba

T + s
2, τ −s

=
∞
X
m=0
s
2
m 1
m!(∂T )mBa(T, τ −s),
(4.7)
Ca

T + s −τ
2
, s

=
∞
X
n=0
s −τ
2
n 1
n!(∂T )nCa(T, s),
(4.8)
Expressing Aa(T, τ) in terms of these expansions, we find that
Aa(T, τ) =
X
mn
1
m!n!
Z ∞
−∞
ds

−τ −s
2
n
(∂T )mBa(T, τ −s)
s
2
m
(∂T )nCa(T, s).
(4.9)
Each term in the sum now has the structure of a convolution. To find the Fourier transform, we can
to each term apply the convolution theorem, which states that a convolution in the time­domain
corresponds to an ordinary product in the frequency domain. We additionally use the fact that
Z
tf(t)eiωtdt = −i∂ω
Z
f(t)eiωtdt,
(4.10)
to find
eA(T, ω) =
X
mn
1
m!n!
 i
2∂ω
n
(∂T )m eB(T, ω)
 
−i
2∂ω
m
(∂T )n eC(T, ω)

=
 X
m
1
m!(∂B
T )m

−i
2∂C
ω
m X
n
1
n!
 i
2∂B
ω
n
(∂C
T )n
!
eB(T, ω) eC(T, ω)
= exp

−i
2
 ∂B
T ∂C
ω −∂B
ω ∂C
T

eB(T, ω) eC(T, ω),
(4.11)
where the differential operators are understood to act only on the function whose superscript they
bear. Eq. (4.11) forms the basis of the adiabatic expansion. The zeroth order term, containing no
derivatives, corresponds to the adiabatic (quasi­static) approximation, where the electrons in the
device follow the external field instantaneously, while higher order terms correspond to dynamical
corrections. 2
It is worth considering how the form of eq. (4.11) changes if either B or C is a function of only
one time­variable. This case can be included in our previous analysis by writing any single­time
function B(t) formally as a two­time function in the form
B(t, t′) = B(t)δ(t −t′).
(4.12)
In this form, the Wigner transform of B is
eB(T, ω) =
Z ∞
−∞
dτB

T + τ
2

δ(τ)eiωτ = B(T).
(4.13)
1Note that we must here in fact assume that all these derivatives exist and that the Taylor series of Aa and Ba converge
to Aa and Ba. We expect this assumption to be valid as long as the external time­dependent perturbation to the system
is not exceedingly pathological. A closer mathematical investigation of this requirement would be interesting, but is
outside the scope of this project.
2It may therefore be argued that the name ’adiabatic expansion’ given to this method is a bit of a misnomer, since
only the zeroth order term actually corresponds to adiabatic time­dependence.
34
4.1. Adiabatic expansion
==PAGE:43==
Hence ∂ω eB(T, ω) = 0, and eq. (4.11) reduces to
eA(T, ω) = exp

−i
2∂B
T ∂C
ω

B(T) eC(T, ω).
(4.14)
We now consider the equations of motion for the greater and lesser Green functions, eq. (3.87).
From the coordinate transformation we have i∂t = i
2∂T + i∂τ. Transformed into Wigner space,
this becomes i∂t = i
2∂T + ω. With this, the Wigner representation of eq. (3.87) becomes
 i
2∂T + ω −exp

−i
2∂H
T ∂G
ω

HD(T)

e
G≷(T, ω)
= exp

−i
2
 ∂Σ
T ∂G
ω −∂Σ
ω ∂G
T
 
eΣ
≷(T, ω) e
Ga(T, ω) + eΣ
r(T, ω) e
G≷(T, ω)

.
(4.15)
where Σ = ΣL + ΣR, i.e. the sum over α in eq. (3.87) has been absorbed into the definition of
the self­energy.
For the retarded and advanced GFs, we obtain from eqs. (3.95) and (3.96)
 i
2∂T + ω −exp

−i
2∂H
T ∂G
ω

HD(T)

e
Gr/a(T, ω)
= 1 + exp

−i
2
 ∂Σ
T ∂G
ω −∂Σ
ω ∂G
T

eΣ
r/a(T, ω) e
Gr/a(T, ω).
(4.16)
Once the Green functions have been found, the current matrix in the Wigner representation eΠα(T, ω)
may be calculated by the use of eq. (3.73). The time integral in its definition becomes another ex­
ponential operator in the Wigner coordinates, so that we obtain
eΠα(T, ω) = exp

−i
2
 ∂G
T ∂Σ
ω −∂Σ
ω ∂G
T
 
e
G> eΣ
<
α −e
G< eΣ
>
α

,
(4.17)
where the arguments (T, ω) have been suppressed on the Green functions and self­energies. The
current J(T) is given by the real trace of the current matrix evaluated at equal times as derived
in eq. (3.71). To obtain this from the Wigner­space current matrix, we use the inverse Fourier
transform setting τ ≡t −t′ = 0, and obtain thereby
Jα(T) = 2 Re Tr
Z ∞
−∞
dω
2π
eΠα(T, ω).
(4.18)
This is the final expression for the current obtained from the mixed­coordinates method. This ex­
pression matches that derived in [3]. A great advantage of this numerical scheme, compared to
many other methods for solving the time­dependent current, is that all expressions are only locally
dependent on the central time T, which means that the current at any time T may be obtained
without knowledge of the current at any other times. This allows for easy parallelization of calcu­
lations implementing this scheme, as the current may be separately calculated in parallel for each
desired time­point. It is also advantageous in situations where one is interested in the response of
a system to external perturbations that last a long time, or in the state of a system a long time after
a perturbation has been applied.
The adiabatic expansion is now obtained by expanding the exponential operators in eqs. (4.15),
(4.16) and (4.17) in a power series, and collecting all terms of the same order in ∂T . The series
must be truncated at some point, and for the resulting approximation to be successful, all higher
order terms beyond the truncation order must be very small such that they can be neglected with
little error. This point is discussed in section 4.1.2. We also note that to implement the scheme, the
4.1. Adiabatic expansion
35
==PAGE:44==
Wigner transform of the time­dependent self­energies must be calculated. This issue we address
in appendix B.1.
In the time­independent case, all derivatives with respect to T vanish, and all but the zeroth­order
term in the expansion of the exponential operators disappear. Hence, we can expect the scheme
to work well when the external potential varies slowly, thereby the name adiabatic expansion. We
will now proceed to illustrate the structure of this expansion.
4.1.1
Expansion of the exponential operators
To obtain the current at a given order of approximation, we write out the operators appearing in the
equations of motion by expanding the exponentials and collecting terms by powers of ∂T , making
the scheme well­suited for taking ∂T as a small parameter.
We start by collecting terms in eq. (4.16) on the left­hand­side, obtaining
 i
2∂T + ω −exp

−i
2∂H
T ∂G
ω

HD −exp

−i
2
 ∂Σ
T ∂G
ω −∂Σ
ω ∂G
T

eΣ
r/a
e
Gr/a = I,
(4.19)
where I is the identity matrix in the device space. This equation has the form Lr/a e
Gr/a = I,
where Lr and La are linear operators. In the following, we will omit the superscripts (r/a) for
brevity. We may expand both L and e
G in powers of the small parameter ∂T , thus writing
L = L0 + L1 + L2 + · · ·
(4.20a)
e
G = e
G0 + e
G1 + e
G2 + · · · ,
(4.20b)
The equation of motion must be satisfied independently at each order of the expansion. The zeroth
order equation is therefore
L0 e
G0 = I =⇒
e
G0 = L−1
0 .
(4.21)
The first and second order equations become
L0 e
G1 + L1 e
G0 = 0 =⇒
e
G1 = −e
G0L1 e
G0.
(4.22)
L0 e
G2 + L1 e
G1 + L2 e
G0 = 0 =⇒
e
G2 = −( e
G0L2 e
G0 + e
G0L1 e
G1)
(4.23)
This result may be easily generalized to any order. Indeed, the formula for e
Gn becomes
e
Gn = −( e
G0Ln e
G0 + e
G0Ln−1 e
G1 + · · · + e
G0L1 e
Gn−1),
(4.24)
This scheme allows us to write down the expression for the perturbative correction to the retard­
ed/advanced Green’s functions at any order. The operators Ln are found by expanding the expo­
nential functions on the left­hand side of eq. (4.19) and collecting terms in powers of ∂T .
Once the advanced/retarded Green’s functions have been found at any order, the greater/lesser
functions can be found using a similar scheme. Their equation of motion, eq. (4.15), have the form
Lr e
G≷= M ≷e
Ga,
(4.25)
where Lr is same operator appearing in the expansion of the retarded Green’s function, and
M ≷= exp

−i
2
 ∂Σ
T ∂G
ω −∂Σ
ω ∂G
T

eΣ
≷
(4.26)
36
4.1. Adiabatic expansion
==PAGE:45==
Expanding all these operators in the same manner as above, we find the equations
Lr
0 e
G≷
0 = M ≷
0 e
Ga
0
Lr
0 e
G≷
1 + Lr
1 e
G≷
0 = M ≷
0 e
Ga
1 + M ≷
1 e
Ga
0
...
Lr
0 e
G≷
n + Lr
1 e
G≷
n−1 + · · · + Lr
n e
G≷
0 = M ≷
0 e
Ga
n + M ≷
1 e
Ga
n−1 + · · · + M ≷
n e
Ga
0.
(4.27)
When e
G< and e
Gr are known up to a given order, the current matrix be found by an expansion of
eq. (4.17), which follows in the same spirit as the expansion for e
G≷.
With these equations, the perturbation expansion can in principle be continued up to any order,
though the complexity of the expressions increases rapidly at higher orders. To further elucidate
the structure of the expansion, we may also be write it as a formal matrix equation. Defining
L =





L0
0
0
· · ·
L1
L0
0
· · ·
L2
L1
L0
· · ·
...
...
...
...




,
⃗G =





e
G0
e
G1
e
G2
...




,
(4.28)
the series of equations in the perturbation expansion have the form
Lr ⃗Gr/a =





I
0
0
...




,
(4.29)
and
Lr ⃗G≷= M ≷⃗Ga,
(4.30)
such that solving the perturbation expansion up to any given order is in a formal sense equivalent
to a matrix inversion of L.
This structure of the expansion may be exploited to write a program capable of automatically
generating and solving the equations in this scheme up to any given order. Such a program has
been written in Python for this project using recursive function calls to define the higher­order ex­
pressions and finite difference methods to approximate derivatives. However the implementation
turned out to be extremely inefficient, most likely due to the high level of recursion, and results for
the adiabatic approximation beyond the first order dynamical correction have therefore not been
investigated. This problem is discussed further in the outlook in chapter 6.
As an alternative to the algorithmic approach outlined above, it is possible to obtain explicit ex­
pressions for the Green functions and their derivatives at any order by manually expanding the
operators. As the complexity of the expressions increases rapidly with higher orders, this ap­
proach, however, is only useful up to the first order. Yet, it has two significant advantages. First,
the first­order approximation is expected to be the most significant dynamical contribution for the
systems in which the expansion is expected to work. Second, due to the increasing complexity
of the expressions and the need for numerical differentiation, the higher order terms will be sig­
nificantly more computationally expensive to calculate even in an efficient implementation. The
explicit expressions for the Green functions, their derivatives, and the current matrix up to the first
order are given in appendix B.2. These are the expressions that have been implemented in Python
and used to obtain the results presented in chapter 5.
4.1. Adiabatic expansion
37
==PAGE:46==
4.1.2
Convergence of the adiabatic expansion
When working with an approximate description of a system, it is always of interest to know when
the approximation can be assumed to hold. As the adiabatic expansion is exact when there is no
external time­dependence, 3 it is natural to expect that the scheme should work well when the
time­dependence is sufficiently slow, however this observation begs the question slow compared
to what. In [3], where the adiabatic expansion was introduced, the authors claim that the external
time­dependence must be slow relative to the energy scale of the contact self­energy. To illustrate
the use of the method, they provide an analysis of a quantum dot (single energy level) coupled to
two electrodes in the wide­band limit with level­width functions ΓL = ΓR = Γ/2, and perturbed
by an external AC potential of the form ∆(T) = ∆0 cos(ΩT). The parameter which must be
small for the expansion to hold is then stated to be Ω/Γ. However, this ratio is not well­defined for
more complex systems when the level­width function is energy­dependent, and does not address
potential problems that may arise in connection with quasi­bound states. In this section, we will
provide some additional discussion of this issue.
The approximation in the method consists of the neglection of terms of the form (∂T ∂ω)n acting
on various combinations of the Hamiltonian, self­energies, and Green functions. We note that
these terms are all dimensionless, so that their magnitude is independent of the energy­ and time
scales used to describe the system. To ensure rapid convergence, we require that ( i
2∂A
T ∂B
ω )n/n!
decays quickly with increasing n when this operator acts on any combination of the aforementioned
functions. To check that this condition is satisfied for a given system is not trivial. Even if the
Hamiltonian and self­energies (that are taken as inputs to the equations) vary slowly with time
and energy, there is no guarantee that the calculated Green functions will do so. For instance, if
the device contains bound or quasi­bound states, i.e. states that are only weakly coupled to the
electrodes, rapid variation with energy is expected in the retarded Green function, which contains
poles at the eigenenergies of fully bound states. Problems can also arise if the level­width functions
vary quickly with energy as may for instance happen near a band­gap, or at low temperatures
when the Fermi distribution, which appears in the definition of the lesser and greater self­energies,
approaches a step function.
While it is difficult to ascertain in advance whether the adiabatic expansion will work well for
a given system, there are several ways to check the results after the fact. In situations where
the adiabatic expansion does not work, for instance in the presence of quasi­bound states, the
derivatives of the Green functions or self­energies become extremely large. This tends to make
the calculated first­order dynamical correction to the current numerically unstable, making it very
evident that there is a problem with the calculation. An example of such a situation will be shown
in section 5.2.
While the higher­order expressions for the current are quite complicated, it is easy to compute the
individual terms that enter into these expressions, namely derivatives of the self­energies, Green
functions and Hamiltonian. The degree of convergence may therefore also be evaluated by calcu­
lating these quantities and confirming that they are numerically small.
An additional check of the degree of convergence can be made from the observation that the adia­
batic expansion conserves charge at every order of approximation [3]. As the number of particles
in the device may be found from the lesser device Green function evaluated at equal times, the
continuity equation takes the form
∂T
Z ∞
−∞
dω
2π Im Tr
n
e
G<(T, ω)
o
= JL(T) + JR(T).
(4.31)
3In this case, the zeroth order term of the expansion reduces to the well­known time­independent expression
eq. (3.30), while all higher order terms vanish identically.
38
4.1. Adiabatic expansion
==PAGE:47==
As the adiabatic expansion is in powers of ∂T and the left­hand side of eq. (4.31) contains an explicit
time­derivative, the conservation of charge expressed at each order of approximation becomes
∂T
Z ∞
−∞
dω
2π Im Tr
n
e
G<
n (T, ω)
o
= JL,n+1(T) + JR,n+1(T),
(4.32)
which means that we can find the sum of the currents at order n+1 from the lesser Green function
at order n. For every system examined in this project, we have checked that eq. (4.32) is satisfied
for the zeroth­order Green function and the first order dynamical correction to the current. In
addition to serving in this way as a verification of the implementation, eq. (4.32) can also be used
to test whether the considered order of expansion is sufficient for the system under investigation.
Calculating the current to order n requires knowledge of the device Green functions to order n. It
is therefore easy to calculate
R ∞
−∞
dω
2π Im Tr
n
e
G<
n (T, ω)
o
. If the considered order of expansion is
sufficient, the current from all higher orders should be negligible, and we would therefore expect
this integral to be a constant of time. This condition is not sufficient to ensure that the calculation
has converged to an acceptable degree, but it is necessary, and therefore serves as a useful check.
A different parameter that must be treated with care to ensure convergence is the energy variable
ω. This is evaluated on a grid which is used to numerically compute the energy integral appearing
in the expression for the current, eq. (4.18). The minimum range of energies that must be covered
in this grid may require some physical insight to determine, as it should cover the whole range of
energies where charge transport occurs. Whether this requirement is satisfied can be checked after
calculating the current by confirming that the numerical support of the current matrices eq. (4.17) is
contained well within the considered range. If the input level­width function has compact support,
a safe choice can also be to include the entire support in this range. An appropriate sampling rate
of the frequency variable is more difficult to evaluate. As we must calculate Fourier transforms
of the level­width functions to obtain the self­energies in the Wigner representation, the sampling
rate must at least be larger than their Nyquist rate, which is the lowest rate at which a function may
be sampled in order to avoid aliasing. This issue is discussed in more detail in appendix B.1. In
practice, the convergence has been checked by varying the sampling rate and confirming that this
did not affect the calculations. Numerical investigations of this issue seem to indicate that when
too few sampling points are included, large fluctuations of the current even in the absence of an
external potential are predicted. To the degree that this is a general feature of the approximation,
it makes it very clear to see whether this potential problem has occurred.
4.2
Propagation (ODE) scheme
A different numerical scheme was introduced by [4] in 2009 and improved by [5] in 2016. This
approach uses the equations of motion for the Green function and self­energies to derive a closed
set of equations. The resulting coupled, non­linear ODEs may be solved numerically by ordinary
ODE solvers. In the numerical implementation used in this project, an algorithm based on the
Runge­Kutta­45 approach is used. Our derivation follows that of [4], but with the generalization
that we allow the time­dependence of the coupling matrix elements to be different from each other.
We wish to find a closed system of equations from which we can determine the evolution of the
energy­resolved current matrices Πα(ε, t) given in eq. (3.79). We will approach this task by first
writing an EOM for the Πα. The resulting expression will turn out to include the density matrix of
the device region, σ, and a new quantity which we denote Ωαα′. We will then proceed by deriving
equations of motion for these two quantities, which will finally result in a closed set of equations.
4.2. Propagation (ODE) scheme
39
==PAGE:48==
From eq. (3.79), we find that
i∂tΠα(ε, t) = iG>(t, t)Σ<
α (ε, t, t) −iG<(t, t)Σ>
α (ε, t, t)
+
Z t
−∞
dt1
 i∂tG>(t, t1)Σ<
α (ε, t1, t) + G>(t, t1)i∂tΣ<
α (ε, t1, t) −(>⇄<)

,
(4.33)
where the symbol (>⇄<) is short­hand for an identical copy of the previous expression, except
with all lesser and greater symbols interchanged.
The same­time lesser and greater Green’s functions are related to the state operator σ(t) in the
device by the relations
G<(t, t) = iσ(t),
G>(t, t) = −i(1 −σ(t)).
(4.34)
For the same­time self­energies, we have
Σ<
α (ε, t, t) = ifα(ε)Γα(ε),
Σ>
α (ε, t, t) = −i(1 −fα(ε))Γα(ε).
(4.35)
With this, the first two terms of eq. (4.33) take the form
iG>(t, t)Σ<
α (ε, t, t) −iG<(t, t)Σ>
α (ε, t, t) = i(fα(ε) −σ(t))Γα(ε).
(4.36)
We proceed with evaluating the next terms of eq. (4.33). We need to find the equations of motion for
G≷and Σ≷. Those for the self­energies can be constructed directly from the definition, eq. (3.76),
i∂tΣ≷
α(ε, t1, t) = −(ε + ∆α(t))Σ≷
α(ε, t1, t).
(4.37)
The EOM for the lesser and greater Green function was derived in section 3.5.2, eq. (3.87), and is
restated here for convenience,
i∂tG≷(t, t′) = HD(t)G≷(t, t′) +
X
α
Z ∞
−∞
dt1

Σ≷
α(t, t1)Ga(t1, t′) + Σr
α(t, t1)G≷(t1, t′)

.
(4.38)
This expression contains two terms. The first term, proportional to HD, we may interpret as due
to the internal properties of the device, while the second term is related to the coupling between
the device and the reservoirs. This second term is closely related to the quantity Ω, which we will
define momentarily.
Substituting these expressions back into eq. (4.33), we obtain
i∂tΠα(ε, t) = i[fα(ε) −σ(t)]Γα(ε) + (HD + ε + ∆α(t))Πα(ε, t)
+
X
α′
Z t
−∞
dt1
Z t
−∞
dt2

Σ>
α′(t, t2)Ga(t2, t1) + Σr
α′(t, t2)G>(t2, t1)

Σ<
α (ε, t1, t) −(>⇄<)
	
.
(4.39)
The term in the second line can be collected in a sum over a two mode quantity Ωαα′(ε, ε′, t),
which we define by
Ωαα′(ε, ε′, t) =
Z t
−∞
dt1
Z t
−∞
dt2

Σ>
α′(ε′, t, t2)Ga(t2, t1) + Σr
α′(ε′, t, t2)G>(t2, t1)

Σ<
α (ε, t1, t) −(>⇄<)
	
.
(4.40)
A physical interpretation of Ωαα′ is not immediately clear. It is related to the derivative of the
lesser and greater Green functions in the device by
Z t
−∞
dt1 (i∂t −H) G>(t, t1)Σ<
α (ε, t1, t) −(>⇄<) =
X
α′
Z dε′
2π Ωαα′(ε, ε′, t)
(4.41)
40
4.2. Propagation (ODE) scheme
==PAGE:49==
The term (i∂t−H)G≷can loosely be interpreted as the change in the state of the device due to the
coupling to the electrodes. At the same time, the two integrals over time appearing in the definition
of Ωαα′ give it the appearance of a kind of response function. However, its precise nature is not
transparent. We continue by deriving an equation of motion for Ωαα′(ε, ε′, t). This can be obtained
directly from eq. (4.40) by taking a derivative with respect to t and using eq. (4.37),
i∂tΩαα′(ε, ε′, t) =

ε′ −ε + ∆α′(t) −∆α(t)

Ωαα′(ε, ε′, t)
+i
 Z t
−∞
dt2

Σ>
α′(ε′, t, t2)Ga(t2, t)Σ<
α (ε, t, t)
	
+
Z t
−∞
dt2Σr
α′(ε′, t, t2)G>(t2, t)Σ<
α (ε, t, t)
−
Z t
−∞
dt1iΓα′(ε′)G>(t, t1)Σ<
α (ε, t1, t)
!
−(>⇄<)
(4.42)
Note that the expression in the last line is −iΓα′(ε′)Πα(ε, t). The second and third lines may be
combined and rewritten in a similar form. Using the relations Ar −Aa = A> −A<, holding for
both Green functions and self­energies, we combine lines two and three into
i
Z t
−∞
dt2
n
Σ>
α′(ε′, t, t2)G<(t2, t) −Σ<
α′(ε′, t, t2)G>(t2, t)
o
Σ<
α (ε, t, t)
(4.43)
Using that

Σ≷
α′(ε′, t, t2)
†
= −Σ≷
α′(ε′, t2, t), we find from eq. (4.43) that
i
Z t
−∞
dt2

G<(t, t2)Σ>
α′(ε′, t2, t) −G>(t, t2)Σ<
α′(ε′, t2, t)
	†
Σ<
α (ε, t, t)
= −iΠ†
α′(ε′, t)Σ<
α (ε, t, t).
(4.44)
With this, the total equation of motion for Ωbecomes
i∂tΩαα′(ε, ε′, t) =

ε′ −ε + ∆α′(t) −∆α(t)

Ωαα′(ε, ε′, t)
+Π†
α′(ε′, t)Γα(ε) + Γα′(ε′)Πα(ε, t).
(4.45)
Finally, we need an equation of motion for the density matrix of the device region σ(t).
This can be found from the equation of motion for G< and the relation G<(t, t) = iσ(t) by similar
manipulations as in section 3.5.2. The result is
i∂tσ(t) = [HD(t), σ(t)] + i
X
α

Πα(t) + Π†
α(t)

(4.46)
Equations (4.39), (4.45), and (4.46) constitute a closed set of ODEs which may, given some initial
condition, be solved using standard methods. If the system of interest is in equilibrium before the
time­dependent perturbation is applied, or if one is not interested in transient effects, the issue of
choosing an appropriate initial condition can be avoided by setting the start time for the propagation
scheme to lie well before the time­span of interest. By propagating the equations over an initial
time­span much longer than the time­scale of internal dynamics in the system, steady state can
be achieved before the time­dependent perturbation is applied independent of the initial condition
used. This method has been used in all simulations with the ODE scheme in this project. The price
4.2. Propagation (ODE) scheme
41
==PAGE:50==
to pay for this approach is an increase in computational effort due to the longer range of times over
which the equations must be propagated.
The system of equations derived here match those derived in [4]. To obtain the current from the
energy­resolved quantities used in the scheme, an energy integral must be carried out. This integral
must in general be calculated using numerical quadrature, requiring the evaluation of the Ωα,α′ and
Πα on a fine grid of energy values. As these quantities are matrices in the device space, the scheme
can be very computationally expensive when used on large systems. As alluded to previously, an
improvement was suggested by [5]. In this variation of the method, the level­width function is
diagonalized in terms of a set of auxiliary wave­vectors ξ. The eigenvalues appearing in this ap­
proximation are approximated by a sum of Lorentzian functions. Similarly, the Fermi distribution
is approximated as a polynomial fraction. This allows all energy integrals to be carried out using
the calculus of residues, which computationally is much cheaper than numerical quadrature. It is
this auxiliary­mode formulation of the ODE scheme that has been used in this project. A derivation
of the equations of motion as they appear in this scheme may be found in appendix B.3; they are
the same as the equations derived here, only expressed in terms of the auxiliary modes. A brief
review of the calculus of residues is given in appendix C. The price that is paid for the improvement
in computation time is that the Fermi­ and level­width functions must, as previously mentioned,
be approximated by a sum of Lorentzians A very efficient fractional decomposition of the Fermi
function was proposed by [27] and has been implemented here. The approximation of the level­
width function by Lorentzian functions is more difficult, and we investigate the consequences of
this approximation in section 5.2.
4.3
Summary
In this chapter, we introduced the two numerical schemes used in this project to calculate the
current through an open system. In the first scheme, which we call the adiabatic expansion, the
equations of motion are transformed to the Wigner representation, and expressed through an ex­
ponential operator. This scheme is computationally inexpensive, but approximate, and is expected
to work well only when the external potential varies slowly compared to the internal dynamics of
the system.
In the second scheme, which we denote the ODE propagation scheme, a closed set of equations
of motion describing the time­resolved behavior of the system was derived. These equations are
exact, and may be solved numerically by propagating the equations forward from a given initial
condition. The price for the high accuracy is that the scheme is computationally expensive, and
requires that the level­width function be approximated as a sum of Lorentzian functions.
In the next chapter, we will use these two schemes to calculate the non­equilibrium dynamics
of four different model systems. The primary focus is to evaluate the accuracy of the adiabatic
expansion, which has been implemented in Python for this project. The accuracy is evaluated
by comparison to the ODE scheme, which has been implemented in Python by Aleksander Bach
Lorentzen.
42
4.3. Summary
==PAGE:51==
5
Calculation of current for model systems
In this chapter, we will investigate the performance of the adiabatic expansion on several simple
model systems. The emphasis is on the calculation of current through the device. The performance
of the AE is evaluated by comparison to the ODE propagation scheme which is numerically exact.
Since charge may accumulate inside the device as a consequence of the dynamics, the current
flowing from the left­ and right electrodes are generally not the same. To simplify the presentation
of data, we generally focus on just the current through the left electrode.
First, we discuss a model system used to verify the numerical implementation of both the AE and
the ODE propagation scheme by comparison to published results [3, 4]. A further verification of
the ODE scheme is given in appendix B.4. We then evaluate the consequences of the Lorentzian
approximation of the level­width function necessary in the ODE propagation scheme by analysis
of a single site coupled to an infinite one­dimensional tight­binding chain.
Finally, we move on to discuss two simple models for systems of experimental interest, namely
a charge pumping system using a rotating or oscillating molecule as discussed by [28], and a toy
model for a THz­STM system such as the one used by [18].
5.1
Single energy level – Verification of the implementation
As a first test of the implementation of the AE, we investigate a single quantum dot coupled to
two metallic electrodes which are described in the wide­band limit Γ(ε) = Γ with equal coupling
between the two electrodes, ΓL = ΓR = Γ/2. The chemical potential of the electrodes µL, µR and
the steady­state on­site energy of the dot ε are all zero, and the temperature is fixed at kBT = 0.1Γ.
The electrodes and the dot are modulated by a harmonic (AC) potential V (t) = Γ cos(Ωt), where
Ω= 0.1Γ. The potential couples to the electrodes and the dot via coupling constants ∆L/R and ∆,
instantaneously shifting the energy of the states in the left and right electrodes by ∆L/RV (t) and
the energy of the quantum dot by ∆V (t). This perturbation takes the system out of equilibrium,
and causes current to flow. This configuration is identical to one studied by [3], and by reproducing
their results we can therefore verify the implementation written for this project. Additionally, this
model system has the advantage that an exact analytical solution to the problem exists [2], which
makes it ideal for an initial test of both the AE and the ODE propagation scheme. A sketch of the
system may be seen in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of the setup for the single energy level. The electrodes are treated in the
wide­band limit. The red curves show how the energy levels of the electrodes and the quantum dot
varies in time due to the external potential.
In figure 5.2, the time­resolved current through the single level is shown. The parameters, listed
Chapter 5. Calculation of current for model systems
43
==PAGE:52==
in the caption, have been chosen to match those used in [3] so that the result reported in that pa­
per is reproduced, thereby verifying our implementation. It is clear that the first order dynamical
B
A
Figure 5.2: a) Figure taken from [3]. The time­resolved current out of the left electrode is shown for
the single­energy level model in the wide­band limit. The physical parameters are ΓL = ΓR = Γ
2 ,
µL = µR = 0, kBT = 0.1Γ, Ω= 0.1Γ, ∆L = 0, ∆R = 0.125Γ, ∆= 1Γ, ε = 0. The red
and blue curve show the zeroth and first order approximations from the adiabatic expansion, while
the green curve shows the exact current calculated by the expressions from [2]. The dashed black
curve shows the profile of the applied potential (arbitrarily scaled).
b) A reproduction of the figure from [3] using the code written for this project. The agreement
between the figures is exact as far as the author can tell, and serves as a nice verification of our
implementation. The orange dashed curve shows the time­resolved current predicted by the ODE
propagation scheme, which reproduces the exact result almost exactly. T = 2π/Ωis period of the
AC potential.
correction to the current (J0 + J1) is a significant improvement over the adiabatic result (J0),
and this result therefore shows promise for the AE method. The success of the first order dynam­
ical correction in this example may be understood from consideration of a few points. The fact
that the electrode level­width functions are taken in the wide­band limit and that the temperature
is reasonably high 1, means that all quantities vary reasonably slowly with ω. Additionally, the
external potential varies slowly (Ω≪Γ), and so we can expect the terms (∂ω∂T )n in the AE to
vanish rapidly with increasing n. Hence the error caused by omission of all the higher order terms
(n ≥2) is relatively small. At the same time, the first order dynamical correction is certainly not
negligible compared to the adiabatic result. In the model considered, the strongest variation in
time is that of the single energy level (∆≫∆R > ∆L). As the level shifts up and down above
and below the Fermi levels of the electrodes, we expect the occupation of the level to decrease and
increase periodically. This important feature of the dynamics cannot be described in the adiabatic
(zeroth order) approximation, since JL,0 = −JR,0, i.e. the net current flowing into the device to
zeroth order always vanishes. These features give a qualitative explanation for the improvement
seen with the inclusion of first order dynamical correction. To further illustrate this point, figure
5.3 shows the current through the same system when the parameters of figure 5.2 are changed such
that either ∆or ∆R is set to zero. With ∆= 0, (figure 5.3a), the energy of the quantum dot
is constant in time, and only the energy of the right electrode varies. The occupancy of the level
therefore varies much less and, accordingly, the adiabatic term approximates the exact current very
well. On the contrary, with ∆R = 0 (figure 5.3b), only the energy of the dot varies with time, and
1The energy scale at present is arbitrary. However, if we take Γ = 1 eV, the temperature of kBT = 0.1Γ would
correspond to around 1160 K.
44
5.1. Single energy level – Verification of the implementation
==PAGE:53==
the system has perfect left­right symmetry. In the adiabatic approximation, no current flows. The
first­order correction, however, is qualitatively very accurate for this system. The shape of the
first­order current in figure 5.3b is quite intuitive; current flows into the dot while its energy is
decreasing (∂tV < 0) and out of the dot while its energy is increasing.
B
A
Figure 5.3: Current through the single energy level. The configuration is the same as the one shown
in figure 5.2, except for the parameters indicated. a) With ∆= 0, the energy of the quantum dot is
time­independent. In this situation, the adiabatic current is almost exact, and dynamical corrections
are not needed. b) With ∆R = 0, the only variation is in the energy­level of the dot. The potentials
of the electrodes are equal, and no current flows in the adiabatic limit as demonstrated by the
vanishing of J0. The flow of current is now an entirely dynamical process, owing to occupancy of
the dot increasing and decreasing periodically as its energy oscillates. The current shown in figure
5.2 may be qualitatively understood as the sum of the two processes illustrated here.
The system considered here is arguably the simplest possible model for which a time­dependent
transport calculation can be done, and it is therefore reassuring that the adiabatic expansion works
well in this case.
5.1. Single energy level – Verification of the implementation
45
==PAGE:54==
5.2
Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
In this section we model a quantum dot coupled to an infinite one­dimensional tight­binding chain
as illustrated in figure 5.4. To cast this model within our framework where there is no direct
coupling between the electrodes, we describe it as a double quantum dot connected to two semi­
infinite chains. The level­width function of a semi­infinite tight­binding chain is well­known, and
takes the form Γα(ω) ∝
q
1 −
  ω−µα
2t
2, where t is the hopping matrix element of the chain and
µα the chemical potential of electrode α. To make the investigation more concrete, we take the
hopping matrix element of the chain to be t = 1
2 eV and the on­site energy of the T­coupled dot
(shown blue in figure 5.4) to be −1 eV. These parameters define the energy scale of the problem,
and let us formulate results in terms of real­world units. The chemical potential of the left electrode
is set to µL = 0.05 eV and that of the right electrode to µR = 0 eV, while the temperature is
kbT = 0.025 eV, corresponding to 290 K. External time­dependence is introduced in the system
by letting the coupling VT between the T­coupled dot and the chain vary in time. This system is
similar to the one studied theoretically by [29] using both Floquet theory and an approach denoted
the geometric phase propagator, introduced by the same authors in a previous paper [30].
Figure 5.4: Two semi­infinite tight­binding chains coupled to a double quantum dot in a T­shape
junction. The hopping matrix element between the two sites is time­dependent as illustrated by the
wiggly line. The chemical potentials of the two chains are not necessarily the same.
As an exact expression for the self­energy in this system is available, this model provides an oppor­
tunity to investigate the significance of the Lorentzian approximation of the level­width function
used in the ODE propagation scheme; while the use of such an approximation is mandatory in the
ODE scheme, it may be optionally used in the AE, and we can therefore calculate the AE current
with and without the expansion, comparing the results.
The level­width function of one of the two semi­infinite chains coupled to the system is shown
in figure 5.5. This has been calculated using the program TBTrans, which calculates the level­
width function by a recursive method. Alongside the exact self­energy, a least­squares Lorentzian
approximation to this function using 15 Lorentzians is shown in orange. This is the fit used in the
ODE propagation scheme in place of the exact self­energy. While the mean­square error of the fit
is quite low near the Fermi level (ω ≈0), we note a few qualitative errors. In particular the small­
amplitude rapid oscillations near the Fermi­level and the ”tails” of the function, i.e. the observation
that the Lorentzian approximation of the level­width function does not vanish for |ω| > 1. Each
of these two qualitative features of the approximation may induce errors in the calculated current
through the system. To separate the effect caused by the wiggles and those caused by the tails, we
have defined a third approximate level­width function obtained by convolving the exact solution
with a single Lorentzian function, which thus acts as a filter. This filtered level­width function is
shown as a maroon dashed curve in figure 5.5. It displays tails similar to the Lorentzian fit, but
does not have any of the wiggles near the Fermi level. The Lorentzian filter used in 5.5 has a width
W = 0.1 eV, and is explicitly given by the expression fW (ω) = f0
W 2
W 2+ω2 . The constant f0 is
46
5.2. Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.5: Self­energy in a tight­binding chain. The blue curve shows the exact self­energy calcu­
lated by TBTrans. The orange dashed line shows an approximation to the exact self­energy using
a sum of 15 Lorentzian functions that have been fitted to the TBTrans result using a least squares
fit. The red curve shows a filtered self­energy calculated by convolving the exact result with a
single Lorentzian. The parameters of this filter Lorentzian have been chosen to match the tails of
Lorentzian expansion and the value at ω = 0. The inset shows the deviation of the Lorentzian
expansion and the filtered self­energy from the exact result.
chosen to make sure that the function value is correct at ω = 0. By calculating the current through
the system using each of the three self­energy curves, we can estimate the error caused by using
the wrong self­energy, and separate the effect caused by the small wiggles and those caused by the
tails.
For this investigation, we let the system be excited by a THz pulse V given by the expression
V (t) = A sin(Ωt + ϕ)e
−t2
2ζ2 ,
(5.1)
where we set A = 1 eV, Ω= 2π · 20 THz, ϕ = π
3 and ζ = 13.3 fs. This expression and the
above parameters have been chosen to make the pulse resemble a typical THz pulse encountered
in experiments. The wave­form of the pulse and its power spectrum may be seen in figure 5.6. We
will use the same function to model a THz pulse in section 5.4. This external time­dependence
affects only the coupling VT between the central site and the T­coupled site.
The current out of the left electrode calculated with the first order of the adiabatic expansion using
the three self­energy functions from figure 5.5 may be seen in figure 5.7. Also shown (green
curve) is the same current calculated by the ODE scheme. While the currents predicted by the
ODE scheme and the AE using the Lorentzian and filtered self­energies agree almost exactly, a
notable difference is observed when comparing to the AE current calculated with the exact self­
energy. This finding indicates that the wiggles caused by the Lorentzian expansion do not have an
important effect on the behavior of the system, while the tails of the self­energy, on the other hand,
may be quite important.
To further investigate the origin of this behavior, we investigate the current calculated by the adia­
5.2. Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
47
==PAGE:56==
B
A
Figure 5.6: a) A model THz pulse and b)its power spectrum. The functional expression for the
voltage is given in eq. (5.1). The power spectrum is calculated as the the absolute value squared
of the Fourier transform of the pulse.
batic expansion when we let the width of the filter used above approach zero. This corresponds to
the limit of no filtering, and so we might expect the dashed maroon curve in figure 5.7 to contin­
uously approach the blue curve as we approach this limit. However, this is not what we observe.
In figure 5.8a–c, the width of the Lorentzian filter has been reduced to 0 eV, 0.01 eV and 0.02 eV
respectively, and the current out of the left electrode has again been calculated with the adiabatic
expansion. At zero filter width, the exact self­energy is reproduced and the green and blue curves
shown in 5.8a are therefore identical to the blue and green curves of figure 5.7. At a filter width
of 0.01 eV, shown in 5.8b, the current calculated by the adiabatic expansion does not seem to con­
verge to a reasonable value. Increasing the width to 0.02 eV, shown in 5.8 the AE current is very
close to that calculated by the ODE method. This is in spite of the fact that the tails of the filtered
self­energy do not match those of the Lorentzian expansion, as may be seen in the bottom part of
figure 5.8c.
We therefore observe a strong variation in the calculated current when the self­energy is varied just
slightly. The explanation for the behavior here illustrated seems to be the presence of a bound state
of the system at an energy around −1.2 eV. This state is outside the bandwidth of the exact self­
energy, and it therefore does not participate in the transport when the exact level­width function
is used. However due to the non­vanishing tails of the Lorentzian fit, the state does couple to the
electrodes, albeit weakly, when an approximation is used. The weakly coupled quasi­bound state
shows up as a sharp peak in the density of states and the transmission function of the system which
is not present when the exact level­width function is used. This may be seen in figure 5.9.
The peak in the DOS implies a rapid energy variation of e
Gr, which breaks the adiabatic expansion
and results in the unstable behavior seen in figure 5.8b. Increasing the width of the filter, such as
illustrated in 5.8c enhances the coupling between the quasi­bound state and the electrodes, thereby
amending the problem and causing the adiabatic expansion again to yield a physically reasonable
result. Enhancing the coupling further, by increasing the filter width, does not significantly change
the calculated current.
To confirm that the coupling to this state is indeed responsible for the observed variation, we have
also calculated the current through the system using the Lorentzian approximation, but truncating
48
5.2. Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.7: Current out of the left electrode for the T­coupled system. The blue, yellow and ma­
roon curves show the results predicted by the first order of the adiabatic expansion using the three
different self­energies shown in figure 5.5 in the calculation, while the green curve shows the exact
numerical result using the ODE approach, in which the Lorentzian expansion of self­energies has
been used by necessity. The dotted line shows the excitation bias, which is a model of a THz pulse.
The current values should be read on the right axis, while the value of the voltage bias should be
read on the right axis.
the lower bound energy integral in eq. (4.18) at ω = −1 eV to exclude this state. The resulting
current (not shown here) was visually identical to the one shown in figure 5.8a, confirming that
the inclusion of the bound state is responsible for the variation.
This observation has important consequences for the accurate modeling of systems. It indicates
that there may be a large quantitative difference between a weakly coupled quasi­bound state and a
true bound state of the system, and one should therefore be extra observant of the presence of such
states in a model system of interest. It also illustrates that one must be careful when approximating
the level­width function, even if the approximation is very good in the least­squares sense. We note
that in a real system, particle interactions in the device region tend to smear out energy levels and
induce coupling to states which might otherwise be bound [21]. This observation suggests the result
calculated using the approximation to the self­energy may in fact be closer to the physical reality
than the calculation with the exact level­width function. This we say after noting that the calculated
current is almost entirely independent of the strength of the coupling to the quasi­bound state, as
long as this is much weaker than the coupling to the main transport state, which suggests that the
amount of level broadening and the physical mechanism behind it may not be very important to
the current through the system.
5.2. Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
49
==PAGE:58==
A
B
C
Figure 5.8: a) Top: Current calculated by the adiabatic expansion and the ODE scheme using the
exact self­energy. These are identical to the corresponding curves in figure 5.7. Bottom: The
exact self­energy used in the adiabatic expansion and the Lorentzian expansion used in the ODE
scheme. b) Top: A narrow Lorentzian filter of width W = 0.01 eV is applied to the self energy
used in the adiabatic expansion, resulting in divergent behavior of the calculated current, denoted
J0.01. The green curve calculated by the ODE scheme is identical to the one in a and is shown
for comparison. Bottom: The filtered self­energy compared against the exact self­energy and the
Lorentzian expansion (orange line). c) Top: A slightly wider Lorentzian filter of width W = 0.02
eV is used in the adiabatic expansion. The current now converges to almost exactly the same shape
as predicted by the ODE scheme. This is in spite of the fact that the tails of the self­energy now
do not match the ones used in the Lorentzian fit as illustrated in the bottom part of the figure.
A
B
Figure 5.9: a) Density of states of the T­coupled TB chain. When the filtered self level­width
function is used, a sharp peak appears near ω = −1.2 eV, indicating the presence of a quasi­bound
state. This state is not present when the exact level­width function is used because this function
vanishes identically outside the range ω ∈[−1, 1] eV. b) The stationary transmission function
calculated using eq. (3.39). A sharp peak appears around ω = −1.2 eV when the approximate
level­width function is used. The presence of the quasi­bound state has a significant influence on
the current through the system, although it only couples very weakly to the electrodes.
50
5.2. Quasi­bound states in site coupled to one­dimensional chain
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.10: Charge pumping configuration suggested by [28]. A molecular rotor (blue) is attached
to two gold electrodes via molecular anchoring groups (green). Upon application of an AC bias
on the gate substrate (red), the molecule may be induced to rotate while the orientation of the
anchoring groups remains fixed. The rotation and bias induce a periodic modulation of the energy
levels in the rotor and of the coupling between the rotor and anchoring groups. If the two anchoring
groups are not co­planar (ϕL ̸= ϕR) the device may function as a molecular pump. The figure is
taken from [28].
5.3
Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
In this section, we consider the concept of controlling the current through a device by dynamically
varying the electrode­device coupling. This is the main idea in the study of charge pumping, which
is the transfer of current through a system without the application of a bias across the electrodes
[28]. This concept has been proposed for use in metrology, as it may allow for an extremely pre­
cise control of current. Charge pumping has already been demonstrated experimentally in carbon
nanotubes [31, 32, 33], where some experiments used acoustic waves to drive the time­dependent
potential. A different method for realizing a charge­pumping system could be by leading the cur­
rent through a molecule undergoing rotation or oscillation. In the absence of cylindrical symmetry
of the system, the electrode­molecule coupling will depend on the angle at which the device at­
taches to the electrodes, and this can be exploited for charge pumping. Such a model is considered
in [28] and illustrated in figure 5.10. A molecule is coupled to two gold electrodes via two an­
choring groups. At low temperatures (typically below 15 K [28]), the application of an ac gate
voltage causes the molecule to rotate while the anchoring groups maintain their orientation. As
the coupling between molecule and the anchoring groups depends on the angle between them, the
rotation induces a periodic variation of the coupling. Simultaneously, the gate voltage periodically
shifts the energy levels in the molecule. By fixing the anchoring groups at different angles relative
to the substrate, the device can act as a charge pump. Our model for this system is illustrated in
figure 5.11, and consists of three sites, where the energy of the central site as well as the coupling
matrix elements between the left and right sites are modulated periodically, with different phases.
The variation of the central energy level ε as well as the coupling matrix elements VLc and VcR are
thus described by the expressions
ε(t) = ε0 + ε1 cos Ωt,
VLc(t) = V0 + V cos(Ωt + ϕLc),
5.3. Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.11: Simple tri­level model for the system shown in figure 5.10. The chemical potentials
of the two electrodes are equal, but a net current may be induced from one electrode to another by
modulating the coupling between the left and right electrodes, and the energy of the central orbital.
VcR(t) = V0 + V cos(Ωt + ϕcR).
The pumping mechanism works as follows. In half of the AC cycle, the energy ε of the central site
increases, and we would expect charge to flow out of the site. In the other half, the energy decreases,
resulting in an influx of charge. By fixing the angles ϕR and ϕL such that the coupling strongest to
one side while current flows in, and to the other side when current flows out, a net charge transfer
per cycle can be obtained. For the following investigations we set ϕLc = 0 and study how the
charge transfer varies as a function of ϕcR. This corresponds to fixing the left anchoring group in
figure 5.10 to be co­planar with the gate substrate. We treat the gold electrodes in the wide­band
limit and set the coupling between the gold electrodes and the anchoring groups to be identical. For
generality, we set ΓL = ΓR = 1, which defines the energy scale of the model. All quantities are
then dimensionless, and scale by appropriate powers of ΓL/R. For order­of­magnitude estimations,
we can interpret this energy­scale as 1 eV.
For the coupling between the anchoring groups and the molecule, we set V0 = 0.1 , V = 1
2 and
Ω= 0.05. The latter corresponds to a rotation frequency of approximately 12 THz on the 1­eV
scale. The constants in the energy of the central level are fixed at ε0 = −1 and ε1 = −2, while the
chemical potentials of the two electrodes are fixed at µL = µR = 0. With these parameters, the
energy of the central level will switch from below to above the electrode level during the course
of a cycle. The temperature is set to kbT = 0.002, corresponding to 23.2 K on the 1­eV scale.
The rather low temperature has been chosen to match the experimental conditions under which the
rotation can be induced. We fix the phase off­set of the right anchoring group at ϕR = π
2 . With
these parameters, the variation of ε, VLc, and VcR may be seen in figure 5.12c. The current out of
the left and right electrode, respectively, is shown in figure 5.12a,b.
During the first half of the cycle, the energy of the molecule is increasing, and we correspond­
ingly observe a net flow of charge out of the molecule. In this same part of the cycle, the coupling
is strongest to the left anchoring group such that most charge goes to the left electrode. On the
other half of the cycle, the situation is reversed; the molecule energy decreases, and the coupling
is strongest to the right anchoring group such that the right electrode delivers most of the charge.
Thus, a net transport of charge from the right to the left electrode occurs over the course of each
cycle. From the figure we observe good qualitative and reasonable quantitative agreement be­
tween the ODE scheme and the first­order dynamical correction from the adiabatic expansion.
The ODE current shows several rapid small­amplitude oscillations of the current, a feature which
is not present in the AE result. We note that the J0 vanishes identically over the entire cycle,
showing that the charge pumping in this setup is a completely dynamical process which cannot be
modeled statically.
In figure 5.12d, the occupancy of the molecular level is shown. We note that it behaves as ex­
52
5.3. Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
==PAGE:61==
pected, emptying when the molecular energy is high and filling up when it is low. Interestingly,
the ODE and AE schemes obtain significantly different occupation levels when the site is almost
full, while they agree extremely well when the site is nearly empty. It is also interesting that the
first­order correction to the occupancy, which corresponds to the charge transported by the second­
order current, differs only slightly from the zero­order result, which is an indication that including
the second order dynamical correction may not change the result significantly.
In figure 5.13, the density of states in the molecule­and­anchors system is shown as a function
of time and energy. The dashed black lines indicate the eigenenergies of the isolated system, i.e.
when the electrodes are decoupled. Due to the coupling to the electrodes, the levels are broadened
out particularly near the chemical potential of the electrodes, where the structure of the bands is
much less clear. The large surge of current observed just before t/T = 0.4 coincides with the
point where all three bands are close to the electrode chemical potential. This result seems quite
reasonable, as only bands near the chemical potential are expected to participate in transport.
The total charge transferred per cycle may be obtained by integrating the current through either the
left or right electrode over one period. Due to the conservation of charge, it should be immaterial
whether the left or right current is chosen and we have confirmed numerically that this physical
constraint is satisfied. We investigate then how total charge transfer depends on the driving fre­
quency Ωand the phase­shift ϕR of the right anchoring group. The result of this investigation is
shown in figure 5.14.
Both methods are in quite good agreement at low frequencies, however the likeness drops as the
frequency increases. It is particularly notable that the adiabatic expansion fails to capture any of
the dynamics associated with the increase in frequency, showing an almost completely constant
result as this parameter is increased. On the contrary, the ODE propagation scheme reveals a
general tendency for the total charge transfer to decrease with frequency. Intuitively this result
makes sense, as the pump works by successive filling and emptying of the central energy level.
One can imagine that at high driving frequencies, the central level does not have time to fill up
completely, resulting in a lower transfer of charge. Furthermore, the result from the AE appears
much more symmetrical than that of the ODE scheme, and so the AE does T detect a difference in
the dynamics depending on whether the phase of the right anchoring group lags behind, or is ahead
of the rest of the system. The largest transfer of charge seems to occur for around ϕR = 0.4π,
and both methods agree that the largest amount of charge that may be transferred in this scheme is
around 0.7 electrons per cycle on average.
5.3. Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
53
==PAGE:62==
B
A
D
C
Figure 5.12: a,b) The current out of the left and right electrode, respectively, over a period of
the oscillating potential. During the first half of the cycle, current flows out of the molecule and
primarily through the left electrode, while in the latter half current flows into the molecule primarily
through the right molecule. The variation of the central energy level ε and the coupling constant
VLc, VcR over a cycle are shown in c. It is evident that the qualitative behavior of the currents
matches the intuitive expectation. In d, the occupancy of the central site is shown. The result
seems to confirm our interpretation of the mechanism of charge transfer; the central site fills up
through one electrode and empties into the other. The parameters for the calculation are: ΓL =
ΓR = 1, ε0 = −1, ε1 = −2, V0 = 0.1, V = 1
2, ϕL = 0, ϕR = π
2 , Ω= 0.05. The temperature
is kbT = 0.002 and the chemical potentials of the electrodes are µR = µL = 0.
54
5.3. Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.13: Density of states in the rotating molecule as a function of time and energy. The
parameters are as in figure 5.12.
Figure 5.14: Total charge transferred per cycle in the rotating molecule configuration as calculated
by the adiabatic expansion and the ODE method for varying values of ϕR and Ω. The remaining
parameters are as described in figure 5.12.
5.3. Charge pumping by a rotating molecule
55
==PAGE:64==
Tip
Molecule HOMO
Substrate
Figure 5.15: Simple model for the THz­STM system analyzed by [18]. The dashed line indicates
a weak coupling between the two electrodes (metal tip and gold substrate), modeled by single sites
connected to reservoirs in the wide­band limit. The solid lines indicate the much stronger coupling
through the molecular orbital. The energy level changes in time as it is modulated by an impinging
THz pulse.
5.4
A simple two­level THz­STM model
A different system that could be interesting to examine with our method is a model for the THz­
STM system [18] that was discussed in chapter 2. We remind the reader that in this setup, electrons
tunnel from a metal tip to a gold substrate through a pentacene molecule. The bias voltage from
tip to substrate is controlled by a small DC offset, and modulated by intense THz pulses. In the
absence of a THz pulse, the molecular orbitals of the pentacene molecule are not available for
transport as they are too far from the Fermi level of the tip and substrate, and only a weak current
can flow through the system due to tunneling directly from the tip to the gold substrate. However
exposure to an intense THz pulse may shift the Fermi level of the tip sufficiently such that transport
through the HOMO becomes available, resulting in a sharp increase in current at negative bias.
A very simple model that exhibits similar behavior may be seen in figure 5.15. The gold substrate
is modeled by an electrode in the wide­band limit (right), while the metal tip is modeled by a similar
electrode (left) coupled to a single level, indicated by a red dot. The chemical potential of the tip
(and the energy of the red­dot site to which it is connected) is set to µL = 0.05 eV, while that of
the substrate is fixed at µR = 0 eV, modeling a small static bias across the system. The HOMO
of the molecule is modeled by a single energy level with energy ε0 = −2 eV. These numbers
have been chosen to match roughly the experimental configuration of [18]. The inclusion of the
single site connected to the metal tip enables us to model tunneling directly from the tip to the
substrate without the involvement of the molecule, as indicated in figure 5.15 by the thin dashed
line. The temperature of the whole set­up is set to kBT = 25 meV, corresponding to T = 290K,
or a Terahertz lab on a nice chilly day. In [18] the effect of the THz pulse on the system is treated
adiabatically, and it is therefore interesting to examine the time­resolved behavior of the system
and compare this to a purely adiabatic simulation. In figure 5.16 the static transmission function of
the system in the absence of a THz pulse, calculated using eq. (3.39), may be seen. Two peaks are
observed, a smaller one near the Fermi level of the electrodes which also corresponds to the energy
of the tip site. A larger peak in the transmission appears near the energy of the HOMO level. This
behavior corresponds qualitatively to that described by [18].
56
5.4. A simple two­level THz­STM model
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.16: Static transmission from the tip to the gold substrate, calculated via equation
eq. (3.39). The vertical dashed lines indicate the energy levels of the device (single dot and molec­
ular HOMO) in isolation.
The system is excited by a THz pulse which rigidly shifts the energy level of the left site and
electrode. We use a similar expression for the THz pulse as we did in section 5.2. The expression
for the waveform is given in eq. (5.1) and is illustrated in figure 5.6; the only difference is that in
this section we set the amplitude to A = −3 eV such that the pulse can shift the metal tip to the
HOMO level. The density of states of the system under influence of the THz pulse may be seen in
figure 5.17, where the dashed lines indicate the eigenenergies of the decoupled system. The upper
level which is mostly localized on the tip site, follows the profile of the THz pulse as this reaches
the system, while the lower level, mostly localized on the HOMO is relatively unaffected by the
pulse. The exception to this is near the peak of the pulse at T = 0 where the tip energy approaches
that of the HOMO, causing the states to mix noticeably. That the states are mixed at this point, and
thus cannot be separated into a ”tip” state and a ”molecule” state is also evident from the fact that
the lower eigenvalue decreases significantly at this point, despite the fact that the molecular orbital
does not feel the THz pulse. We remark as a side­note that this behavior is consistent with the von
Neumann–Wigner theorem which prevents the eigenvalues of the two levels from crossing. In the
absence of the THz pulse, the density of states is notably more peaked near the lower (molecular)
level, indicating that this level is more localized in the absence of the pulse, just as we would expect
from the previous discussion.
The current through the left electrode is shown in figure 5.18. We note that there is only a small
difference between the purely adiabatic J0 and the first­order dynamical correction from the AE.
Both results also match the exact ODE result well. It bodes well for the use of the adiabatic ex­
pansion scheme that when the first­order dynamical correction is small, the static calculation is
also very accurate. This highlights another potential use of this method, namely that it may be
used to estimate whether a stationary calculation is sufficient to describe the behavior of a system,
or whether a more computationally expensive time­dependent calculation is necessary. Although
we have here only looked at a very simple toy model of a THz­STM system, results such as these
could be used to substantiate the validity of the stationary analysis used for this system by [18],
who did not report a way to evaluate their analysis except by an after­the­fact comparison to the
experimental result.
5.4. A simple two­level THz­STM model
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.17: Density of states in the two­level THz­STM model. The dashed lines indicate the
eigenenergies of the isolated system. For zero bias, these energies are divided into one near the on­
site energy of the tip (0.05 eV) and one near the HOMO level (−2 eV). At sufficiently negative bias
(near T = 0), the eigenenergies approach each other and the levels become significantly mixed,
increasing transmission.
In addition to the total time­resolved current through the system we may also look at the energy­
resolved current density given by the real trace of the current matrices eΠ0,α(T, ω) and eΠ1,α(T, ω).
This is shown for the left electrode in figures 5.19 and 5.20 for the zeroth and first orders, respec­
tively. We remind the reader that the chemical potential of the substrate (right electrode) is fixed at
µR = 0, while the chemical potential of the left electrode, like the metal tip, follows the THz pulse.
The colored area in figure 5.19, where the current density is non­zero, thus corresponds to states
with energies in between the Fermi levels of the two states. This observation is in good agree­
ment with the formula eq. (3.38) which gives the steady­state current through a time­independent
system.
The first order dynamical correction to the current density, seen in figure 5.20, on the other hand
displays a more complicated behavior that is less easily interpreted. We note that here current may
also flow at energies that are not between the Fermi levels of the system. The largest dynamical
corrections occur close to the eigenenergies of the system and are generally large when the second
derivative of the external pulse is at its greatest. We remind the reader that this non­equilibrium
current is responsible for the zeroth­order filling and emptying of levels in the device. We note also
that the most significant dynamical corrections occur at the points where the larger level crosses
the chemical potential of the right electrode, and when the levels are close and mix the most.
58
5.4. A simple two­level THz­STM model
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.18: Tunneling current from tip. The first­order dynamical correction to the current is quite
small, and the prediction matches the result of the ODE scheme well, indicating that an adiabatic
description of the influence of the THz pulse on the system may be sufficient. The dotted black
line shows the incident THz pulse, whose value should be read on the right axis.
Figure 5.19:
Current density in the zeroth order of the adiabatic expansion, calculated as
Re Tr{Π0,L}. The dashed lines indicate the eigenenergies of the decoupled system consisting of
metal tip and molecule.
5.4. A simple two­level THz­STM model
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.20: First order dynamical correction to the current density, calculated as Re Tr{Π1,L}.
The dashed lines are the same as in figure 5.19.
60
5.4. A simple two­level THz­STM model
==PAGE:69==
5.5
Summary
In this chapter we used the adiabatic expansion and the ODE scheme to calculate the current
through several model systems. Using a model of a single quantum dot connected to two elec­
trodes described in the wide­band limit, we reproduced a result from [3] thereby verifying that
our implementation of the numerical scheme is correct. In addition, we saw that the ODE scheme
almost exactly reproduces the analytical result for this system, as we would expect. An additional
test of the implementation of the ODE scheme, as well as an investigation of how the error in the
AE scales with frequency, may be found in appendix B.4.
Then, through the analysis of a quantum dot coupled to an infinite chain, we saw that the Lorentzian
approximation to the self­energies can have a significant impact on the calculated current in the
presence of bound states. While the presence of the state made a large difference, we also saw that
the strength of the coupling to the state did not affect the results much. An exception to this rule
was found when the coupling was extremely weak which caused the AE to become numerically
unstable.
After these tests of the methods, we analyzed two simplified models of real systems. This showed
that the qualitative behavior of a model for the charge pumping system proposed by [28] can be
predicted using both schemes, although the AE fails to predict the way that results depend on the
frequency of the external potential. At very low frequencies, both methods were found to yield
similar, although not completely identical results. From the analysis of the THz­STM model, we
illustrated how the AE may be used to evaluate in a computationally inexpensive way whether a
time­dependent simulation is necessary to describe the dynamics of a system, or if a steady­state
calculation may suffice. We illustrated also how additional insight into the system dynamics may
be obtained in the AE by examining the energy­resolved current density.
5.5. Summary
61
==PAGE:70==
62
5.5. Summary
==PAGE:71==
6
Conclusion and outlook
In this work we have used the NEGF formalism to derive the equations of motion governing the
behavior of open quantum systems out of equilibrium when acted upon by a time­dependent exter­
nal potential. The NEGF theory was introduced, and a numerical scheme for solving the resulting
equations based on an adiabatic expansion was investigated. The approximation was tested on sev­
eral model systems, and its performance evaluated based on comparison to the numerically exact
ODE propagation scheme formulated by [5]. We found good agreement between the first order
dynamical correction obtained from the adiabatic expansion and the exact numerical solution for
systems where the time­scale of the internal dynamics was much faster than that of the external
perturbation. The first­order dynamical correction was found to be particularly useful when the
time­dependent dynamics cause the number of electrons in the device region to vary with time, a
feature which stationary (fully adiabatic) calculations cannot capture. On the other hand, we found
that the presence of bound or quasi­bound states in the system poses a problem in this approxima­
tion, as such states have long life­times which may easily become comparable in duration to the
external perturbation. States may become quasi­bound during only part of the simulation time,
and their presence is difficult to predict, making it hard to determine in advance whether the adi­
abatic expansion will work well on a given system of interest. This is particularly problematic in
larger systems, where only a small fraction of states in the device couple directly to the electrodes,
and many states exist that can potentially become quasi­bound. In addition, systems for which the
level­width function varies rapidly with energy may not be suited for analysis with this approach.
On the other hand, the adiabatic expansion is computationally inexpensive, and it seems generally
easy to judge whether the simulation has converged or not. Such an evaluation can be done based on
the first order correction to the device density matrix, which should be small if the calculation has
obtained good accuracy, or by investigation of the time­ and frequency dependence of the calculated
quantities (self­energies, Green functions) in the zeroth and first orders. If these quantities exhibit
rapid variation with time and frequency, the resulting dynamical correction may not be accurate.
When this problem occurs it is typically very clear from the obtained first­order correction, which
exhibits numerical instability in the presence of rapid variation.
A particularly well­suited use of the method in its current state of implementation is in determining
whether an adiabatic description of the behavior of a system is sufficient, or if a more accurate,
computationally expensive analysis is required.
The adiabatic expansion thus constitutes a useful and intriguing approach to the solution of the
equations of motion governing the non­equilibrium behavior of quantum systems. Among some
of its advantages compared to other methods are its flexibility, allowing almost all parameters to
vary with the central time variable T, and the fact that it gives direct access to the time­resolved
non­equilibrium Green functions of the device. There are thus many features of this method that
would be interesting to study more closely. In the following, we will discuss several interesting
future investigations and potential improvements to the method.
Higher order terms and improved efficiency.
The equations of motion used in the adiabatic expansion are in principle exact if the exponen­
tial operator appearing in the expansion could be evaluated without approximation. This suggests
that significantly improved accuracy could possibly be obtained if the higher order terms in the
series can be evaluated. Such an implementation should, however, not sacrifice efficiency, and
it remains an open question whether a sufficiently accurate and efficient implementation of the
higher­order terms is possible. One possible approach for tackling this issue, which was examined
Chapter 6. Conclusion and outlook
63
==PAGE:72==
briefly in this project, would be to approximate the input functions (Hamilton, level­width func­
tions) by a sum of Chebyshev polynomials which are well­suited to approximation of functions
when the figure of merit is the maximum deviation from the real function [34]. By implementing
the formulas specifically for a linear combination of Chebyshev polynomials, the amount of eval­
uation points needed in the calculations may be drastically reduced. Additionally, the derivatives
of the polynomials can be calculated analytically, which increases both speed and accuracy. The
primary challenge in implementing a formulation in terms of coefficients of Chebyshev polynomi­
als is that multiplication of two terms becomes non­trivial, in particular because it is not a closed
operation in the N­dimensional space spanned by the N Chebyshev basis polynomials of orders
0, 1, · · · N −1. Whether this issue can be handled in a satisfying manner could be an interesting
future investigation.
Modeling particle interactions.
One of the motivating reasons for working with a theoretical formulation based on the NEGF
formalism is the possibility to include particle interactions in the model, and it would therefore be
of interest to incorporate these in the numerical implementation. In weakly interacting systems,
the effect of interactions can often be modeled in a correlation self­energy [21] which depends on
the Green function of the system. In a recently published paper, expressions for the correlation
self­energy in the so­called second Born approximation are given [35]. This is a second order
approximation for the electron­electron interaction. To implement this in the adiabatic scheme, it
would be necessary to expand the correlation self­energy in a power series alongside the Green
functions. The inclusion of particle interactions in the numerical scheme would not only allow for
more realistic models, it might also help alleviate the problem associated with quasi­bound states.
This is because interactions tend to smear out the density of states [21].
Energy flow and time­dependent thermal properties.
Using the expressions derived in appendix A.3, the movement of energy through the system can
already be modeled using our scheme. Some energy may be dissipated as heat in the electrodes or
the device during the course of transport, causing the temperature of the system to vary in time.
Such a temperature dependence can be easily modeled in the adiabatic expansion by letting the
temperature, and thereby the Fermi distribution functions, vary with the central time T. This flexi­
bility, permitting almost all quantities in the formulation to vary with the central time, is one of the
advantages of the adiabatic expansion. Such a time dependence cannot, for instance, be straightfor­
wardly included in the ODE propagation scheme. It would therefore be interesting to investigate
the effect that such a time dependence would have on the dynamics of systems. This could for
instance be relevant if a very small device is perturbed by an intense time­varying potential such
that the temperature of the device might fluctuate on a very short time scale.
Updating the DFT Hamiltonian using dynamical corrections.
To obtain a realistic model of transport through a molecular system, the Hamiltonian governing
the system can be found using DFT. In a DFT calculation, the ground state electronic density of a
system is determined by solving a self­consistency problem. From the solution to this problem, an
effective Hamiltonian governing the behavior of the system is found, and this Hamiltonian may be
used in subsequent transport calculations. However, when the system is brought out of equilibrium
by an external perturbation, the change in the electronic density caused by the perturbation should
also change the effective Hamiltonian. It may therefore be possible to use the corrections to the
density found from the transport calculation to update the Hamiltonian via DFT at each time­step
of the calculation, thus using an updated Hamiltonian that reflects the non­equilibrium density at
each time­step. This method may result in a more accurate modeling of molecular structures, and
we therefore believe it is worth further investigation. The drawback of this scheme in the adia­
batic expansion is that it would prevent calculations from being run in parallel for different times.
Additionally, updating the Hamiltonian with each time step may be computationally expensive,
64
Chapter 6. Conclusion and outlook
==PAGE:73==
such that the relative speed­up obtained from using the adiabatic expansion relative to the ODE
scheme becomes less significant. We envision therefore that this approach may be better suited for
combination with the ODE scheme.
65
==PAGE:74==
A
Additional theoretical discussion
In this chapter we include some additional theoretical discussion which we believe should not be
left out of the work, but is not essential enough to be included in the main text. We first discuss more
closely the concept of contour­ordered Green functions. This topic is necessary for calculations
of non­equilibrium dynamics, however a full discussion would require many pages of theory and
can be found in any standard NEGF textbook. Therefore we only give a brief review of the topic.
Then we present the Langreth rules, used to express the non­equilibrium theory in terms of ordinary
time­variables. In the third section, we discuss the time­dependent flow of energy through a nano­
structure. Expressions for this energy flow may be easily obtained once the particle current has
been found using the numerical methods detailed in this report, however some care should be taken
to obtain a thermodynamically consistent description. Finally, we describe how the numerical
schemes used in this thesis can also be applied when the Hamiltonian and level­width functions of
the system are given in a non­orthogonal basis.
A.1
Contour­ordered Green functions
Consider a system governed by a Hamiltonian H = H + h′(t), where h′ is a time­dependent
external perturbation. This could for instance be a pulse of light impinging on the system. We
assume that h′(t) = 0 for t < t0 such that t0 is an initial time when the perturbation is turned on.
Additionally, we assume that prior to this time, the system is in thermal equilibrium and therefore
described by the equilibrium density operator ρ = e−βH/Z, where Z = Tr
 e−βH
, and β =
(kBT)−1 is the reciprocal temperature. To describe the system after the perturbation is turned on,
we may cast the operators in the Heisenberg picture corresponding to either the time­independent
H or the full Hamiltonian H. For a time­independent Schrödinger­picture operator AS, we have
then 1
AH(t) = U†
H(t, t0)ASUH(t, t0),
AH(t) = U†
H(t, t0)ASUH(t, t0).
(A.1)
Combining these relations, we can relate the operators in the two pictures and write
AH(t) = U†
H(t, t0)UH(t, t0)AH(t)U†
H(t, t0)UH(t, t0).
(A.2)
The operators AH and AH may also be related by directly transforming from the H­picture to the
H­picture. In the H­picture, the time­evolution of operators are governed by H and states are
governed by the Hamiltonian h′
H(t) = U†
H(t, t0)h′(t)UH(t, t0). We therefore transform to the
Heisenberg picture with respect to H by the transformation
AH(t) = V †(t, t0)AH(t)V (t, t0),
(A.3)
where
V (t, t0) = T exp

−i
Z t
t0
dt1h′
H(t1)

.
(A.4)
Comparing eqs. (A.2) and (A.3), we find that
V (t, t0) = U†
H(t, t0)UH(t, t0),
(A.5)
or explicitly
T exp

−i
Z t
t0
dt1h′
H(t1)

= eiH(t−t0)T exp

−i
Z t
t0
dt1H(t1)

.
(A.6)
1This discussion follows [22] (pp. 84–94).
66
Appendix A. Additional theoretical discussion
==PAGE:75==
This relation is known as Dyson’s equation and is very useful in transforming from one time­
evolution picture to another [22]. With Dyson’s equation at hand, we may simplify the transfor­
mation relations eqs. (A.2) and (A.3) by introducing a contour­valued time variable.
We consider a contour on the real line stretching from t0 to t (or beyond) and then returning again to
t0 as illustrated in fig. 3.2 in the main text. A time variable t′ may be considered to lie either on the
upper or lower branch of the contour. We introduce a contour­ordering operator Tc which orders
operators according to the order in which their contour­valued time arguments appear when travers­
ing the contour in the direction indicated in the figure. Expanding the exponentials in eq. (A.3),
we obtain
AH(t) =
X
nm
in(−i)m
n!m!
Z t
t0
dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
dtn eT{h′
H(t1) · · · h′
H(tn)}AH(t)
·
Z t
t0
dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
dtmT{h′
H(t1) · · · h′
H(tm)}.
(A.7)
Interpreting the time­variables of the left integrals as residing on the backward part of C, and
those of the right integrals as residing on the forward part of the contour, we see that the operators
appearing in eq. (A.7) are in fact contour­ordered. We can therefore merge T and eT and replace
them by TC by letting the integrals run over the entire contour. At this stage we must take into
account the combinatorics of the expression. Since,
Z
C
TCf(τ1)dτ1 =
Z t
t0
Tf(t1)dt1 −
Z t0
t
eTf(t1)dt1,
(A.8)
a term containing k contour integrals is equivalent to 2k real­time integrals. In a given term, there
will be
  k
m

=
k!
m!(k−m)! terms that contain precisely m integrals on the forward path and k −m
integrals on the backward path. In other words,
TC
Z
C
f(τ1)dτ1 · · ·
Z
C
f(τk)dτk =
k
X
m=0
k!(−1)k−m
m!(k −m)!

eT
Z t
t0
f(t1)dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
f(tk−m)dtk−m

·

T
Z t
t0
f(t1)dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
f(tm)dtm

.
(A.9)
We now multiply the right­hand side of eq. (A.7) by 1 = P
k δn,k−m and perform the summation
over n to find that
AH(t) =
X
k
k
X
m=0
ik−m(−i)m
m!(k −m)!
Z t
t0
dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
dtn eT{h′
H(t1) · · · h′
H(tn)}AH(t)
·
Z t
t0
dt1 · · ·
Z t
t0
dtmT{h′
H(t1) · · · h′
H(tm)}
=
X
k
(−i)k
k!
TC
Z
C
dτ1 · · ·
Z
C
dτkh′
H(τ1) · · · h′
H(τk)AH(t)

= TC

e−i
∫
C dτ1h′
H(τ1)AH(t)

,
(A.10)
where we have used that ik−m · (−i)m · (−1)k−m = (−i)k and the fact that when performing the
sum over n, terms where m > k yield no contribution.
We can therefore use a contour­ordered exponential to relate operators in the equilibrium H­picture
to the non­equilibrium H­picture.
A.1. Contour­ordered Green functions
67
==PAGE:76==
For the purpose of developing a perturbation theory, we define a contour­ordered Green function,
Gc
p,p′(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
TCap,H(τ)a†
p′,H(τ ′)
E
= −i
Tr
n
e−βHTCap,H(τ)a†
p′,H(τ ′)
o
Tr{e−βH}
,
(A.11)
where, as indicated, the operators ap,H and a†
p′,H evolve according to H.
Using the transformation rule eq. (A.10), we can express the contour­ordered Green function in
terms of the H­picture operators ap,H and a†
p′,H, whereby we obtain [22]
Gc
p,p′(τ, τ ′) = −i
D
TC
n
e−i
∫
C dτ1h′
H(τ1)ap,H(τ)a†
p′,H(τ ′)
oE
.
(A.12)
The advantage of including the contour­ordering operator in the Green function is that it allows us to
put the entire expression under a single contour­ordering operator. If the equilibrium Hamiltonian
H is sufficiently simple such that the time­dependence of the ap,H can be solved ­ in particular if
it is quadratic in the creation and annihilation operators and therefore does not contain interactions
­ this expression is now suitable for a perturbation expansion. If the equilibrium Hamiltonian does
contain interactions, further reductions are necessary. This is achieved in the following way; we
write H = H0+Hi where H0, the ’free’ Hamiltonian, is quadratic in the creation­ and annihilation
operators. We can then divide the total Hamiltonian as H(t) = H0 +(H(i) +h′(t)) and repeat the
previous steps to achieve an expression similar to eq. (A.12), which will now take the form
Gc
p,p′(τ, τ ′) = −i

TC

e−i
∫
C dτ1[H(i)
H0+h′
H0(τ1)]ap,H0(τ)a†
p′,H0(τ ′)

.
(A.13)
Eq. (A.13) is almost completely analogous to eq. (A.12) with H replaced by H0, and h′ replaced by
h′ + H(i). However, there is one difference as the expectation value is still calculated with respect
to the thermal equilibrium density associated with H, and not H0, and the expression is therefore
still not suited for a perturbative expansion using Wick’s theorem. In [22] it is shown how this
problem can be remedied by evaluating H(i) on a contour to which a tail has been added stretching
from t0 to t0 −iβ. The addition of this tail allows one to calculate the expectation value with
respect to ρH0 =
e−βH0
Tr e−βH0 as desired. The physical implication of replacing the thermal average
with respect to ρH in equation (A.13) by an average with respect to ρH0 is to set the system to a
different (and physically ’wrong’) initial state. In many situations where one is not interested in
transient phenomena, this difference is of no importance. In the remainder of this project, we will
not consider systems of interacting particles, and we therefore avoid this problem by simply taking
H = H0 which allows us also to calculate transient properties of the systems of interest. Because
of this, we will not go further into the discussion of the problems related to particle interactions.
A.2
Real time formulation – Langreth theorem
In order to work with the contour­ordered Green function formalism in practice it is highly de­
sirable to fix the time­variable to the real line, as contour integrals are cumbersome to work with
in implementations [21]. In the perturbation theory, we encounter operators defined by contour
integrals of the form
C(t, t′) =
Z
C
dτA(t, τ)B(τ, t′).
(A.14)
The contour may be divided into two parts. The ’upper’ branch, as shown in figure 3.2, where
the direction of the contour is toward larger real times, we will denote −→c , and the ’lower’ branch
we correspondingly denote ←−c . Due to the contour ordering, we observe that if τ and τ ′ are on
different branches of the contour, we have
Gc
p,p′(τ, τ ′) =
(
G>
p,p′(τ, τ ′),
τ ∈←−c
and
τ ′ ∈−→c ,
G<
p,p′(τ, τ ′),
τ ∈−→c
and
τ ′ ∈←−c ,
(A.15)
68
A.2. Real time formulation – Langreth theorem
==PAGE:77==
Using this and the relation eq. (3.46) between the four real­time Green functions, the Langreth
theorem is used to relate retarded, advanced, lesser and greater functions of contour­times, defined
as in eq. (A.14) to corresponding functions of real times.
A derivation of the Langreth rules may be found in [21]. Here, we will just state them; with C(t, t′)
defined as in eq. (A.14), we have
C≷(t, t′) =
Z
dt1
 AR(t, t1)B≷(t1, t′) + A≷(t, t1)BA(t1, t′)

,
(A.16)
and
CR/A(t, t′) =
Z
dt1AR/A(t, t1)BR/A(t1, t′).
(A.17)
Corresponding relations may be defined for functions containing matrix products of three or more
operators. For operators defined by equal­time products D(τ, τ ′) = A(τ, τ ′)B(τ, τ ′) or F(τ, τ ′) =
A(τ, τ ′)B(τ ′, τ) the Langreth rules give [21]
D<(t, t′) = A<(t, t′)B<(t, t′),
DR(t, t′) = A<(t, t′)BR(t, t′) + AR(t, t′)B<(t, t′) + AR(t, t′)BR(t, t′)
(A.18)
and
F <(t, t′) = A<(t, t′)B>(t′, t),
F R(t, t′) = A<(t, t′)BA(t′, t) + AR(t, t′)B<(t′, t).
(A.19)
These relations have been used several times in chapter 3 to reformulate the contour­ordered theory
in terms of real time variables.
A.3
Energy flow
There has been considerable discussion in the literature of the problem of describing the flow of
energy through a time­dependent nano­system in a thermodynamically consistent manner [36, 37,
38, 39]. It is in general not trivial to define the concept of energy in a system that does not display
time­invariance, as energy is inherently connected to this symmetry. However, a sensible definition
of the energy flow through the system may still be determined.
We define the energy in the device as the observable associated with the device Hamiltonian, con­
sistent with the time­independent definition. Its expectation value is then E = ⟨H⟩= Tr{H(t)σ(t)},
and the rate of change is
∂tE = Tr{∂tHσ + H∂tσ}.
(A.20)
An equation of motion for σ(t) is given in equation (4.46). Using the result here, we find that
∂tE = Tr
(
∂tHσ + H
X
α

Πα(t) + Π†
α(t)
)
,
(A.21)
where we have used the fact that Tr{H [H, σ]} = 0 as may be shown using the cyclic invariance
of the trace. The two terms in equation (A.21) seem to have a clear interpretation. The first term
Tr{∂tHσ} is the change in energy due to the external variation of the device Hamiltonian, while
the second term
JE
D(t) =
X
α
Tr
n
H(t)

Πα(t) + Π†
α(t)
o
=
X
α
2 Re Tr{H(t)Πα(t)}
(A.22)
is the net total energy entering the device via the electrodes. Once the current matrices Πα have
been found, JE
D can easily be calculated with eq. (A.22). Some care must however be taken,
A.3. Energy flow
69
==PAGE:78==
because energy may also be stored in the contacts, i.e. in the coupling between the device and
the electrodes [36]. This may be interpreted as a capacitive energy due to the accumulation of
charge in the contacts, and it may also vary in time. To illustrate this point, we consider the energy
accounting from the point of view of electrode α.
Defining Eα = ⟨Hα⟩, we have
∂tEα =
 d
dtHα

=
*X
k
h
˙εαkb†
αkbαk
i
−i[Hα, H]
+
.
(A.23)
The first term is the variation due to the shift of the occupied energy levels in the electrode, and may
be written as P
k ˙εαk(t) Im(G<
αk(t, t)). The second term is related to the device­electrode coupling,
and is very similar to the expression defining the particle current out of the device. Evaluating the
commutator, we obtain
i ⟨[Hα(t), H(t)]⟩=
X
kn
Tαkn(t)εk(t)G<
n,αk(t, t) + c.c. = 2 Re
"X
kn
Tαkn(t)εk(t)G<
n,αk(t, t)
#
(A.24)
identically to the expression for the particle current eq. (3.54), except for the extra factor εk(t).
This gives us a nice interpretation of this term as the energy carried by the particles leaving the
reservoir through the electrode, and we define it therefore as the energy current
JE
α (t) = 2 Re
"X
kn
Tαkn(t)εk(t)G<
n,αk(t, t)
#
.
(A.25)
out of electrode α. We may perform the same manipulations with this expression as was done for
the particle current in the last section. Doing so, we obtain an expression for JE
α in terms of the
particle current matrices from the last section, namely
JE
α (t) = 2 Re Tr
Z dε
2π[ε + ∆α(t)]Πα(ε, t)

.
(A.26)
We now have an expression for the energy entering the device through the electrodes, eq. (A.22),
and an expression for the current leaving the electrodes to the device eq. (A.26). One might expect
these currents to be identical in the sense P
α JE
α (t) = JD(t), however this is not the case due to
the previously mentioned capacitive energy in the contacts. An expression for this energy can be
found from the conservation of total energy current
X
α
JE
αc(t) + JE
α (t) = JD(t),
(A.27)
where JE
αc is the flow of energy into the device from the contact. This definition matches that of
[36], and an expression for the contact energy current Jαc in terms of the current matrices can be
found by using the expression for JD in eq. (A.27) and considering individually each term in the
sum over the electrodes.
A.4
Extension to a non­orthogonal basis ­ Löwdin transform
In order to apply the adiabatic expansion to a system, the self­energies must be known. These are
typically be found using ab­initio simulations based on density functional theory (DFT) and im­
plemented in the software Transiesta. However, many DFT implementations use a non­orthogonal
basis set consisting of atomic orbitals centered on every atom in the simulated molecule. The non­
orthogonality stems from the fact that orbitals of neighboring atoms tend to overlap. It is therefore
70
A.4. Extension to a non­orthogonal basis ­ Löwdin transform
==PAGE:79==
desirable to extend the expressions in the adiabatic expansion so that this case may be dealt with in
a numerically efficient way. Our treatment in this section loosely follows the discussion of [40].
The space of single­electron wave functions is spanned by a basis of orbitals {|ϕµ⟩}. The overlap
is described by the overlap matrix S with elements
Sµν = ⟨ϕµ|ϕν⟩,
(A.28)
normalized such that the diagonal elements Sµµ = 1. We assume that the basis, and thereby S is
constant in time, but the treatment can be generalized to include a time­dependent basis. A general
wave­function |ψ⟩may be expanded in this basis set, |ψ⟩= P
α cα |ϕα⟩≡cα |ϕα⟩, where we
adopt the Einstein notation, i.e. the convention that an index that is repeated once as an upper and
then as a lower index (or vice versa) is summed over. This notation is commonly used in the study
of differentiable manifolds and in particular in the study of relativity [41], where the term metric
tensor is used in place of overlap matrix. For a more thorough discussion on the mathematical
underpinnings of this notation, we refer to [42]. One of its merits is in the fact that changes of
basis are much easier to deal with using this notation. The coefficients cα in the expansion of |ψ⟩
depend on the basis set, however |ψ⟩itself is independent of the basis chosen to describe it, a fact
that follows immediately from the notation by virtue of the fact that |ψ⟩does not bear an index
sub­ or superscript.
A change of basis is a linear transformation of the form
cα →cα = Qα
βcβ,
|ϕα⟩→
ϕα

= (Q−1)β
α |ϕβ⟩,
(A.29)
where (Q−1)γ
αQα
β = δγ
β is the identity matrix. The key feature of this transformation is that it
leaves all physical (i.e. index­free) quantities invariant,
|ψ⟩= cα |ϕα⟩= cβδγ
β |ϕγ⟩= cβQα
β(Q−1)γ
α |ϕγ⟩= cα ϕα

.
(A.30)
We define now the inverse overlap matrix Sµν by the relation
SµνSνλ = δµλ.
(A.31)
With this definition, the overlap matrix may be used to consistently raise or lower the indices of
any tensor quantity.
The Schrödinger equation i∂t |ψ⟩= H |ψ⟩expressed in the basis {|ψα⟩} takes the form
i∂tcα |ϕα⟩= cαH |ϕα⟩≡cα |ϕβ⟩Hβ
α = cβ |ϕα⟩Hα
β ,
(A.32)
where the relation H |ϕα⟩= |ϕβ⟩Hβ
α defines the tensor components Hβ
α of H. On the right­
hand side of eq. (A.32) we have simply switched the names of the dummy indices α, β.
In
eq. (A.32) the unknown quantities are the coefficients cα. Leaving out the known basis wave
functions from the equation, we find
i∂tcα = Hα
β cβ.
(A.33)
Typically, however, the Schrödinger equation in a non­orthogonal basis is not formulated in terms
of the tensor components Hα
β of the Hamiltonian, but instead in terms of components defined
from inner products,
⟨ϕα|H|ϕβ⟩= SαγHγ
β ≡Hαβ,
(A.34)
A.4. Extension to a non­orthogonal basis ­ Löwdin transform
71
==PAGE:80==
in terms of which the Schrödinger equation reads
i∂tcα ≡i∂tSαβcβ(t) = Hαβcβ,
(A.35)
or simply i∂tSc = Hc, where by H we mean the matrix with elements Hµν, and by c the vector
with components cα.
Our interest is now to perform a change of basis of this equation in a way that minimally changes
the basis set. The canonical way to do this is the Löwdin transformation [43], where we define a
transformation matrix Qα
β = (Sαβ)
1
2 . 2 From this we find immediately (Q−1)β
α = S
−1
2
αβ .
This particular basis transformation has two useful properties. First, the new basis is orthonormal.
To see this, we just transform the overlap matrix to the new basis and find
Sµν = (Q−1)γ
µ(Q−1)δ
νSγδ =
X
γδ
S
−1
2
µγ SγδS
−1
2
δν = δµν,
(A.36)
which shows that the new basis is orthonormal as the overlap is simply the identity. Second, in
typical applications S is very close to the identity as the overlap between neighboring orbitals is
typically small. This means that S
1
2 is even closer to the identity, and our transformation therefore
changes the orbitals minimally. Numerically this is desirable, as such a transformation is unlikely
to introduce long­range interactions in the new basis set.
Using eq. (A.29) to cast all quantities to the Löwdin basis, we find that the new coefficients are
c = S
1
2 c. For the Hamiltonian, we can similarly show that we obtain H = S−1
2 HS−1
2 .
The Green functions associated to H naturally bears raised indices. This can be seen from the
equation of motion
(Sµνi∂t −Hµν)Gνλ = δλ
µ,
(A.37)
where the overlap matrix appears on the first term by the process of lowering the upper index of
the Hamilton operator. Having established that the Green functions carry raised indices, we see
that their transformation law in the Löwdin basis is G = S
1
2 GS
1
2 . By similar reasoning, it can
be shown that the self­energy carries lower indices like the Hamiltonian, and thus transforms with
S−1
2 .
The adiabatic expansion can thus be used directly in systems with non­orthogonal bases by initially
transforming the input Hamiltonian and self­energies to the Löwdin basis.
2This definition may look strange as the number of upper and lower indices is not the same on each side of the
equation. This just reflects the fact that the equation is not independent of the basis in which it is cast. Such basis
dependence would not be permissible for a physical law, but is exactly what we are after here. We note also that the
square­root and inverse are well­defined as S is Hermitian and positive­definite.
72
A.4. Extension to a non­orthogonal basis ­ Löwdin transform
==PAGE:81==
B
Numerical Implementation
In this chapter, we present some details on the numerical implementation of the adiabatic expansion
written in Python for this project. The Python code used for the calculations can be found on github
at https://github.com/JakobKSvaneborg/Time-dependent-transport.
A particular challenge in the numerical implementation of the adiabatic expansion is the efficient
and accurate calculation of the Wigner­transformed self­energies for an arbitrary external potential.
In the following section, we present some analysis on how this issue has been addressed in the
Python program.
B.1
Wigner transform of self­energies
Calculating the Wigner transforms of eqs. (3.69), we find the expressions
eΣ
<
α (T, ω) = i
Z ∞
−∞
dτ exp
(
iωτ −i
Z T+ τ
2
T−τ
2
dt1∆α(t1)
) Z ∞
−∞
dϵ
2πfα(ε)Γα(ε)e−iετ,
(B.1)
and
eΣ
r
α(T, ω) = −i
Z ∞
0
dτ exp
(
iωτ −i
Z T+ τ
2
T−τ
2
dt1∆α(t1)
) Z ∞
−∞
dϵ
2πΓα(ε)e−iετ.
(B.2)
We note that the exponent of the integrand is anti­symmetric in τ, such that Σ<
α must be real, and
eΣ
<
α (T, ω) = i
Z ∞
0
dτ exp
(
iωτ −i
Z T+ τ
2
T−τ
2
dt1∆α(t1)
) Z ∞
−∞
dϵ
2πfα(ε)Γα(ε)e−iετ +
c.c.
(B.3)
Once the retarded self­energy has been found, the advanced self­energy is easily found by complex
conjugation. We do not need the greater self­energy in our formulation.
We have in equation (B.1) assumed that Γ is time­independent. This is the situation relevant for
most systems of experimental interest, where the density of states in the electrodes remains constant
over the time of the experiment. However if required, a dependence on the central time T can be
introduced without further complications.
The accurate and fast calculations of the Wigner­transformed self­energies is imperative for the
adiabatic expansion scheme to work well. We now consider how this may be achieved in a variety
of situations. We first consider the general case where the energy­dependence of Γα is arbitrary,
and the external potential ∆α is an arbitrary pulse with finite support in time. We then consider
the simplifications that may be achieved if
• The external modulation is harmonic, ∆α(t) = Aα cos(Ωαt + ϕα).
• Γα is energy­independent, i.e. the electrodes are described in the wide­band limit,
• Γα is given by a sum of Lorentzians.
The heart of the efficient implementation of the self­energy calculation is to evaluate the integrals
using the fast Fourier transform (FFT), which has a very efficient implementation in Numpy, or
using contour integrals in the case of the Lorentzian expansion.
Appendix B. Numerical Implementation
73
==PAGE:82==
B.1.1
Discrete Fourier Transform
Computers are digital, and numerical implementations therefore demand that the functions in­
volved in a calculation be evaluated in a discrete array of points. As the theory is formulated in
terms of functions of continuous variables, it is worth considering the way that this digitalization
affects the expressions.
In particular for the problem of calculating the self­energies, we would like to be able to calcu­
late the Fourier transforms appearing in the definition of the self­energy using the Fast Fourier
Transform algorithm, as this is much faster than calculating the integrals by traditional numerical
quadrature. An efficient implementation of the FFT algorithm may be found in the Numpy package
in Python, where the FFT of an array fof length n with elements fm, m = 1, ...n is defined as the
array F with elements Fk given by
Fk =
n−1
X
m=0
fme−2πi mk
n .
(B.4)
The original function (array) may be recovered using the inverse transform, defined from
fm = 1
n
n−1
X
k=0
Fke2πi mk
n .
(B.5)
Due to the many existing efficient implementations of the FFT, we would like to use these formulas
in the calculation of the self­energies. We therefore have a problem of determining the array fm
such that
Z ∞
−∞
dε
2πf(ε)e−iετ ≈
n−1
X
m=0
fme−2πi mk
n .
(B.6)
A connection between these formulations is made by the definition of the Riemann integral, which
defines the integral of a function f as the limit
Z b
a
f(ε)dε = lim
N→∞
b −a
N
N−1
X
m=0
f(εm)
(B.7)
where the εm are uniformly sampled on the interval [a, b], i.e. εm = a + m
N (b −a). We assume
now that the function f(ε) has finite support in such an interval [a, b] such that we can take these
values as the limits of integration. Note that this corresponds to the physically relevant situation,
as states in the electrodes only exist in a finite energy range. With the Riemann integral, we find
that
F(τ) =
Z b
a
dε
2πf(ε)e−iετ = lim
N→∞
b −a
2πN
N−1
X
m=0
f(εm)e−iεmτ,
(B.8)
where εm = a + m
N (b −a). If we consider a finite N, we see that this corresponds precisely to the
FFT formula if we take
fm = b −a
2πN f(εm)e−iaτ
(B.9)
and
τ(εm −a) = 2πmk
N
(B.10)
This relation thus defines a grid of points τk on which the transformed variable τ lives, namely
τk = 2π
mk
N(εm −a) = 2πk
b −a.
(B.11)
74
B.1. Wigner transform of self­energies
==PAGE:83==
In order to obtain an accurate representation of the function f, the Nyquist sampling criterion must
be satisfied. This states that the sampling frequency
1
∆ε =
N
b−a must be at least twice as large as the
largest frequency component of the sampled signal. This means that N and the integration interval
must be chosen sufficiently large such that the support of the Fourier transform ef is contained in
the range
h
0,
N
2(b−a)
i
. If we can estimate the bandwidth of f, we can ensure that this holds directly.
If that is not possible, the sampling rate should be chosen sufficiently large such that the resulting
transform vanishes for all of the upper part of the spectrum. If the original function is reasonably
well­behaved, this should ensure that the entire spectrum is contained. This means that to avoid
aliasing Fk should vanish for k ≥N/2. When actually using the FFT algorithm, this will not quite
hold, as aliasing does occur in the right half of the frequency range. This range corresponds to the
negative frequencies contained in the signal, and should not be included in our formulation. We
address this problem numerically by multiplying the Fourier transformed function with a Gaussian
low­pass filter, which effectively removes large frequencies.
It is also important to note that when using the FFT algorithm, the points at which the transformed
function is evaluated are entirely determined by N and (b−a). Therefore it is useful only if we can
accept having the function evaluated at these values of τ. In particular, we note that the spacing
between successive τ values depends only on the size of the integration interval b −a. This is
important to take into account due to the Nyquist sampling theorem, which states that the DFT can
be used to accurately represent a signal only if the sampling frequency is at least twice as large as
the largest frequency contained in the signal. Note that k will take the values 0, 1, · · · n −1. The
largest value of τ that will be included is therefore τn−1 = 2π n−1
b−a . These considerations place
some restrictions on the functions that we wish to evaluate with the FFT. We must have
• Support: The functions with which we work must have support in the range τ ∈[0, τmax],
where τmax = 2π n−1
b−a .
• Sampling rate: The transformed function will be sampled at a rate ∆τ =
2π
b−a. This must be
larger than twice the maximum frequency contained in the signal.
To satisfy these requirements, we must choose sufficiently large n and a sufficiently large integra­
tion area b −a, and this range may therefore have to extend past the actual support of the function.
To obtain the self­energies we also need to apply the inverse Fourier transform. After obtaining
Fk ≈F(τk) with the FFT, we must therefore calculate
Σ =
Z τmax
0
dτg(T, τ)F(τ)eiωτ,
(B.12)
where g(T, τ) = exp
n
iωτ −i
R T+ τ
2
T−τ
2 dt1∆α(t1)
o
. Using the inverse FFT, we want to make the
approximation
Σ(ω) =
Z τmax
0
dτg(τ)F(τ)eiωτ ≈1
N
n−1
X
k=0
hke−i2π mk
N .
(B.13)
With the same reasoning as before, we see that we require
hk = τmaxg(τk)Fkeiτa,
(B.14)
and
τk(ωm −a) = 2πkm
N ,
(B.15)
which implies ωm = εm. Satisfying this last equality is desirable, as it lets us directly control the
points at which the Wigner­transformed functions should be evaluated. This illustrates how the
FFT algorithm may be used to efficiently calculate the Wigner transform of the self­energies in
B.1. Wigner transform of self­energies
75
==PAGE:84==
the general situation. We will now examine the simplifications that may be obtained under more
specific conditions.
B.1.2
Wigner­transform of a Lorentzian expansion
If the level­width function is approximated by a sum of Lorentzian functions, i.e.
Γα(ε) =
NL
X
ℓ=1
W 2
αℓ
(ε −εαℓ)2 + W 2
αℓ
Λαℓ,
(B.16)
the calculus of residues may be used to efficiently calculate the energy integral appearing in eqs. (B.1)
and (B.2). The denominator may be expanded as
(ε −εαℓ)2 + W 2
αℓ= (ε −εαℓ+ iWαℓ)(ε −εαℓ−iWαℓ),
and we see thereby that Γα has a simple pole at every point z±
αℓ= εαℓ± iWαℓ. The residues r±
αℓ
at each of these poles may be found by evaluating
lim
ε→z±
αℓ
 ε −z±
αℓ

Γα(ε),
(B.17)
whereby we find
r±
αℓ= ∓i
2WαℓΛαℓ.
(B.18)
The expansion of the level­width function may thus equivalently be written
Γα(ε) =
NL
X
ℓ=1

r+
αℓ
ε −zp
αℓ
+
r−
αℓ
ε −z−
αℓ

= i
2
NL
X
ℓ=1
WαℓΛαℓ

−(ε −εαℓ−iWαℓ)−1 + (ε −εαℓ+ iWαℓ)−1
.
(B.19)
To use the calculus of residues, we will also need to approximate the Fermi function. [27] demon­
strated a very accurate Padé­type approximation of the Fermi function of the form
fα(ε) ≈1
2 +
NF
X
p=1
 
r+
p
ε −z+
p
+
r−
p
ε −z−
p
!
,
(B.20)
where z+
p and z−
p are poles in the upper and lower half­planes, respectively, and r±
p the correspond­
ing residues. Using these expansions, we will consider the expressions for the Wigner transforms
of the self­energies. Integrating over a contour in the lower half plane, recalling that τ ≥0, we
find that
Z ∞
−∞
dε
2πe−iετΓα(ε) = −i
NL
X
ℓ=1
r−
αℓe−iz−
αℓτ.
(B.21)
The imaginary part of the pole z−
αℓcause the integrand to decay exponentially with τ, and ensures
that the integral over τ will converge. If the τ integral is to be calculated numerically, the cut­off
τm should be chosen according to the slowest decay rate, i.e. the pole with the smallest imag­
inary part. As the imaginary part of each Lorentzian pole is precisely the (signed) width of the
Lorentzian function, (Im(z±
αℓ) = ±Wαℓ), we see that the width of the approximating Lorentzians
is proportional to the exponential decay rate of the integrand. From this we infer that a sharply
peaked level­width function corresponds to a system with a long memory, as even large values of
τ contribute to the integral; on the other hand, in the wide­band limit the system has no memory
of its previous state.
Having evaluated the energy integral with the calculus of residues, we can now define a grid of
points τk on which to evaluate this function. Choosing this grid to be the same as in the previous
section, we obtain the same Fk, and we can then again use the same approach as in eq. (B.13) to
efficiently calculate the integral over τ, thereby obtaining the self­energies in Wigner space.
76
B.1. Wigner transform of self­energies
==PAGE:85==
B.1.3
Wide­band limit
In the wide­band limit, the level­width function is a constant Γα(ε) = Γα, independent of energy.
We can treat this case using the results of the last section by modeling the constant function as a
single Lorentzian with an infinite width,
Γα =
lim
W→∞
W 2Γα
ε2 + W 2 .
(B.22)
The expression for the retarded self­energy can then be evaluated using the residue theorem, whereby
we find
Σr
α(T, ω) =
lim
W→∞−i
Z ∞
0
dτ W
2 Γαe−Wτ exp
(
iωτ −i
Z T+ τ
2
T−τ
2
dt1∆α(t1)
)
(B.23)
As W →∞, the integrand becomes more and more sharply peaked near τ = 0 and the second
exponent, containing the potential, can be neglected. The integral can then easily be calculated,
and we obtain simply Σr
α = −i
2Γα.
For the lesser self­energy, the presence of the Fermi function in the integral means that no such
significant simplification is possible in the wide­band limit. We therefore calculate this function
using the FFT approach as described in section B.1.1.
B.1.4
Harmonic (AC) potential
When the driving potential is harmonic, ∆α(T) = Vα cos(ΩαT + ϕα), the effect of the external
potential on the self­energy in the Wigner representation can be calculated analytically. With this
form of the potential, the expression for the retarded self­energy 1 eq. (B.2) becomes
eΣ
r
α(T, ω) = −i
Z ∞
0
dτe
iωτ−iVα
∫T + τ
2
T −τ
2
dt1 cos(Ωαt1+ϕα) Z ∞
−∞
dε
2πe−iετΓα(ε).
(B.24)
The integral in the exponent is simply
Vα
Z T+ τ
2
T−τ
2
dt1 cos(Ωαt1 + ϕα) = Vα
Ωα
h
sin

ΩαT + Ωα
τ
2 + ϕα

−sin

ΩαT −Ωα
τ
2 + ϕα
i
.
(B.25)
We use the identity sin(a + b) −sin(a −b) = 2 cos(a) sin(b) and the Jacobi­Anger expansion of
the form
e−iz sin θ =
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(z)einθ,
(B.26)
where Jn is the nth Bessel function of the first kind. With these identities, we can simplify the
exponential in equation (B.24) to find
e
−iVα
∫T + τ
2
T −τ
2
dt1 cos(Ωαt1+ϕα) =
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(Ψα(T))einΩα τ
2 ,
(B.27)
where Ψα(T) = 2Vα
Ωα cos(ΩαT + ϕα). We remark here that in a numerical implementation this sum
must of course be truncated at a certain point. How many terms should be included is determined by
the fraction Vα/Ωα, since we always have |Ψα(T)| ≤2Vα/Ωα. For a given value of the argument,
an N can be found such that all Bessel functions Jn(x) with n ≥N vanish numerically for |x|
smaller than the given value. We remark also in this regard that if Vα = 0, only the zeroth order
Bessel function is needed.
1We could just as well have taken the lesser self­energy.
B.1. Wigner transform of self­energies
77
==PAGE:86==
This then yields
eΣ
r
α(T, ω) = −i
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(Ψα(T))
Z ∞
0
dτei(ω+ nΩα
2 )τ
Z ∞
−∞
dε
2πe−iετΓα(ε).
(B.28)
For the lesser self­energy, the τ integral can be taken from −∞to ∞, and the two integrals combine
to simply Γα
 ω + nΩα
2

. For the retarded self­energy, we will introduce a small η > 0, like in
chapter 3 which is taken to approach zero at the end of the calculation. With this, we may first
perform the integral over τ to obtain a sum of expressions of the form
lim
η→0+
Z ∞
−∞
dε
2π
Γα(ε)
ω −ε + nΩα
2
+ iη = −i
2Γα

ω + nΩα
2

+ P
Z ∞
−∞
dε
2π
Γα(ε)
ω −ε + nΩα
2
,
(B.29)
The second term is 1
2 times the Hilbert transform of Γα. We denote the Hilbert transform by the
symbol h, and find that the complete expression for the retarded self­energy in this case becomes
eΣ
r
α(T, ω) = 1
2
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(Ψα(T))

h(Γα)

ω + nΩα
2

−iΓα

ω + nΩα
2

.
(B.30)
If the level­width function is expanded in a sum of Lorentzians, the energy integral may instead be
carried out using the residue theorem. We would start out with the expression
eΣ
r
α(T, ω) = −
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(Ψα(T))
NL
X
ℓ=1
r−
αℓ
Z ∞
0
dτei(ω+ nΩα
2
−z−
αℓ)τ.
(B.31)
Now, all the z−
αℓhave a strictly negative imaginary part, which causes the integrand to vanish for
large τ, and we find explicitly,
eΣ
r
α(T, ω) = −
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(Ψα(T))
NL
X
ℓ=1
r−
αℓ
Z ∞
0
dτei(ω+ nΩα
2
−z−
αℓ)τ
= −i
∞
X
n=−∞
(−1)nJn(Ψα(T))
NL
X
ℓ=1
r−
αℓ
ω + nΩα
2
−z−
αℓ
.
(B.32)
From this expression it is evident that the retarded self­energy is analytic in the upper half­plane, as
all of its poles lie in the lower half plane. This is what we would expect from a retarded function.
The lesser self­energy may be expanded in a similar way, however we must now also sum over the
poles of the expansion of the Fermi function. In addition, we recall that τ now takes both positive
and negative values. We will not give the details of the derivation here, which is carried out much
like the analysis above.
B.2
Zeroth and first orders of the adiabatic expansion
We here give the explicit equations for the Green functions and the current matrix up to first order in
the adiabatic expansion. To zeroth order, i.e. neglecting all derivatives with respect to T, equation
(4.16) and equation (4.15) yield
(ω −HD) e
Gr/a
(0) = 1 + eΣ
r/a e
Gr/a
(0)
(B.33a)
(ω −HD) e
G≷
(0) =

eΣ
≷e
Ga
(0) + eΣ
r e
G≷
(0)

.
(B.33b)
78
B.2. Zeroth and first orders of the adiabatic expansion
==PAGE:87==
which can be immediately solved to yield
e
Gr/a
(0) =

ω −HD −eΣ
r/a−1
(B.34a)
e
G≷
(0) = e
Gr
(0) eΣ
≷e
Ga
(0),
(B.34b)
where the arguments (T, ω) have been suppressed. These solutions for the zeroth order (adiabatic)
functions can now be used in equation (4.15) and equation (4.16) to collect all terms linear in ∂T
and thereby obtain e
G(1). For the retarded/advanced functions, this results in
 i
2∂T + i
2∂T HD ∂ω

e
Gr/a
(0) +(ω −HD) e
Gr/a
(1) = eΣ
r/a e
Gr/a
(1) −i
2∂T eΣ
r/a∂ω e
Gr/a
(0) + i
2∂ω eΣ
r/a∂T e
Gr/a
(0) .
(B.35)
The term multiplying e
Gr/a
(1) in the above equation is precisely [ e
Gr/a
(0) ]−1, so that we obtain
e
Gr/a
(1) = −e
Gr/a
(0)
 i
2∂T + i
2∂T HD ∂ω

e
Gr/a
(0) −i
2
e
Gr/a
(0) ∂T eΣ
r/a∂ω e
Gr/a
(0) + i
2
e
Gr/a
(0) ∂ω eΣ
r/a∂T e
Gr/a
(0) .
(B.36)
For the greater/lesser functions, we obtain
 i
2∂T + i
2∂T HD ∂ω

e
G≷
(0) + (ω −HD) e
G≷
(1)
= eΣ
≷e
Ga
(1) + eΣ
r e
G≷
(1) −i
2∂T eΣ
≷∂ω e
Ga
(0) + i
2∂ω eΣ
≷∂T e
Ga
(0) −i
2∂T eΣ
r∂ω e
G≷
(0) + i
2∂ω eΣ
r∂T e
G≷
(0)
(B.37)
with the solution
e
G≷
(1) = e
Gr
(0) eΣ
≷e
Ga
(1) + i
2
"
−e
Gr
(0) (∂T + ∂T HD ∂ω) e
G≷
(0)
−e
Gr
(0)∂T eΣ
≷∂ω e
Ga
(0) + e
Gr
(0)∂ω eΣ
≷∂T e
Ga
(0) −e
Gr
(0)∂T eΣ
r∂ω e
G≷
(0) + e
Gr
(0)∂ω eΣ
r∂T e
G≷
(0)
#
.
(B.38)
The series may be continued in this way up to arbitrarily high order.
B.3
Auxiliary mode expansion in the ODE scheme
To improve the numerical efficiency of the scheme, the Fermi function and level­width function
are expanded as a series in the energy variable. This is known as the auxiliary mode scheme, and
allows for efficient computation of energy integrals by use of the residue theorem. This approach
was first suggested by [5], and our treatment follows their analysis.
The expansion of the Fermi function takes the form
fα(ε) ≈1
2 +
NF
X
p=1
 
r+
p
ε −z+
p
+
r−
p
ε −z−
p
!
,
(B.39)
where NF is the number of poles included in the approximation, which becomes exact in the limit
NF →∞. The coefficients r±
p and z±
p are found using the approximation introduced by [27]. The
level­width function Γ(ε) may be diagonalized in a suitable basis. We therefore write
Γα(ε) =
Nc
X
c=1
⃗ξαc(ε)vαc(ε)⃗ξ †
αc(ε),
(B.40)
B.3. Auxiliary mode expansion in the ODE scheme
79
==PAGE:88==
where Nc is the number of channels, vαc(ε) is the eigenvalue corresponding to ξαc, and the wave­
vectors ξα form a normalized, but non­orthogonal set. Note that since Γα(ε) is Hermitian, it can
always be diagonalized in an orthonormal basis. However, it is possible to choose a basis such
that the eigenvalues vαc are related to the group velocities of electrons in channel αc, and the
wave vectors may be categorized into outgoing and incoming states [44]. It may therefore be
advantageous to use a non­orthogonal basis. This can also be the case if the self­energy is the
result of a DFT calculation in which a non­orthogonal basis was used. In certain cases, the wave­
vectors ξ become energy independent. This occurs for instance when the crystal structure of the
leads is cubic, and there is no external magnetic field. When this is the case, we may expand the
vαc(ε) as a sum of Lorentzians,
Γα(ε) =
Nc
X
c=1
NL
X
ℓ=1
⃗ξαc
ΛαℓcW 2
αℓc
(ε −εαℓc)2 + W 2
αℓc
⃗ξ †
αc.
(B.41)
The goal of the numerical scheme is now to express the equations of motion in terms of these
auxiliary modes. In terms of the auxiliary modes, the greater and lesser self­energies defined in
eqs. (3.69) take the form
Σ≷
α(t1, t) =
Nc
X
c=1
NL+NF
X
x=1
⃗ξαcΣ≷
αxc(t1, t)⃗ξ †
αc ≡
Nc
X
c=1
NL+NF
X
x=1
⃗ξαcΛ≷,±
αxc exp

i
Z t
t1
dt′(χ±
αxc + ∆α(t′))

⃗ξ †
αc,
(B.42)
where the index x = {ℓ, p} combines the Lorentz poles from the expansion of the level­width
function, and the poles from the expansion of the Fermi function. The new coefficients entering
equation (B.42) are defined as
Λ>,±
αxc =
−i
2 ΛαℓcWαℓc(1 −fα(εαℓc ± iWαℓc)),
± 1
β vαc(χ±
αpc)

,
(B.43a)
Λ<,±
αxc =
 i
2ΛαℓcWαℓcfα(εαℓc ± iWαℓc),
± 1
β vαc(χ±
αpc)

,
(B.43b)
and
χ±
αxc =

εαℓc ± iWαℓc,
z±
p
	
.
(B.44)
These expressions are straightforwardly obtained from eqs. (3.69) by evaluating the energy integral
with the help of the residue theorem. In applying the theorem, the contour must be closed in the
upper half plane if t > t1, and the variables bearing the superscript ′+′ must be used. In contrast,
when t < t1, the contour must be closed in the lower half­plane, and the variables bearing the
superscript ′−′ must be used.
Using this new expression for the self­energy in the expression for Πα(t), equation (3.73), we
obtain
Πα(t) =
Nc
X
c=1
NL+NF
X
x=1
Z t
−∞
dt1
h
G>(t, t1)Λ<+
αxc⃗ξαc⃗ξ †
αc −G<(t, t1)Λ>+
αxc⃗ξαc⃗ξ †
αc
i
exp

i
Z t
t1
dt′(χ+
αxc + ∆α(t′))

=
Nc
X
c=1
NL+NF
X
x=1
⃗Ψαxc(t)⃗ξ †
αc,
(B.45)
where we have defined the auxiliary mode wave vectors
⃗Ψαxc(t) =
Z t
−∞
dt1

G>(t, t1)Λ<+
αxc −G<(t, t1)Λ>+
αxc

exp

i
Z t
t1
dt′(χ+
αxc + ∆α(t′))

⃗ξαc.
(B.46)
80
B.3. Auxiliary mode expansion in the ODE scheme
==PAGE:89==
The time­dependence of Πα is now contained entirely in the ⃗Ψαxc. Their equation of motion is
most easily found by simply calculating the derivative of equation (B.46), which yields
i∂t⃗Ψαxc(t) = (1 −σ(t))Λ<+
αxc⃗ξαxc + σ(t)Λ>+
αxc⃗ξαxc −(χ+
αxc + ∆α(t))⃗Ψαxc(t) + i∂G
t ⃗Ψαxc(t),
(B.47)
where the differential operator ∂G
t acts only on the lesser and greater Green functions. Using their
equations of motion given in equation (3.87), we obtain finally
i∂t⃗Ψαxc(t) = Λ<+
αxc⃗ξαxc +
 Λ>+
αxc −Λ<+
αxc

σ(t)⃗ξαxc
+[HD(t) −χ+
αxc + ∆α(t)]⃗Ψαxc(t) +
X
α′x′c′
Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t)⃗ξα′c′.
(B.48)
The scalar quantities Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t) are defined as
X
α′x′c′
Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t)⃗ξα′c′ = (i∂G
t −HD(t))⃗Ψαxc(t),
(B.49)
Term for term, by using equation (3.87), this becomes
Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t) =
⃗ξ †
α′c′
Z t
−∞
dt2
( Z t2
−∞
dt1

Σ>
α′x′c′(t, t1)Σ<
αxc(t2, t) −Σ<
α′x′c′(t, t1)Σ>
αxc(t2, t)

Ga(t1, t2)
+
Z t
−∞
dt1
 Σ>
α′x′c′(t, t1) −Σ<
α′x′c′(t, t1)
 
G>(t1, t2)Σ<
αxc(t2, t) −G<(t1, t2)Σ>
αxc(t2, t)

)
⃗ξαc
(B.50)
We see that Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t) is thus a matrix element coupling the wave vectors ⃗ξα′c′ and ⃗ξαc. Taking
the derivative of Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t) with respect to time, we obtain the equation of motion
i∂tΩαxc,α′x′c′(t) =
 χ−
α′x′c′ + ∆α′(t) −χ+
αxc −∆α(t)

Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t)+
i(Λ>−
α′x′c′ −Λ<−
α′x′c′)⃗ξ †
α′c′ ⃗Ψαxc(t) + i⃗ξ †
α′c′
 Z t
−∞
dt1Σ>
α′x′c′(t, t1)

Λ<+
αxc −Λ>+
αxc

G<(t1, t)−
Σ<
α′x′c′(t, t1)

Λ<+
αxc −Λ>+
αxc

G>(t1, t)

⃗ξαc.
(B.51)
We rewrite the last line, using that

Σ≷
α′x′c′(t1, t)
∗
= −Σ≷
α′x′c′(t, t1), and similarly for G, to
obtain
i

Λ<+
αxc −Λ>+
αxc
 ⃗ξ †
α′c′
Z t
−∞
dt1Σ>
α′x′c′(t, t1)G<(t1, t) −Σ<
α′x′c′(t, t1)G>(t1, t)

⃗ξαc
= i

Λ<+
αxc −Λ>+
αxc
 Z t
−∞
dt1

G<(t, t1)Σ>
α′x′c′(t1, t) −G>(t, t1)Σ<
α′x′c′(t1, t)
 ⃗ξαc
†
⃗ξαc
= −i

Λ<+
αxc −Λ>+
αxc
 ⃗Ψ†
α′x′c′(t)⃗ξαc.
(B.52)
Substituting this back into equation (B.51), we obtain the final equation of motion
i∂tΩαxc,α′x′c′(t) =
 χ−
α′x′c′ + ∆α′(t) −χ+
αxc −∆α(t)

Ωαxc,α′x′c′(t)
+ i

Λ>−
α′x′c′ −Λ<−
α′x′c′
 ⃗ξ †
α′c′ ⃗Ψαxc(t) + i

Λ>+
αxc −Λ<+
αxc
 ⃗Ψ†
α′x′c′(t)⃗ξαc.
(B.53)
Equations (4.46), (B.48), and (B.53) together constitute a closed set of equations, similar to the
ones derived in section 4.2 which may be propagated forward from a given initial condition.
B.3. Auxiliary mode expansion in the ODE scheme
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure B.1: Sketch of the DQD configuration. The energy levels in the dot are broadened by
the self­energy. The on­site energies of the dot and the chemical potentials of the left and right
electrodes may vary independently.
B.4
Double quantum dot – verification of the ODE scheme
In this section we present a calculation of the current through a system containing two energy levels,
a so­called double quantum dot. The presence of two levels allows for the system to display internal
dynamics, a quality that the single energy level does not possess. We consider a configuration
where the two levels are coupled in series as illustrated in figure B.1. This setup corresponds to
the configuration analyzed in [4], where the effect of varying the bandwidth of the electrode self­
energies is studied. Therefore it may serve as a test system allowing us to verify the implementation
of the ODE scheme by reproduction of the results reported by [4]. The DQD is described by the
Hamiltonian
H = εl(t)c†
l cl + εr(t)c†
rcr + γc†
rcl + γ∗c†
l cr.
(B.54)
To reproduce the results of [4], we will treat the system both in the wide­band limit and away from
the wide­band limit by approximating the level­width function by a single Lorentzian of varying
width. The left electrode couples only to the left site, and the right electrode couples only to the
right site. They do this through symmetrical level­width functions ΓL(ε) = ΓR(ε) = Γ(ε)/2,
where
Γ(ε) = Γ
W 2
ε2 + W 2 ,
(B.55)
where W is the width of the Lorentzian used, and Γ is a constant which defines the energy scale
of the problem. The temperature is fixed at kbT = 0.1Γ and the hopping elements are fixed at
γ = γ∗= Γ. Initially the chemical potentials µL, µR and the on­site energies εl/r are zero. As
an external time­dependent bias V (t) is applied, these energies change according to ∆x · V (t),
where x ∈{L, R, l, r} and the constants ∆x have the values ∆L = 1
2, ∆l = 1
4, ∆r = −1
4, and
∆R = −1
2. The external bias has the form
V (t) = 3
2Γ [tanh(tΓ) −tanh(tΓ −20)] .
(B.56)
This pulse has the shape of a rectangular box pulse with softened edges. The parameters have
been chosen to match the system analyzed in [4], and by reproducing their results we can obtain a
verification of the implementation of the ODE scheme. The current through the system for different
values of W may be seen in figure B.2. The top part of the figure is taken from [4], while the bottom
part of the figure shows calculations made by the code used in this project.
The agreement between the results reported by [4] and the prediction made by the ODE scheme
(green curves) is exact as far as the author can tell, providing strong evidence that our implemen­
tation is correct. Also shown is the current through this system as calculated using the adiabatic
82
B.4. Double quantum dot – verification of the ODE scheme
==PAGE:91==
Figure B.2: Top: Current out of the left electrode predicted by the ODE propagation scheme when
the DQD system is exposed to a box­shaped pulse. The level­width function is approximated by a
single Lorentzian of with W. The different curves correspond to different values of W. The figure
is taken from [4]. Bottom: A reproduction of three of the curves shown in the top figure, namely for
the WBL, W = 2 and W = 1
2. The current predicted by the ODE propagation scheme is visually
identical to that shown in the top, and serves as a verification of the implementation of the ODE
propagation scheme. Currents predicted by the zeroth and first orders of the adiabatic expansion are
shown as well. While these currents settle on the correct steady­state values, unphysical behavior is
observed near the edges of the box pulse. This illustrates how the adiabatic expansion breaks down
when the external pulse varies rapidly. Note that the y­axis on the figure to the right is different
from that of the two others.
expansion. Note that near the edges of the box pulse, the external bias varies quickly relative to
Γ, breaking down the assumption in the AE of slow variation. This results, unsurprisingly, in the
AE current yielding a very poor prediction near these edges. In fact, the calculated current seems
decidedly unphysical as the current starts to flow slightly before the bias is turned on. We note
also that the performance of the AE is better in the wide­band limit, which also makes sense as
the variation of the level­width function with energy increases the error in the scheme. Note also
that these faults show up only in the first­order dynamical correction to the current. The purely
adiabatic result matches the steady­state value of the ODE scheme very accurately.
To evaluate the performance of the AE in a more controlled setting, we changed the bias to a
harmonic wave V (t) = Γ cos(Ωt), keeping all other parameters the same as before. We then
calculated the current through the system using both the zeroth and first orders of the adiabatic
expansion, and the ODE scheme. The performance of the AE was evaluated through the relative
B.4. Double quantum dot – verification of the ODE scheme
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure B.3: Relative RMS error in the current through the DQD calculated by the zeroth and first
orders of the adiabatic expansion under an AC potential. The scaling of the error with frequency
is as one would expect, with the zeroth order error being approximately linear and the first order
error quadratic in the frequency. Note that the error in the first order dynamical correction seems
to flatten out for very low frequencies. We suspect that this is due to numerical issues in the self­
energy calculation at very low frequencies.
root­mean­square (RMS) deviation from the current predicted by the ODE scheme, defined by
eRMS,x =
v
u
u
t
R T
0 (Jx −JODE)2dt
R T
0 J2
ODEdt
,
(B.57)
where Jx is short­hand for either J0 or J0 + J1. A plot of the obtained RMS error for the zeroth
and first orders of the AE may be seen in figure B.3. Up to around ln(Ω/Γ) = −1, corresponding
to Ω≈0.37Γ, the errors scale with frequency as one would expect from such a scheme; The
error in the dynamically corrected current J0 +J1, which takes into account first­order derivatives
with respect to the central time, is approximately of order Ω2. The error in the purely adiabatic
current J0, which contains no derivatives, scales instead with Ω. At very low frequencies, the
improvement in the first­order correction seems to stop, and the curve flattens out. We suspect
that this is due to numerical issues with the calculation of the self­energy. As detailed in section
B.1, the Wigner transform of the self­energies under a harmonic potential contains an infinite sum
over Bessel functions P
n Jn(Ψα(T)). The magnitude of Ψα(T) scales as Ω−1, and thus for very
low frequencies a huge number of Bessel functions must be included to correctly evaluate the self­
energy. We suspect that too few Bessel functions have been used at the very lowest frequencies
examined, and that this is the cause for the flattening of the curve.
84
B.4. Double quantum dot – verification of the ODE scheme
==PAGE:93==
C
Contour integrals
The mathematical field of complex analysis is concerned with the study of complex­valued func­
tions f of one or more complex variables. As the study of quantum mechanics involves precisely
such functions, many tools and techniques from complex analysis are needed in this endeavour.
In this chapter, we will introduce some fundamental concepts of complex analysis and one such
tool that has been used in this project extensively in this project, namely the calculus of residues,
or residue theorem. For simplicity, the results in this chapter will be presented for a function of
only one complex variable. For a more thorough discussion and proofs of several of the statements
made here, we refer to [45].
A function f : Df ⊆C →C is said to be differentiable at a point z0 if the limit
lim
z→z0
f(z) −f(z0)
z −z0
(C.1)
exists, and is independent of how the limit is taken (i.e. from which direction in the complex plane
z approaches z0). Writing z = x + iy where x, y ∈R and f(x + iy) = u(x, y) + iv(x, y) where
u, v : R2 →R, it can be shown that two necessary conditions for f to be complex differentiable
are
∂u
∂x = ∂v
∂y,
∂u
∂y = −∂v
∂x.
(C.2)
These conditions are known as the Cauchy­Riemann equations. If f is differentiable at every
point of its domain, it is said to be holomorphic, or equivalently, analytic. This is a very strong
requirement and has many consequences, one of which is that a holomorphic function is in fact not
just once differentiable, but infinitely differentiable.
The most important consequence that we use in this project is the fact that if the domain of a
holomorphic function f is simply connected (colloquially: has no holes), the integral of f around
any closed contour C in its domain vanishes,
I
C
f(z)dz = 0.
(C.3)
A meromorphic function g : Dg ⊆C →C is a function that is holomorphic everywhere in its
domain except at a countable number of points. Such a function may be expressed as the ratio of
two holomorphic functions, and the isolated points then correspond to the zeros of the denominator,
also denoted the poles of g. Typically we encounter meromorphic functions of the form
g(z) = f(z)
z −z0
.
(C.4)
Let C be any closed contour in the complex plane which encircles the pole z0 of g once. By
appropriately deforming C, it may be shown that
I
C
g(z)dz =
I
C
f(z)
z −z0
dz = ±2πif(z0),
(C.5)
where the plus sign must be chosen if the loop is traversed in a counter­clockwise direction, and the
minus sign if the loop is traversed in a clockwise direction. The value f(z0) is called the residue of
g at z0, and the result (C.5) is therefore known as the residue theorem, and is extremely useful in
evaluating integrals of meromorphic functions. A special case often encountered is in calculating
Appendix C. Contour integrals
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure C.1: Contour used to evaluate integrals of the form
R ∞
−∞f(x)dx when |z|f(z) →0 for
|z| →∞in the upper half of the complex plane.
integrals of the form
R ∞
−∞f(x)dx where f is a function that decays sufficiently fast in the upper
or lower half of the complex plane such that |z|f(z) →0 for |z| →∞in at least one of these half
planes. Assume that this statement holds in the upper half plane. Then we may take a contour such
as the one illustrated in figure C.1. The contour runs along the real axis in the interval [−R, R]
and then returns to the starting point via a semicircular path in the upper half­plane. By virtue of
of our assumption on f, it holds that
Z
C
f(z)dz →
Z ∞
−∞
f(x)dx
for
R →∞.
(C.6)
If f is meromorphic, the contour integral may be easily evaluated using the residue theorem, and
a closed­form expression for the integral of f over the real line may thereby be obtained. Another
type of integral that may be evaluated using eq. (C.6) are integrals of the form
Z ∞
−∞
f(x)eiαxdx,
(C.7)
where α > 0. In this case, it is sufficient that |f(z)| →0 as |z| →∞in the upper half plane. This
result is known as Jordan’s lemma [45].
We note that if α < 0 a similar result holds, but the contour would be required to lie in the lower
half­plane. To obtain the integral over the real line, this contour would have to be traversed in the
clockwise direction, resulting in a change of sign, but otherwise a result completely analogous to
the case of positive α.
Another type of integral that may be calculated using results from complex analysis are integrals
of the form
lim
η→0+
Z ∞
−∞
f(x)
x ± iηdx.
(C.8)
If f is analytic, this integral may be evaluated using the Sokhotski–Plemelj theorem [46] which
gives the value
lim
η→0+
Z ∞
−∞
f(x)
x + iηdx = ∓iπf(0) + P
Z ∞
−∞
f(x)
x dx,
(C.9)
86
==PAGE:95==
where P denotes the Cauchy principal value. This integral often finds use in the calculating the
Fourier transform of retarded functions, where the integral of the an exponential
R ∞
0 dte(x+iη)t
gives precisely the fraction appearing in eq. (C.9).
87
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
[1]
Yanho Kwok, Yu Zhang, and GuanHua Chen. “Time­dependent density functional theory
for quantum transport”. In: Frontiers of Physics 9.6 (Dec. 2014), pp. 698–710. ISSN: 2095­
0470. DOI: 10.1007/s11467-013-0361-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11467-013-
0361-5.
[2]
Antti­Pekka Jauho, Ned S. Wingreen, and Yigal Meir. “Time­dependent transport in inter­
acting and noninteracting resonant­tunneling systems”. In: Phys. Rev. B 50 (8 Aug. 1994),
pp. 5528–5544. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.50.5528. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevB.50.5528.
[3]
Thomas D. Honeychurch and Daniel S. Kosov. “Timescale separation solution of the Kadanoff­
Baym equations for quantum transport in time­dependent fields”. In: Phys. Rev. B 100 (24
Dec. 2019), p. 245423. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.100.245423. URL: https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.245423.
[4]
Alexander Croy and Ulf Saalmann. “Propagation scheme for nonequilibrium dynamics of
electron transport in nanoscale devices”. In: Phys. Rev. B 80 (24 Dec. 2009), p. 245311. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevB.80.245311. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.80.
245311.
[5]
Bogdan Stefan Popescu and Alexander Croy. “Efficient auxiliary­mode approach for time­
dependent nanoelectronics”. In: New Journal of Physics 18.9 (Sept. 2016), p. 093044. DOI:
10.1088/1367-2630/18/9/093044. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/18/9/
093044.
[6]
Jae­Sung Rieh. “THz Applications”. In: Introduction to Terahertz Electronics. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2021, pp. 273–350. ISBN: 978­3­030­51842­4. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-030-51842-4_6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51842-4_6.
[7]
Dmitry A. Ryndyk. Theory of Quantum Transport at Nanoscale : An Introduction. eng.
Springer, 2016, Online–Ressource (XII, 246 p. 81 illus., 62 illus. in color, online resource)
(unknown). ISBN: 3319240862, 3319240889, 9783319240862, 9783319240886.
[8]
G. Baym and L.P. Kadanoff. Quantum statistical mechanics : Green’s function methods in
equilibrium and non­equilibrium problems. 1962.
[9]
L.V. Keldysh. “Diagram Technique for Nonequilibrium Processes”. In: Soviet Physica JETP
20 (4 1965). ISSN: 0038­5646.
[10]
Mads Brandbyge et al. “Density­functional method for nonequilibrium electron transport”.
In: Phys. Rev. B 65 (16 Mar. 2002), p. 165401. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.65.165401. URL:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.65.165401.
[11]
Nick Papior et al. “Improvements on non­equilibrium and transport Green function tech­
niques: The next­generation transiesta”. In: Computer Physics Communications 212 (2017),
pp. 8–24. ISSN: 0010­4655. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2016.09.022. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001046551630306X.
[12]
Taehee Kang, Young Mi Bahk, and Dai Sik Kim. “Terahertz quantum plasmonics at nanoscales
and angstrom scales”. eng. In: Nanophotonics 9.2 (2020), pp. 435–451. ISSN: 21928606,
21928614. DOI: 10.1515/nanoph-2019-0436.
[13]
Peter Bøggild et al. “Mapping the electrical properties of large­area graphene”. In: 2D Ma­
terials 4.4 (Sept. 2017), p. 042003. DOI: 10.1088/2053-1583/aa8683. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1088/2053-1583/aa8683.
[14]
Xinzhong Chen et al. “THz Near­Field Imaging of Extreme Subwavelength Metal Struc­
tures”. eng. In: Acs Photonics 7.3 (2020), pp. 687–694. ISSN: 23304022. DOI: 10.1021/
acsphotonics.9b01534.
88
Bibliography
==PAGE:97==
[15]
Alexander Sell, Alfred Leitenstorfer, and Rupert Huber. “Phase­locked generation and field­
resolved detection of widely tunable terahertz pulses with amplitudes exceeding 100 MV/cm”.
In: Opt. Lett. 33.23 (Dec. 2008), pp. 2767–2769. DOI: 10.1364/OL.33.002767. URL: http:
//opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-33-23-2767.
[16]
Jonas D. Buron et al. “Electrically Continuous Graphene from Single Crystal Copper Ver­
ified by Terahertz Conductance Spectroscopy and Micro Four­Point Probe”. In: Nano Let­
ters 14.11 (Nov. 2014), pp. 6348–6355. ISSN: 1530­6984. DOI: 10.1021/nl5028167. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/nl5028167.
[17]
Tyler L. Cocker et al. “An ultrafast terahertz scanning tunnelling microscope”. In: Nature
Photonics 7.8 (Aug. 2013), pp. 620–625. ISSN: 1749­4893. DOI: 10.1038/nphoton.2013.
151. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2013.151.
[18]
Tyler L. Cocker et al. “Tracking the ultrafast motion of a single molecule by femtosecond
orbital imaging”. In: Nature 539.7628 (Nov. 2016), pp. 263–267. ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI:
10.1038/nature19816. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19816.
[19]
J. Tersoff and D. R. Hamann. “Theory of the scanning tunneling microscope”. In: Phys.
Rev. B 31 (2 Jan. 1985), pp. 805–813. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.31.805. URL: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.31.805.
[20]
T. Hannotte et al. “s­SNOM imaging of a THz photonic mode”. In: 2020 45th International
Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW­THz). 2020, pp. 1–2.
DOI: 10.1109/IRMMW-THz46771.2020.9370928.
[21]
Hartmut J.W. Haug and Antti­Pekka Jauho. Quantum Kinetics in Transport and Optics of
Semiconductors. 2nd ed. Springer, 2007.
[22]
Jørgen Rammer. Quantum Field Theory of Non­equilibrium States. Cambridge University
Press, 2007.
[23]
C. J. O. Verzijl, J. S. Seldenthuis, and J. M. Thijssen. “Applicability of the wide­band limit
in DFT­based molecular transport calculations”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 138.9
(2013), p. 094102. DOI: 10.1063/1.4793259. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4793259.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4793259.
[24]
Leslie E Ballentine. Quantum mechanics: a modern development. World Scientific Publish­
ing Company, 2014.
[25]
Franz Mandl and Graham Shaw. Quantum field theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[26]
Henrik Bruus and Karsten Flensberg. Many­body quantum theory in condensed matter physics:
an introduction. OUP Oxford, 2004.
[27]
Jie Hu et al. “Pade spectrum decompositions of quantum distribution functions and optimal
hierarchical equations of motion construction for quantum open systems”. In: The Journal
of chemical physics 134 (June 2011), p. 244106. DOI: 10.1063/1.3602466.
[28]
B D Napitu and J M Thijssen. “Adiabatic and non­adiabatic charge pumping in a single­level
molecular motor”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 27.27 (June 2015), p. 275301.
DOI: 10.1088/0953- 8984/27/27/275301. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-
8984/27/27/275301.
[29]
Georgios E Pavlou et al. “Time­dependent transport through a T­coupled quantum dot”. In:
The European Physical Journal B 91.10 (2018), pp. 1–10.
[30]
GE Pavlou, AI Karanikas, and FK Diakonos. “Life­times of quantum resonances through
the Geometrical Phase Propagator Approach”. In: Annals of Physics 375 (2016), pp. 351–
367.
[31]
P. J. Leek et al. “Charge Pumping in Carbon Nanotubes”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (25 Dec.
2005), p. 256802. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.256802. URL: https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.256802.
[32]
V.I. Talyanskii et al. “Charge pumping in carbon nanotubes”. In: Physica E: Low­dimensional
Systems and Nanostructures 34.1 (2006), pp. 662–665. ISSN: 1386­9477. DOI: https://
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:98==
doi.org/10.1016/j.physe.2006.03.054. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1386947706001950.
[33]
M R Buitelaar et al. “Charge pumping and current quantization in surface acoustic­wave­
driven carbon nanotube devices”. In: Semiconductor Science and Technology 21.11 (Oct.
2006), S69–S77. DOI: 10.1088/0268-1242/21/11/s10. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/
0268-1242/21/11/s10.
[34]
Wikipedia contributors. Chebyshev polynomials — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [On­
line; accessed 7­July­2022]. 2022. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Chebyshev_polynomials&oldid=1095221317.
[35]
M Ridley et al. “A many­body approach to transport in quantum systems: from the transient
regime to the stationary state”. In: Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical
55.27 (June 2022), p. 273001. DOI: 10.1088/1751-8121/ac7119. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1088/1751-8121/ac7119.
[36]
Thomas Lehmann et al. “Time­dependent framework for energy and charge currents in
nanoscale systems”. In: Chemical Physics 514 (2018). Energy and Entropy of Change: From
Elementary Processes to Biology, pp. 176–182. ISSN: 0301­0104. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemphys.2018.01.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0301010417309990.
[37]
Jian­Sheng Wang, Jian Wang, and Nan Zeng. “Nonequilibrium Green’s function approach to
mesoscopic thermal transport”. In: Phys. Rev. B 74 (3 July 2006), p. 033408. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.74.033408. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.74.033408.
[38]
Marı́a Florencia Ludovico et al. “Dynamical energy transfer in ac­driven quantum systems”.
In: Phys. Rev. B 89 (16 Apr. 2014), p. 161306. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.89.161306. URL:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.89.161306.
[39]
Marı́a Florencia Ludovico et al. “Dynamics of energy transport and entropy production in
ac­driven quantum electron systems”. In: Phys. Rev. B 94 (3 July 2016), p. 035436. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevB.94.035436. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.
035436.
[40]
R. McWeeny. Methods of molecular quantum mechanics. eng. Academic Press, 1992, 573
s. ISBN: 0124865526, 9780124865525.
[41]
Steven Weinberg. “Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of the General
Theory of Relativity”. eng. In: (1972).
[42]
C Edmund Bertschinger. “Introduction to tensor calculus for general relativity”. In: (1999).
[43]
PO LOWDIN. “ON THE NON­ORTHOGONALITY PROBLEM CONNECTED WITH
THE USE OF ATOMIC WAVE FUNCTIONS IN THE THEORY OF MOLECULES AND
CRYSTALS”. eng. In: Journal of Chemical Physics 18.3 (1950), pp. 365–375. ISSN: 10897690,
00219606. DOI: 10.1063/1.1747632.
[44]
Benoit Gaury et al. “Numerical simulations of time­resolved quantum electronics”. In: Physics
Reports 534.1 (2014). Numerical simulations of time­resolved quantum electronics, pp. 1–
37. ISSN: 0370­1573. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2013.09.001. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0370157313003451.
[45]
George B. Arfken, Hans J. Weber, and Frank E. Harris. Chapter 11 ­ Complex Variable
Theory. Ed. by George B. Arfken, Hans J. Weber, and Frank E. Harris. Seventh Edition.
Boston: Academic Press, 2013, pp. 469–550. ISBN: 978­0­12­384654­9. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384654-9.00011-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780123846549000116.
[46]
Wikipedia contributors. Sokhotski–Plemelj theorem — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 6­July­2022]. 2022. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Sokhotski%E2%80%93Plemelj_theorem&oldid=1096523133.
90
Bibliography
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:100==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 311
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fysik.dtu.dk
