==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Optimization of the layout of a wind 
farm considering wake effects
Elvia Gonzalez Llamas
DTU Wind Energy-M-0551
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0551 
July 2022
Project period: 
February - July 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Katherine Dykes
Juan-Andrés Pérez-Rúa
DTU Wind Energy
Ivan Arana
Worley
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Elvira Gonzalez Llamas
Title:
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm 
considering wake effects
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Wind energy is the leading source of renewable energy today, and it is expected a big growth
of this technology the following years, specially of offshore wind energy. This implies that a
great investment is going to be made in this technology, and it will play an important role on
the decarbonization of the energy sector. Therefore, an adequate design of wind farms is
essential to build efficient wind plants that can meet the energy demand of the future. A good
wind farm design involves many expertise areas: aerodynamic assessment, connection to the
electricity grid, structural infrastructure, logistics of transport, operation and maintenance, etc.
Design optimization is a very useful tool to build efficient wind farms that encompasses all
these expertise areas. Among all the sub-disciplines that involve wind farms optimization, the
optimization of the layout to minimize the wake losses between wind turbines is one of the
most studied cases. This report is going to focus on the maximization of the energy output of
offshore wind farms regarding the position of the wind turbines in the wind farm layout to min-
imize the wake effect. To analyze this optimization problem, two approaches are considered:
a gradient-based algorithm, implemented in TOPFARM, a software that DTU is developing,
and an heuristic algorithm, implemented by the author.
This optimization has been tested in three different wind farms: the IEA Wind Task 37 refer-
ence offshore plant with 16 wind turbines, the Emerald wind farm with 114 wind turbines of
14MW, and the Sceirde rocks wind farm, which has 20 wind turbines of 20MW. All the flow
modelling for these case studies has been done using PyWake, a software tool developed by
DTU Wind Energy that allows to compute the wake interaction between the wind turbines.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This present report has been carried in collaboration with the department of Wind Energy at
DTU and Worley. It has been 5 months of dedicated work and it marks the end of my masters
degree.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors for the support and guidance during this pe-
riod. Thanks to Ivan, for giving me the opportunity of doing this thesis with Worley and being
always supportive and dedicated to my project. Thanks to Katherine Dykes and Juan-Andrés
Pérez-Rúa for their feedback throughout the thesis and for arousing my interest in the wind
farm optimization field. Thanks also to Javier Criado Risco for his help with the DTU software,
TOPFARM and PyWake.
Thanks a lot to my family for all their support during my university years. Coming to Denmark
to study this master would simply not have been possible without their help and their encour-
agement.
Finally, thanks to my boyfriend and my friends, those in Denmark and abroad, for the love and
the good times. This would have been much harder without you. And, last but not least, a
special mention to my friends from Worley, who encouraged me to cooperate, to share my
achievements and my failures and, all in all, to work as a team.
ii
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Motivation and scope of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The aerodynamic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
The formulation of the problem and the study cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Optimization algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Validation of the models
29
5
Results
32
5.1
Results for the reference offshore wind farm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Results for the wind farm with clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Sceirde rocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Sensitivity analysis
42
6.1
Computational cost of the validation case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Computational cost of the Emerald wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Computational cost of the Sceirde rocks farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Conclusions and future work
45
Bibliography
47
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Wind energy is a very fast-growing technology and currently it is the leading source of renew-
able energy. There are two main alternatives to generate this energy. On one hand, onshore
wind energy has improved gradually since 1970 until the technology that we know nowadays,
and it represents 88% of the wind energy capacity installed in 2021 in Europe [1]. It is ex-
pected that it will continue growing, but with a lower rate than the last years, because the
energy market is investing more on offshore wind. On the other hand, the history of offshore
wind energy is more recent, but currently it is developing faster than any other technology.
This is because offshore wind energy meets better the demand of the wind power industry,
specially with the development of bigger turbines that are more challenging to be installed on
land [2]. Offshore wind power has gained popularity over the last years and it is predicted a
huge increase in this technology for the next 20 years. For instance, it is expected 27.9 GW
of new offshore wind between 2022 and 2026, which would mean doubling the current annual
installation rate [1]. It is more complex and expensive than onshore wind power, but it has
also some key advantages, like a higher capacity factor in the sea or an availability of larger
wind farm areas, that are more suitable for major projects. Therefore, it is very important a
correct assessment of this technology to make feasible investments and to meet the energy
demand in the future.
One of the challenges in the development of wind farms is improving the aerodynamic effi-
ciency. Wind turbines extract the kinetic energy from the wind and they transform it in elec-
tricity. Due to the conservation of energy in the system, the wind speed is decelerated in the
region immediately downstream of the turbine, and the turbines that are downstream can suf-
fer from power losses that affect the power output of the wind farm. The deficit of wind speed
downstream of a wind turbine is also referred as wake loss, and a good wind farm design
can minimize it by spacing correctly the turbines. Usually, the optimal spacing between wind
turbines in the prevailing wind direction is set to ∼6-12D, where D is the turbine diameter, and
the spacing can be a bit smaller in the spanwise direction. [3] [4].
Traditionally, the wind turbines in offshore wind farms have been installed forming a regular
layout. Numerous studies prove that an optimized irregular layout can reduce the wake losses
[5] [6], and the optimization of the layout of a wind power plant has been a prolific sub-discipline
in the field of wind energy systems [7]. To minimize the wake losses in a wind farm, first it is
important a valid flow model of the site. There are several engineering models that calculate
the wake deficit between the wind turbines. For instance, the model developed by Jensen [8]
has been extensively used in the literature to calculate the interaction between wind turbines
[9] [10] [11]. Similarly, the Bastankhah-Gaussian model [12], which is more recent, defends a
more accurate model than Jensen for the far wake and it has also been used for some opti-
mization problems [13] [14]
There has been also a lot of research regarding the best optimization technique for the layout
of the wind farms. There is not an algorithm that works more efficiently for all the cases, but
based on the type of problem and its applications there are some better suited approaches.
Traditionally, heuristic algorithms, which do not use derivatives or gradients to get a solu-
tion, have been more used for this problem [15] [9] [11]. However, there is also research on
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
1
==PAGE:8==
gradient-based algorithms, which use the derivatives of the objective function to determine
the direction of the objective solution, because these algorithms can scale better to large wind
farms [14] [16]. Based on these two general categories of optimization, this project aims to
implement an heuristic and a gradient-based algorithm for the optimization of the layout of
offshore wind farms to maximize their energy output regarding the wake losses. Their perfor-
mance is going to be discussed by comparing wind farms of different sizes and characteristics.
2
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature review
Wind energy is a complex, uncertain and heterogeneous field in systems engineering. It is
complex, in the sense that the design of a wind farm requires a level of expertise in diverse
fields of engineering that are interlinked to create an holistic and multidisciplinary system. It
is uncertain, because of the different sciences that are involved in the design of the wind farm
and can affect its feasibility. For instance, the random nature of wind that can affect the life-
time of the wind turbine rotor, or potential environmental, social or political threats that need
to be assessed prior to the installation of the wind farm. And it is heterogeneous, because
the design must comply with different environments, terrains, wind inflows, political laws and
transmission grid requirements [7].
Systems engineering aims to integrate, design and manage complex systems in a variety of
industries, like aerospace, car manufacturing, construction or wind energy. Because of the
complexity and multiple disciplines involved in these systems, optimization is an important tool
that has gained relevance with the development of optimization algorithms, and it is still a big
area of research.
There are many important fields involved in the wind farm design, like the wake modelling, the
transmission grid between the wind turbines, the foundations or the plant operations. With the
development of the multidisciplinary optimization (MDAO) in the second half of the 20th cen-
tury [17], the wind farm optimization could integrate better all the disciplines in order to build
large offshore wind power plants successfully. Besides, neglecting some disciplines can lead
to disregarding some important constraints [18]. For example, optimizing the hub heights of
the wind turbines in a wind farm can lead to a solution that is not structurally or financially fea-
sible. Still, nowadays it is not possible to get a global solution for a wind farm design problem
due to the different inputs or variables, that require of different approaches. However, it is very
important to understand the specifications and limitations of the design, so even if the final de-
sign is not optimal for all the disciplines, it is still a valid solution that meets all the requirements.
One of the most studied problems of optimization in wind energy is the layout of the wind
turbines in the wind plants. Traditionally, the wind turbines were placed over an offshore wind
farm area following a regular array. The main reasons of using a regular layout are to facilitate
the logistics of the installation of the wind turbines and to ensure the navigability of the area
for fishery or for operational and maintenance tasks [19]. In the recent years, the effects of
complex terrains in offshore transmission grids and the wake interference between the wind
turbines has shown the importance on researching about the wind farm layout optimization to
improve the feasibility of the wind farm [7].
Optimization metrics in the wind farms design
There are several criteria that are used to evaluate the optimization of a wind farm. Typically,
an optimum design would aim to maximize the energy production or minimize the operational
costs over its lifetime. The different metrics that evaluate the characteristics of a potential de-
sign and compare it with other alternatives are used in the optimization as objective functions.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
3
==PAGE:10==
The most common metrics in the wind farm optimization are the following:
• AEP: The Annual Energy Production is the expected energy production of the wind
farm in one year considering its power production. The expected power production is
calculated using the power curve of each wind turbine and the Weibull distribution of the
wind for that specific site.
• CAPEX: the capital expenditures include the costs of the wind turbine itself, the instal-
lation and assembly, the balance of system, the foundations, the logistics and every
expense related with the construction of the wind farm before it is commissioned.
• OPEX: The operational expenditures involve all the maintenance costs of the wind farm
over its lifetime, and also the taxes or the land lease.
• LCOE: The Levelized Cost of Energy encloses the previous parameters to define a
relationship between the costs and the energy production [20]. It represents the cost of
producing one unit of energy (MWh). The simplified cost equation is:
LCOE = F ⋅CAPEX + OPEX
AEP
(2.1)
where F = r/(1 −(1 + r)−n represents financial effects that can vary the evaluation of
the costs over the economic lifetime (n), such as the discount rate (r) or other relevant
parameters if they are needed. [18].
The LCOE is a very comprehensive metric for evaluating the wind farm design, as it encloses
the financing costs and the energy production in a single function. On the other hand, including
a cost model to evaluate CAPEX, OPEX and other financial effects will increase the uncertainty
of the optimization and its complexity.
Wake effect in a wind farm
The wake effect is the loss of wind speed behind the rotor of a wind turbine that will affect
the power production of wind turbines downstream. It causes from 10% to 20% of loss of
power output in large offshore wind farms [21]. Because of this, it is essential an adequate
modelling of the flow around the wind turbines, as minimizing the wake losses can lead to an
improvement of the performance of large wind farms.
Some authors have described the wake interference between wind turbines for regular arrays
of wind farms. For example, the reference [22] studies the power output of Horns Rev 1, an
offshore wind farm with a regular layout, and analyses the influence of the wind direction on
the power losses. It concludes that the power drop is very linked to the wind direction, and
wind direction has also an effect on atmospheric stability, which influences the wake effect.
Horns Rev 1 is a Danish offshore wind plant that is located in the west coast of Denmark
and is composed of 80 wind turbines in a 8x10 grid. The wind turbines are Vestas V80 and
the wind farm is owned by DONG Energies A/S and Vattenfall AB [22]. This wind farm is
characteristic of low average turbulence intensity (∼3%), which is also indicative of stable
atmospheric conditions. The turbulence intensity is defined as the rate of variation of wind
speed measurements around the average wind speed, and for higher atmospheric turbulence
intensity, the power deficit decreases [23]. Figure 2.1 illustrates the wake effect in Horns Rev
by the formation of fog downstream the wind turbines.
4
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Picture of Horns Rev 1 taken from the south of the wind farm the 12th of February
of 2008. Picture was taken by photograph Christian Steiness [24].
Other authors have also studied the minimization of the wake effect by using different hub
heights or rotor diameters in the wind farm, and they have concluded that using an hetero-
geneous distribution of hub heights decreases the COE of the wind farm, compared to an
homogeneous distribution of hub heights in the wind farm [25], [26].
Understanding the physics of the wind turbulence that describes the turbine wakes is not only
crucial to maximize the energy production, but also to ensure structural integrity of the wind
turbines by determining fatigue loads caused by other wind turbines upstream [27]. The wind
turbulence is related with the fluctuations of the wind velocity, and there are many factors that
can describe it, like temperature, atmosphere pressure, air density, surface roughness, topog-
raphy, or other wind turbines upstream, and a slight variation in any of these variables affects
the turbulence behaviour. Although the Navier-Stokes equations attempt to mathematically
describe the wind motion as a Newtonian fluid, the high complexity of the turbulence makes
it almost chaotic, with no equation that can fully describe the mathematical function behind it.
Even Richard Feynman said in his lectures that ”Turbulence is the most important unsolved
problem of classical physics” [28].
Since the 1970s, the wind turbine wakes have been a very intensive subject of research, as
it is reviewed in the reference [29]. The authors state that a division can be made between
the near and the far wake region to explain the dynamics of the flow. From the wind farm
perspective, the far wake modelling is more interesting to explain the interference between
the wind turbines, five times the rotor diameter downstream of the wind turbine [29].
One of the first analytical models to describe the velocity deficit on the wake was proposed
by Jensen [8]. In this paper, the wake deficit is presented with a ”top-hat” shape, and the
wake diameter expands linearly with kwake right downstream of the rotor. Although the Jensen
model is used because of its simplicity, wind tunnel experiments and CFD modelling of large
eddy simulations (LES) have found that a Gaussian axisymmetric shape is more accurate to
describe the velocity deficit distribution in the far wake [30], [31]. The ”top-hat” shape tends
to underestimate the velocity deficit at hub height and overestimate the deficit near the edge
of the wake. The Bastankhah-Gaussian model [12] assumes a Gaussian distribution for the
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
5
==PAGE:12==
velocity deficit and considers the previous studies to elaborate a more accurate model for the
far wake.
Research and classification of the wind farm layout optimization problem
Despite the stochastic nature of the wind, the problem can be considered as deterministic,
which means that the result of the optimization will not change if the inputs are not modified,
because the algorithm does not include any random variable, contrary to the stochastic prob-
lems. Although one may argue that there is uncertainty associated with the wind, an accurate
wind resource assessment of the site can estimate the long-term trends and the fluctuations
by using data and regional weather models and make the input ”static”, which also makes the
problem non-time dependent and hereby simplifies the process.
It is unknown whether there is more than one local solution for this problem. Unimodal opti-
mization problems have one single solution, and usually they are more simple to solve. For
multimodal problems that have complex objective functions and constraints, once a solution
is found, it is not possible to know if that is a global or a local solution. The wind farm layout
problem is multimodal, and because of this there has been a lot of research about the best
algorithm solver for this problem.
When the Offshore Wind Farm Layout Optimization (OWFLO) project was launched in 2004,
most of the studied algorithms for this project up to this day were heuristic [32]. The objective
of the project was to develop efficient optimization algorithms that would help in the develop of
large wind farms. Heuristic algorithms were the preferred ones because they could perform a
global search without assuming the modality or continuity of the cost function, contrary to the
gradient-based algorithms. The downside of some heuristic algorithms is the high computa-
tional cost, specially because of their slow convergence behaviour, which tends to increase
exponentially with increasing number of wind turbines.
The first algorithm that was proposed to optimize the layout of the wind turbines was a ge-
netic algorithm (GA) using the Jensen wake model by Mosetti et al. in 1994 [15]. The genetic
algorithms were one of the earliest heuristic algorithms to be developed. Like the heuristic
models, they are based on probabilistic search rather than derivatives or mathematical princi-
ples, so they perform a global search that increases the chances of finding a global solution.
The layout optimization using the genetic algorithm was further studied and improved by Wan
et al. [33] by using a more complex wake model. More recent publications still use the genetic
algorithm for an holistic approach that intends to optimize the layout but also considering the
intra-array cables to ensure real-world constraints [34].
Other heuristic algorithms have been used over the last years to solve the wind farm layout
optimization problem. In 2013, a greedy algorithm was used by Chen et al. [9] to optimize a
wind farm layout by maximizing the wind plant profit, and better results than with the genetic
algorithm were obtained. The greedy algorithm is an heuristic algorithm that starts from an
empty layout and places the turbines one by one according to the evolution of the cost func-
tion. Chen et al. [9] conclude that better results in less computational time can be obtained
than by using the genetic algorithm.
6
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:13==
A multi-start algorithm was proposed by B. Pérez and R. Mínguez [35] that encompasses two
different algorithms: first, an initial heuristic search that obtains a feasible initial solution, and
secondly, a gradient-based nonlinear algorithm that performs a local search to get a local min-
ima. In this way, it is performed a better global search by using the heuristic algorithm and
a good approximation to the local minima by using the gradient-based. The paper concludes
that the approach works good for small wind farms, whereas for large offshore wind farms
with turbines that have little freedom to move the effectiveness is reduced. In [11], a random
search algorithm was proposed to optimize the layout of Horns Rev 1 (80 WT), and it also
tested its application in optimized layouts with success: this means that a layout optimized
with a gradient-based algorithm could avoid a local minima by performing a second step op-
timization using the random search algorithm.
Other authors have tried a mixed integer linear programming approach (MILP) [10] [36] which
can guarantee the quality of the solution better than the genetic or the greedy algorithms
and allows to solve with a similar MILP approach the layout optimization and the inter-array
cable optimization. Fischetti also uses a proximity search algorithm, which is related to Large-
Neighbourhood search heuristics, to ensure the convergence of the solution [37].
Although several researchers have applied a mathematical programming method [38] to the
wind farm layout problem, the use of gradient-based algorithms for this problem is quite re-
cent. The gradient-based algorithms are based on mathematical principles by using the first
derivative (the gradient) of the objective function and the second derivative, which provides
more information about the curvature. Although gradient-based algorithms had been used for
wind turbine design optimization, the optimization of the wind farm layouts is more challenging,
because the design space is more complex, the disciplines involved can lead to more uncer-
tainties and the wake model or the function costs can have discontinuities that make the use
of gradient-based algorithms impossible [18]. On the other hand, gradient-based algorithms
usually scale better to larger problems [16] and turbines can vary their position in a continuous
space, rather than being limited to mesh points.
In 2015, J. Park and K. H. Law published the optimization of the layout of Horns Rev 1 us-
ing sequential quadratic programming (SQP) [39]. SQP is a gradient-based algorithm that
became one of the most successful for nonlinear constrained optimization problems. This
method solves iteratively quadratic subproblems and converges on the local minima of the
objective function. To estimate the gradients, finite differences can be used [40] [41], but the
scalability of the problem is more limited because the finite differences increase greatly the
computational time. Overall, the application of gradient-based algorithms in the optimization
of the layout of wind farms is still on development phase because it is very recent, but it has
promising results. For example, a recent study [42] tries to reduce the multi-modality of the
design space for a better application of gradient-based algorithms. Other study argues that
using an adequate wake model that is smooth, continuous and does not have flat regions, can
allow the use of gradient-based algorithms [43].
2.1
Motivation and scope of the thesis
The motivation of this thesis is to compare the performance of an heuristic and a gradient-
based algorithm with the optimization of the layout of offshore wind farms. On one hand, the
heuristic algorithm has been implemented by the author in Python and it is based on the paper
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
7
==PAGE:14==
by Fischetti [36] and the greedy algorithm [9]. On the other hand, the gradient-based algo-
rithm is the Sequential Least Squares Quadratic Programming (SLSQP) that is included in
the TOPFARM software that has been developed by DTU [44]. Also, based on the previous
research, it is found valuable to study the optimization of a combined algorithm that uses the
output of the heuristic algorithm to perform a gradient-based optimization.
The objective with these two algorithms is to create a reliable and robust model that can
complete optimizations in an acceptable amount of computational time. This means that all the
simulations will be performed in a personal computer, but a fast, high performance computer
can be used for future work.
8
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:15==
3
Methodology
3.1
Introduction
In this chapter, the main elements and assumptions of the optimization problem are going to
be explained: first, the blade element momentum theory, that explains how the wind speed
defines the power output of the wind turbines and the wake model, that explains the wake
interaction between the wind turbines. Second, the characteristics of each wind farm, which
include the characteristics of the wind turbines and the specific site where they are located.
Last, the characteristics of each algorithm are going to be explained, as well as how they are
applied to this specific problem.
3.2
The aerodynamic model
3.2.1
The blade element momentum theory (BEM) and the power curve
The simple one-dimensional (1-D) model for an ideal rotor is very useful to explain the extrac-
tion of mechanical power from the wind. The ideal disk is considered frictionless, and there is
no rotational velocity component in the wake.
Figure 3.1: Control volume around the wind turbine rotor [45]
Where V0 is the wind speed far upstream and u1 is the final value of the speed in the wake.
u is defined as the velocity at the rotorplane. The flow upstream and downstream the rotor is
stationary, incompressible, and no external force acts on the fluid up and downstream of the
rotor, hence, the Bernuilli equation can be used.
Δp = 1
2ρ 􏿴V2
o −u2
1􏿷
(3.1)
The relationship between A and A1 is given by the conservation of mass:
̇m = ρAu = ρA1u1
(3.2)
The thrust is the force in the streamwise direction and can be defined as:
T = ρuA (Vo −u1) =
̇m (Vo −u1)
(3.3)
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
9
==PAGE:16==
and by combining 3.1 and 3.3, the speed in the rotor plane can be defined as:
u = 1
2(Vo + u1)
(3.4)
and the axial induction factor a is defined as:
u = (1 −a)Vo
(3.5)
or
u1 = (1 −2a)Vo
(3.6)
Then, from the equation 3.3 the thrust T can be expressed as:
T = 2ρV2
oa(1 −a)A
(3.7)
and the shaft power P can be found using the integral energy equation on the control volume:
P =
̇m 􏿶
1
2V2
o + po
ρ −1
2u2
1 −po
ρ 􏿹= 2ρV3
oa(1 −a)2 A
(3.8)
Introducing Vcut-in and Vcut-out as the cut-in and cut-out wind speed to define the operational
range of wind speeds of the wind turbine and Vrated as the minimum wind speed that can
generate the rater power, the power curve can be expressed as:
P(V) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
0
V < Vcut-in
Prated ⋅􏿵
V−Vcut-in
Vrated −Vcut-in 􏿸
3
Vcut-in ≤V < Vrated
Prated
Vrated ≤V < Vcut-out
0
V ≥Vcut-out
(3.9)
The power and thrust coefficients, Cp and CT are defined as:
Cp =
P
1
2ρV3
oA
= 4a(1 −a)2
(3.10)
CT =
T
1
2ρV2
oA
= 4a(1 −a)
(3.11)
3.2.2
The Gaussian-Bastankhah model
As it was previously mentioned in the literature review, the Gaussian-Bastankhah model [12]
elaborates an accurate model to define the wake effect. It assumes a Gaussian distribution
for the velocity deficit, which is more accurate than the Jensen model to describe the velocity
in the far wake [30], [31].
10
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:17==
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
x/D
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Deficit [m/s]
Center line deficit
Jensen model
Bastankhah-Gaussian model
2
1
0
1
2
y/D
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Deficit [m/s]
Deficit profile 8D downstream
Jensen model
Bastankhah-Gaussian model
Figure 3.2: Comparison of the center line velocity deficit and the deficit profile in the far wake
for the Jensen wake model and the Bastankhah-Gaussian model.
The velocity deficit in the wake is described by the Gaussian-Bastankhah model [12] as it
follows:
ΔV
V∞
=
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
1 −
􏽭
⃓
⃓
⃓
⎷
1 −
CT
8 􏿵
k∗x
d0 + 0.2√β􏿸
2
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
⋅exp
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
−1
2 􏿵
k∗x
d0 + 0.2√β􏿸
2
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩􏿶
z −zh
d0
􏿹
2
+ 􏿶
y
d0 􏿹
2⎫⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎭
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
(3.12)
Here the parameter β =
1
2
1+√1−CT
√1−CT
is only dependent on CT, which is a characteristic of the
wind turbine. The deficit is assumed to expand by a wake growth rate k∗and this parameter
is set to 0.03245 for this case. With β and k∗defined, the velocity deficit downstream can be
fully calculated. This model assumes that the wake is propagated in downstream direction,
and the wake deficit for the turbines upstream is 0. This makes the computation faster but,
on the other hand, ignores blockage effects. This assumption is going to be used for all the
simulations.
To calculate the velocity deficit caused by multiple turbines, and how that affects the turbines
downstream, a superposition model is used . The most common ones are the linear sum and
the quadratic sum. For this project, the total velocity deficit caused by multiple wind turbines
is calculated as a quadratic sum of the wake of each wind turbine upstream:
􏿶
ΔV
V∞􏿹
total
=
􏽭
⃓
⃓
⎷
􏿶
ΔV
V∞􏿹
2
1
+ 􏿶
ΔV
V∞􏿹
2
2
+ 􏿶
ΔV
V∞􏿹
2
3
+ …
(3.13)
Equations 3.12 and 3.13 allow to create a velocity map of the wind farm and, consequently,
a power density map that allows to compute the energy output of the wind farm. The flow
modelling has been done using PyWake, a software tool developed by DTU [46].
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: Comparison of the linear and the quadratic superposition models to calculate the
velocity deficit between wind turbines.
3.3
The formulation of the problem and the study cases
The main elements that define the characteristics of this problem are:
• Design variables: The design variables are the coordinates of each wind turbine on the
map (x, y). They are measured in UTM coordinates1, and x refers to Easting coordinates,
while y refers to Northing coordinates. The wind turbines are initially located forming a
regular grid.
• Constraints: The boundary constraint is defined by the perimeter of the wind farm. None
of the wind turbines can be placed outside of the wind farm boundary.
The spacing constraints define the minimum allowable inter-turbine spacing, which is
set to a different parameter for each case study, considering the capacity of the wind
turbines and the available wind farm area.
• Parameters: The type, power capacity and number of wind turbines that are going to be
placed in the site.
The site characteristics, which account for the wind resource assessment of the wind
farm, the surface roughness or another aspects to consider to calculate the wake effect
(like possible neighbouring wind farms). As the project is focused on offshore wind
farms, no roughness or complex effect of the terrain have been included.
• Objective function: Maximizing the AEP (It is a single-objective optimization). The AEP
of the wind farm is only dependent on the position of the wind turbines:
AEP (x, y) = 8760 ⋅
n
􏾜
i=1
Pi(x, y) = 8760 ⋅
n
􏾜
i=1
􏿶
1
2ρ cp ArotorUi(x, y)3􏿹
(3.14)
This sets the AEP as the objective function to maximize by varying the position of the
wind turbines inside the wind farm area.
1The UTM projection is a system that divides earth into 60 zones and projects each zone into a plane as a basis
for the coordinates. Each zone has 6 degrees width. The UTM system, equally to the latitude- longitude system,
ignores the altitude of the location. [47]
12
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:19==
There are three different wind farms that are going to be optimized:
• The IEA Wind Task 37 reference offshore plant [13] with 16 IEA37 3.35 MW reference
turbines is going to be optimized in the validation chapter 4.
• The Emerald wind farm, with 114 wind turbines of 14 MW each, is going to be optimized
in the results chapter 5. Moreover, the implementation of clusters is going to be stud-
ied to facilitate the computational time of the optimization and to design a layout that
complies better with logistical purposes.
• The Sceirde rocks wind farm, with 20 wind turbines of 20 MW each, is going to be also
analyzed in the section 5.3.
3.3.1
IEA 37 wind farm
The first optimization scenario is based on the paper from IEA Task 27 on Wind Farm Layout
Optimization Case Studies [48]. This paper studies the influence of the optimization approach
and the wake model on the wind farm layout optimization. To do so, a wind farm scenario is
created with a fixed circular boundary. The characteristics of this wind farm are:
• Constraints: The perimeter of the wind farm is a circular boundary. It is centered in
coordinates (0,0) and the radius of the wind farm is set to 1300 m. The inter-turbine
spacing is set to four times the rotor diameter.
• Parameters: The wind turbines are the IEA37 reference turbine with 3.35 MW of capacity
with the following characteristics and power curve:
– Rotor diameter: 130 m
– Hub height: 110 m
– Nominal power: 3.35 MW
– Cut-In wind speed: 4 m/s
– Rated wind speed: 9.8 m/s
– Cut-Out wind speed = 25 m/s
– Constant CT curve: CT = 4 ⋅
1
3 ⋅(1 −
1
3) = 8/9
Figure 3.4: Power and CT curve for the IEA37 3.35 MW reference wind turbines
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
13
==PAGE:20==
The site defined for this simulation has a fixed wind speed of 9.8 m/s. Therefore, the
data variables only depend on the wind direction. The wind rose for this simulation is
defined by 12 discrete bins as it is shown in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Wind rose for IEA37 Site.
The 16 wind turbines are initially located in the site forming a regular grid. Given this
arrangement from [13], the AEP is computed and used to compare it with the AEP of
the optimized layout.
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
IEA 37 wind farm AEP = 373.207 GWh
Figure 3.6: Regular grid for the validation case.
The AEP is calculated summing the power from all the 16 wind turbines, following equation
3.14, and the power is calculated using the wind speed as an input in the equation 3.9.
Pfarm =
n
􏾜
j=1
Pturb,j
(3.15)
14
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:21==
3.3.2
Emerald wind farm
The Emerald wind farm is an offshore wind farm that is going to be built in the East coast of
Ireland. It has a total capacity of 1596 MW, and due to its large size (it has 114 wind turbines
of 14 MW) it is of great interest to optimize its layout and analyze the performance of each
algorithm in terms of scalability of the problem.
• Constraints: The available area to place then wind turbines is defined by the perime-
ter of the wind farm. The reference wind farm is located in the southwest of Ireland,
close to Cork coast. The coordinates of the wind farm perimeter are obtained from an
internet database [49]. The latitude-longitude coordinates are then converted into UTM
coordinates. The inter-turbine spacing is set to seven times the rotor diameter.
Figure 3.7: Emerald wind farm area.
• Parameters: The direct-drive wind turbine SG 14-236 DD with 14 MW of capacity and
manufactured by Siemens Gamesa is the chosen turbine for this wind farm [50]. It has
the following characteristics:
– Rotor diameter: 236 m.
– Hub height: 150 m.
– Nominal power: 14 MW.
– Cut-In wind speed: 3 m/s
– Cut-Out wind speed = 25 m/s
This wind turbine is not sold in the market yet, hence the power curve is not available
on the internet. Consequently, the power curve has been developed with PyWake using
the GenericWindTurbine power curve with the characteristics described above.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.8: Theoretical power and CT curve for the SG 14-236 DD wind turbines computed
with PyWake
The non-linearity of the power curve and the cT curve is caused by the ambient turbu-
lence intensity of the site, which is set to 0.1. The main difference between this power
curve and the power curve from figure 3.4 is that cT is not constant for all the wind
speeds:
– Below the rated wind speed, V < Vrated, cP and cT are constant and they have
the maximum value, to maximize the generation of power for any wind speed. For
this turbine, cPMAX = 0.49 and cTMAX = 0.8.
– Above the rated wind speed, Vrated
<
V, the turbine is generating the nominal
power. Therefore, the coefficients cP and cT vary, following the equations 3.10 and
3.11. The cT curve is approximately proportional to ∼
1
V3
o
The characteristics of the site for the Emerald wind farm have been downloaded directly
from Global Wind Atlas, a public source on the internet developed by DTU, with financial
support from the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) [51]. The
data extracted for this site has uniform Weibull parameters over all the flat area and a
predefined wind sector probability, that is shown in the figure below 3.9. The inputs to
extract the wind data for this site from Global Wind Atlas are:
– Coordinates of the wind farm: 51° 22’ 17.05” N, 8° 0’ 9.59” O.
– Height for the wind measurement: In this case, as the sea level is 0 m, the input is
the hub height of the wind turbines, 150 m.
– Roughness of the terrain: Because this place is in the sea, the roughness of the
terrain is set to 0.1 by default [52].
16
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.9: Wind rose of the Emerald site.
Creation of the regular grid and the clusters
Placing the wind turbines in their initial positions forming a regular grid is the first step to set
the optimization problem. The process to calculate their initial position is:
• First a polygon is defined with the coordinates of the wind farm boundaries and the
shape of the area.
• Then, a mesh is computed and only the points that are inside the boundaries of the wind
farm are selected. The distance between the points of the mesh has been selected
manually so the total number of wind turbines is close to the total capacity of the wind
farm, and it has been set 11 times the rotor diameter (2596 m). In total, 116 points were
plotted inside the boundaries of the wind farm. To adjust the wind turbines to the total
capacity of the wind farm (1596 MW), the last two points were discarded.
• Finally, 114 wind turbines of 14 MW are considered in the wind farm. With this arrange-
ment, the AEP is computed and it will compared with the AEP for the optimized layout
with each algorithm in chapter 5. The result of the initial arrangement is shown in figure
3.10.
Due to the large size of the wind farm, it is convenient to divide it in four clusters. The objective
of the clusters are to facilitate the computation of the optimization problem and for logistic
purposes (in case an electrical substation is installed in the middle of each cluster). The
division of the wind farm is based on similar power density and number of turbines for each
cluster. The power density is defined as:
Pdensity =
Ptotal
Areacluster
=
∑nWT
i=1 Pi
Areacluster
[MW/km2]
The power density for the whole wind farm and for each cluster is around 1.8 MW/km2.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
17
==PAGE:24==
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
Emerald wind farm (114 WT)    AEP = 7497.92 GWh
Figure 3.10: Regular grid of the reference wind farm. Each black spot represents the location
of each wind turbine.
The optimization of the clusters is sequential and the order to optimize the clusters is following
the prevailing wind direction, which as it is shown in figure 3.9 is 225o- 250o. The first cluster
to be optimized is cluster 4, shown in colour red in the figure 3.11. When this cluster is opti-
mized, the second cluster to be optimized is cluster 3, shown in colour green in the optimized
layout. Then, the cluster downstream is optimized, cluster 2, and finally cluster 1 is optimized.
Once the optimization of one cluster is finished, the wake effect and the turbine positions are
computed so the following cluster considers this input for its optimization. The simulation with
wake effects from neighbouring clusters must use the effective wind speed instead of the free-
stream local wind speed. With
ΔV
V∞defined in equation 3.12, the effective wind speed for each
wind turbine, Ve is defined as:
Ve = V∞
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣1 −􏿶
ΔV
V∞􏿹
total
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦
(3.16)
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
Emerald wind farm with clusters (114 WT)  AEP = 7497.92 GWh
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Figure 3.11: Regular grid of the wind farm divided in four clusters. Each dot represents the
initial position of the wind turbine.
18
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:25==
3.3.3
Sceirde rocks wind farm
The Sceirde rocks wind farm is an offshore wind farm that is planned to be built in the Galway
Bay, in the West coast of Ireland. It has a total capacity of 400 MW, and it is composed by
20 wind turbines of 20 MW each. The study of this wind farm is interesting because it shares
common characteristics with the two previous wind farms: it does not have a large number of
wind turbines, like the IEA37 wind farm, and it has a similar wind assessment as the Emerald
wind farm (similar climate, uniform Weibull parameters). Therefore, it is also valuable to study
the performance of the algorithms with a medium size wind farm.
• Constraints: This wind farm is located in the West of Ireland, close to Galway Bay. The
coordinates of the wind farm perimeter are obtained from an internet database [49],
like for the Emerald wind farm. The inter-turbine spacing is set to five times the rotor
diameter.
Figure 3.12: Sceirde rocks wind farm area.
• Parameters: The selected wind turbines have 20 MW of capacity, which is a very high
rated power and they are still in development phase. The characteristic of the 20 MW
wind turbines have been selected by extrapolation of the characteristics of the SG 14-
236 DD [50] and inspired by the study [53]. It has the following specifications:
– Rotor diameter: 273 m.
– Hub height: 175 m.
– Nominal power: 20 MW.
– Cut-In wind speed: 3 m/s
– Cut-Out wind speed = 25 m/s
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.13: Power and CT curve for the 20 MW wind turbines computed with PyWake.
The characteristics of the site for the Sceirde rocks wind farm have been downloaded
directly from Global Wind Atlas [51] in the same way and with the same characteristics
than the Emerald wind farm. The wind rose for this site is shown in figure 3.14.
– The coordinates of the wind farm are: 53°15’57.00”N, 9°58’18.73”O
– Height for the wind measurement is again the height of the wind turbines, that is
175 m for this case.
– The site is offshore, so the roughness of the terrain is again set to 0.1 [52].
Figure 3.14: Wind rose of the Sceirde rocks site.
The initial position of the wind turbines in Sceirde rocks forming a regular layout is shown in
figure 3.15.
20
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:27==
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
Easting [km]
5899
5900
5901
5902
5903
5904
5905
Northing [km]
Sceirde rocks wind farm (20 WT)    AEP=2005.94 GWh
Figure 3.15: Regular grid of the Sceirde rocks wind farm.
3.4
Optimization algorithms
3.4.1
Gradient-based algorithm
Gradient-based optimization is based on mathematical principles and it is used in problems
where objective functions and constraints are non-linear, and twice differentiable (it exists the
first and the second derivative of the function). The multimodality of the function is unknown,
which means that it is not guaranteed that the algorithm finds the global optimum and the so-
lution for this problem is deterministic, meaning that the output value will be always the same
for a given input.
Gradient-based algorithms, as the name would suggest, use the gradient of the function to get
information about the slope of the curve. If the objective function is expressed as a Taylor’s
series:
f(x + p) = f(x) + ∇f(x)Tp
(3.17)
where p is a small step so the second order of the expansion is negligible. Given that x∗is a
minima, f(x∗+p) ≥f(x∗) and therefore Δf(x∗)Tp ≥0. To guarantee this inequality independently
of the value of p, the first condition for a design variable to be a minima is that:
∇f(x∗) = 0
(3.18)
A general constrained optimization problem is expressed as:
minimize
f(x)
by varying
xi
i = 1, … , nx
subject to
gj(x) ≤0
j = 1, … , ng
hk(x) = 0
k = 1, … , nh
xl,i ≤xi ≤xu,i
i = 1, … , nx
(3.19)
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
21
==PAGE:28==
where gj are inequality constraints and hj are equality constraints. xl,i and xu,i are the lower
and upper bounds of the design variables.
The constrained problem presented in 3.19 can be expressed as a Lagrangian:
ℒ(x, λ, σ, s) = f(x) + λTh(x) + σT 􏿴g(x) + s2􏿷
(3.20)
where λ and σ are constants that multiply each constraint. The KKT theorem [54] states that
an optimal solution x∗expressed as a Lagrangian function must satisfy that:
∇f (x∗) +
nh
􏾜
k=1
λk∇hj (x∗) +
ng
􏾜
j=1
σj∇gj (x∗) = 0
(3.21)
Because the Lagrangian function is dependent on x, λ, σ and s, it is needed to set all the
partial derivatives to 0:
∂ℒ
∂xi =
∂f
∂xi + ∑nh
k=1 λk
∂hk
∂xi + ∑ng
j=1 σj
∂gj
∂xi = 0,
i = 1, … , nx
∂ℒ
∂λk = hk = 0,
k = 1, … , nh
∂ℒ
∂σj = gj + s2
j = 0,
j = 1, … , ng
(3.22)
with the complementary condition differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to the slack vari-
ables:
∂ℒ
∂sj
= 2σjsj = 0,
j = 1, … , ng
(3.23)
that means that if the constraint is active, sj = 0 and if the constraint is inactive, σj = 0.
To guarantee that an optimum point is a minimum, the best option is to check the second
derivatives. Using the Lagrangian function, the Hessian of the Lagrangian for the design
variables must be defined as positive (all the eigenvalues of the matrix are positive):
pT [∇xxℒ] p > 0
(3.24)
where p is a small step in a feasible direction fulfilling that ∇h(xf)Tp = 0.
With the conditions 3.22 and 3.24 it can be assured that the optimal solution is a minima. To
find the optimal solution, a system of equations needs to be solved. One of the first methods
that can solve this type of problems is the Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP), from
where numerous algorithms have been derived, including the one that is used for this wind
farm layout optimization [55].
The SQP method consists on solving a system of equations by differentiating the Lagrangian
function. For example, the KKT conditions for an optimization problem with only equality
22
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:29==
constraints would be given by:
􏿰
∇xℒ(x, λ)
∇λℒ(x, λ) 􏿳= 􏿰
∇f(x) + [∇h(x)]Tλ
h(x)
􏿳= 0
(3.25)
and it satisfies the condition:
􏿰
∇2
xxℒ
[∇h]T
[∇h]
0
􏿳􏿰
sx
sλ 􏿳= 􏿰
−∇xℒ
−h
􏿳
(3.26)
Where sx = xk+1 −xk and sλ = λk+1 −λk. The linear system of equations can be solved for
each iteration k, and the design variable xk+1 and the Lagrange multiplier λk+1 are updated.
There are different ways to solve the system of equations. The Sequential Least Squares Pro-
gramming algorithm (SLSQP) is an application of the SQP method that uses a quasi-Newton
method to obtain an approximation of the Hessian of the Lagrangian. It was described by Di-
eter Kraft in 1988 [56] and it is currently included in the SciPy library of Python that TOPFARM
uses.
The system of equations is only solved for the equality and the active constraints. The in-
equality constraints that are inactive for the iteration k are then omitted in the next iteration.
As a first guess, the algorithm evaluates the function values for all the inequality constraints,
and it includes the ones that are the closest to be active, meaning that gk ≤|τg|, where τg is a
small tolerance.
The structure of the algorithm is explained in [56]:
Inputs:
x0: Starting point of the design variable.
τf: Precision goal for the value of f in the stopping criterion.
maxiter: Maximum number of iterations.
Outputs:
x∗: Optimal point.
f(x∗): Corresponding function value.
Initializing:
λ0=0
W0 = I : the Hessian of the Lagrangian approximation is represented as Wk. The initial
approximation is to identity matrix I.
k = 0: represents the number of the iteration.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
23
==PAGE:30==
Loop:
while ‖f(x)k−1 −f(x)k‖ > τf or k ≤maxiter do:
1. Solve the system like the one presented in 3.26 for each iteration with the variables
from the previous iteration (or the initial one if it is the first iteration).
2. Perform a directional line search by a linear least squares subproblem, presented
with more detail in the reference [56].
Update variables:
xk+1 = xk + αdk
λk+1 = λk + sk
The approximation of the Hessian of the Lagrangian Wk+1 is updated using a BFGS
formula [55] where sk = xk+1 −xk and yk = ∇xℒ(xk+1, λk+1) −∇xℒ(xk, λk+1) :
Wk+1 = Wk −
WksksT
k Wk
sT
k Wksk
+
ykyT
k
yT
k sk
Structure of the maximization of the AEP problem using the SLSQP algorithm:
The variables to maximize are the coordinates of each wind turbine that are given with two
coordinates: x and y.
Therefore, the AEP function that will be maximized is dependent on those two variables. The
objective function can be expressed as a minimization problem because max f(x) = min −f(x):
minx∈Rnf(x) = min(−AEP(x, y))
subject to the constraints:
gboundary(xi, yi) ≤0
where gboundary(xi, yi) express the perimeter of the wind farm to limit each wind turbine to stay
within the constraints. For example, if the wind farm was circle-shaped, like the validation
case, gboundary(xi, yi) = x2
i + y2
i −R2 ≤0.
The interspace between the wind turbines is another constraint and it is defined by:
ginterspace = dij −dmin ≤0
i = 1, … , n
j = 1, … , n
i ≠j
where the distance between the wind turbines is defined by the Euclidean distance:
dij = √(xj −xi)2 + (yj −yi)2
And dmin is defined for each problem. Usually, the minimum distance between wind turbines is
not less than 4 times the rotor diameter [3] [4], but this parameter can be increased depending
on the specific characteristics of each wind farm.
24
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:31==
3.4.2
Heuristic algorithm
This algorithm was specifically designed for this problem and it is inspired by the paper by
Fischetti [36] and by the greedy algorithm presented in [9]. It is an iterative algorithm that
performs one movement per iteration and, similar to the greedy algorithm, it begins from an
empty layout and it places the turbines one by one. The wake effect is computed for each
iteration using PyWake in the downstream direction. The relative wind speed for each wind
turbine is calculated related to the absolute wind speed, and not iterating the relative wind
speed of all the wind turbines, which is a limitation of the approach but on the other hand it
requires computational time.
The structure of the algorithm is as follows:
Creating the mesh:
A mesh is created within the boundaries of the wind farm. To do so, it is used a function
that requires two inputs:
– N, that relates to the number of columns and rows, and therefore the density of the
mesh (NxN).
– The boundaries, which are defined by perimeter of the wind farm.
The function then chooses the points of the mesh that are within the boundaries.
The output of this function is a list of points equally distributed among the mesh that
represent the possible locations of the wind turbines (i).
Inputs
Apart of the inputs that are common for both algorithms (gradient-based and heuristic)
and are necessary for the description of the problem (site characteristics, turbine param-
eters, etc.) this algorithm can have the number of turbines as a variable, and therefore
a lower and an upper boundary need to be defined:
Nmax : it is the maximum number of wind turbines that can be placed. For this optimiza-
tion, Nmax = NTotal, where NTotal is the number of wind turbines installed in the regular
grid.
Nmin = NTotal −2
: it is set as a lower boundary. The reason for having 2 of margin
between the upper and the lower boundary is for the algorithm to not have convergence
problems and always reach NTotal.
Although the number of turbines is a variable that can be optimized, this feature will not
be used for this project and the number of turbines will remain the same as for the regu-
lar grid, NTotal. The reason for this is because the objective of the project is to compare
the optimized AEP against the AEP using a regular grid, and also analyze the optimized
AEP using a gradient-based algorithm. If the number of turbines differs from the other
layouts, the comparison is not consistent. Therefore, a study of the optimization of the
number of wind turbines will remain for future work.
Initializing:
xi = 0
for
i = 1...M : A binary variable x is defined:
– xi = 1 if there is a wind turbine active in that site i.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
25
==PAGE:32==
– xi = 0 if there is a wind turbine active in that site i.
The algorithm starts with 0 wind turbines placed, hence xi = 0 for all the grid points M.
γ0 = ∑x=1 xi = 0 : is an integer variable that counts the total number of active wind
turbines.
ΔAEPi = AEP(xi, yi) : this vector computes the AEP for the site i considering the wake ef-
fects from other wind turbines. As in the beginning there are not wind turbines installed,
this vector does not compute any interference from other wind turbines and computes
the same value of ΔAEPi for all the wind farm, because the wind speed is uniform along
the wind farm and so it is the potential energy that can be generated.
Loop
One movement is done for each iteration. The variable δi represents the increment
on the AEP by activating a wind turbine in a site where there was not a wind turbine
activated. Likewise, it represents the decrement on the AEP by deactivating a wind
turbine in a place where there was an active wind turbine:
δi =
⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩
ΔAEPi
if xi = 0
−ΔAEPi
if xi = 1
To respect the variable bound (Nmin ≤γ ≤Nmax) a penalty method is applied:
flipi =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩
−huge
if xi = 0 and γ ≥Nmax
huge
if xi = 0 and γ < Nmin
⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩
−huge
if xi = 1 and γ ≤Nmin
huge
if xi = 1 and γ > Nmax
where huge is a fixed integer number, 109, that penalizes or favours placing a wind tur-
bine or deactivating it, depending on the local limits Nmax and Nmin.
Then the algorithm chooses the position i where δi + flipi is maximum:
opt position = max(δi + flipi)
The variable xi for the optimum position is then flipped:
– if xi = 0 it flips to xi = 1 (the turbine in that site is activated).
– if xi = 1 it flips to xi = 0 (the turbine in that site is now deactivated).
Update variables:
γ = ∑x=1 xi : the number of activated wind turbines for the next iteration is updated.
AEPTotal = ∑x=1 ΔAEPi : the AEP for all the wind farm is the sum of all the increments
of AEP from each of the active wind turbines.
ΔAEPi = AEP(x, y) : the AEP vector is computed again using PyWake for all the points
in the mesh.
26
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:33==
The interspace restriction between the wind turbines is applied when the AEP vector is
computed using a penalization method, so the turbines are not placed too close:
if
distance(wtj, meshi) < distmin
then
ΔAEPi = −big where big = 102 : This
means that the algorithm will not place a wind turbine in a place that is is too close
to another active turbine wtj.
Convergence criteria:
The algorithm always converges on a solution that cannot be improved with any more
iterations. Therefore, for a loop iteration k, the cost of the objective function, AEPTotalk
is tracked:
if AEPTotalk = AEPTotalk−1 = AEPTotalk−2 then convergence = True : it can be con-
cluded that the algorithm has converged and the simulation is finished.
When the simulation converges, the total number of turbines is NTotal. To ensure that
the installed turbines form an optimized layout and they are within the boundaries Nmin
and Nmax, the algorithm includes an update of the boundary limits.
Two new variables are created:
Nmaxlocal = NTotal −1
Nminlocal = NTotal −2
Two new parameters for the upper and lower boundary are initialized. Nmaxlocal is reduc-
ing the number of wind turbines to one turbine less than in the regular grid case. These
new parameters are used in the algorithm loop.
Then, one new condition is added to the convergence criteria:
if convergence = True and γ ≠NTotal:
inc = γ −NTotal
Nmaxlocal = Nmaxlocal −inc
Nminlocal = NTotal −2 −inc
By doing this, it has been proven that, first, the algorithm gives less implementation
errors because the number of wind turbines always converges to NTotal, and secondly, it
delays the convergence of the solution and the algorithm can improve its performance.
The idea of updating the boundary limits is also used by Fischetti [36].
Although the structure is very similar to the ad hoc heuristic algorithm present in [36], there
are some inherent differences with the algorithm presented by Fishetti. The main difference
is that Fischetti computes an interference matrix Iij of the power loss that each turbine i expe-
riences by the rest of turbines j, and then with a linear superposition of this matrix it calculates
the total power loss for the turbine i. However, this study computes a velocity deficit matrix
using PyWake for each iteration, and then uses a quadratic sum of the velocities to compute
the wake loss in a turbine i, because it is found to be a more reliable approach to compute the
wake superposition [57]. Then, the power loss is calculated using the power curve.
On the other hand, the greedy algorithm presented in [9] has a similar structure to the algorithm
presented here, but it places the wind turbines in the grid regarding to the place with maximum
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
27
==PAGE:34==
local wind speed. Although it is a valid approach, the power output is the same for wind speeds
above Vrated, so it has been preferred to use the maximum local AEP (which proportional to
the power output by a factor of 8760) to select the points to install the wind turbines.
3.4.3
Heuristic algorithm as a smart start for the gradient-based algorithm
Some researchers have made use of multi-start algorithms that encompass an heuristic algo-
rithm and a gradient-based algorithm to avoid reaching a local minima [35] [58]. It is proven
that the results of the optimization depend on the starting point. In this project, the heuristic
algorithm is going to be used as the first step of a multi-start algorithm, and the second step
of the optimization will be using the gradient-based algorithm. The results of this optimization
are going to be compared with the other two algorithms.
28
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:35==
4
Validation of the models
This chapter helps to understand the performance of the models with the simplest case. The
gradient-based model and the heuristic model are both tested using a wind farm with 16 wind
turbines within a circular boundary of 1300 m of radius. The characteristics of this wind farm,
was it was mentioned previously in the methodology chapter 3, correspond to the IEA37 Task
[13]. The starting point for both algorithms is a regular grid, and the improvement of AEP [%]
is always related to the regular grid case.
First, the optimization using a gradient-based algorithm was performed. The result of the
optimization is shown below:
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500iter = 281) AEP = 382.061744 GWh   +2.373%
Figure 4.1: Gradient-based optimization with a tolerance of 10−6. The simulation took 281
iterations to complete and approximately 212 s.
The blue dots represent the optimized points and the grey points represent the initial positions.
The simulation did not reach the maximum number of iterations and it performed successfully.
This optimization was tested for different tolerances, and for the figure 4.3 it has been chosen
the best performance. The optimization with other tolerances will be explained further with a
sensitivity analysis in section 6.1.
The second optimization was done using the heuristic algorithm. Figure 4.2 shows the result
with two different mesh to illustrate how the mesh density has a big impact on the result. For
instance, selecting a mesh of 40x40 points (figure 4.2 on the left) can optimize the layout
0.566% in 32 s, whereas choosing a mesh of 95x95 (figure 4.2 on the right) can obtain an
improvement of 1.595% in 47s. The blue dots represent the position of the wind turbine and
the black dots represent the available points in the grid for the wind turbines to be placed.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
29
==PAGE:36==
1000
500
0
500
1000
1000
500
0
500
1000
40x40) AEP = 375.320559 GWh    +0.566%
1000
500
0
500
1000
1000
500
0
500
1000
95x95) AEP = 379.160870 GWh    +1.595%
Figure 4.2: Result for the validation case using the heuristic model.
As it is shown in the plots above, a higher mesh density gets a better result. This is as ex-
pected, because the turbines have more available grid points to be placed, so the search is
more accurate. However, as it will be seen in the sensitivity analysis chapter 6, a higher num-
ber of points is not always correlated with a better performance.
The last part of the validation case is the smart-start algorithm. To perform this optimization,
the best performance of the heuristic algorithm is going to be chosen as the starting point of
the gradient-based algorithm. This means that the heuristic simulation uses a 95x95 mesh
and the gradient-based algorithm has a 10−6 tolerance. The optimized layout is shown below:
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500iter = 327) AEP = 383.347402 GWh   +2.717%
Figure 4.3: Optimization using the smart-start algorithm (heuristic + gradient-based algorithm).
The simulation took 327 iterations and approximately 251 s to converge. It reached the high-
30
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:37==
est AEP from all the simulations but it also had the highest computational cost, because it
requires of the sequential optimization of the heuristic and the gradient-based algorithm.
The summary of results for the validation case is:
Algorithm
Computational speed
AEPopt [GWh]
AEPopt
AEPbase
Gradient-based
212 s
382.062
+2.373
Heuristic
47 s
379.161
+1.595
Smart start
251 s
383.347
+2.717
Table 4.1: Summary of the results of the optimization of the IEA37 offshore reference wind
farm.
All in all, both the gradient-based and the heuristic algorithm work successfully, meaning that
they both manage to compute an optimized layout that has higher AEP than the regular layout.
The gradient-based algorithm can reach a higher maximization of the AEP than the heuris-
tic algorithm, but it also takes longer computational time. It is worth mentioning again that
using the result of the heuristic algorithm to perform an optimization with the gradient-based
algorithm (smart-start) obtained the highest AEP value.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
31
==PAGE:38==
5
Results
In this chapter, the Emerald wind farm is going to be optimized using the heuristic algorithm
and the gradient-based algorithm. As this is a large offshore wind farm with 114 wind turbines,
four clusters are going to be used and optimized sequentially with the objective of reducing
the computational cost of the simulation and for logistic purposes (in real-world optimized
wind farms, it is convenient to have the layout divided in clusters for the later installation of
substations and design of the inter-array cable routing). Finally, a medium-size offshore wind
farm, Sceirde rocks, is also going to be optimized with the objective of testing the algorithms in
a real case wind farm with a handier number of wind turbines than the Emerald wind farm. For
both wind farms, there is going to be studied the AEP map, where it shows the wind turbines
that have highest AEP, and that can be linked with a higher preventive maintenance to ensure
the correct functioning of the wind farm.
5.1
Results for the reference offshore wind farm
The result of the simulation for the Emerald wind farm using a gradient-based algorithm is
shown below:
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
101)   AEP = 7518.109273 GWh    +0.269%
Initial
Optimized
Figure 5.1: Optimization with the gradient-based algorithm for the whole wind farm with a
tolerance of 10−5. The simulation took 101 iterations to finish.
The optimization with the gradient-based algorithm reached the limit of maximum iterations
(101 iterations) and took 106046 s to finish. The reason of not increasing the limit of max-
imum iterations is because the simulation was taking more than one day to complete, and
as it was described in the motivation for the thesis 2.1, the objective of the optimization is to
develop a fast and robust model, so the simulation time was limited. The high computational
cost is due to the large number of variable. Hence, this is why the study of the optimization
using clusters to try to decrease the computational cost is so relevant.
32
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:39==
The optimized layout shows a slight change in the wind turbines that are closer to the bound-
aries of the wind farm. These wind turbines tend to be placed closer to the edges, and further
from the other wind turbines. This is expected, because if the wake losses decrease when the
spacing between the wind turbines is increased. However, the wind turbines in the centre of
the wind farm do not have much mobility, so their change of position is practically indiscernible.
The second simulation was performed using the heuristic algorithm. The result of the opti-
mization is shown in figure 5.2.
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
70x70)   AEP = 7530.917412 GWh    +0.440%
Initial
Optimized
Figure 5.2: Optimization with the heuristic algorithm for the whole wind farm with a mesh of
70x70.
The optimization using the heuristic algorithm shows better results than with the gradient-
based algorithm. Moreover, it shows that all the wind turbines move to different positions,
contrary to the gradient-based optimization. In both cases, the wind turbines tend to be placed
closer to the boundaries, because that maximizes the area of the wind farm and separates
the wind turbines. The simulation for the heuristic algorithm took 14166 s to complete.
Finally, the smart-start optimization using the result from the heuristic algorithm as an starting
point for the gradient-based algorithm is performed. The optimized layout is shown in picture
5.3. The mesh used for the heuristic algorithm is 70x70 and the tolerance for the gradient-
based algorithm is 10−5 with a maximum iterations limit.
The improvement of AEP is respect to the regular grid layout. Figure 5.3 shows a better result
of the AEP than the previous two algorithms. The downside of this optimization is that it takes
119119 s to finish and it still reaches the maximum iterations with the gradient-based algorithm,
so it does not converge on a local minima.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
33
==PAGE:40==
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
iter = 102)   AEP = 7537.267436 GWh    +0.525%
Initial
Optimized
Figure 5.3: Emerald wind farm layout optimized with the heuristic algorithm and the gradient-
based algorithm (smart-start).
The summary of the results for the optimization of the emerald wind farm is:
Algorithm
Computational speed
AEPopt [GWh]
AEPopt
AEPbase [%]
Gradient-based
106046 s
7518.109
+0.269
Heuristic
14166 s
7530.917
+0.440
Smart start
119119 s
7537.267
+0.525
Table 5.1: Table summarizing the main results of the optimization of the Emerald wind farm
with each algorithm.
34
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:41==
5.1.1
Best performing wind turbines
The heuristic algorithm is based on selecting the points in the grid that can produce more AEP.
Therefore, the output of the simulation is an AEP map describing the energy output of each
wind turbine. This is very useful to detect the best performing wind turbines, and it can be
important to have an optimal maintenance strategy of the wind farm depending on the level of
degradation that each wind turbine has. In [59], the paper shows the influence of the energy
production with the preventive maintenance of the machine, and therefore it illustrates the
importance of this analysis. In the figure 5.4, the wind turbines with highest AEP output are in
red colour.
550
560
570
580
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
70x70)   AEP = 7530.917412 GWh    +0.440%
65.25
65.50
65.75
66.00
66.25
66.50
66.75
67.00
AEP [GWh]
Figure 5.4: AEP map for the Emerald wind farm optimized with the heuristic algorithm.
5.2
Results for the wind farm with clusters
The results for layout optimization of the wind farm divided in clusters that are optimized se-
quentially are shown in figures 5.5 and 5.6.
Although the computational time is slightly lower for both algorithms than for the case without
clusters (2656 s for the heuristic algorithm and 16997 s for the gradient-based algorithm), the
AEP output is lower for the optimized layout than for the regular grid layout, and that is why
the AEP improvement [%] are negative numbers.
The explanation for this is because, as it was mentioned in the methodology (chapter 3), the
optimization of the clusters is sequential, so the clusters are optimized one after the other,
instead of being all optimized simultaneously. Therefore, the first cluster has an optimized
layout with the wind turbines closer to the boundary. The second cluster repeats the operation
and also has an optimized layout with the wind turbines closer to the boundary, and so on.
Consequently, the last clusters to be optimized have less available positions and the wind
turbines from adjacent clusters are placed too close, which increases the total power losses.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
35
==PAGE:42==
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
iter =208)  AEP = 7180.037533 GWh    -4.240%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
Figure 5.5: Optimization of the Emerald wind farm divided in clusters using the gradient-based
algorithm with a tolerance of 10−4.
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
10x10)  AEP = 7375.384643 GWh     -1.676%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
Figure 5.6: Optimization of the Emerald wind farm divided in clusters using the heuristic algo-
rithm with a mesh of 10x10.
5.2.1
Separation of clusters
The solution to try to improve the optimization of the wind farm with clusters is to separate the
boundaries of the adjacent clusters by a λD distance, where λ can take integer values from 1
to 3, and D is the rotor diameter distance, 236m. This does not mean a global increment in
the wind farm area, but rather a decrement of the available area to place the wind turbines.
This extra constraint helps the algorithm to not place turbines from different clusters too close
to each other. The optimized layouts with this approach are shown below.
36
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:43==
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
iter =84)  AEP = 7421.137250 GWh    -1.024%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
10x10)  AEP = 7522.912747 GWh    +0.309%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
Figure 5.7: Optimization with 1D distance between the clusters. On the left, the gradient-
based optimization with tol = 10−3 and on the right, the heuristic one with 10x10 mesh.
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
iter =204)  AEP = 7500.31524 GWh    +0.032%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
10x10)  AEP = 7522.318900 GWh    +0.288%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
Figure 5.8: Optimization with 2D distance between the clusters. On the left, the gradient-
based optimization with tol = 10−3 and on the right, the heuristic one with 10x10 mesh.
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
iter =84)  AEP = 7507.21332  GWh    +0.124%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
10x10)  AEP = 7534.351525 GWh     +0.425954%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
Figure 5.9: Optimization with 3D distance between the clusters. On the left, the gradient-
based optimization with tol = 10−3 and on the right, the heuristic one with 10x10 mesh.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
37
==PAGE:44==
The results show a better optimization with the separation of clusters. It was found that the
heuristic algorithm could perform successful optimizations with a low mesh (10x10). This is
because, although each individual cluster is less optimized than with more density mesh, the
global optimization of the wind farm remains positive. On the other hand, a very high density
mesh, which as it will be explained in the sensitivity analysis chapter 6, can get higher AEP
for the case without clusters, does not obtain the best results for the wind farm with clusters.
As it is expected, the more optimized the layout is, the closer the turbines are to the bound-
aries of each cluster, which can cause a problem if the other clusters are too close. It is very
important to remember that this approach, which limits the available wind farm area, is an
extra constraint in the optimization problem, so the optimization of the AEP is expected to be
lower than for the case without clusters. However, it has as an advantage that the compu-
tational cost for this examples is very low compared to the other cases with this wind farm,
because the number of variables to be optimized simultaneously is lower. For all the cases,
the heuristic algorithm obtained better results.
The best results were obtained for a cluster separation of 3D. Therefore, this case is going to
be used for the smart-start simulation. The gradient-based algorithm as a tolerance of 10−3
and the heuristic algorithm has a mesh of 10x10. The optimized layout is shown below:
545
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Easting [km]
5670
5675
5680
5685
5690
5695
5700
5705
5710
Northing [km]
iter =82)  AEP = 7631.123 GWh    +0.437%
Initial
Optimized c1
Optimized c2
Optimized c3
Optimized c4
Figure 5.10: Smart-start optimization of the Emerald wind farm with clusters separated by 3D.
For further studies of optimization of layouts with clusters, it would be very valuable to imple-
ment a simultaneous optimization of the clusters, instead of the sequential optimization that
performed in this project.
38
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:45==
The summary of the results are presented in the following table:
Clusters
distance
Algorithm
Computational speed
AEPopt [GWh]
AEPopt
AEPbase
0D
Gradient-based
16997s
7180.038
-4.240
Heuristic
2656 s
7375.386
-1.676
1D
Gradient-based
16223 s
7421.137
-1.024
Heuristic
2290 s
7522.913
+0.309
2D
Gradient-based
14872 s
7500.315
+0.032
Heuristic
2268 s
7522.319
+0.288
3D
Gradient-based
13079 s
7518.109
+0.124
Heuristic
2074 s
7534.351
+0.426
Smart start
16012 s
7631.123
+0.437
Table 5.2: Summary of results for the optimization of the Emerald wind farm with clusters.
5.3
Sceirde rocks
The Sceirde rocks wind farm [60] is the third case that has been studied to analyse the perfor-
mance of the two algorithms for a different wind farm, this one with a medium size. It is formed
by 20 wind turbines of 20 MW each . The results of the simulation are the shown below.
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
Easting [km]
5899
5900
5901
5902
5903
5904
5905
Northing [km]
iter = 95)   AEP = 2088.560287 GWh    +4.119%
Initial
Optimized
Figure 5.11: Sceirde rocks optimized layout using the gradient-based algorithm with a toler-
ance of 10−9.
The simulation with the gradient-based algorithm took 95 iterations and 763 s to converge. The
output of the optimization was the same for a wide range of tolerances (from 10−3 to 10−9), and
the simulations also converged on the same iteration. However, we cannot guarantee that it
is a global optimum because the modality of the objective function is unknown, and because
the local minima can change for smaller tolerances, like 10−10, as it will be further explained
in the sensitivity analysis chapter (6).
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
39
==PAGE:46==
The optimization using the heuristic algorithm took 2152 s. The optimum AEP is not as high
as with the gradient-based algorithm. The optimized layout is shown in the figure 5.12 with a
mesh of 80x80.
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
Easting [km]
5899
5900
5901
5902
5903
5904
5905
Northing [km]
80x80)   AEP = 2065.546051 GWh    +2.972%
Initial
Optimized
Figure 5.12: Sceirde rocks optimized layout using the heuristic algorithm with a mesh of 80x80.
Both algorithms, gradient-based and heuristic, decrease greatly their computational time com-
pared to the previous case, the Emerald wind farm. This is closely related to the number of
wind turbines that are optimized.
Based on the previous simulations, the optimization for the smart-start algorithm is shown
below. The gradient-based algorithm has a tolerance of 10−9) and the heuristic algorithm has
a mesh of 80x80. The simulation took 2913 s to converge.
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
Easting [km]
5899
5900
5901
5902
5903
5904
5905
Northing [km]
iter = 372)   AEP = 2091.131151 GWh    +4.247%
Initial
Optimized
Figure 5.13: Sceirde rocks optimized layout with gradient-based algorithm (tolerance of 10−9)
and heuristic algorithm (with mesh 80x80).
40
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:47==
The summary of results for this wind farm are presented in this table:
Algorithm
Computational speed
AEPopt [GWh]
AEPopt
AEPbase
Gradient-based
763 s
2088.560
+4.119
Heuristic
2152 s
2065.546
+2.972
Smart start
2913s
2091.131
+4.247
Table 5.3: Summary of results for the optimization of the Sceirde rocks wind farm.
5.3.1
Best performing wind turbines
In the same way as for the Emerald wind farm, the AEP map for the Sceirde Rocks optimized
layout with the heuristic algorithm is shown in the figure 5.14. The wind turbines with higher
AEP output are the ones upstream that first see the free-stream of the wind in the prevailing
wind direction according to the wind rose presented in figure 3.14. This is expected, because
those turbines have the wake losses that are propagated downstream minimized.
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
Easting [km]
5899
5900
5901
5902
5903
5904
5905
Northing [km]
80x80)   AEP = 2065.546051 GWh    +2.972%
98
100
102
104
106
108
AEP [GWh]
Figure 5.14: Sceirde rocks with heuristic algorithm showing the AEP map. The maroon dots
show the wind turbines that generate more energy.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
41
==PAGE:48==
6
Sensitivity analysis
This chapter is focused on the influence that the main inputs of each algorithm (the mesh
density for the heuristic algorithm and the tolerance for the gradient based algorithm) have on
each simulation, and how that affects the computational cost of the optimization.
6.1
Computational cost of the validation case
All the simulations for all the different cases have been performed with a personal laptop. This
is because the main goal of the thesis is compare between reliable optimization models that
prioritize the fast optimization over the high performance optimization. Nevertheless, it would
be interesting for future work to run the simulations in fast computers.
0
50
100
150
200
250
Computational cost [s]
374
376
378
380
382
AEP [GWh]
1E-03
1E-04
1E-05
1E-09
Computational cost for the gradient-based algorithm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Improvement of AEP [%]
Figure 6.1: Computational cost of the gradient-based algorithm for the validation case.
Figure 6.1 shows that, for the gradient-based algorithm, the computational cost of the opti-
mization is a monotonically increasing function. This means that, for smaller tolerances, the
optimization of the AEP can be improved and the computational cost increases. The simula-
tion has been tested for tolerances 10−n where n = 3 … 9. The function stabilizes for a certain
tolerance, meaning that the improvement of AEP can be neglected. From this case, using
a tolerance of 10−9 improves the AEP 0.0012% respect to using a tolerance of 10−5, but the
computational cost increases significantly.
42
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:49==
10
20
30
40
50
Computational cost [s]
372
374
376
378
AEP [GWh]
Optimized AEP
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
N, where mesh density is defined by NxN
Mesh density
Computational cost for the heuristic algorithm
Figure 6.2: Computational cost of the heuristic algorithm for the validation case.
On the other hand, for the heuristic algorithm, the maximum AEP does not have a monotoni-
cally increasing function for the computational cost (the blue plot). Although the computational
cost increases with a higher mesh density (orange plot), it does not guarantee a higher AEP
output. This can be due to errors in the implementation of the algorithm, or to an objective
function that changes its output abruptly when discrete points are used. For this, it is pre-
ferred the continuous design space used for the gradient-based optimization, that has a more
smooth function of the computational cost 6.1
6.2
Computational cost of the Emerald wind farm
An analysis of the computational cost with each algorithm has been made for the Emerald
wind farm. For the wind farm without clusters, as it was mentioned in chapter 5, the gradient-
based algorithm reached the maximum number of iterations and took more than one day to
finish the computation. Therefore, because of time constraints and because the simulation
was tested with the tolerances 10−5 and 10−6 and it finished with the same output, the sensitiv-
ity case study for the gradient-based algorithm has been discarded for this case. However, it
would be very interesting to perform this sensitivity analysis with a faster computer for future
studies, and also with a higher maximum iteration limit.
The sensitivity analysis of the computational time for the Emerald wind farm using the heuristic
algorithm is shown in the figure 6.3. Contrary to sensitivity analysis for the validation case,
here the function is monotonically increasing. This means that, in order to obtain a higher
optimized AEP, the simulation increases its computational cost, because it requires a higher
density mesh. For these simulations, the highest AEP output corresponds to a mesh density
of 70x70, which is the optimized layout that is presented in section 5.1.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
43
==PAGE:50==
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Computational cost [s]
7512.5
7515.0
7517.5
7520.0
7522.5
7525.0
7527.5
7530.0
AEP [GWh]
Computational cost for the heuristic model
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Improvement of AEP [%]
Figure 6.3: Computational cost of the heuristic algorithm for the Emerald wind farm optimiza-
tion.
6.3
Computational cost of the Sceirde rocks farm
For this case study, the computational cost of the heuristic algorithm and the gradient-based
algorithm is presented in the same plot, in figure 6.4. The heuristic algorithm has a mono-
tonically increasing cost function, similar to the one presented in figure 6.3. However, the
gradient-based model gets the same output in the same time from the tolerances 10−3 until
the tolerance 10−9. For the simulation with 10−10 of tolerance, the maximum AEP increases
but so does the computational time. This indicates that for tolerances bigger than 10−9, the
simulation reaches the same local minima.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Computational cost [s]
2035
2040
2045
2050
2055
2060
2065
AEP [GWh]
Computational cost for heuristic
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
Improvement of AEP [%]
1e-09
1e-10
Heuristic model
Gradient-based model
Figure 6.4: Computational cost of the simulations for the Sceirde rocks wind farm.
44
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:51==
7
Conclusions and future work
This project performed the layout optimization of three wind farms regarding the wake effects
with two different algorithms, one heuristic and one gradient-based. The main results for all
the optimizations are presented in the following table:
Study case
Algorithm
Computational speed
AEPopt [GWh]
AEPopt
AEPbase
IEA37 ref.
wind farm
(16 WT)
Gradient-based
212 s
382.062
+2.373
Heuristic
47 s
379.161
+1.595
Smart start
251 s
383.347
+2.717
Emerald wind
farm (114 WT)
(no clusters)
Gradient-based
106046 s
7518.109
+0.269
Heuristic
14166 s
7530.917
+0.440
Smart start
119119 s
7537.267
+0.525
Emerald wind
farm (114 WT)
(with clusters
separated 3D)
Gradient-based
13079 s
7518.109
+0.124
Heuristic
2074 s
7534.351
+0.426
Smart start
16012 s
7631.123
+0.437
Sceirde rocks
(20 WT)
Gradient-based
763 s
2088.560
+4.119
Heuristic
2152 s
2065.546
+2.972
Smart start
2913s
2091.131
+4.247
Table 7.1: Summary of the main results of the optimization of each study case, for each
optimization algorithm.
It cannot be concluded which algorithm is better for the wind farm layout optimization prob-
lem. However, it can be observed that the gradient-based algorithm got higher AEP for wind
farms of small/medium size (IEA 37 reference wind farm and Sceirde rocks), and the heuristic
algorithm got better results for the biggest wind farm, Emerald, for the cases with and without
clusters. In terms of computational cost, the heuristic algorithm takes less time to converge for
almost all the cases (not for Sceirde rocks). Moreover, the gradient-based algorithm reached
the maximum iterations limit for the Emerald wind farm optimization. Although gradient-based
algorithms are well-known for its good scalability to large problems, the use of finite differ-
ences increases greatly the computational cost. It would be very interesting for future work to
perform the optimization with the gradient-based algorithm using an automatic differentiation
function (autograd) that takes less computational time, instead of the finite differences, which
are very computationally expensive.
Regarding the smart-start algorithm, the AEP for all the cases was higher after this simulation.
Also, the smart-start algorithm is the combination of both algorithms, and this means that any
improvement that can be done in any of the algorithms will also affect the performance of
this algorithm, because it is very linked to the performance of each of the algorithms individu-
ally. As a disadvantage, the computational cost increases because it requires a consecutive
optimization of the heuristic and the gradient-based algorithms.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
45
==PAGE:52==
Regarding the computational cost, it is important to repeat that the goal with this project is
to define a robust, reliable and fast model that can be used in personal laptops. For future
work, it would be very interesting to try the simulations in a fast and more powerful computer,
specially the case of the Emerald wind farm optimization using the gradient-based algorithm
with a higher limit of maximum iterations, to fully investigate the application of this optimizer.
Moreover, it would be very valuable for a further study of optimization with clusters, to imple-
ment a simultaneous optimization of all the clusters, instead of the sequential optimization that
has been performed in this work.
The use of other metrics, like LCOE, has not been studied, but it can be an interesting ap-
proach for future studies. Moreover,it can be a good application to analyze the optimization
of the number of wind turbines using the heuristic algorithm.
46
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Ivan Komusanac et al. “Wind energy in Europe- 2021 Statistics and the outlook for 2022-
2026”. In: WindEurope 1.1 (2022), pp. 4–40. URL: https://proceedings.windeurope.org/
biplatform / rails / active _ storage / disk / Windeurope - Wind - energy - in - Europe - 2021 -
statistics.pdf.
[2]
Mehmet Bilgili, Abdulkadir Yasar, and Erdogan Simsek. “Offshore wind power devel-
opment in Europe and its comparison with onshore counterpart”. In: Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 15.2 (2011), pp. 905–915. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2010.11.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032110003758.
[3]
Richard J. A. M. Stevens et al. “Combining economic and fluid dynamic models to de-
termine the optimal spacing in very large wind farms”. In: Wind Energy 20.3 (2017),
pp. 465–477. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.2016. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.2016.
[4]
Richard J.A.M. Stevens, Dennice F. Gayme, and Charles Meneveau. “Effects of turbine
spacing on the power output of extended wind-farms”. In: Wind Energy 19.2 (2016),
pp. 359–370. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.1835. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.1835.
[5]
Longyan Wang, Yunkai Zhou, and Jian Xu. “Optimal Irregular Wind Farm Design for
Continuous Placement of Wind Turbines with a Two-Dimensional Jensen-Gaussian
Wake Model”. In: Applied Sciences 8.12 (2018). ISSN: 2076-3417. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
app8122660. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/8/12/2660.
[6]
S Sanchez Perez-Moreno et al. “Multidisciplinary design analysis and optimisation of a
reference offshore wind plant”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1037 (June
2018), p. 042004. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1037/4/042004. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1088/1742-6596/1037/4/042004.
[7]
K. Dykes et al. “Applications of Systems Engineering to the Research, Design, and
Development of Wind Energy Systems”. In: (Dec. 2011). URL: https://www.nrel.gov/
docs/fy12osti/52616.pdf.
[8]
NO Jensen. “A note on wind turbine interaction”. In: Riso-M-2411, Risoe National Lab-
oratory, Roskilde, Denmark (1983).
[9]
Kai Chen et al. “Wind turbine positioning optimization of wind farm using greedy algo-
rithm”. In: Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 5 (Apr. 2013). DOI: 10.1063/
1.4800194.
[10]
Patrik Fagerfjäll. “Optimizing wind farm layout - more bang for the buck using mixed
integer linear programming”. In: 2010.
[11]
Ju Feng and Wen Zhong Shen. “Solving the wind farm layout optimization problem
using random search algorithm”. In: Renewable Energy 78 (2015), pp. 182–192. ISSN:
0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2015.01.005. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148115000129.
[12]
Majid Bastankhah and Fernando Porté-Agel. “A new analytical model for wind-turbine
wakes”. In: Renewable Energy 70 (2014). Special issue on aerodynamics of offshore
wind energy systems and wakes, pp. 116–123. ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.renene.2014.01.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960148114000317.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
47
==PAGE:54==
[13]
Pietro Bortolotti et al. “IEA Wind TCP Task 37 Systems Engineering in Wind Energy -
WP2.1 Reference Wind Turbines”. In: (May 2019). URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy19osti/73492.pdf.
[14]
David Guirguis, David A. Romero, and Cristina H. Amon. “Toward efficient optimiza-
tion of wind farm layouts: Utilizing exact gradient information”. In: Applied Energy 179
(2016), pp. 110–123. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.
06.101. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261916308765.
[15]
G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and B. Diviacco. “Optimization of wind turbine positioning in large
windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering and In-
dustrial Aerodynamics 51.1 (1994), pp. 105–116. ISSN: 0167-6105. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/0167-6105(94)90080-9.
[16]
John Hwang et al. “Large-Scale Multidisciplinary Optimization of a Small Satellite’s De-
sign and Operation”. In: Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 51 (Sept. 2014). DOI: 10.
2514/1.A32751.
[17]
J. Agte et al. “MDO: assessment and direction for advancement—an opinion of one
international group”. In: (Dec. 2010), p. 17. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-009-
0381-5.
[18]
Andrew Ning, Katherine Dykes, and Julian Quick. “Systems engineering and optimiza-
tion of wind turbines and power plants”. English. In: Wind Energy Modeling and Simula-
tion - Volume 2: Turbine and System. Ed. by Paul Veers. Vol. 2. Institution of Engineering
and Technology, 2019, pp. 235–92. ISBN: 9781785615238. DOI: 10.1049/pbpo125g_
ch7.
[19]
Javier Serrano González et al. “Optimal wind-turbine micro-siting of offshore wind farms:
A grid-like layout approach”. In: Applied Energy 200 (2017), pp. 28–38. ISSN: 0306-
2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.071. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261917305676.
[20]
IRENA. “Renewable energy technologies: Cost analysis series”. In: (June 2012), p. 64.
URL: https://www.irena.org/Publications.
[21]
Rebecca Jane Barthelmie et al. “Modelling and Measuring Flow and Wind Turbine
Wakes in Large Wind Farms Offshore”. English. In: Wind Energy 12.5 (2009), pp. 431–
444. ISSN: 1095-4244. DOI: 10.1002/we.348.
[22]
Martin Méchali et al. “Wake effects at Horns Rev and their influence on energy produc-
tion”. In: Jan. 2006.
[23]
Kurt S. Hansen et al. “The impact of turbulence intensity and atmospheric stability on
power deficits due to wind turbine wakes at Horns Rev wind farm”. In: Wind Energy 15.1
(2012), pp. 183–196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.512. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.512.
[24]
C. Hasager et al. “Wind farm wake: The Horns Rev photo case”. In: Energies 6 (Feb.
2013), pp. 696–716. DOI: 10.3390/en6020696.
[25]
Andrew P.J. Stanley, Andrew Ning, and Katherine Dykes. “Optimization of turbine design
in wind farms with multiple hub heights, using exact analytic gradients and structural
constraints”. In: Wind Energy 22.5 (2019), pp. 605–619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
we.2310. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.2310.
[26]
A. Wolf Ciavarra et al. “Wind farm optimization with multiple hub heights using gradient-
based methods”. In: ().
[27]
F. González-Longatt, P. Wall, and V. Terzija. “Wake effect in wind farm performance:
Steady-state and dynamic behavior”. In: Renewable Energy 39.1 (2012), pp. 329–338.
ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2011.08.053.
48
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:55==
[28]
Richard P Feynman, Robert B Leighton, and Matthew Sands. The Feynman lectures
on physics, Vol. I: The new millennium edition: mainly mechanics, radiation, and heat.
Vol. 1. Basic books, 2011.
[29]
Nord-Jan Vermeer, Jens Sørensen, and Antonio Crespo. “Wind turbine wake aerody-
namics”. In: Progress in Aerospace Sciences - PROG AEROSP SCI 39 (Oct. 2003),
pp. 467–510. DOI: 10.1016/S0376-0421(03)00078-2.
[30]
Leonardo P. Chamorro and Fernando Porté-Agel. “A Wind-Tunnel Investigation of Wind-
Turbine Wakes: Boundary-Layer Turbulence Effects”. In: (Apr. 2009). DOI: 10.1007/
s10546-009-9380-8.
[31]
Niels Troldborg, Jens Sørensen, and Robert Mikkelsen. “Actuator Line Simulation of
Wake of Wind Turbine Operating in Turbulent Inflow”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 75 (Aug. 2007). DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/75/1/012063.
[32]
C Elkinton, James Manwell, and Jon Mcgowan. “Offshore Wind Farm Layout Optimiza-
tion (OWFLO) Project: an introduction”. In: FME Transactions 38 (Jan. 2005).
[33]
Chunqiu Wan et al. “Optimal micro-siting of wind turbines by genetic algorithms based
on improved wind and turbine models”. In: Proceedings of the 48h IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC) held jointly with 2009 28th Chinese Control Conference.
2009, pp. 5092–5096. DOI: 10.1109/CDC.2009.5399571.
[34]
Ajit C. Pillai et al. “Optimisation of Offshore Wind Farms Using a Genetic Algorithm”. In:
International Journal of Offshore and Polar Engineering 26.03 (Sept. 2016), pp. 225–
234. ISSN: 1053-5381. DOI: 10.17736/ijope.2016.mmr16. URL: https://doi.org/10.
17736/ijope.2016.mmr16.
[35]
Beatriz Pérez, Roberto Mínguez, and Raúl Guanche. “Offshore wind farm layout opti-
mization using mathematical programming techniques”. In: Renewable Energy 53 (2013),
pp. 389–399. ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2012.12.007.
[36]
Martina Fischetti, Matteo Fischetti, and Michele Monaci. “Optimal Turbine Allocation for
Offshore and Onshore Wind Farms”. English. In: Optimization in the Real World. Ed. by
K. Fujisawa. Mathematics for Industry. Springer, 2016, pp. 55–78. DOI: 10.1007/978-
4-431-55420-2_4.
[37]
Martina Fischetti and Michele Monaci. “Proximity search heuristics for wind farm optimal
layout”. English. In: Journal of Heuristics 22.4 (2016), pp. 459–474. ISSN: 1381-1231.
DOI: 10.1007/s10732-015-9283-4.
[38]
S.D.O. Turner et al. “A new mathematical programming approach to optimize wind farm
layouts”. In: Renewable Energy 63 (2014), pp. 674–680. ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.10.023.
[39]
Jinkyoo Park and Kincho H. Law. “Layout optimization for maximizing wind farm power
production using sequential convex programming”. In: Applied Energy 151 (2015), pp. 320–
334. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.03.139. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261915004560.
[40]
Paul A. Fleming et al. “Wind plant system engineering through optimization of layout
and yaw control”. In: Wind Energy 19.2 (2016), pp. 329–344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1002/we.1836. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.1836.
[41]
Jonas Schmidt and Bernhard Stoevesandt. “The impact of wake models on wind farm
layout optimization”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 625 (June 2015), p. 012040.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/625/1/012040. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/625/
1/012040.
[42]
J J Thomas and A Ning. “A method for reducing multi-modality in the wind farm layout
optimization problem”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1037 (June 2018),
p. 042012. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1037/4/042012. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/
1742-6596/1037/4/042012.
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
49
==PAGE:56==
[43]
J. J. Thomas et al. “Gradient-Based Wind Farm Layout Optimization Results Compared
with Large-Eddy Simulations”. In: Wind Energy Science Discussions 2022 (2022), pp. 1–
28. DOI: 10.5194/wes-2022-4. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/preprints/wes-2022-4/.
[44]
Gunner Chr. Larsen and Pierre-Elouan Réthoré. “TOPFARM – A Tool for Wind Farm
Optimization”. In: Energy Procedia 35 (2013). DeepWind’2013 – Selected papers from
10th Deep Sea Offshore Wind R&D Conference, Trondheim, Norway, 24 – 25 January
2013, pp. 317–324. ISSN: 1876-6102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2013.07.
184. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876610213012708.
[45]
Martin O. L. Hansen. “Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines”. In: 2001.
[46]
Mads M. Pedersen et al. “DTUWindEnergy/PyWake: PyWake”. In: (Feb. 2019). DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.2562662.
[47]
“The UTM Grid Reference System”. In: 3.1 (1977), pp. 1–14. ISSN: 01601040. URL:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40967933 (visited on 05/28/2022).
[48]
Nicholas F. Baker et al. “Wind Farm Layout Optimization Case Studies”. In: (2018),
pp. 1–2. URL: https://github.com/byuflowlab/iea37-wflo-casestudies/blob/master/cs1-
2/iea37-wakemodel.pdf.
[49]
Global Offshore Map. 2022. URL: https://map.4coffshore.com/offshorewind.
[50]
The SG 14-236 DD. 2021. URL: https://www.siemensgamesa.com/en-int/- /media/
siemensgamesa/downloads/en/products-and-services/offshore/brochures/siemens-
gamesa-offshore-wind-turbine-brochure-sg-14-236-dd.pdf.
[51]
Global Wind Atlas. 2022. URL: https://globalwindatlas.info/.
[52]
Martin Dörenkämper et al. The Making of the New European Wind Atlas – Part 2: Pro-
duction and Evaluation. Apr. 2020. DOI: 10.5194/gmd-2020-23.
[53]
Carlos Eduardo Silva de Souza and Erin E. Bachynski-Polić. “Design, structural model-
ing, control, and performance of 20 MW spar floating wind turbines”. In: Marine Struc-
tures 84 (2022), p. 103182. ISSN: 0951-8339. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marstruc.
2022.103182. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0951833922000259.
[54]
Francisco Facchinei, Christian Kanzow, and Simone Sagratella. “Solving quasi-variational
inequalities via their KKT conditions”. In: Mathematical Programming 144.1 (2014), pp. 369–
412.
[55]
Joaquim R. R. A. Martins and Andrew Ning. Engineering Design Optimization. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2021. DOI: 10.1017/9781108980647.
[56]
D. Kraft. A software package for sequential quadratic programming. Deutsche Forschungs-
und Versuchsanstalt für Luft- und Raumfahrt Köln: Forschungsbericht. Wiss. Berichtswe-
sen d. DFVLR, 1988. URL: http://degenerateconic.com/uploads/2018/03/DFVLR_FB_
88_28.pdf.
[57]
Christopher R. Vogel and Richard H. J. Willden. “Investigation of wind turbine wake
superposition models using Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes simulations”. In: Wind
Energy 23.3 (2020), pp. 593–607. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.2444. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.2444.
[58]
A. P. J. Stanley and A. Ning. “Coupled wind turbine design and layout optimization with
nonhomogeneous wind turbines”. In: Wind Energy Science 4.1 (2019), pp. 99–114. DOI:
10.5194/wes-4-99-2019. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/4/99/2019/.
[59]
Hajej Zied, Rezg Nidhal, and Chelbi Anis. “An Optimal Preventive Maintenance Plan
According to Power Generation for a Wind Turbine”. In: (2016).
[60]
Green Investment Group acquires vanguard offshore wind development project in the
west of Ireland. 2021. URL: https://www.greeninvestmentgroup.com/en/news/2021/gig-
acquires-vanguard-offshore-wind-development-project-in-the-west-of-ireland.html.
50
Optimization of the layout of a wind farm considering wake effects
==PAGE:57==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399, 4000 Roskilde
Nils Koppels Alle, Bygning 403, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4677 5085
www.windenergy.dtu.dk
