==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emil Bjergskov Larsen 
(s163561) 
Generic hearing aid demonstrator for 
hardware design and agile concept 
testing 
MasterвҖҷs thesis, August 2022 
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
Generic hearing aid demonstrator for hardware design and agile concept testing 
 
Report written by: 
Emil Bjergskov Larsen (s163561) 
 
Advisors: 
Technical University of Denmark: 
 
Jonas Brunskog (jbru@dtu.dk), Associate Professor 
 
Frieder Lucklum (fluc@.dtu.dk), Professor MSO, Head of Center 
Oticon A/S: 
 
Ester Creixell Mediante (emed@demant.com), Vibro-Acoustic Specialist, HW A&M Specialist 
 
 
 
DTU Electrical Engineering 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Гҳrsteds Plads 
Building 348 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project period: 
 
February 2022 вҖ“ July 2022 
ECTS: 
 
30 
Education: 
 
M.Sc. Eng. 
Field: 
 
Engineering Acoustics 
Class: 
 
Confidential 
 
Edition: 
 
1. edition 
Remarks: 
 
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark. 
 
 
Copyrights: 
 
В© Emil Bjergskov Larsen, 2022 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Current solution - The mockup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The project reference - Panacea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Components in the demonstrator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
An interdisciplinary project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology
8
2.1
How to verify the demonstrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
9
3.1
The wave equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The discrete wave equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
The coupled system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.1
Visco-thermal losses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
What are the microphones measuring?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Experimental setup and numerical model
20
4.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1
Microphone sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
SSR and FFT analyzer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results and Discussion
23
5.1
Loudspeaker excitation - Mockup (experimental) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Receiver excitation - Mockup (experimental) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Can the measurements be trusted?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Mockup: experiment vs simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Demonstrator: experiment vs simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
i
==PAGE:6==
6
Conclusion and future work
42
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Appendix A - Datasheets
ii
7.1
Microphone data sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
7.2
Amplifier overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
8
Appendix B - Coupler modeshapes
ix
9
Appendix C - Additional plots
xi
9.1
Simulation: mockup vs demonstrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
9.2
Mockup experimental vs demonstrator simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
10 Appendix D - Alternative coherence
xv
10.1 Alternative verification method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Internal vibrations are the primary feedback path in conjunction with the decrease in size of
hearing aids. Only mechanical solutions can deal with this, because the microphones perceive the
vibrations as pressure, which adds up to the sounds that are supposed to be amplified.
The objective of the thesis was to develop a demonstrator to accelerate the process of testing
mechanical solutions to prevent internal feedback.
The work is interdisciplinary, and you are
forwarded to look at the work of Nikolaj Toftte, where the design of the prototype is described [1],
available from August 11th, 2022.
The demonstrator looks and behaves like a BTE, with receiver, amplifier and two microphones
inside.
A vibro-acoustic response from the demonstrator was achieved when the internal receiver was
excited. The direct receiver output was measured at a 2cc-coupler, but the microphones in the
demonstrator also picked up a signal. The difference in coupler pressure SPL and microphone
output SPL,is the loopgain. This measure indicate how much gain a hearing aid can apply before
the unwanted signal from the microphones is detected and amplified as well. Thus, the loopgain
was measured to assess internal feedback. Both experimental and simulated results was achieved.
The current testing tool will be examined as well, and the results will work as a guideline to know
how the prototype should perform.
Less gain can be produced at the moment for the experimental demonstrator. But for every itera-
tion, a new issue was discovered and the aspects of assemble procedure is still to be investigated.
Though, the demonstrator simulation showed potential, therefore it would be beneficial to keep
iterating the final prototype.
iii
==PAGE:8==
 
iv
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank everyone involved. Especially my supervisors Jonas Brunskog and Frieder
Lucklum from DTU, and Ester Creixell Mediante from Demant. Thank you for taking the time
and helping me through thick and thin.
This project would not have made possible without the work of Nikolaj (Giv den gas) Toftte. His
ability to always progress and not over-complicate things is admirable.
It would not be possible to assemble iterations if not Brian Jacobsen, Alexandru M. Simion,
Christian Ortiz Leal, Shanchivan Rajalingam and Kenneth Nielsen had taken the time to supply
us with components. For that, I am really grateful.
Anastasios Galanopoulos, Mariya Kavardzhikova and Benjamin Trimoreau made it possible to use
the non-invasive tool. Because of that, our prototype could be tested.
Of course a huge shout out to my friends and family. Thank you for believing in a brother since
day one.
Finally, I want to thank Josephine for being my number one supporter. You are a fighter like no
other, and a big inspiration to me.
v
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Hearing loss comes across quite frequently and can emerge with age, deceases, accidents or loud
noise exposure. The human ear is a complex set of membranes, bones and auditory nerves and it
would be inevitable to contain the same hearing level over a lifespan. Reduced hearing will lead
to increased listening effort and even tendency to give up on following conversations, lectures etc.
The life quality in general goes down, and even though the person with hearing loss might not
notice, for sure the people around do. At least, a large percentage of people with induced hearing
loss are in denial, and it is often the people around the actual sufferer, that motivates a visit to
the audiologists [2].
In these situations, when people are not in pain but simply have a noise induced hearing loss, the
general reason is the loss of outer hair cells. The outer hair cells are the ones that amplify weaker
signals but unfortunately are fragile for loud noises. For induced hearing loss, a hearing aid can
improve the hearing significantly. But amplification also has a limit. Hearing aids are small and
from an aesthetic point of view, many people do care about the looks. This means the sizes of
hearing aids are only getting smaller with time, like all technology that becomes smaller, while
maintaining a high output. But in conjunction with developing smaller devices, new mechanical
problems arise. The problem is, signal processing and amplification algorithms cannot deal with
components being too close to each other. And THAT is what Oticon wants; contribute with
mechanical solutions to make sure the smaller hearing aids still deliver sufficient gain.
This project will strive to develop an agile tool that can be adapted to new concepts and accelerate
the process of testing mechanical solutions.
1.1
Current solution - The mockup
The overall purpose is to accelerate the process of testing new hearing aid (HA) concepts. Until
now, new concepts are investigated by testing on mockups. A mockup is a 3d-printed simplified
solid geometry with cavities for the most essential components in a HA. The mockup used in this
project is seen in Figure 1. It is based on OticonвҖҷs product, Panacea, which is described in section
1.2.
1
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1: The reference mockup used in this project. There are two microphones and a receiver
in a suspension inside. The wires are used for lab testing
Notice the wiring is on the outside of the body. This is one of the reasons, why the mockup is not
agile at the moment. A distinction is made between the microphones; front and rear, and they
are connected to the outside via the respective inlets. There are a total of four components inside
the mockup; front and rear microphone and a receiver surrounded by a suspension which is seen
through the transparent solid geometry. The hook is actual hook taken from a Panacea HA.
In terms of concept verification, the Mockup can only be used to investigate the vibro-acoustic
internal feedback. Thus, the mockup cannot provide usability testing and this method is also non-
flexible to changes. On the other hand, if specific concepts were to be tested using a full hearing
aid, the level of complexity makes it inconvenient, since everything must be rearranged. OticonвҖҷs
desire is to have an in-between Demonstrator, where new concepts concerning components such
as the receiver (loudspeaker), suspension, microphones, and inlets in terms of internal feedback
could more agile be tested. The demonstrator should eventually also be suitable for wearing and
usability testing such as sound quality evaluation.
2
==PAGE:12==
1.2
The project reference - Panacea
Oticon has a wide range of products and this project is based on a specific HA. The reference HA
is the Panacea from 2018, as seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Exploded view of Panacea
Panacea is a behind-the-ear (BTE) model which is slightly smaller than earlier models and
will compete in the market for aesthetics. The Panacea re-uses both existing components and
also concepts from earlier products to meet the expectations from the stakeholders [3]. But there
is a trade-off when it comes to aesthetics and exposure of components. Besides the use of small
components, they are also located close to each other, and therefore the microphones are exposed
to structure-borne vibrations originated from the receiver. The front microphone are also close to
the acoustic tube, which is the direct path from the receiver to the ear. And transferring amplified
sound waves in a small tube will affect the inner walls, thus the HA body will vibrate and can be
picked up by the microphones. Therefore, internal feedback is a frequent concern in the HA design
process [4].
3
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Components in the demonstrator
The choice of components in the demonstrator is to be justified. The type of amplifier is completely
different than the one in the Panacea due to modularity purposes. In Figure 2 of the Panacea
model, the amplifier (green PCB board) is a major constrain in terms of modularity.
In the
beginning, the only terminals needed on the amplifier is four for the microphones, three for the
receiver, and a clock, data, plus and minus for a HA programming cable. So, a smaller PCB should
be found. First thought was to look at ITEs, a custom HA moulded to fit вҖҷIn-The-EarвҖҷ. Luckily,
a group at Oticon suggested the Amber-projectвҖҷs amplifier. An overview of the amplifier is seen
in appendix 7, and the components in the demonstrator is seen below, Figure 3.
Figure 3: The components in the demonstrator: Two microphones, amplifier with suspension and
cs44 connector
The structural design is based on the Panacea, but will be 3D-printed. The push button feature
is assessed subordinate according to the scope of the project. But on the outside it will have the
same geometry and size. Inlets microphones, receiver and suspension are reused as well. But
as seen in Figure 2 the inside components are mounted on a pair of racks. The racks are replaced
with directly gluing components to the inner walls of the вҖҷmockup-shellsвҖҷ. The inside of the final
design of the demonstrator is seen below, Figure 4.
4
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4: The inside of the demonstrator. hook is missing.
Notice blue tech at the receiver wire and underneath one of the microphones. This has shown to
be efficient in terms of isolating the cavities.
1.4
An interdisciplinary project
This is an interdisciplinary product development project. The overall task has been coordinated
and solved in cooperation with a colleague, Nikolaj Toftte. He is studying Design & Innovation at
DTU, and will hand in a thesis as well. His thesis will cover the development of the end-product
and he will handle the design and prototyping i.e. solder and glue micro-mechanical components.
It is still needed to be involved in one anotherвҖҷs fields and cooperate, especially for the idea
generation and concept development, which will guide the outcome of the respective theses and
make sure the end-product contains the relevant specifications from both fields. The separate
findings are compiled in two separate theses.
This thesis will be covering the testing method
and reliability of all the iterations and prototypes of the Demonstrator, the final outcome of this
project.
The process of the interdisciplinary project will follow the concept of Design Thinking, a method
to understand, explore and materialize a project. The method is described through the steps seen
in Figure 5.
5
==PAGE:15==
Figure 5: Design thinking
In short, the project starts with a discussion with Oticon to make sure the end-product meets the
requirements; make a tool that can accelerate the concept development phase, while also being able
to do more validation testing. But also, the final product needs to perform equal to the existing
method.
So, in order to emphasize and define the projectвҖҷs needs, a major part of the process will be
dedicated to set target values for feedback performance, thus do valid testing on the mockup. This
belongs to the Design Thinking step of understanding the project, where it is heading and how to
get there.
All the phases will be recurring, and the Design Thinking process is expected to be iterative. Rapid
prototyping is the key word for this, since a design typically develop through learning by doing.
It is often when testing the prototypes one notice an error.
1.5
Research Questions
To make sure the Demonstrator is reliable and usable, research questions have been formed to push
the product towards this direction. The starting point is known, since a mockup already exist,
which has been used for product development at Oticon. Knowing that the mockup is sufficient
for feedback testing, this data needs to be required. Therefore, a feedback test will be used to find
appropriate target values.
6
==PAGE:16==
1. How are target values (mean and standard error) defined using the experimental data?
2. How can the feedback test setup be verified?
The 2nd question is necessary to investigate.
The target values must be obtained from a test
running at best practice. Test parameters must be tuned to nominal inputs, to make sure of no
addition of non-linear behavior. The choice of signal and the signal processing needs to be justified
and will be ultimately be decided by the coherence. The setup could also implement a control
measure of some kind if possible.
An equivalent output should be achieved by simulating the mockup with the Finite-Element-
method (FEM). Having a fully functioning mockup simulation, would prove all relevant physics
and boundary conditions are applied in the model.
3. What should be applied in the simulation to reflect the experimental setup with the mockup?
4. How are experimental and simulated data compared?
Once the mockup is fully described both with experimental and simulated data, it will be time
for measuring the demonstrator. The goal is to maintain a frequency response within a certain
range which will be specified. For the simulation of course, there is no variability. It is the ideal
representation of a prototype, since all contact points are fixed. This is what is wanted but can be
difficult to achieve in reality. The demonstrator prototype cannot be expected to behave the same
way. The main concern is the manually building and gluing process, and making sure there are
no slits where air can escape. Another concern can be roughness or tolerances of the 3d-printed
micro-mechanical parts which have very fine geometry, that the inlets might not behave exactly
as the ideal.
The difference between the mockup and the demonstrator is the implementation of an amplifier in
the demonstrator, which will add changes in geometry and weight, thus, also the response. It will
be interesting to see how big of a difference there is in the simulation at first.
5. How can one make sure that the demonstrator maintain the reference feedback response in
practice?
7
==PAGE:17==
2
Methodology
2.1
How to verify the demonstrator
The process of verifying the demonstrator will go through vibroacoustic experiments and numerical
finite element simulations. The starting point will be to follow OticonвҖҷs best practice measurement
of loop gain response on a mockup. The experimental setup is run through Pulse, a data analysis
software from BrВЁuel & KjГҰr (HBK). These results can be directly compared to a simulation of
the mockup, if the simulation is also following the Oticon guidelines. Thus, both methods should
reflect same setup that they use in the company.
The test setup and simulation will be explained in a later section, but it is important to notice that
the preferred method cannot be evaluated with coherence. Therefore, another signal processing
for the same setup will be tested.
The demonstrator will afterwards be developed and the methodology steps can be summed up
like:
1. Mockup test - Stepped sine sweep method (Oticon best practice)
2. Mockup test - white noise method
If the white noise method gives good coherence, then the linear sweep method is verified
3. Mockup simulation - (Oticon best practice)
If the simulation gives similar results, the simulation must include all relevant physics.
4. Demonstrator simulation - (Oticon best practice)
If the simulation gives similar results, a prototype can be made for experimental measurement to
give final verification.
8
==PAGE:18==
3
Theory
First of all, this chapter will review the theory behind the FEM. It will be described how to find
pressure and deformation numerically, how to couple acoustic and structural domains and how to
make sure the other relevant boundary conditions add losses or absorb.
Another theory to include is feedback and why it is happening. Also, metrics will be introduced
called loopgain and snoopgain. When calculating these, one can tell how much gain can be applied
before feedback will happen. Feedback cannot be prevented when having a receiver and microphone
in the same circuit, and possible error sources in the demonstrator will be described.
Finally, in order to discuss the results, it is also important to understand, what the microphones
are measuring and how the vibrations in a HA is picked up by the microphones.
3.1
The wave equation
An important aspect of knowing the performance of a HA, is to evaluate the sound pressure going
in and out of a HA system. Often a microphone is used to achieve this information, but sound can
also be described theoretically.
First of all, sound travel as waves through fluids when excited by vibrating objects, but in solids
they travel as vibration. These waves can be described by their amplitude, direction and wave-
length, but are depending on the fluid in which they propagate. In fluid, the waves appear as
pressure while a solid will vibrate/deform when being exposed to waves.
The sound waves in air are solutions to HelmholtzвҖҷs equation, the wave equation, and thereby, the
pressure amplitude in each direction can be found. It is often written in the following form in
frequency domain, where the acoustic medium is homogeneous with constant properties:
Оҙ2p
Оҙx2 + Оҙ2p
Оҙy2 + Оҙ2p
Оҙz2 + k2 В· p = 0
(1)
Where p is the sound pressure and k is the frequency dependent wavenumber defined as Пү/c, where
Пү is the angular frequency in radians, Пү = 2 вҲ—ПҖ вҲ—f, and c=342 (m/s) is the speed of sound in air.
The gradient operators can be rewritten with Laplacian, вҲҶor the divergence operator squared
вҲҮ2. Standard conditions are assumed, 20oC in 1 atm[5]. Isentropic propagation is assumed, which
9
==PAGE:19==
means no acoustic energy is lost[6].
In a structural domain the linear elasticity equation is solved to find deformations in solids. It is
derived from HookeвҖҷs law and NewtonвҖҷs 2nd Law.
Newton :
F = m В· a
(2)
Where F is force, m is mass and s is acceleration.
Hooke :
Пғ = E В· Пө
(3)
Where Пғ is stress (Pa), E is YoungвҖҷs modulus (Pa) and Пө is strain i.e. the relative change in length,
when height is deformed.
It was earlier stated that waves propagate from vibrating objects, which directly refers to NewtonвҖҷs
2nd Law; that force originates from an accelerating mass. Applying this force to a solid with a
surface will send waves through the thickness, and combining this with HookeвҖҷs law, which describes
the stress/strain in a solid, gives the linear elasticity equation in solids where deformations are
solutions [7]:
вҲҮПғ + Пү2ПҒsu = 0
(4)
where ПҒs is the mass density of the solid.
If these were to be solved theoretically, a simple problem would be appropriate, for example a
standing wave tube, where one must assume a solution. But the Parts of the HA have complex
geometries. So, the work-around is to approximate a solution.
3.2
The discrete wave equation
It was mentioned that the FEM will be used. This is for this purpose, to approximate sound
pressure and deformation in a model using the wave equation. The model is defined by acoustic
and structural domains, and is to be discretized:
10
==PAGE:20==
Figure 6: Cross section view of the acoustic sphere around the HA in the FE-model. The domain
is denoted, в„Ұ, and the boundary is denoted О“
.
The left picture in Figure 6 shows the continuous air sphere domain, в„Ұ. The outer geometry of the
system is subtracted from the sphere and the components in the system is seen in Figure 23. and
the boundary of the domain is denoted О“. This will later be used in the weak equation. The right
picture shows the discrete system and the solution for a specific frequency. This is just for showing
the concept. Here a mesh is created, which means the domain is divided into specific points called
nodes. It is seen that the distance between the nodes is much smaller on the boundary around the
HA than on the outside sphere boundary, and the distance is decided from the element size.
There are two consideration to make when deciding the element size, esize. As a rule of thumb,
to be well above the Nyquist criteria, a minimum of six elements per wavelength (О») is needed to
represent a wave in a discrete system. The frequency spectrum under investigation in this project
is 100 Hz - 10000 Hz, which means the maximum esize is the shortest О» divided by six:
esize = О»
6 =

c
fmax

6
=

343 m
s
10000Hz

6
= 0.0057m
(5)
The other important aspect of choosing the esize is to stay true to the model, meaning to achieve
the correct geometry. As example, the PVC tube require a finer mesh to capture the thin circular
geometry. And while being flexible, the higher sound pressure in the model is passing inside the
tube, making the tube deform the most of all components in the model. This also adds up to the
importance of having a smaller esize in this area.
After making the system discrete, the wave equation will be solved for each node in the discrete
11
==PAGE:21==
system. So somehow, the wave equation also needs to be represented discrete. Before making it
discrete, the weak form of the wave equation is described. Notice procedure is done on the wave
equation in air, but will also count in the structural domain if changing pressure to deformation
and define speed of sound with elastic properties.
The approach is referred to as the Galerkin procedure, where a test-displacement function, П•,
is pre-multiplied the wave equation, and then integration is carried out over в„Ұto transform the
Laplace into a boundary and domain integral.
Z
в„Ұ
П•[вҲҶp + k2p]dв„Ұ= 0
(6)
Notice that П• has to fulfill the kinematic boundary condition of p.
The next step is to separate the boundary from the domain in two integrals. To do this, GreenвҖҷs
1st Identity is used:
вҲ’
Z
в„Ұ
вҲҮП• В· вҲҮpdв„Ұ+
Z
О“
П•(вҲҮp В· n)dО“ +
Z
в„Ұ
k2П•pdв„Ұ= 0
(7)
For the boundary integral over О“, n is the outward pointing normal vector. With this, one can
describe the magnitude of the flow in the vector field.
What is left is to achieve interpolation between the nodes. This is done by multiplying the pressure
p with the shape functions N to get Np, and let NT=П•.
вҲ’
Z
в„Ұ
вҲҮNT В· вҲҮNdв„Ұp +
Z
О“
NT(вҲҮNp В· n)dО“ +
Z
в„Ұ
k2NTNdв„Ұp = 0
(8)
Now the displacement field inside the elements is approximated as well.
3.3
Boundary conditions
A specific boundary condition is added to the nodes on the interaction boundary to interchange
pressure and deformation. For a time harmonic motion, the boundary condition on the interaction
boundary can be specified as:
12
==PAGE:22==
{na}T
(
1
ПҒa
вҲҮp
)
= вҲ’в„Ұ2{ns
T}{u}
(9)
Where na and ns are the normal vectors pointing away from their domain boundary, ПҒaisthedensityofair, 1.2kg
вҲҮp is the pressure gradient, в„Ұis the frequency and u is the structural particle movements (defor-
mation). The discrete matrix form to describe this is:
([Ka] вҲ’в„Ұ2[Ma]){P} + в„Ұ2[S]{D} = {0}
(10)
The outside boundary of the air sphere needs to be absorbing all incoming sound waves.
{na}T
(
1
ПҒa
вҲҮp
)
= вҲ’i в„Ұ
ПҒaca
p
on
О“abs
(11)
3.4
The coupled system
The FE-model consists of acoustic and structural regions. The acoustic domain is the air sphere,
coupler, inlets and the acoustic tube, while the microphones, receiver, suspension, HA body, hook
and PVC tube are structural components with elastic properties. The coupled system on matrix
form is given as:
(
пЈ®
пЈ°Ks
ST
0
Ka
пЈ№
пЈ»вҲ’Пү2 В·
пЈ®
пЈ°Ms
0
вҲ’S
Ma
пЈ№
пЈ») В·
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
d
p
пЈј
пЈҪ
пЈҫ=
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
fs
fa
пЈј
пЈҪ
пЈҫ
(12)
Where subscript s is the structural part and a is the acoustic contribution to the equation.
[K] is the global stiffness matrices where the material properties are specified, so the forces and
pressure in the system can be related to displacements.
The size of the local stiffness matrix
depends on the degrees of freedom for each element and the amount of element. [M] is the mass
matrices and provides interpolation between nodes in the generated mesh. The matrix contains
the shape functions.
13
==PAGE:23==
[S] is a two-way coupling between the mechanical and acoustic domain. When the HA vibrates, the
interaction boundary will work as a sound source and affect the surrounding air. Conversely the air
will behave as a load on the boundary. {D} is the displacement vector, {P} is the pressure vector
and the right hand side is the force vectors {f} in structural and acoustic domain respectively.
3.4.1
Visco-thermal losses
There is also a need for applying the effect of visco-thermal losses in the air domain in inlets and
the air tube that connects the receiver to the coupler. These cavities are narrow and losses cannot
be neglected. To take the losses into account, simple impedance conditions can be applied to
simulate drag in the acoustic waves towards the surfaces. Impedance can be stated as the relation
between force/velocity and in the case of acoustic impedance:
{n}T{1
ПҒвҲҮp} + iПү
Z p = 0
(13)
Where Z = ПҒc
(14)
Where Z is calculated as an approximation of visco-thermal losses, which in reality occur in
the bulk of the acoustic domain. This approximation is called the Boundary Layer Impedance
method (BLI.)
14
==PAGE:24==
Figure 7: The concept of Visco-thermal losses. The edges of the wavefront at t1 will reach t2 after
the center of the wavefront
3.5
Feedback
As mentioned in the introduction, structural vibrations in a HA are unavoidable. It is a general
concern in the HA industry now, when components are closer to each other than ever. This will
resolve in internal feedback. Another type of feedback is external feedback which is caused by
leakage. The industry have dealt with this for many years, so it is not as critical in a final product,
but can most certainly become a problem for the demonstrator if not assembled appropriate.
External feedback happening in a fully functioning HA, could be when the earmold is not com-
pletely shut in the ear. Then amplified sound will emerge and in a loop, the amplified sound is
picked up by the microphones again and again with a sample delay. This can more visually be
shown by a block diagram as seen in Figure 8.
15
==PAGE:25==
Figure 8: The loop in which feedback occurs
So, the microphone perceives sound, it is amplified and send right back into the microphone. But
nowadays the earmolds are fitted for the specific user, and leakage is not an issue for final products
unless they are dropped or not treated with kindness.
Sound leakage turned out to be an issue with of the demonstrator. A sound leakage test at Oticon
can determine if there is a leakage, but not specify where it is coming from. The test is done by
sending a pressure through a вҖҳclosedвҖҷ system and see if any pressure can still be detected outside,
thus, see if the system is closed as supposed. It checks the path from the hook opening through
the acoustic pipe. The path should only be connected directly with the receiver spout, but sound
pressure was still detected for the demonstrator. This will be discussed later.
Another thing that also relates to sound leakage, is the importance of sealing the microphones, so
they are only connected to the outside via the inlets. This phenomenon was clear, when testing the
circuit to see if the soldering job was acceptable. When microphones and receiver were connected
to the amplifier, one could upload an image to the amplifier and control it via a software on the
computer called GearBox. Besides checking serial number etc., one could send an input level to
the amplifier, and make the receiver put out a sound pressure. High pitched вҖҳsquealingвҖҷ sound was
playing if the amplifier not fried from the soldering. But if the port of the microphones were shut,
the squealing sound would stop immediately, since they were not connected anymore. This means,
if the circuit is correctly inserted and glued inside the 3d printed parts of the demonstrator, it
would be possible to run this test and stop the squealing simply by holding a finger tight to the
16
==PAGE:26==
inlet openings.
The internal feedback paths come from close contact between components in a Panacea. The
receiver is supposed to move freely in its cavity. But when the receiver is vibrating, it can still
happen, it touches the inner walls of the cavity. It should not be touching at any moment and is
minimized by vibration spikes in three dimensions on the suspension as seen in Figure 9.
Figure 9: The suspension is hanging freely but is fixed at the connection to the hook. The curvature
will be hanging downwards [3]
The Figure shows the fixed boundary at the opening. That is the only touching connection to
the racks and hook in the Panacea. It is tight enough to completely isolate the direct channel
from receiver to ear, but also loose enough to not make the suspension deform, even though it
is a rubber material with stiffness of 20-40 (MPa) depending on the frequency. A design in the
demonstrator is made so the receiver can also move freely from curvature and down.
The way the feedback performance will ultimately be determined in this project is by calculating
loopgain. Loopgain is the pressure divided with the pressure perceived by the microphone, and
afterwards converted to [dB]. It is also interesting to extract the Snoopgain. In the test setup a
third microphone will be included, referred to as the snoop microphone. It will be located as close
as possible to the inlet openings without touching. In theory, the snoop microphone should perceive
17
==PAGE:27==
the same sound pressure as the front and rear microphone, respectively. But what the response
really shows, is a scenario, where the HA microphones are insensitive to internal vibrations and
without the effect of the inlet.
The receiverвҖҷs task is to transduce the electrical signal from the amplifier and convert it back
into acoustic sound waves like a loudspeaker. The vibrations depend on the programming of the
amplifier, since it is fitted to the specific HA wearer needs and preferences. So, people who need
more amplification will to a greater extend experience feedback in form of a high pitched вҖҳsquealingвҖҷ
3.6
What are the microphones measuring?
The mockup, demonstrator and final HA are using the same Micro-Electro-Mechanical System
(MEMS) microphones. It is important to understand how they transduce sound pressure, and
within this theory lies opportunities for improvements in terms of inlet design.
Figure 10: Exploded view of Panacea
A MEMS microphone has one entrance through the port at the inlet. It consists of two air filled
chambers separated by a membrane. The front chamber is directly connected to the outside. At the
bottom of the back chamber there is a plate, referred to as the backplate. The backplate and the
membrane are metal, but has to be charged in order to obtain a voltage output, i.e. a condenser.
18
==PAGE:28==
Then a casing for the application-specific-integrated-circuit (ASIC) is taking up space in the back
chamber, which means the microphone becomes sensitive when vibrating in the direction parallel
to the membrane.
The microphone generates a voltage output proportional to the distance between membrane and
back plate. Thus, mechanical vibrations are converted to electrical signals. The microphones are
directly subjected to sound pressure coming from the outside via the inlet, and this is the wanted
output voltage. But the membrane can accelerate due to several phenomena because of inertia,
since the membrane has a mass. And if incoming sound makes the membrane move, the internal
vibrations will make the membrane move even more. This will produce an additional unwanted
output since the distance to the backplate changed but not due to sound pressure. The membrane
will be sensitive to vibrations caused by the following:
1. When the HA body accelerate perpendicular to the membrane, the membrane will move even
more, since it is more flexible than its surrounding body.
2. When air in the front chamber is pushed at uniform velocity due to sound pressure having a
wavelength longer than the membrane diameter. Then the membrane will be in a constant
deflection from rest, meaning the membrane is closer to the backplate.
3. When the HA accelerate parallel to the membrane, the asymmetry in the back chamber can
cause negative pressure in the part under the membrane
4. The air column in the inlet also has inertia and will be compressed at the bottom when the
HA body accelerate upwards
Another thing to consider is the fluid-structure interaction boundary. When the HA body vibrates
the boundary will be moving like a piston, thus behaving like a sound source. This will tweak the
desired sound pressure as well.
19
==PAGE:29==
4
Experimental setup and numerical model
4.1
Test setup
4.1.1
Microphone sensitivity
The Snoop microphone sensitivity is achieved first through a test where the setup includes B&K
Pulse software, loudspeaker, standing wave tube, reference microphone and Snoop microphone.
The sensitivity of the reference microphone is already known and the response is flat across the
frequency spectrum under investigation 100 Hz вҖ“ 10 kHz. Figure 11 shows a sketch of the setup.
Figure 11: Plane wave tube measurement to achieve sensitivity of snoop microphone
The measurement is executed with Pulse and a linear stepped sine sweep of 199 frequencies is
generated through the loudspeaker with an amplitude of 1 Pa. The setup is using a SSR analyzer,
which provides a complex adaptive average mode, with an accuracy of 0.1 dB, delay of 10ms and
a max time of 1s. Elaboration is found in section 4.2.
Both reference microphone and snoop microphone measure at the opening of the standing wave
tube. The loudspeaker is located at the closed end. The output voltage of the reference microphone
can then be divided by its sensitivity to get the perceived pressure. The output voltage of the
snoop microphone can now be divided with the perceived pressure from the reference microphone
to translate the sensitivity to the Snoop microphone.
snoopsensitivity(V/Pa) = snoop(V)
ref(Pa)
(15)
To get the sensitivity of the HA microphone, the setup is changed. The diagram in Figure 12
20
==PAGE:30==
shows the signal path of the setup.
Figure 12: Exploded view of Panacea
The measurement is done on the front and rear microphone individually. According to whether
it is front or rear, input 1 is shifted together with the snoop microphone location. The Snoop
microphone should be as close as possible to the inlet and pointing to the inlet opening. The
generator should connect to the loudspeaker.
The output voltage of the snoop microphone is
divided with its sensitivity to isolate the perceived pressure.
21
==PAGE:31==
snoop(Pa) =
snoop(V)
snoopsensitivity(V/Pa)
(16)
And the output voltage from front and rear microphones are each divided with the perceived
pressure from the snoop microphone to get the sensitivity that is not affected by inlets or internal
vibrations.
frontsensitivity(V/Pa) = front(V)
snoop(Pa)
(17)
rearsensitivity(V/Pa) =
rear(V)
snoop(Pa)
(18)
Ideally, the output voltage at front and rear respectively, should be the same. For the final step
of calculating loop and snoop gain, the generator is switched to the receiver. Same sweep will be
executed at the receiverвҖҷs nominal voltage, 165mVrms.
When testing the mockup, it has been decided to do a reproducability test.
When handling
the snoop microphone, one has to be careful when placing it close to the inlet opening without
touching. So this procedure is tested from ten measurements. The loudspeaker distance has also
been moved, then coupler been taken on and off between measurements.
4.2
SSR and FFT analyzer
The B&K Pulse software is equipped with a Steady State Response (SSR) analyzer. It will ef-
fectively suppress background noise in two steps. First of all a band pass is centered around the
analysis frequency to remove undesired components. And for optimal estimation of the frequency
response a complex adaptive averaging algorithm is used. It makes sure to get rid of all data that
are not in the specified accuracy range with a 67% confidence level. The algorithm is activated
after a delay time, to make sure the system is at steady state and it will stop averaging after
the specified maximum time. It also secure the complex frequency response in the end. But un-
fortunately, the software does not allow extracting the cross-power spectra, therefore the method
cannot be validated by coherence.
22
==PAGE:32==
5
Results and Discussion
This chapter show and discuss the results of the tests. The representation order will be the same
as the steps to verify the demonstrator. The first thing to look at will be the raw data. These data
will give a general understanding of the signal chain and how the components behave. This can
also help explaining Loop gain, which is the final calculation to really say at what gain feedback
occurs.
According to the Design Thinking model, the Mockup results is used for the define process, where
reference values will be defined.
5.1
Loudspeaker excitation - Mockup (experimental)
An external loudspeaker is used to achieve the acoustic sensitivity of the microphones inside the
HA. Theoretically the snoop microphone should produce the same output voltage when externally
exposed as the HA microphones. That is because its position is so close to the inlet. The height
of the inlet will not have an effect in this frequency range. The maximum frequency range resolve
in a sound wave of 3,4cm which is bigger than the inlet height, therefore they are assumed close
enough to each other to perceive the sound signal the same, in terms of loudness. This can be
checked when comparing the output voltages from the raw data and dividing them.
23
==PAGE:33==
Figure 13: The relation between the voltage outputs
It is seen in Figure 13 that the front and rear microphone behave the same from between 100 Hz
and 2000 Hz. Towards higher frequencies they deviate more and more up until a perceived sound
level of 4 dB difference. For humans, psycho-acoustically speaking, this difference corresponds to
a doubling of the sound intensity. But for transducers they have a sensitivity, and since the snoop
microphone sensitivity is known, this can be now transferred.
24
==PAGE:34==
Figure 14: Snoop microphone sensitivity
The Snoop Microphone sensitivity is seen in Figure 14. It is in the range between around 0.0083
[V/Pa] as the lowest value and 0.012 [V/Pa] as the highest. When converted to dB it is around a 3
dB difference. This will be multiplied to the graphs seen in Figure 13 to get the HA microphonesвҖҷ
sensitivity.
25
==PAGE:35==
Figure 15: Snoop, front and rear microphone sensitivity comparison
Now the foundation has been made for the analysis of the mockup. By establishing the relation
between the microphones, the contribution of internal vibrations or other effects of the mockup
can be compared to the snoop microphone, which is not coupled.
5.2
Receiver excitation - Mockup (experimental)
The generator is switched to the receiver and the raw voltage output from the microphones is
plotted in Figure 16.
26
==PAGE:36==
Figure 16: Voltage output of front and rear microphone
First thing to discover in Figure 16 is that the standard error margin stretches more for frequencies
below around 1000 Hz for all microphones. It seems like the microphones detect the same reso-
nances for front and rear respectively. Especially at 2000 Hz where all ten measurements suggest
approximately the same output voltage. Though it seems the resonances are at same frequencies,
the magnitude is not the same. And for the Snoop Microphone at the front inlet opening the
margin of error is still stretched more than the others.
The Front Microphone output seems to be below the Snoop in general, where the opposite is seen
for the Rear Microphone. It is important to remember, the receiver is giving the output now.
When thinking again about how a hearing aid is working, the receiverвҖҷs purpose is to transduce
an amplified signal into a sound pressure that should go into the ear canal only. The microphones
detect a low signal anyways, but the loop gain will tell us how much gain can be applied before
27
==PAGE:37==
feedback will happen.
The sensitivity is now used to convert the actual voltage into sound pressure, shown in dB in
Figure 17.
Figure 17
The range is between around 2 dB to 50 dB. Now it is interesting to see, how much sound is really
translated to the coupler.
When the receiver is running at nominal voltage, the following sound pressure is perceived by the
coupler microphone, shown in dB in Figure 18:
28
==PAGE:38==
Figure 18
A margin is seen immediately for the rear measurement. This can perhaps be explained due to
the reproduce-ability test. Maybe it was not on the same day. It happened that the receiver wires
had to be soldered again.
There is a direct path from the receiver to the coupler and no leakage at all, so the signal-to-
noise (SNR) is very positive. The way the coupler is used, is to act as a human ear, thus it is
just a cavity of a human size ear approximately from the concha through the ear canal to the
tympanic membrane, where the tympanic membrane now is shifted with a coupler microphone.
But it approximating a ear-mold as well. It is important to notice the small dip around 600 Hz.
This is used as an indicator that there is no nonlinearity in the measurement. If the receiver was
playing at a voltage above the nominal, this would flatten out. The resonances are clear to see but
decreases with frequency from the third peak and further. The sound level is of course higher at
the coupler than at the Snoop and HA microphones.
A coarse example could be at 200 Hz the average level at the Front Microphone was -70 dB, seen
in Figure 17, and the level at the coupler was 17 dB, seen in Figure 18. Let the gain from the
вҖҳimaginaryвҖҷ amplifier be above 87 dB, then the very low microphone detection would be noticed
29
==PAGE:39==
as a squealing sound in the ear i.e., feedback. And that is what the Loop gain shows in Figure 19.
Figure 19
Notice the coloring. From now on, the experimental mockup data will be shown in blue scale
coloring. That is convenient when comparisons to simulations and demonstrator experimental
data will be done.
When carefully looking at the sharp resonances, they can be distinguished from each other. What
was seen as resonances in the microphone Vout / sensitivity, is anti-resonances in the Loop Snoop
Gain comparison. It is clearly seen for example at 2000 and 8000 Hz. And the highest resonance
from the coupler plot is seen, still as a resonance, at around 1600 Hz. It is a bit shifted when
comparing the same for peak loop and snoop gain. But when looking at around the same frequency
for the microphone Vout / sensitivity, the HA microphone has an ant-resonance, which pushes the
loop gain up, since the calculation is coupler pressure divided with the microphone pressure and
then converted to dB.
30
==PAGE:40==
For good measure, the same Loop Snoop gain comparison for the rear test setup is shown in Figure
20.
Figure 20
The same things can be mentioned again about this measurement. But when comparing the Loop
and Snoop gain at front and rear inlet, it is interesting to see that the Snoop gain is higher than
the Loop gain at the rear inlet and the other way around at the front inlet. Obviously, there are
many thoughts going into inlet design when conceptualizing a HA. If it is sure that there is no
leakage or internal feedback, theoretically the Loop and Snoop gain would be the same. But as
mentioned earlier, the pressure build-up inside the inlets will have a noticeable effect, and therefore
the Snoop gain is often used as indicator. If the Loop gain is higher, this indicates the inlet design
is balancing out the contribution from the inlet pressure build-up.
Investigating inlets has not been a part of this project, but a common way of dealing with balanced
31
==PAGE:41==
inlets is to twist the inlet and turning the HA microphones upside down. This is not the case for
this mockup, therefore it rather indicates that the rear microphone is possibly exposed to more
internal feedback than the front.
5.3
Can the measurements be trusted?
A way to look at the quality of the test setup is by measuring the coherence. This is not possible
with the SSR analyzer. A non-conventional method has been implemented to get it. While the
SSR analyzer puts all energy into one frequency at a time, an averaging FFT-analyzer records the
peak coherence across the whole spectrum simultaneously with a Hanning window. It has been
taken into account that the spectral lines should match the stepped sine sweep frequencies and
there is no segmentation of overlapping averaging windows.
Оі2
xy =
|Sxy(Пү)|2
Sxx(Пү)Syy(Пү)
(19)
Where Оі2
xy is the coherence, |Sxy(Пү)|2 is the cross spectrum between input voltage auto spectrum
Sxx(Пү) and the microphone output voltage auto spectrum, Syy(Пү).
The coherence is measured between the input voltage (measured at input 4 on the Pulse as seen
in Figure 12) and the output voltage from the Snoop and HA microphones as well as the output
pressure from the coupler Microphone. Figure 21 shows the measured coherence at the front inlet
position.
32
==PAGE:42==
Figure 21
Figure 22 shows the measured coherence at the rear inlet position.
Figure 22
For both front and rear coherence, below 1000 Hz the plots show less correlation between the
33
==PAGE:43==
receiver and HA microphones as well as receiver and Snoop microphones, while the the measure-
ment conditions of achieving the coupler pressure is phenomenal from 100 Hz to 10000 Hz.
If anything, the coherence for this method could be assumed higher because the FFT analyzer is
not controlled with noise reduction features. Practically, it was possible to speak in the room while
only processing with SSR analyzer. But if someone sneezed while measuring, the coherence would
become much worse across all frequencies, all the while the Loop gain data would not notice.
that being said, the microphones did show bigger standard error in Figure 16 than the coupler did
in Figure 18. The effect of low coherence can therefore be interpreted in terms of the difficulty
of repeat the test and measure the exact same values. Though, this should be taken warily, and
might only apply for frequencies where the amplitude is below around -100 dB. This can be seen
for the Snoop Microphone at the front inlet. For example in Figure 16, when looking at the Snoop
microphone at the front, the region from 1050 Hz - 1400 Hz gives an output above -90 dB, and
even though the standard error is stretched over 8 dB, the coherence suggest ideal measurement
condition, probably because of the higher output.
So, can the data be accepted? From an organizational point of view, this method was implemented
and adopted as best practice. There is no interest in changing that, and at so low signals it is
difficult to have a good coherence, especially when thinking about, the dream scenario is for the
microphones to experience no signal at all except for the coupler Microphones. Adding the FFT
analyzer is the only way to add coherence to the measurement, but an alternative could be changing
the input signal to white noise and control Pulse only using the FFT analyzer. A microphone SPL
response is seen together with the coherence in appendix 10
5.4
Mockup: experiment vs simulation
The advantage with simulations is to have a comprehensive understanding of the behavior of a
design before even thinking about manufacturing it. This way time and materials can be spared.
So, when the time comes to evaluate the demonstrator simulation, a mockup simulation should be
ready for comparison.
An approximated copy of the test setup is modelled including PVC tube, coupler. The Snoop
microphone is also implemented as a coordinate system 0.5mm from the inlet openings. Note,
34
==PAGE:44==
there are two front inlets, left and right, but measurements and simulations are always carried out
the left front inlet when looking from behind. Neither mockup or demonstrator are symmetric,
since the spout of the receiver is not centered and the amplifier is glued the right side of the shell
when looking from behind.
Figure 23: Parts in the mockup numerical model
As seen in Figure 23, the system is bounded by the air sphere and the 2cc coupler, which is also
air-filled. Front and Rear inlet is also air and the inside of hook and PVC forms an acoustic tube
with air, which is the direct way between receiver and coupler. All mechanical components are
behaving as one part, thus this is a linear model. The mechanical region is fixed at bottom of the
PVC tube, where it meets the coupler.
The coupler pressure will be compared.
The resonances are decided from the acoustic cavity
between the coupler and receiver, so if the resonances are the same, it would mean the cavities
dimensions are the same.
35
==PAGE:45==
Figure 24: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
When looking at the resonances in Figure 24, the simulated coupler must be accepted.
The
modeshapes are seen in Appendix 8.
The Loop and Snoop gain from the simulation is now compared with the earlier experimental
response, starting with front as seen in Figure 25:
36
==PAGE:46==
Figure 25: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
The magnitude of the snoopgain are the same between 1200 Hz and 6000 Hz. for experimental
and simulated results. Therefore, the pressure at the front inlet opening is the same. When the
loopgain curves are above the snoopgain, it indicates the sound pressure level perceived by the HA
microphone is lower than the actual sound pressure level. The microphone sensitivity must have
balanced out the the contributions discussed in 3.6. Or maybe the HA body is vibrating, which
exposes the snoop microphone that has no vibration sensitivity.
Neither of the simulations capture the 2000 Hz peak, which means it could be electrical noise.
Maybe from the Wires to the microphones have been re-soldered many times. In the phase at 9500
Hz a similar sudden phase-shift is seen.
From 100 Hz to 1000 Hz the simulations are decreasing, and no resonances or anti resonances are
seen. But no peaks were seen in the coupler either before 1450 Hz. Which means, the peaks in
the loop and snoopgain are at least still the HA tubing resonances. But the anti resonances are
37
==PAGE:47==
happening when the microphone sound pressure level is higher.
Figure 26: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
For the rear microphone as seen in Figure 26 both simulation and experimental results have a
consistent snoopgain above the loopgain. It indicates that the sound pressure level perceived by
the HA microphone is higher than the actual sound pressure level. At least it is the same for both,
but in general for the rear microphone the simulated loop gain is much lower than the experimen-
tal. Maybe it could be something with the transducer models that are imported in Ansys. The
actual performance is blackboxed, but maybe it could how it is angled in the model that affects
the output.
Like the front measurements, the standard error below 1000 Hz is stretching over 15 dB even
though it is the same mockup under test, and it is much lower than the simulated results. It is
known from the demonstrator that the assembling procedure can easily get inaccurate. And the
38
==PAGE:48==
contact conditions are neglected in the simulation. That also means, what looks like valleys here
is interpreted as noise, especially since the coherence showed the same.
5.5
Demonstrator: experiment vs simulation
First of all the response from three different demonstrators are shown:
Figure 27: Three versions of the demonstrator: loopgain front and rear
The difference from 3 to 4 is the receiver cavity, which is bigger in version 4. Clear leakage is seen
for Version 4.2 and 4.1 seems able to supply more gain.
The Demonstrator simulation caused some problems. Around 80 geometry operations have been
made even though it started as an imported CAD model. With the tools that ANSYS provides,
39
==PAGE:49==
the model ended up working, but when zooming on the boundary between hook and HA body, the
geometries are not like in reality. The loop gain will be compared to the experimental demonstrator.
Figure 28: Unfortunately no snoopgain for the experimental demonstrator results
Notice, the method for measuring the demonstrator is with the вҖҷnon-invasiveвҖҷ-tool. Basically the
same, but the processing is hidden. Therefore, it is not known if the results is also divided with
вҲҡ
2,
or not. It gives a 3 dB difference. Other than that it looks promising. Especially when thinking
about how it is planned to refine the prototype. It is still preliminary study of the demonstrator,
and as shown in Figure 4, the blue tech is actually restraining the receiver to move freely, meanwhile
the wires are are stiff. So the vibrations are more likely to be transferred to the HA body and
amplifier. This might explain why the peaks are more damped for the experimental results. It
seems like if they were more amplified, the front measurements would be the same.
The low frequencies for the demonstrator prototype is also distorted as seen in the coupler pressure
in Figure 29, it has a up-slope around 1000 Hz. This was because it accidently was run with 0.5
40
==PAGE:50==
Vrms and scaled down for comparison.
Figure 29: Coupler pressure comparison between the demonstrator: experimental and simulation
Additional plots are seen in Appendix 9.
41
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusion and future work
Experimental and simulated results have been gathered for the mockup. By implementing the
snoop response, it was verified, that the microphones are sensitive to the same vibrations. The
target values were defined by the metrics loopgain and snoopgain.
The feedback test setup was tried to be verified with coherence. But the FFT analyzer did not
use the Adaptive averaging algorithm. It was therefore assumed to be better than shown.
The boundary conditions in the simulation seemed to be sufficient, the peaks were more aligned
for the front microphones, both for mockup and demonstrator, while either the rear simulation
results or the rear experimental results are off. The most highlighted comparisons were bewteen
loopgain, snoopgain and coupler pressure. But the experimental and simulated data should also
be compared with the microphone SPL, to look for irregularities.
For the front microphone the response is accepted.
It is not all peaks that the simulation is
capturing, but is assumed to be electrical noise in the measurement data. On the other hand the
rear simulation results should be revised.
The demonstrator has been through 4 versions, where the first two were not tested. But with
each iteration, one becomes aware of something new. Than manually soldering and assembling is
difficult for everyone, but the demonstrator has potential. Thoughts about how to make it better
are already brought to the workshop, and next thing to look at, is the choice of wires. And how
to isolate internally, with either blue tech or another method.
6.1
Future Work
First of all, it would be an idea to use actual statistics to look for significant differences.
A new demonstrator is on the way to improve the free motion of receiver.
The CAD model is not well adapted into Ansys, and a solution for this should be found.
42
==PAGE:52==
i
==PAGE:53==
7
Appendix A - Datasheets
7.1
Microphone data sheet
 
 
            Revision: draft                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10/23/2018 
         Sheet 1 of 9                                                                                                                                                         В© Copyright 2017 Knowles 
 
  
The MM25 is a uniquely trimmable microphone.  Using KnowlesвҖҷ proven ultralow noise 
MEMS technology, the MM25 consists of an acoustic sensor, a low noise input buffer, 
and an output amplifier. These devices are suitable for applications where excellent 
matching is required. 
 
 
Product Features 
пӮ· Trimmable Sensitivity, Phase and Current 
пӮ· Small Package / Bottom Port 
пӮ· High SNR  
пӮ· Extended Dynamic Range 
 
 
 
пӮ· Maximum RF Protection 
пӮ· Ultra-Stable Performance 
пӮ· Standard SMD Reflow 
пӮ· Omnidirectional 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
MEMS Microphone 
MM25-33663-000 
ii
==PAGE:54==
 
 
            Revision: draft                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10/23/2018 
         Sheet 2 of 9                                                                                                                                                         В© Copyright 2017 Knowles 
Acoustic & Electrical Specifications 
Table 1: General Microphone Specifications 
Test Conditions: 22 Вұ 2В°C, 50 Вұ 5% R.H., VDD =0.9V and no load unless otherwise indicated 
 
Parameter 
Minimum 
Nominal 
Maximum 
Units 
  
Supply Voltage (VDD) 
0.88 
0.9 
1.4 
V 
operating range 
Sensitivity 
60 Hz 
-4 
-3 
-2 
dB 
dB re sensitivity @ 1kHz 
1 kHz 
-58 
-57 
-56 
dB 
dB re 1V / 0.1 Pa 
10 kHz 
-3.0 
-2.0 
-1.0 
dB 
dB re sensitivity @ 1kHz 
Peak 
- 
4.5 
- 
dB 
dB re sensitivity @ 1kHz 
Peak Frequency 
- 
16 
- 
kHz 
- 
Supply Current (Drain) 
29 
31 
33 
ВөA 
- 
Output Load Voltage (VL) 
0.35 
0.45 
0.55 
V 
after settled (open load) 
Input-Referred Noise, A-Weighted 
- 
25 
27 
dB SPL 
20 Hz to 20kHz bandwidth 
Signal to Noise Ratio, A-Weighted 
- 
69 
- 
dB A 
20 Hz to 20kHz bandwidth 
Input-Referred Noise, 1/3rd Octave 
- 
14.5 
- 
dB SPL 
@100 Hz 
- 
11 
- 
dB SPLпҖ 
@1 kHz 
- 
16.5 
- 
dB SPLпҖ 
@10 kHz 
Output Impedance 
2600 
3150 
5500 
пҒ— 
@ 1 kHz 
 
Start Up Time 
- 
<1 
- 
seconds 
sensitivity stable within +/- 0.2dB 
Acoustic Overload Point 
- 
120.5 
- 
dB SPL 
10% THD @ 1 kHz 
Power Supply Rejection Ratio 
- 
-42 
-38 
dB 
@ 1kHz 
Input-Referred 
EMI 
0.70-0.96 GHz 
90 V/m 
- 
30 
35 
dB SPL 
IEC 60118-13 Ed. 4.0 
1.4-2.0 GHz 
50 V/m 
- 
30 
35 
dB SPL 
2.0-2.7 GHz 
35V/m 
- 
20 
35 
dB SPL 
Input Referred Vibration  
- 
54 
- 
dB SPL 
blocked port, 1g acceleration,  
sensitivity @ 1kHz 
- 
65 
- 
dB SPL 
open port, 1g acceleration,  
sensitivity @ 1kHz 
Humidity Coefficient 
- 
0.0 
- 
dB 
per %RH 
Storage Temperature 
-40 
- 
+100 
ВәC 
- 
Operating Temperature 
-17 
- 
+63 
ВәC 
- 
Directivity 
Omnidirectional 
- 
Polarity 
Increasing output voltage 
Increasing pressure at inlet 
ESD Tolerance 
MIL вҖ“ STD вҖ“ 750 Class 2 Rating 
EOS / ESD вҖ“ S5.1 вҖ“ 1993 Class 2 Rating 
Sensitivity, Output Impedance, A-Weighted Noise, and Supply Current are 100% tested. 
 
Functional operation at these or any other conditions beyond those indicated under вҖңAcoustic & Electrical SpecificationsвҖқ is not implied. Exposure 
beyond those indicated under вҖңAcoustic & Electrical SpecificationsвҖқ for extended periods may affect device reliability.  
 
 
 
iii
==PAGE:55==
 
 
            Revision: draft                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10/23/2018 
            Sheet 3 of 9                                                                                                                                 В© Copyright 2017 Knowles 
Frequency Response  
 
Figure 1: Typical frequency response measured in a pressure cavity under nominal conditions (Table 1). Response above 10 kHz is typical in free 
field and not measured in the pressure cavity. 
3rd Octave Equivalent Noise  
 
Figure 1: Typical Equivalent Noise under nominal conditions (Table 1) 
 
 
 
 
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
10
100
1,000
10,000
Sensitivity (dB re 1V/0.1Pa) 
Frequency (Hz) 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Equivalent Noise (dB SPL) 
1/3 Octave Band (Hz) 
iv
==PAGE:56==
 
 
            Revision: draft                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10/23/2018 
            Sheet 4 of 9                                                                                                                                 В© Copyright 2017 Knowles 
Mechanical Specifications 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                
 
 
 
12JPn Port 
Notes: 
Metal can may be flush with, but not extend past, 
edge of microphone base on four sides. 
 
вҖң*вҖқ Denotes dimension applies to the center of 
ground ring. 
 
Pick Area only extends to 0.25 mm of any edge or 
hole unless otherwise specified. 
 
Dimensions in millimeters [inches] 
v
==PAGE:57==
vi
==PAGE:58==
7.2
Amplifier overview
This document is the property of Demant and may not be copied or communicated to a third party or used for any purpose other than that for which it is supplied without the express written consent of Demant. No 
warranty or representation is given concerning such information, which must not be taken as establishing any contractual or other commitment binding upon Demant or any of its subsidiary or associated companies. 
 
 
 
Initials: 
Release date: Description: 
 
Sheet No.: 
Originated by: 
CASP 
Auto Date 
SCHEMATIC, AMBER 312 
 
1 of  1 
Revised by: 
 
Auto Date 
 
Ver.: 5 
 
Category: 
Revision: 
Doc-00105911 
D 
0 
 
DT-00000077 rev. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shown with all options 
 
 
vii
==PAGE:59==
viii
==PAGE:60==
8
Appendix B - Coupler modeshapes
ix
==PAGE:61==
x
==PAGE:62==
9
Appendix C - Additional plots
9.1
Simulation: mockup vs demonstrator
Figure 30: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
xi
==PAGE:63==
Figure 31: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
xii
==PAGE:64==
9.2
Mockup experimental vs demonstrator simulation
Figure 32: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
xiii
==PAGE:65==
Figure 33: Coupler pressure comparison between the mockup: experimental and simulation
xiv
==PAGE:66==
10
Appendix D - Alternative coherence
10.1
Alternative verification method
Figure 34
xv
==PAGE:67==
Figure 35
xvi
==PAGE:68==
Figure 36
xvii
==PAGE:69==
References
[1] Nikolaj Funch Toftte. Generic hearing aid demonstrator for hardware design and agile concept
testing. A DTU MASTER THESIS PROJECT IN COOPERATION WITH OTICON, August
2022.
[2] Kevin St. Clergy. 77% of people with hearing loss are in denial. Help Me Hear, 2021.
[3] BPBJ. Panacea design report, 7 2021.
[4] B. R. Varanda, R. N. Miles, and D. Warren. Characterization of the dominant structural
vibration of hearing aid receivers. Journal of Vibration and Acoustics, Transactions of the
ASME, 138, 12 2016.
[5] et. al Jacobsen. FUNDAMENTALS OF ACOUSTICS AND NOISE CONTROL. 2011.
[6] Peter Risby. General rights modelling of acoustic viscothermal losses using the boundary
element method: From method to optimization.
[7] Ester Creixell Mediante. Computational reduction techniques for numerical vibro-acoustic
analysis of hearing aids, 2018.
[8] Grzegorz Knor. How shading plot in matlab? 10 2013.
[9] VINAY CHANDWANI. Shape functions or interpolation functions. 8 2013.
[10] Ester Creixell Mediante. Modeling the uncertainty of mechanical contacts in hearing aids,
modellering af usikkerhed af mekaniske kontakter i hГёreapparater. 2014.
[11] Ester Creixell-Mediante. Balanced inlet design for microphone vibration sensitivity cancella-
tion in hearing aids.
