==PAGE:1==
Remote IoT-based Smart Control
and Monitoring of Electric Drives
by
Wybren Oppedijk and Niels Tiben
A Master’s thesis submitted to the Department of Wind and Energy Systems in
fulfillment of the requirements for a Master’s degree in
Computer Science and Engineering
Under supervision of prof. Dr. Tomislav Dragičević
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Electric drives, such as pumps for water systems, account for three to four per
cent of global energy consumption. Some drives have a buffer tank, allowing
them to be flexible when they are off or (partly) on. This flexibility can be used
to relieve the electrical grid at peak times, but currently, this often does not
happen.
The research investigates whether a network of water pumps can be used in
ancillary services. For this purpose, a real-world wastewater pumps network
is examined, together with a simulated and freely customisable network, and
studied whether load balancing works with a complex Danish ancillary service.
For this purpose, it is crucial to estimate the energy consumption flexibility in
advance.
The methods applied were to analyse, validate, clean up and supplement exist-
ing sensor values. Several machine learning models and existing models from the
literature have been investigated for predicting flexibility. Furthermore, meth-
ods have been presented to improve future measurement sampling. The result
is that a LightGBM model is the most suitable for predicting flexibility, and
then the amount of precipitation significantly impacts offered flexibility.
The conclusion is that pumping station operators can use flexibility to stabilise
the network, provided a few conditions are met. Participation in ancillary ser-
vices is not considered realistic for the existing real-world network because the
power potentials and tank sizes are not large enough. Larger networks that tar-
get urban areas can participate, but large tank sizes and large water inflows are
required. The more extensive networks are tested in a simulation and therefore
need further research for real-world application.
Keywords: Multi-energy systems, cloud control, ancillary services, wastewater,
pump control, water-energy nexus, real-world data, machine learning flexibility
prediction, simulation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Whilst working on this thesis assignment, we had to take guidance and help of
some persons who deserve our gratitude.
We want to thank our supervisor, prof. Dr. Tomislav Dragičević for offering
us a graduation position in an awesome team of the DTU Wind and Energy
Systems department. Without your knowledge and drive to explore creative
ideas, we would not have taken every opportunity to get the most out of the
project.
Additionally, we would like to thank Dr. Daniel Gebbran for all the guidance.
A countless number of answers and suggestions were given, that helped us to
quickly get started in the complex world of wastewater pumps and ancillary
services. And it didn’t stop there, as we look back on many informal, informative
and fun meetings together. We were sorry to see you go, but we wish you all
the luck with your new adventure in Brazil.
Luckely, Dr. Ramadhani Kurniawan Subroto did a great job by stepping in
Daniel’s footsteps after he left. Ramadhani quickly became our new target for
throwing our many questions at. We are very grateful that Ramadhani always
made time for a meeting, even if his time schedule did not always allow to. We
are also very pleased with the feedback he gave on the thesis, which also helped
us improving our writing skills.
Furthermore, we would like to thank the other amazing persons in our team:
Miguel Gajardo, Javiera Quiroz, Pere Gómez, Dr. Mohammad Mehdi Mardani
and prof. Dr. Nenad Mijatovic. They have been very friendly and helpful from
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
begin to end, and are the reason that we felt welcome and part of the team.
Finally, we want to thank Torben Jørgensen, Allan Thams, Klaus Jensen and
Andreas Aupke from BEOF and Danfoss; which were involved in this project
and gave us the domain expertise that was needed for doing the thesis.
A picture of us together with the amazing people we have been working with
during our MSc. thesis. The picture is taken in Allinge, Bornholm; next to one
of the wastewater pumping stations that are part of this research. From left to
right, top to bottom: Torben Jørgensen, Allan Thams, Klaus Jensen, Andreas
Aupke, Niels Tiben, Ramadhani Kurniawan Subroto, Wybren Oppedijk, Javiera
Quiroz, Miguel Gajardo, Pere Gómez, Nenad Mijatovic and Mohammad Mehdi
Mardani. Not on the picture: Tomislav Dragičević and Daniel Gebbran.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Wastewater-energy nexus on Bornholm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Ancillary services (AS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Flexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.5
Related work and contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Measurement analysis
21
3
Data modelling
27
3.1
Error correction and state addition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Time interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Inflow approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Aggregation with external data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Finalised data-set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Prototype
41
4.1
Initial prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Proposed prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Flexibility estimation
47
5.1
Day-ahead flexibility estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Real-time flexibility estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:8==
vi
6
Coordination
59
6.1
Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Simulation
67
7.1
Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Inflow sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3
Grid sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.4
Technical details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.6
Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8
Discussion and conclusion
89
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
AFE Active Front-End
AS Ancillary Services
BEOF Bornholms Energi & Forsyning
DPT Data Processing Tool
DSO Distribution System Operator
EA Energy Arbitrage
EV Electric Vehicle
FCDM Frequency Control by Demand Management
FCR Frequency Containment Reserve
FRS Frequency Response Service
GPIO General-Purpose Input/Output
LTE Long Term Evolution
MES Multi-Energy System
PEM Packatized Energy Management
PLC Programmable Logic Controller
PST Pumping Station
STOR Short Term Operational Reserve
==PAGE:10==
viii
TE Transactive Energy
TSO Transmission System Operator
VPN Virtual Private Network
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
When demand and supply are not in balance, problems arise. This occurrence
became noticeable at the beginning of the pandemic when demand for masks,
hand sanitisers, and even toilet paper outstripped the available supply. A good
balance between supply and demand is critical for a functional society. Electri-
cal grids are also influenced by supply and demand. Like the examples above,
stable electrical grids are no exception when keeping society functional. When
looking back at the blackouts in Texas in February 2021, the state experienced
an unexpectedly cold winter that caused a spike in demand for electric heat-
ing, supplemented by supply problems created by low wind power and frozen
equipment[nas21]. This electricity imbalance caused a massive power outage,
leaving millions without power for days[Dou21]. Similar events occur elsewhere,
like the power outages in July 2012 in India, leaving over 700 million people in
the dark[the12].
Situations like these are unlikely to improve soon. First, society will always be
vulnerable to natural disasters and political disputes. Think of the ongoing gas
shortages in Europe, which are driving up the electricity demand and increasing
the electricity prices. Secondly, we are undergoing a green energy transition
with a vast expansion of renewable energy sources (e.g., photovoltaic and wind
energy). They plan to replace fossil fuel plants, which are stable power sources
for the grid. Thirdly, whilst these new forms of energy production are great
for the climate, they bring a new challenge: electricity supply is now more than
ever influenced by natural factors such as wind and sunlight[HRR20]. Whenever
sunny and windy weather turns cloudy and windless, an imbalance arises on the
electric grid, as the electrical supply is reduced. An electricity shortage can re-
sult in a reduced grid frequency[YDL+19]. Conversely, there can be an increased
grid frequency when supply exceeds demand. Minor differences in supply and
demand are tolerated, but when the difference exceeds a set threshold value,
action must be taken to re-stabilise the grid’s balance.
Several stabilisation
methods are on the shelf, which will be discussed further in this section.
One way to stabilise the energy grid is to alter electricity production. If natural
sources, like wind and sunlight, fail to provide enough energy, other sources
can fill the demand gaps. Conventional energy producers (like gas plants) can
increase production, or energy storage systems (like batteries) can inject energy
into the grid[GBCC20]. Another strategy is to alter or time-shift power con-
sumption used by electrical consumers. The time-shifting strategy presents a
way of shifting electricity usage to off-peak hours, after which the grid stabilises
by having reduced electric loads at times when electricity shortage occurs. To
apply time-shifting electricity stabilisation, it is essential to have electrical appli-
ances that have some freedom in scaling up or down the electricity consumption.
One system that can potentially fulfil this need is a wastewater system on the
Danish island of Bornholm. This system consists of a network of water basins,
pumps and pipelines, in which the pumps can potentially scale down when elec-
==PAGE:13==
3
tricity is scarce. Therefore, the wastewater system can be called a nexus between
wastewater and energy. Whilst the research in this thesis is applied to a setup
on Bornholm, it is not limited to it. This thesis aims to research whether a
general water-energy nexus can be used for electrical grid stabilisation.
To effectively use a wastewater-energy nexus to stabilise the network, the de-
vices in the system must be able to deliver ancillary services. Ancillary Services
(AS) refer to functions that help grid operators to maintain a reliable electricity
system. AS maintain the proper flow and direction of electricity, address im-
balances between supply and demand, and allows the system to recover after a
power system event.
This thesis assignment is initiated in the DTU Wind and Energy department. It
is based on an industrial project (EURDP-funded ACTION project1) in collab-
oration with Danfoss Drives A/S and Bornholms Energi & Forsyning (BEOF).
The overarching purpose of this project is to develop, implement and demon-
strate smart active front-end (AFE) converters with an electric grid interface.
This interface unlocks their energy flexibility potentials.
This thesis investigates to what extent wastewater-energy nexuses are suitable
for use in AS. To investigate this, it is crucial to have a good understanding of
the wastewater system on Bornholm. The following section will explain how the
wastewater system works, where it is located and how the pumps are currently
operated. In the following, after Bornholm’s energy nexus, several types of AS
will be discussed. Different AS are available in northern Europe, so different
services will be explained and weighted.
1https://energiforskning.dk/en/node/16003
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
1.1
Wastewater-energy nexus on Bornholm
This section explains the real-world context of a wastewater pumping station
(PST) located on the Danish island of Bornholm. On the northern part of the
island, in and around the town Allinge-Sandvig, a series of PSTs has been made
available to researchers from the ACTION project to investigate whether the
PSTs can be used in energy AS. The network of PSTs ensures that sewage water
from urban areas is pumped to a wastewater treatment plant. This thesis often
refers to a specific station, as e.g. ’PST 232’. The number 232 is an identifier
given by BEOF and is inherently used for research in this thesis. The map with
PSTs is shown below:
3K\VLFDOORFDWLRQVRIWKH367VLQ$OOLQJH%RUQKROP







%OLQGWDUPHQ
3 N:
3 N:
7RZDUGVWUHDWPHQWSODQW
.M UQHV
3 N:
3 N:
/¡VHE N
3 N:
3 N:
.QXGVQ V
3 N:
3 N:
+\OGHVOHW
3 N:
3 N:
*U¡QQHGDOVYHM
3 N:
3 N:
2VWHNDUUHW
3 N:
3 N:
3 N:
,QIORZIURP
367VLQ6DQGYLJ
Figure 1.1: The network of PSTs made available to the researchers, all in the
area of Sandvig-Allinge. Each red dot represents a PST (and its
identifier), which are connected to other PST(s), visualised as blue
lines. The arrow indicates the sewage water pumping direction.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Wastewater-energy nexus on Bornholm
5
To better understand the structure behind this sewerage network, we have to
go back in time. The information below was gathered during the trip to the
island of Bornholm by consults with experts from BEOF2. BEOF is the utility
authority on Bornholm, which takes charge of the management of PSTs. Before
modern sewage management, it was common practice on Bornholm to discharge
sewage water into the Baltic Sea. At that time, a network of sewage pipes was
available, and gravity allowed the sewage water to reach the sea. After new
environmental laws were introduced[was] in the 70s, the obligation to treat the
water and thus stop wastewater dumping in the sea came into force. Around
that time, facilities were built at strategic points along the coast to collect the
sewage water and pump it back up the hill to reach a higher-lying treatment
plant. These pumping facilities are typical wooden structures, as seen in the
two pictures embedded in Fig. 1.1, and can be observed at many points along
the coast of Bornholm.
Each PST generally has the following components: an inlet pipe, a water storage
tank, two or more pumps and an outgoing pipe. Furthermore, a PST has various
measuring instruments, which among others, record electricity consumption, the
water level in the tank, and the flow in the outgoing pipe.
Figure 1.2: A closer look at PST 239 (Knudnæs).
The left picture shows
the wastewater tank currently being filled by inflowing wastewater
from the lower pipe. The upper pipe is an emergency outflow pipe
to the ocean for excess wastewater, and is only used in case of an
overload. The right picture shows the two pumps (15 kW and 54
kW) that pump the wastewater towards PST 240.
The purpose of each PST is to pump the sewage, via a series of intermediate
PSTs, to a processing plant.
The way the pumps work can differ per PST.
However, we observed similar behaviour across all PSTs, except for the largest
PST 240. Each PST receives the sewage water directly into the water tank.
Sewage water can come from three different sources.
The first source (1) is
2www.beof.dk
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
other PSTs. Since it is a network, wastewater does not flow directly from one
PST to the treatment plant but needs several ’hops’ to reach the plant. The two
other sewage water sources are (2) local households & industry and (3) rainfall.
The inflowing water fills up a large tank placed in the ground (as shown in the
left picture of Fig. 1.2. A tank is located at every PST, and the size of each tank
can differ among the PSTs. When the water level reaches the first threshold,
one of the two pumps starts to operate and pumps out the water in the tank.
If there is heavy water inflow due to, e.g. heavy rainfall, it can happen that the
water level still rises despite one pump being switched on. If that happens, and
the water reaches a second (higher) threshold value, the second, usually more
powerful pump will also start running. The pumps remain on until the tank
is almost empty. In exceptional cases where both pumps fail to pump enough
water away, the water can flow into an emergency overflow pipe that brings the
wastewater directly to the Baltic Sea. A schematic overview of all components
is shown in the figure below:
PST
Water tank
Inflow
_
_
_
_
→
→
→
Pump 2
→
↓
Water level sensor
Outflow sensor
Outflow
→
Power sensor
Power sensor
Pump 1
Overflow
pipe
→
→
Figure 1.3: A schematic overview of all components and sensors in a PST.
Measurement devices are located at four positions, recognisable
by the wireless signal icon. The electricity source is 400 volt 3-
phase.
Each pump operates according to the threshold logic, which is handled by a
programmable logic controller (PLC) at each PST. The PLCs do not cooperate,
so it is unknown when a PST can expect inflow from another PST. Furthermore,
the pumps are not coordinated to be used at more efficient times, e.g. when the
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Ancillary services (AS)
7
electricity supply exceeds the demand. At the same time, water pumps consume
quite a lot of energy. It is estimated that three to four percent of global energy
consumption comes from water pumps[Ost14]. Currently, there is an unused
potential for utilising these pumps in AS.
The fact that intelligent coordination is not happening now does not mean that
future PST cooperation should be ruled out. With smart planning, pumps can
potentially be used to provide AS. The water tank can be used as a buffer for
energy, and the pumps can be used to control that buffer. An important detail,
however, is that many different types of AS exist. Various services demand other
consumption shifting patterns, influencing how the pumps should be used. In
the next section, several AS are explained and discussed.
1.2
Ancillary services (AS)
In the presence of generation and consumption variations, it is crucial for the
power system always to maintain the balance between generation and demand.
This constraint ensures that measures occur whenever net frequency or voltages
deviate. At the distribution level, a voltage deviation results from an imbalance,
which can be solved by units injecting or absorbing energy into the electric grid.
Any mismatch between demand and supply at the transmission level affects
the grid’s frequency.
This results in real-time fluctuations in frequency and
voltage. Minor fluctuations are tolerated as they do not impact the operation
and stability of the grid. When fluctuations become larger, problems can arise
on the grid.
The power system operator should compensate for any real-time difference in
production and demand. Since this condition is challenging to meet for a sys-
tem operator only, the AS were introduced.
These AS are designed to run
in parallel and help the power system operator stabilise the grid. These ser-
vices influence the production and consumption of producers and consumers in
real-time, thus balancing energy supply and demand[ea04]. Although the litera-
ture suggests little alignment on the AS definition[SHHA11], they all consist of
services required by the transmission system operator (TSO) and the distribu-
tion system operator (DSO), enabling them to maintain integrity and stability
in the transmission system’s power quality. The offered AS heavily depends
on the power region, as every region deals with different regulations, network
structures and challenges. To give an idea about which type of AS exists, an
overview has been compiled with the most common AS or similar load balancing
strategies:[DZPMKP18][Pir10]:
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
1: Spinning and non-spinning reserves
The spinning and non-spinning reserves
are controlled by the power system operator. Spinning reserves are online (al-
ready operating) electricity producers and synchronised to a management sys-
tem, such that the system can increase generation or decrease charging, usually
within 10 minutes. Non-spinning are offline electricity producers that can start
up and provide power, usually in 10 minutes. The grid operator uses remote au-
tomatic generation control to manage the reserves. Spinning and non-spinning
reserves are a particular type of ancillary services since they are often imple-
mented as rotating heavy masses like a flywheel. If a flywheel is set in rotation,
it continues for a while, even after the energy supply has been stopped. Spinning
reserves are often used as a preliminary stage to balancing energy[spi].
2: Frequency Response Service (FRS)
In many parts of the world, including
Europe, the grid’s reference frequency is 50 Hz.
The TSO of each country
has instruments to keep the frequency close to the reference value. But when
imbalances occur, the frequency deviation can be too much. Frequency response
services can be broken down into three types of regulations: the primary reserve,
the secondary reserve and the tertiary reserve.
Figure 1.4: The three types of frequency response services are compared.
Each reserve’s exact boundaries in power and time depend on the
country[Ant16].
The primary reserves are the fastest response to frequency deviations. They
should respond quickly (usually within 30 seconds) to an imbalance, but they
do not have to respond for an extended period. The secondary reserve gradually
complements the primary reserve if the frequency is not restored. The secondary
reserves have more time to respond to imbalances but are also expected to per-
severe responses[nex]. The latter, tertiary reserves, also called manual reserves,
are the final reserves. They have more activation time and a longer lifespan
than the secondary reserves. In Denmark, the TSO (Energinet) activates the
reserve manually by ordering upward and downward regulations at the tertiary
reserve providers.
In Denmark, the frequency response services work as markets. Owners of electri-
cal entities can bid on time-slots in a day-ahead market, where they can provide
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Ancillary services (AS)
9
power injection or consumption in the time slot. The implementation of a pri-
mary response reserve service applied in Denmark is referred to as Frequency
Containment Reserve (FCR). FCR intervenes automatically within seconds in
case of substantial-frequency deviation.
3: Energy Arbitrage (EA)
EA is a technique in which energy is consumed
during off-peak hours (when supply exceeds demand). After, it is stored in, e.g.
batteries. Later during peak hours (when demand exceeds supply), the energy
is injected into the grid[VG18]. Several strategies are available to estimate the
best timings on when to charge and discharge the energy storage[VG18]. Deep
learning strategies, such as a Double-Q learning approach, have great potential
for EA decision-making[YCH20].
4: Transactive Energy (TE)
TE proposes a market-based approach AS for pro-
sumers. This service includes small distributed energy resources, storage devices
(e.g. batteries) and other flexible devices at the distribution level[RHW+08].
Similar to FCR, it uses a market-based approach. In addition to a day-ahead
market, TE introduces a real-time energy market. The principle of TE is in the
feedback mechanism between prosumers and aggregators. An aggregator is a
group consisting of energy suppliers. The feedback refers to a response given
by the prosumers to a request from the aggregator to adjust energy usage. The
market structure uses the feedback information to determine a price, reaching
a balance between supply and demand. This approach relies on a low-latency
IT infrastructure to work.
5: Load shedding
Load shedding is a strategy to deactivate electric consumers
for a short time.
The loads and the power per load vary from country to
country. However, load shedding is expected to happen by disconnecting certain
geographical areas (neighbourhoods, industrial areas) to save energy[XPM21]
[WYC+21].
Heavy industries with high power consumption, like aluminium
and steel manufacturers, are also common load shedders.
6: Packetised Energy Management (PEM)
PEM is a consumer-oriented ap-
proach for coordinating distributed energy sources behind the meter, such as
water heaters, heat pumps, electronic vehicle (EV) charger stations and bat-
teries [AFH22]. In the United States, 40 percent of the annual electricity con-
sumption is from households. However, residential consumers generally do not
optimise their usage of residential loads, as they use the devices when needed.
The electrical loads can range from lights, computers, water boilers and air con-
ditioners. The latter devices, along with EV chargers and heat pumps, are not
just large electric consumers (greater than 1 kWh rating) but also flexible. Un-
like a computer or lights, which should be enabled as soon as needed, a flexible
device can operate anytime, as long the usage constraints are met. For exam-
ple, a heat pump can run whenever, as long as the house is warm; and an EV
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction
can charge whenever, as long as the vehicle is charged at departure. The idea
behind PEM is that online algorithms coordinate a range of flexible devices in
real-time.
On a global level, the AS market is unorganised and extensive[GN17]. This is a
challenge when comparing projects with AS from one country to another. The
solutions provided in the overview above are only a few of the solutions that
exist on the global market. Also, note that a few of the above services may
overlap when applied in practice. For example, energy arbitrage can be part of
the frequency response service. Also, the definition for one type of service may
not be the same in every country. Finally, it needs to be stressed that to use a
particular AS, it should be supported by TSO, DSO, local governance and all
other connected entities.
On a local level, the AS market is much more organised by usually offering a
small subset of the above measures. For example, four different AS are provided
in East Denmark[Eneb].
Traditionally, AS are mainly used by large electricity generators, but with
the emergence of smart grids, they are expanding to smaller generators or
consumers[RPLLPTAO21].
Since this research is physically located in Den-
mark, there will be a strong focus on AS available in Denmark. Denmarks TSO
(Energinet) proposes a particular service, FCR[LKB21], classified into different
types. This thesis uses FCR-D, as this is regarded as the most challenging service
from a technical perspective. This does not mean that the solutions provided
in this thesis are limited to FCR-D, as many AS are centred around flexible de-
vices. The solutions could also be applied in other AS with some adjustments.
The following section presents a more technical approach to FCR-D.
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Ancillary services (AS)
11
Frequency response services in Denmark
The TSO Energinet operates the Danish energy grid. The grid in Denmark
is split into two areas, the west of Denmark called DK1 and the east DK2,
illustrated by Fig. 1.5. The regulations and offered services in both regions
differ. This thesis focuses on the regulations in DK2, which is also the area in
which the PSTs (shown in Fig. 1.1) are located.
Figure 1.5: Illustration of the energy grid division in Denmark [Enea]. The
island of Bornholm is part of DK2, as shown on the bottom right.
In Denmark, the TSO (Energinet) is responsible for providing DK1 and DK2
with frequency response services. The FRS ensures that the stability of the
energy network can be guaranteed in the event of an equipment failure or a
fluctuation in production.
Participants in the FRS can make their capacity
available during the day and are financially compensated by the TSO for doing
this. This compensation works with a bidding structure applied in the day-
ahead market. This market allows participants to trade power for the next day.
At noon each day, bids for power purchase or sale are collected from partici-
pants. A short while later, the hourly prices that specify which participants will
contribute are published. Starting the next day at midnight, power contracts
==PAGE:22==
12
Introduction
are delivered, and participants need to be active for frequency response services
at the contracted hours. Participants can participate by submitting a bid of at
least 300 kW a day ahead.
However, the reserves made available by participants do not necessarily have to
be used. An hour can pass when the frequency stays within safe margins, and
participants do not have to change operation behaviour.
This thesis focuses on the primary reserves for disturbances, which Energinet
in DK2 regulates via FCR-D. FDR-D responds to frequencies below 49.9 Hz
and above 50.9 Hz. Fig 1.6 shows how much power needs to be delivered at
which frequency. For example, if the frequency is 49.7 Hz and the bid agreed
by Energinet is at 300 kW, then 150 kW of power must be supplied to the grid.
Figure 1.6: Power response compared to the grid frequency. [Enea]
For DK2, bidding is done symmetrically for upward FCR-D and downward FCR-
D. The upward FCR-D applies when the frequency drops below 49.9 Hz. In this
case, energy has to be delivered to the grid. Downward FCR-D is the opposite, it
applies when the frequency is above 50.1 Hz, and the energy consumption must
increase. Plans include asymmetrical bids for upward and downward FCR-D,
but this is currently not yet implemented.
Several requirements have to be met to participate in FCR-D. The portfolio
must be able to supply at least 300 kW up- or downward power. Furthermore,
within 5 seconds, 50 percent of the promised power must be delivered, and
within 30 seconds, 100 percent in case of a frequency event. To bid for the
FCR-D market, one needs to know how much their devices can deviate from
their typical power consumption pattern. The possible deviation of power at a
certain time is called flexibility. So it is essential to understand the flexibility of
all devices in the portfolio to determine the size and hours of the bid.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Flexibility
13
1.3
Flexibility
The term flexibility has already been mentioned several times in the text where
it referred to a property of an electrical device. In households, several devices are
flexible, including a water heater, charger for an electric car and air conditioning.
All these appliances have one thing in common: they do not have to be turned
on at all times to achieve their purpose. Take the example of an electric car that
needs to be fully charged: it does not matter when the charger is on. All that
matters is that the vehicle is sufficiently charged before it plans to hit the road
again. Other devices, such as a computer or electric kettle, have to be switched
on as soon as the button is pressed and are therefore not flexible. Now that
the term flexibility has been broadly explained, it is important to explain why
flexibility is essential for grid stability.
The terms electrical imbalance and its consequences have been briefly covered
before. Also, some methods (such as the AS) are presented to restore the balance
when the electricity demand exceeds the supply or vice versa. The discussed
FCR-D service also falls under this. As a participant of FCR-D, you are expected
to monitor the grid frequency during the agreed hours closely. Participants are
expected to act quickly when the network frequency deviates too much. If the
frequency is too low, participants must scale down the electrical consumption
so that the grid’s stress decreases.
To participate in FCR-D, it is required
to have flexibility. To stay with the example of the electric car charging: in
case of a frequency dip, it is often perfectly possible to switch the charger to
half-power or off for a while, primarily if the car will not be used immediately.
This is impossible with a non-flexible device, such as a computer, because it
causes many inconveniences for the user. The example with the electric car is,
to a certain extent, also applicable to the PSTs (as explained in section 1.1).
However, flexibility is not a binary value.
In some cases, more flexibility is
available than in others. Flexibility is influenced by factors such as electrical
power and available time. The weather, behaviour by people or natural disasters
can also play a role.
Flexibility can therefore be defined mathematically in
different ways.
The first way is to represent flexibility as time. At each moment in time, it can
be estimated how many minutes a device can be shut down without endangering
mission-critical performance. In the case of the PST, this concept refers to the
amount of time pumps can be disabled without overflowing the tank.
The
problem with this approach is that it is over-simplified. Not in all situations,
a pump has to shut down; it can also be possible that it only needs to reduce
slightly. For this reason, power must become part of flexibility. Here, flexibility
is expressed as a function based of time and power:
==PAGE:24==
14
Introduction
Timespan
Power reduction
Flexibility
Largest flexibility
Medium flexibility
Smallest flexibility
Figure 1.7: Flexibility is plotted as a function. Note that, in real-life appli-
cations, the flexibility might not be the same trend as shown in
this figure. This figure shows that flexibility balances how much
power is reduced and how long the device can sustain that power
reduction.
Flexibility is then a trade-off between time and power reduction. This means
that how long a device can offer flexibility depends on how much power is
reduced in the case of PST, offering flexibility results in a reduction of pumping
power. The more the pumping power is reduced, the less water can be pumped
out of the tank. As a result, the water tank will rise faster as inflow remains.
A larger power reduction is less sustainable than a slight power reduction. An
essential condition of flexibility in the context of FCR-D is that flexibility can
only be offered if the device is online. A pump that is not on is not flexible
because it cannot reduce power. Furthermore, the water tank must not be too
full because a full water tank cannot handle incoming spikes of inflow if the
pump’s power is in the process of an FCR event.
==PAGE:25==
1.4 Objective
15
1.4
Objective
The objective describes the primary focus of this research and expresses the aims
and intended results. The section about the water-energy nexus on Bornholm
(section 1.1) presented how a system of tanks and water pumps has the potential
to provide flexibility to the energy market. That flexibility can be extracted from
existing infrastructure but is currently unused. To see how this flexibility can be
used, we looked at the AS market, of which one service has become the focus of
this thesis: FCR-D. This thesis aims to find whether it is possible to use drives
in AS. For this goal, two different scenarios will be researched. The first scenario
is a real-world project targeting the unlockment of the flexibility of the PSTs on
the island of Bornholm. The second scenario is a simulation, which estimates to
which extent a proposed network of drives and tanks can participate with AS.
The thesis is structured in the following way: the first part of this thesis con-
sists of data research. The water supply agency BEOF has provided the re-
search team with a set of measurement data, which provide information on the
seven PSTs. The measurement data contains data about the water level, use
of pumps, etc. This data is crucial for determining whether the pumps have
flexibility because it provides insight into the use and load on the sewer network
at different times of the year. The second step is polishing and supplementing
the measurement data. The measurement data consists of real-world data and
may have errors that need to be resolved. This step also explains methods to
add flexibility as a value to the measurements so that a flexibility curve is known
for each time point, as illustrated in Fig 1.7. Right after, a method is presented
that improve future data collections. The method consists of a prototype for a
cloud-enabled sensor monitor that more reliably can monitor sensor values.
After the data has been cleansed, the measurements and externally added data
are examined to see whether it can estimate flexibility. The estimations are
crucial for making bids on FCR-D’s day-ahead market. The next step consists
of practical benchmarks to investigate whether the pumps are fast enough to
anticipate frequency deviations. For this purpose, the response time of a pump
to a frequency change was analysed using an actual pump and a 4g connection.
Finally, simulation software has been developed to examine whether other types
of networks are suitable for FCR-D deployment. The simulation software can be
freely configured so that any network of pumping stations with different sizes
of water tanks and pumps can be benchmarked for the amount of flexibility,
where the simulated PSTs assume real-life water inflow profiles and electricity
fluctuations.
==PAGE:26==
16
Introduction
1.5
Related work and contributions
Water management systems are not a primary focus of AS[VGJG+20]. Nev-
ertheless, water management systems are accountable for approximately three
to four percent of the global energy consumption [Ost14, BW14], making them
a good candidate for using it in AS. Additionally, a PST’s operational costs
mostly come from utilities, where over 70 percent of utility costs is addressable
to electricity costs[MAPS15]. Therefore, reduced operational costs could be an
additional benefit of optimising pump behaviour. This section presents existing
research in this field and describes the differences and similarities with this the-
sis. The first literature research is done on [GID22], as this work is regarded as
preliminary research for the work in this thesis.
[GID22] - Multi-Energy System Cloud Control: Modeling, Analysis
and Validation of Water and Electrical Power Nexus in Bornholm
Island:
The work in this thesis has been greatly inspired by the work presented in
[GID22], and its work formed an excellent base for this thesis, as it explained
the context and potential ideas. [GID22] defines a model for a multi-energy
system (MES). MES is a system that typically combines multiple energy sources,
such as electricity, heat, cooling, fuel and so on, to represent an opportunity to
increase performance relative to independent energy systems[Man14]. [GID22]
proposes a multi-energy system with distributed water pumping system (a PSTs
network) with motor drives (the pumps). The setup with seven PSTs is modelled
in MATLAB Simulink to mimic the behaviour of the situation on Bornholm.
The model takes a water inflow stream and drive efficiency as input, and outputs
parameters: power consumption, water outflow and water height in the tank.
The behaviour of the simulated PST also takes care of the threshold logic in a
similar way as the real-world PSTs on Bornholm (described in section 1.1).
15kW
+
+
_______
1
4.25s +1
Water tank 
volume [L]
Water 
height [m]
Efficiency gain
[L/(kWh)]
kW
P1G
L/h
L/s
Time gain [h/s]
P1T
_1
s
L
+±
_1
s
Water 
inflow [L/s]
L
Water 
outflow [L/s]
Volume 
to height
WT
Pump 
Stateflow
55kW
_______
1
4.25s +1
kW
P2G
L/h
L/s
Pump delay
P2T
+
+
Power 
consumption [kW]
Pump 2 control
Pump 1 control
Figure 1.8: The logical model as presented by [GID22], showing the compo-
nents in a PST: the two electricity inputs, two pumps including
efficiency gain, water inflow, water tank volume, water height and
the PLC’s threshold logic to control the pump’s operation.
==PAGE:27==
1.5 Related work and contributions
17
The paper presents the set of attributes that are measured at each PST, which
is complemented by precipitation and outdoor temperature data. The outflow
(in m3/H) and the tank’s water level are used from the set of attributes. As the
inflow is not measured by sensors, [GID22] proposes a function that approxi-
mates inflow based on differences in water level in the tank and outflow. The
approximated inflow is then used as input for the model. Finally, the model is
evaluated by setting the tank size and pump activation thresholds and feeding
in the approximated inflow data. The model’s outcome shows the same trends
as observed in real-life measurements. The trends consist of rapid tank volume
increases at times when a downstream PSTs starts pumping and relatively short
operations of enabled pumps (usually below five minutes). The approximated
inflow can be improved, as it sometimes reaches negative values.
Whilst the work of [GID22] mentions the potential of using the PSTs in AS, it
does not present a detailed description on how to participate in AS. Additionally,
more work can be done to improve inflow and flexibility approximation, e.g. by
means of improved data modelling. Data modelling that includes measurement
validation methods, more aggregation and eventually machine learning models
for improved estimation are undiscovered topics.
Furthermore, the model is
dependent and evaluated on artificially created data, creating uncertainty. This
leaves the potential to use and compare with real measurement data. Finally,
the paper is limited to one configuration of PSTs. The results can be made more
general if a method is introduced that involves a dynamically set PST network,
so other sewage networks can also readily be validated.
[FBR+19] - Data-driven predictive energy optimisation in a wastew-
ater pumping station
[FBR+19] is one of the few researches that presents an electricity optimisation
problem for pumps in an urban wastewater system. This work considers a single
PST with five pumping units of 110 kW. The pumps support various operating
speeds, which can be adjusted to the inflow quantities. Similar to the PSTs on
Bornholm, the first pumps are activated when the water level hits a threshold.
A difference with the Bornholm PSTs is that additional pumps are activated
once the existing pumps run at full potential and the water level remains above
the threshold. The activated pumps run at a specified speed depending on the
water inflow. A more straightforward mechanic on Bornholm is applied: ex-
tra pumps are only triggered by higher water level thresholds. This research
aims to find improved decision-making for the pump’s operation, such that the
change of overflow is lower and the electricity usage is reduced. They propose
a reinforcement learning framework that individually controls the pumps. En-
ergy reduction is achieved by more efficient use of the pumps, where more water
is pumped away with the same energy. However, the research does not cover
integration with AS, which is an important topic for this thesis. Also, the dy-
namics of the wastewater systems used in [FBR+19] are different: in [FBR+19]
==PAGE:28==
18
Introduction
they apply new decision-making on a single huge PST, dealing with a constant
inflow of between 500 and 4000 L/s and five powerful pumps; compared to a
more complex network of many small PSTs, each with a highly dynamic inflow
of approximately 0 to 45 L/s which is used in this thesis. [FBR+19] has a much
higher and more constant inflow, coming from more sources. Therefore, the
inflow is less prone to sudden spikes and, therefore, more feasible to predict
beforehand. Finally, in [FBR+19] the PST is not regarded as a MES, as they
do not use the water tank as energy storage such that energy (and the pumps)
can be used at other times.
[MAPS16] - Demonstrating demand response from water distribution
system through pump scheduling
In [MAPS16], opportunities for a water distribution system are explored to par-
ticipate in AS. Hence that this system regards clean water and not wastewater,
but both systems should, from a technical point of view, be relatively simi-
lar. In [MAPS16], a PST pumping schedule optimisation is explored with two
strategies: a mixed-integer optimisation problem and a branch and bound algo-
rithm. This research explains a theoretical model that integrates PSTs into AS
applied in Great Brittain, which are Firm Frequency Response (FFR), Short
Term Operational Reserve (STOR) and Frequency Control by Demand Man-
agement (FCDM). The main difference between the services listed above and
FCR-D (applied in Eastern Denmark) are the maximum response times, dura-
tion and minimum power for participation. The duration explains how many
subsequential minutes the power should be reduced. In FCR-D, the maximum
duration depends on the amount of power reduced, but for the British equiv-
alents, it is set by a fixed amount of minutes defined by the FFR, STOR or
FCDM standards. Likewise, the response time and minimum power require-
ments vary between FFR, STOR or FCDM. For example, for STOR (proposed
in the research), the response time and minimum participation power are respec-
tively 30 minutes and 3 MW, compared to 30 seconds and 300 kW for FCR-D.
However, the minimum participation power could be lower when using aggrega-
tion services. The many differences in legislation make it complex to apply the
problems in this paper to the situation in Denmark. Additionally, the research
results are derived from an existing simulation from the same research group.
The tested or intended environment or other details about the simulation are
not presented, which makes it challenging to apply this research in another set-
ting. Most importantly, the work does not contain operational constraints for a
water station, including the desired tank level. Defining the desired tank level
is essential for participating in AS, as it influences the PSTs flexibility. After
all, a tank that is completely filled does not offer flexibility.
==PAGE:29==
1.5 Related work and contributions
19
Other relevant literature
Other research, such as [OPK18] and [Bun08] also involve demand scheduling
for water distribution systems that include multiple PSTs. These researches
target United States AS, and furthermore, the network of PSTs greatly differs
from this thesis. In [OPK18], each PST does not necessarily have a water tank,
and when there is a water tank, then the proportions are not comparable to
the sizes used in this research. [OPK18] deals with water tanks that can hold
up to 5000 m3 of water, compared to an approximate 20 m3 of the largest PST
in this thesis. In [TKA17], a system is discussed that entails a water pumping
system network being controlled by a simple demand response structure. In
contradiction to the one-way tree-topology assumed in this thesis, they consider
a star topology in which water can flow in multiple directions.
Contributions
To sum up, there are several shortcomings in literature. This thesis will fill
these shortcomings by presenting the following contributions:
• Formulation of a theoretical prototype of how a real-world PST, consisting
of pumps, tanks and inflow patterns can be intertwined with the FCR-D
service.
• Application of machine learning algorithms to predict the flexibility curve
given an estimated inflow.
• Aggregation and validation of various data sources, such as sensor mea-
surements, sea tide data and weather data, to improve the flexibility esti-
mations.
• Implementation of a simulation that presents the performance of a system
(how well it can participate in FCR-D), given a user-defined PST network.
• Advice on newly installed prototypes to obtain more complete and reliable
measurement data.
==PAGE:30==
20
Introduction
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2
Measurement analysis
Before a reasonable prediction about the flexibility can be made, it is essential
to understand the data well before starting the modelling. In this chapter, the
data study is explained, and we show what has to be corrected in the data set
before it can be used in further research.
==PAGE:32==
22
Measurement analysis
Measurements play a crucial role in the research of the behaviour of PSTs. They
explain how much wastewater is handled at any given moment and teaches
us how the PSTs work with more special occurrences like heavy rainfall or
typical morning water consumption peaks. These insights into the contextual
information can be used for future decision-making in the energy market. This
chapter analyses the measurement data from the seven PSTs, each with sensors
located at various places. A PST has a tank that acts as a pump buffer. There
is a water level sensor in the tank to track when it is time to pump. This float
sensor constantly transmits the water height inside the tank. The set of pumps
is there to empty the tank. Furthermore, a sensor on the tube measures how
much water is pumped out of the tank by the pumps. Finally, all pumps are
connected to current meters that measure the energy consumption of each pump
individually.
As explained in section 1.1, the purpose of the PSTs is to pump local wastewater
to the next upstream PST, with the eventual goal of moving wastewater to a
water purification plant. There is a difference in the type of PST, as there are
PSTs with an inflow of water from previous PSTs, and there are PSTs with no
inflow from other PSTs, so-called true local-catchment PST. A subsection of the
total water nexus data is available. A schematic map of this network is shown
in Fig. 2.1.
PST 232
Blindtarmen
Ptot = 9.6
PST 233
Grønnedalsvej
Ptot = 8.8
PST 234
Hyldeslet
Ptot = 5.2
PST 237
Løsebæk
Ptot = 9.4
PST 238
Kjærnes
Ptot = 3.0
PST 239
Knudsnæs
Ptot = 69
PST 240
Ostekarret
Ptot = 149
: direction of water stream
Figure 2.1: Schematic overview of how seven PSTs on Bornholm are con-
nected. Only three PSTs are ’true’ local-catchment stations, as
they do not intake water from downstream PSTs. Ptot denotes
the combined power of all pumps in kW.
==PAGE:33==
23
The supplied data contains five different measurement attributes for each PST.
A description of these attributes can be seen in table 2.1
Table 2.1: Description of the different variables in the dataset for each PST.
Attribute
Description
Unit
Date Time
Date and time of measurement
DateTime
Water Height
Water height inside the tank
m
Outflow
Water flowing out of the tank
m3/h
Power P1
Current consumption of pump 1
ampere
Power P2
Current consumption of pump 2
ampere
Power P3 (PST 240 only)
Current consumption of pump 3
ampere
Precipitation
Precipitation at PST
mm/min
The sensor recording period of the data is not the same across all the PSTs
listed in 2.1. Table 2.2 presents per PST how many samples there are recorded
over which period:
Table 2.2: Description of the number of samples and sample rate of the un-
processed data for every PST.
PST
Date range
Nr. samples
Avg. interval*
PST 323
[01-05-2020 - 31-08-2021]
1,408 K
29.96
PST 233
[01-05-2020 - 31-08-2021]
545 K
77.32
PST 234
[01-05-2020 - 31-08-2021]
1,133 K
37.19
PST 237
[01-05-2020 - 31-08-2021]
1,250 K
33.71
PST 238
[01-05-2020 - 31-08-2021]
608 K
69.33
PST 239
[23-04-2020 - 23-02-2021]
4,805 K
5.50
PST 240
[06-05-2020 - 31-05-2020]
480 K
4.56
*average time in seconds between each subsequent measurement.
For the next part, three types of PSTs are distinguished: the first type has a
small and large pump. Usually, only the small pump is used, but when there is
an excess of water inflow due to, e.g. rainfall, the larger pump is switched on to
pump the water away more quickly. The second type of PST has two pumps of
equal size that take turns pumping. A third type is characterised by having a
third pump, e.g., PST 240. The third type is an important PST, as it is a hub
for many downstream pumps in Allinge and Sandvig. This last type also has a
larger tank size.
==PAGE:34==
24
Measurement analysis
04:00
Aug 1, 2020
04:30
05:00
05:30
06:00
06:30
0
20
40
60
P1
P2
P1 and P2 behaviour
Time
Power Consumption in (A)
(a) PST 239 with a small
and a big pump.
00:00
Apr 1, 2021
01:00
02:00
03:00
04:00
0
2
4
6
8
P1
P2
P1 and P2 behaviour
Time
Power Consumption in (A)
(b) PST 232, where two
pumps take turns.
Figure 2.2: Comparison of power usage between two types of PSTs. The dif-
ferent trends in power consumption shows how two types of PSTs
enable their pumps in a different manner.
The tank fills up slowly in situations without rain until the pump empties it
again. However, the water rises rapidly if it rains, and the pump will have to be
switched on sooner. An important note is that the effect of rainfall lasts longer
than the rainfall itself. It takes time for the rainwater to reach the PST, which
can be observed in the plot below:
02:00
Jan 2, 2021
04:00
06:00
08:00
10:00
12:00
14:00
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.05
0.1
Water Level
Precipitation
Effect of precipitation on tank level
Time
Water Height in (M)
Precipitation in mm per min
Figure 2.3: The PST experiences an increased inflow up to an hour after a
rain event in PST 238.
Fig. 2.3 shows the effect of rainfall on the tank level. This can be observed by
three close water level spikes at the time and right after the rainfall. After a
while, all rain ended up in the pump station, and the behaviour turned back
to normal. The ping-pong effect of the water tank level is accountable for the
pumps that empty the tank. For this particular PST, we can conclude that the
first pump’s threshold value is around 1 meter. The pumps run until the water
level reaches the lower threshold of about 0.3 meters.
==PAGE:35==
25
An important note in the data is the difference between the PST with only
local catchment and the PSTs that receive water from other PSTs. The PSTs
that receive water from other PSTs have peaks in the water increase caused by
downstream PSTs. Therefore, when training machine learning models, it has to
be taken into account that if the model does not have access to the data of the
downstream stations, the peaks can not be predicted of PSTs with downstream
pumps.
12:00
Aug 19, 2021
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
0.5
1
Water Level 233
Water Level 234
Effect of downstream pump
Time
Water Height in (M)
Figure 2.4: The water level of two subsequent PSTs compared to each other,
in which PST 233 pumps towards PST 234.
From Fig. 2.4, it can be observed that PST 233 reaches its limit and starts
pumping the water into PST 234. Because of the massive amount of inflow-
ing water in PST 234, PST 234 also starts pumping. The figure shows how
downstream PSTs causes a cascading effect in all upstream PSTs.
Before the data can be used for any modelling, it must first be checked for
errors. As we are dealing with real-world data, lots of errors may occur. For
example, PST maintenance can cause sensors to be temporarily disconnected,
which produces missing values. In the following part, we highlight a subset of
these problems.
A common problem in the data is that the outflow does not match the motor’s
current consumption. See fig. 2.5a; both pumps alone can produce a real-world
outflow of approximately 50 m3. However, when both pumps are switched on,
the outflow measurement observation peaks at 500 m3/h, which is the maximum
the sensor can measure. This is a wrong measurement because both pumps can
never have an outflow of more than 100 m3/h. This phenomenon is also called
sensor saturation. In Fig. 2.5b another problem is shown. Here, the electricity
consumption of the motor increases without any reason, and the outflow remains
the same as at other times when the pump is on. Another reason for this mistake
is that this measurement yields a higher pump electricity consumption than
==PAGE:36==
26
Measurement analysis
allowed for in the pump’s specification.
04:00
Nov 2, 2020
05:00
06:00
07:00
0
5
10
0
200
400
P1
P2
Outflow
Error in Outflow measurement
Time
Power Consumption in (A)
Outflow in M3/H
(a) Outflow shoots to the maximum
of what the sensor can measure,
which is not in line with the
power consumption of the pumps.
12:00
Nov 2, 2020
18:00
00:00
Nov 3, 2020
06:00
12:00
18:00
0
20
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
Outflow
P1
P2
Error in P2 power consumption
Time
Outflow in M3/H
Power Consumption in (A)
(b) The power consumption surpasses
the rating of the motor at 00:00, as
well as the outflow, does not increase
with the extra power consumption.
Figure 2.5: An example of errors with outflow measurement and electric power
measurement.
A general problem in all PSTs is that the sample rate is not constant. Some
of them have significant gaps between two value measurements. This can cause
problems later on since most of our measured values are time-dependent. For
example, the outflow is in m3/h. If there are two measurements with a gap of 10
minutes in between, the uncertainty of how much water is pumped out at that
moment is significant. See Fig. 2.6; this is the time distribution between two
measurements. It can be seen that the variation is substantial. For readability,
some outliers have been removed, which reached up to 1 hour between two
measurements.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
100
200
300
400
500
Sample Rate
Distribution of time between measurements
Figure 2.6: Distribution seconds between samples for PST 234.
All the before-mentioned problems must be solved before the data is usable for
any modelling. Due to the size of the data and the number of erroneous values,
a parser tool is developed that can detect errors and replace them with logical
values. A custom-made tool will tackle these problems in the following chapter.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Data modelling
The measurement data is far from perfect. It contains missing periods, unequal
intervals, no water inflow and different types of errors. This chapter presents a
strategy to fix errors, add contextual information, implement equal intervals and
estimate inflow. On top of that, we aggregate the data with external data sources
such as tide and weather data. Modelling the data is a crucial prerequisite for
more advanced analyses, like machine learning.
==PAGE:38==
28
Data modelling
The unprocessed historical data from multiple PSTs are not suitable for data
research or modelling machine learning models.
The measurements contain
many inaccuracies, the sample time intervals are too variable (30 seconds to
12 minutes), and relevant external data such as precipitation and tides are
missing. The data processing tool (DPT), developed in the python programming
language, has been designed to tackle these problems. The DPT performs the
following tasks step by step:
1. Remove sensor outliers and contextual measurement errors and input the
PST state at each measurement.
2. Apply a time interpolation method to compensate for missing samples and
to obtain a fixed time interval of 30 seconds between each sample.
3. Calculate inflow and flexibility, which will be used as a label for a machine
learning method discussed later in this paper.
4. Enrich sensor data with external data sources, like weather forecast and
sea tide information, to improve performance on future machine learning
models.
The tool takes the unprocessed measurements, PST configurations and (op-
tionally) external data sources as input. The output of the above methods is a
finalised, (nearly) error-free set of measurements with regular intervals of 30 sec-
onds that is optionally supplemented by information about clean water usage,
precipitation and tides. This chapter covers each step in more detail, starting
with error correction and state imputation.
3.1
Error correction and state addition
The first step of the DPT is to detect any errors in the measurement data. The
errors can be broadly classified into two types: (i) faulty sensor values and (ii)
contextual errors, which are impossible transitions between a set of two or more
measurements. These steps are visualised in Fig 3.1
Faulty sensor values
Faulty sensor values (i) are detected by comparing measurement values with
reference values in a predefined configuration file. Each PST has different com-
ponents, resulting in various power consumption patterns and water outflow
values. Therefore, each PST has its configuration and reference values. Also,
the number of pumps within one PST can differ. On top of that, the number of
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Error correction and state addition
29
Figure 3.1: Activity diagram presenting how each sample is validated.
pumps that can be enabled simultaneously also varies among the PSTs. These
characteristics should all be considered while verifying power usage and water
outflow. Therefore, all PST have reference values for various configurations, as
shown in table 3.1. This table shows the allowed value range for each set of
enabled pumps. E.g. [P1] means that pump one is enabled. There are two
columns covering the allowed fluctuations between two adjacent measurements.
Slight power usage fluctuation is permitted and can be caused by natural grid
imbalance or slight sensor inaccuracy.
Table 3.1: Reference values for each PST
 
Expected Power Usage (A) 
Expected Water Outflow (m
3/h) 
PST [P1] 
 [P2] 
 [P3] 
Fluc* [P1] 
[P2] 
[P1 + P2] 
[P3] 
Fluc* 
232 [6.5,9.5] [7,10] 
 
15 
[45,65] 
[45,55] 
[55,65] 
 
1 
233 [6.5,9] 
[6.5,9] 
15 
[12.5,37.5] [12.5,37.5] [40,110] 
1 
234 [3.5,5.5] [3.5,5.5] 
15 
[21,39] 
[21,39] 
[21,39] 
1 
237 [6.5,9.5] [6.5,9.5] 
15 
[0,240] 
[0,240] 
[0,400] 
1 
238 [2,4.5] 
[2,4.5] 
15 
[10,30] 
[10,30] 
[12.5,37.5] 
1 
239 [10,25] 
[20,80] 
15 
[25,75] 
[65,195] 
[70,210] 
1 
240 [24,32] 
[15,30] 
[15,30] 5 
[50,93.5] 
[99,121] 
[153,187] 
[110,300] 1 
* Allowed fluctuation between two measurements. 
==PAGE:40==
30
Data modelling
The reference values in table 3.1 are defined on intuition. Not every PST con-
figuration has been handled with the same dedication to getting values as close
to reality because not all PST are equally important for the data research. The
water level is not included in this table, as this is the only parameter without
errors. Ideally, domain experts should define the thresholds. They know the
dynamics of the PSTs and the most accurate thresholds. We did not receive
a response after requesting thresholds from domain experts. Thus, the valida-
tion process can be further improved by accounting for the electricity and water
physics.
The DPT traverses through each measurement in the data-set and determines
at each measurement which pumps are on. A pump is considered enabled when
the electrical current is above 0.1 amperes. Values between 0 and 0.1 amperes
are considered electrical leakage and are rounded down to 0. After, the set of
enabled pumps is determined, the power usage (for each pump individually) and
expected water outflow (all pumps combined) are compared with the reference
values in table 3.1. The sample will be marked with an error if any value is out
of bounds.
Contextual errors
Contextual errors (ii) require a more sophisticated method to be found and fixed.
This happens with a rule-based validation method. Rule-based validation is a
method in which data samples are validated upon a set of static rules. This
method has proven effective when validating knowledge-based systems[Yoo89],
similar to PST measurement data.
When a drive is powered up, it takes at least a few minutes to scale up or
down in the number of enabled drives. This allows successive measurements in
which a drive is enabled to be grouped into cycles. Information about these
cycles is crucial when applying contextual validation. A cycle is defined as a
set of consecutive measurements where all measurements share the same state
and when at least one pump is enabled.
Four cycle-related parameters are
inputted to the measurements: cycle state, cycle state transition, cycle number
and cycle step. The cycle state defines which pumps are enabled. The cycle
state transition represents whether a pump is in the process of going from one
state to another, which only applies to the first and last measurements in a
cycle. A cycle number is a sequential identifier that specifies in which cycle the
measurement is in. A cycle number is not set for samples without a cycle state.
The cycle step is the ’n-th’ measurement within the given cycle. The cycle step
can be used to see whether a measurement is at the cycle’s beginning, middle,
or end.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Error correction and state addition
31
The cycles are defined for each measurement separately, as shown in table 3.2.
A PST power usage defines the cycle state. A significant power decrease or
increase implies that one or more pumps are being turned off or new pumps are
enabled, causing a state transition event. State transition events are not instant.
Contrary to the example in table 3.2, it can take longer than one measurement.
Imagine a second pump is activated, the power usage immediately rises, but the
water outflow needs some more time. Two consecutive measurements can have
the same cycle state transition in this case. The cycle state transition is vital
for future data research or error fixing. When a faulty value is found, the DPT
can select a replacement value from other values that share the same cycle state
and cycle state transition values.
Table 3.2: A snippet from the processed measurement data shows the mea-
surements on the left and the imputed cycle information on the
right. Starting from 13:00:04, the current for the first pump in-
creases to 24 A, which indicates that a new cycle has begun. The
water outflow starts shortly after.
Datetime 
Water 
level 
Outflow 
level 
Currents 
[P1,P2] 
Cycle 
Number 
Cycle 
Step 
Cycle 
State 
Cycle 
Transition 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
13:00:00 
1.08 
0.0 
[0, 0] 
 
 
 
 
13:00:04 
1.11 
0.0 
[24.0, 0] 
1 
0 
[P1] 
[ ] ĺ [P1] 
13:00:08 
1.14 
8.0 
[24.5, 0] 
1 
1 
[P1] 
[ ] ĺ [P1] 
13:00:12 
1.14 
24.0 
[24.5, 0] 
1 
2 
[P1] 
 
13:00:16 
1.11 
55.0 
[24.3, 0] 
1 
3 
[P1] 
 
13:00:20 
1.09 
54.0 
[24.4, 0] 
1 
4 
[P1] 
 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
After the cycle information is included, it is possible to detect incorrect trends
in sensor measurements. This could be, e.g., sudden zero outflow while previous
and upcoming measurements have flowing outflow, but also mismatches of the
number of enabled pumps and outflow values. At this stage, the state transitions
are also validated. For example, a turned-off PST is not expected to start with
two simultaneously enabled pumps. The PSTs should follow a pattern where
a single pump gets activated first before a second pump gets activated. These
checks happen according to the state machine diagram shown in Fig. 3.2, which
describes all states and its allowed transitions.
Figure 3.2: A state machine diagram showing all the state transitions that
PST equipped with two pumps are expected to make.
==PAGE:42==
32
Data modelling
Corrected Dataset
The methods described above register and correct whenever data errors occur.
This is done by comparing measurements with previous and upcoming measure-
ments. The methods ensure that many errors over the data availability span of
16 months are detected. Some stations are more prone to errors than others.
One of the pumping stations (PST 238) has been further examined to determine
the most occurring errors, which are:
• The power consumption of the second pump & outflow is not within al-
lowed boundaries (11.9k measurements).
• The power consumption of the first pump & outflow is not within allowed
boundaries (7.5k measurements).
• Outflow is not within boundaries (1.3k measurements).
• A pump is enabled for only one measurement. (400 measurements).
• The PST is emitting water, but pumps stopped a long time ago (350
measurements).
• Registration of a sudden ’0 outflow’, while previous and next measure-
ments show correct outflow (40 measurements).
• Unexpected cycle state changes (40 measurements).
• Fluctuation of power consumption (20 measurements).
May 2020
Jun 2020
Jul 2020
Aug 2020
Sep 2020
Oct 2020
Nov 2020
Dec 2020
Jan 2021
Feb 2021
Mar 2021
Apr 2021
May 2021
Jun 2021
Jul 2021
Aug 2021
Month
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Number of errors
PST 238: number of detected data errors per month
Figure 3.3: Each month’s total number of errors in the PST 238 measurement
span.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Time interpolation
33
The number of errors per month greatly varies. PST 238 has good months (May
2020, June 2020) and bad months (December 2020, August 2021), as presented
in Fig.
3.3.
The next data-improvement step is implementing a fixed-time-
interval using a time interpolation method.
3.2
Time interpolation
The measurements are time series data and have a dynamic interval between
each sample that mostly varies from 30 seconds and 10 minutes. Each PST has
dynamic intervals, but the range of intervals differs, meaning that some PSTs
generally sample faster than others. There are two reasons why the measure-
ments are converted to a fixed-time interval. The first reason is that it becomes
easier to calculate future values like inflow and flexibility. If each sample repre-
sents a fixed duration of, e.g. 30 seconds, then volume calculations can be done
with a constant. The second reason is that dynamic intervals bring unequal
importance to each sample. An example: the first emitted measurement after
an inactivity of 10 minutes is much more critical than a measurement after 30
seconds of inactivity. A standard linear regression model trains upon this data
and does not consider this important. Deep learning models might be able to
learn this important variety, but more complexity is needed. The importance of
each sample is equalled if new measurements are interpolated in short periods.
The concept is visualised in Fig. 3.4:
PST-232
PST-233
PST-234
...
Measurements
PST-232
0:00
{ measurement }
0:05
{ measurement }
0.07
{ measurement }
PST-233
0:00
{ measurement }
0:02
{ measurement }
0.06
{ measurement }
PST-232
PST-233
PST-234
...
Measurements
PST-232
0:00
{ measurement }
0:04
{ measurement }
0.08
{ measurement }
PST-233
0:00
{ measurement }
0:04
{ measurement }
0.08
{ measurement }
Figure 3.4: The concept of time interpolation, in which each sample is resam-
pled to form a fixed time interval between each measurement.
==PAGE:44==
34
Data modelling
The time interpolation is a function of the DPT that converts unequally dis-
tributed time-series data to equally distributed time-series data, whereby the
earlier-mentioned ’importance’ is considered. The applied fixed interval is the
fastest interval that occurs in the data (30 seconds), and missing values are im-
puted using a time-weighted average between the previous and following existing
measurement:
vt = vi
tj −tt
tj −ti

+ vj
 tt −ti
tj −ti

(3.1)
In the above interpolation function, vj is the targeted (interpolated) value. vi
and ti are the value and timestamp in seconds of the closest previous sample
in the original data-set. Likewise, vj and tj are the value and timestamp in
seconds of the target’s closest next sample. tt is the target timestamp of the
interpolated value. The formula uses the difference in time with the target time
as a weight function, with a smaller difference denoting a higher weight.
3.3
Inflow approximation
The inflow is a numeric value that describes the volume of water per second
that enters the tank. This value is needed to calculate the flexibility but is not
given by the measurements. Therefore, it is required to approximate this value.
The water tank level is a known value, as the current water level (in meters)
is given in the measurements, and the tank dimensions are known. Given that
outflow is also known, there are two ways of estimating the inflow:
1) Gebbran’s method: The first method is derived from [GID22] and calculates
the inflow using outflow and rate of change in water in the tank in L, as presented
in Eq. 3.2:
∀(p, t) ∈(P, T ) : inflowp,t =
α
tP
t−7
heightp,t +
P
pin∈Pin
tP
t−7
outflowpin,t
7
(3.2)
There is a time delay before outflow starts and before the water level in the
tank delays, which has to do with internal water dynamics in the tank. Geb-
bran’s method assumes that the two parameters (water level and outflow) are
historically fitted such that this delay does not occur in the data. After his-
torical fitting, a rolling horizon with seven consecutive measurements is used to
approximate the water inflow in L/s. The author proposes a time horizon of
seven successive measurements because it yields the highest accuracy.
∀(p, t) ∈(P, T ) represents that inflow is calculates for each PST p in the set
of PSTs P, and for each timestamp t in a given time-span of T . The inflow is
then calculated for each PST separately in which inflowp,t represents the inflow
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Inflow approximation
35
in L/s of PST p at timestamp t. The inflow is influenced by two factors: the
change of water height and the combined outflow of all pumps in the given PST.
α is a numeric constant that converts a water height unit in meters to litres per
second. pin ∈Pin represents every pump in the given PST, of which the outflow
of each pump is summed. This method ensures inflow can be approximated
where pumps are enabled and disabled. The formula can be simplified when
assumed that outflow is only known for all pumps combined and when only one
PST is considered:
inflowt =
α
tP
t−7
heightt +
tP
t−7
outflowt
7
(3.3)
While Gebbran’s method works well in theory, problems arise when applying this
method with measurements that have a relatively long sample rate of 30 seconds
which is the highest observed sample rate in the complete set of measurements
among all PSTs. There is a significant difference in the quantity of outflow water
(in litres) of a pump being turned on at the beginning or end of the 30-second
interval, which cannot be ignored. In data analyses, this resulted in significant
inflow peaks at moments where pumps are enabled or disabled, which does not
come close to real-world usage patterns, as shown in Fig 3.5:
09:00
09:05
09:10
09:15
09:20
09:25
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Inflow [L/s]
Two inflow approximation methods during outflow
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Power [kWh]
Inflow (Gebbran)
Power of pumps
Figure 3.5: The inflow is calculated with Gebbran’s method, in which tank
volume differences are supplemented with outflow. Both values
are in the same units, yet they are not aligned in timing and
volume. This creates spikes and negative inflow at times when
pumps have an outflow.
==PAGE:46==
36
Data modelling
To overcome this problem, a new approach is presented that does not use outflow
for approximating the inflow:
2) Tank-volume differential method: This approach relies on the difference in
tank level at each measurement. A prerequisite of this method is that the data
is converted to a fixed interval between each sample, as described in section 3.2.
The water height difference is calculated at each measurement with the previous
measurement. This difference, given in meters per 5 minutes, is converted to
L/s. However, if there exists outflow, then the inflow is calculated by linearly
interpolating the inflow between the last sample with no outflow and the first
subsequent sample with no outflow, as shown in Eq. 3.4:
inflowt =











α
t
P
t−7
heightt
7∗interval


o = 0
inflown + (t −n)

inflowm−inflown
m−n

o > 0 or t < m.
(3.4)
Here, α defines a constant that converts the water height unit to L. When
outflow exists, a linear interpolation happens between the previous timestamp
n and the fourth following timestamp m that does not have an outflow. m is
deliberately not the first following timestamp after a timestamp without outflow
because the tank needs some time to stabilise the water height after it has been
emptied. This behaviour is the reason for the condition t < m, as this targets
the period where outflow stopped, but the water level has not yet recovered.
In any other case with no outflow, the water level will be calculated with the
same approach as presented in Eq 3.3. The interval is a numeric divider that
converts the litres per sample interval (e.g. 30 seconds) to L/s. An example of
the interpolated inflow is given in Fig. 3.6
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Aggregation with external data
37
09:00
09:05
09:10
09:15
09:20
09:25
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Inflow [L/s]
Inflow (Volume differential method)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Power [kWh]
09:00
09:05
09:10
09:15
09:20
09:25
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Inflow [L/s]
Two inflow approximation methods during outflow
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Power [kWh]
Inflow (Gebbran)
Inflow (Volume diff.)
Power of pumps
Figure 3.6: Left: the inflow as calculated by Eq. 3.4. Between 9:07 and 9:23;
the outflow values linearly interpolated. Note that this period is
extended from the operation times of the pump (between 9:09 and
9:16
to cover imbalances created by the outflow. Right: Eq. 3.3 and Eq. 3.4 com-
pared. The spike and negative inflow during outflow are no longer present with
the volume differential method.
Compared to Gebbran’s approach, there are no more unwanted peaks in the
inflow during times when out occurs and is, therefore, closer to real-world values.
However, there is still a limitation: the inflow is sometimes interpolated with
outflow, so potential real-world peaks are not captured during these periods.
For example, pumping stations are typically switched on for about 5 minutes
when the outflow starts to flow. Short-term precipitation is therefore no longer
registered during outflow moments. However, the majority of the time there is
no outflow, and then this problem is not happening. Another advantage is that
the outflow parameter is more prone to errors than the water level parameter, as
discussed in 3, and by omitting this value for inflow approximation, the risk of
inflow approximation errors is lower. Therefore, this thesis uses the tank-volume
differential method for approximating inflow.
3.4
Aggregation with external data
At this point, the measurements are ready to be used for further processes or
analyses.
The data is validated and corrected, inflow is approximated, and
flexibility is calculated. However, the data could be further improved by sup-
plementing the measurements with external data sources such as information
about weather, sea tide and clean water usage.
==PAGE:48==
38
Data modelling
1) Weather: Large water inflow can be subject to rainfall, and hot summer days
can be a reason for increased water usage. Therefore, precipitation and tem-
perature are retrieved from metiostat1. This data contains hourly precipitation
and temperature data from various weather stations on Bornholm island. Each
weather value is mapped to the corresponding measurements in the historical
data.
2) Sea tide: Seawater may enter the water systems for low-altitude PSTs close
to the sea. Internal documents from an external consultancy company [Kou21]
showed that some PSTs, such as PST 257 (Tejn Vandværk - Havnevej 7, Tejn),
correlate 91 per cent between sea tide and the number of hours that pumps are
enabled. Sea tide has a great potential in estimating when pumps need to oper-
ate because sea tides are a value that can be predicted well in advance[RLHC08,
TAST20]. The tide data of the Baltic Sea is derived from DMI Open Data2,
from a measurement station in Tejn, Bornholm. The data is provided in an ap-
proximate 10-minute interval and mapped to the measurements using a similar
approach as the weather data. At the same time, for each measurement, the
measurement of the previous 10 minutes and the next 10 minutes has also been
added. Water dynamics are the reason that it takes a while before water from a
risen sea reaches the system. The most correlated value can later on be selected
from the set of time-shifted sea tides.
3) Clean water usage: Information about clean water usage is provided by the
water authorities (BEOF3) and is provided in a daily interval; which makes it
less likely to be helpful given the low frequency compared to the sensor values;
yet it is still possible to map it to the measurement values, and experiments will
be done to disclose the added value of this data.
3.5
Finalised data-set
The DPT validates, enhances and supplements the untouched measurement
data. A best-effort approach is applied to find and correct errors in the mea-
surements. After, a time-weighted average interpolation is used to convert the
measurements with various inconstant timestamps to measurements with fixed
intervals between one another. In the next step, two inflow approximation types
are discussed, forming a base for flexibility prediction. A modified version of
Gebbran’s algorithm is applied to approximate inflow based on water height dif-
ference. Finally, the measurements are aggregated with third-party data sources
by including information about weather, sea tide, and clean water usage at each
measurement. Table 3.3 presents all parameters of the processed measurements.
1https://meteostat.net/en/place/dk/rnne
2https://confluence.govcloud.dk/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=41714550
3https://www.beof.dk/
==PAGE:49==
3.5 Finalised data-set
39
Table 3.3: Data-set details
Symbol
Description
Type
Source
t
timestamp (seconds / interval)
int
sensora
volumet
tank volume level in L
float
sensorb
outflowt
water outflow level in L/sec
float
sensorc
ci
current of pump i in A
float
sensor
ctot
current of all pumps in A
float
sensor
pcpt
precipitation in mm
int
Meteostat
tidet
tide in meters
float
DMI OceanObs
tidet−1
tide in meters of prev. 10 min.
float
DMI OceanObs
tidet+1
tide in meters of next 10 min.
float
DMI OceanObs
wt
water usage in L of that day
int
BEOF
cycles
t
cycle state
object
DPT
cyclet
t
cycle state transition
[object, object]
DPT
cyclen
t
cycle number
int
DPT
cyclem
t
cycle step
int
DPT
inflowt
inflow in L/s
float
DPTd
flext
flexibility in seconds
float
DPTe
aConverted from a date-time string
dCalculated using Eq.3.4
cConverted from m3/h
==PAGE:50==
40
Data modelling
The final data set, as described above, will be used for training machine learning
models further on in this thesis. The data has been greatly improved when
compared with the original measurements, but it is not entirely error-free. In
fact, it is never certain what the real value is; therefore, the corrected values are
merely an estimation in the right direction. For future data collection, fixing
the errors at the source would be an improvement instead of using a tool. This
means that hardware at the PSTs should be reliable in monitoring the sensors.
The next chapter presents a strategy to accomplish this.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Prototype
The existing set of measurements suffers from incomplete, erroneous and in-
consistent measurements. Future research benefits from having error-free mea-
surement from each PST, which can be obtained by installing reliable hardware
that real-time registers the sensor values in the PST. This chapter highlights the
research for a suitable prototype for sensor value monitoring. This prototype
must be able to read the analogue sensors present at the pump stations. This
data must then be uploaded to the cloud. There is no fixed internet line available
on the locations, so an LTE modem has to be arranged. Furthermore, the pro-
totype must be able to make a local estimate of the flexibility available for that
specific pump station in the future. Two prototypes are proposed and evaluated;
in which the second prototype is an improvement upon the initial prototype.
==PAGE:52==
42
Prototype
Previously was discussed how the PSTs measurements suffer from many kinds
of mistakes.
There are problems with faulty sensor values, impossible state
transitions, missing periods and unequal intervals between two subsequent mea-
surements. To make the best of the situation, a DPT has been developed that
deals with many kinds of these problems, but the DPT can only fix the data to
an extent. A better strategy is to tackle the problem at the root, which means
that measurements should be monitored more reliably. The existing hardware
for sensor monitoring is not open to system modification, as it is managed by
third parties that do not allow alternation of their systems. Therefore, a strat-
egy is proposed in which a new device will be installed. The device will be
directly connected to the sensor and publish the values to a cloud platform,
bypassing the currently used platforms.
The pump stations on Bornholm island are controlled by a programmable logic
controller (PLC). This controller drives the pumps based on the water level
sensor installed on the water tank. The sensor measures the water height in
metres in the tank. The control of the PLC is programmed to turn the pump
on when the water height is bigger than a threshold, and the PLC turns the
pump off when the water level has dropped a percentage below the threshold.
4.1
Initial prototype
The prototype consists of three parts: an electric current receiver, an inter-
net modem and a single-board computer. Firstly, the electric current receiver
reads out the analogue sensor measurements. Then there is a long term evo-
lution (LTE) modem that takes care of the communication with the internet.
In daily life, LTE is often referred to as 4g. Furthermore, a computer controls
the whole prototype and can run a machine learning model that predicts the
pump’s estimated flexibility.
The sensors in the pump station transmit the data over the 4-20 mA current
loop. In this standard, a 4 mA signal means the sensor measures its minimum
value and 20 mA indicates that the sensor measures its maximum value. A
digital device must take two steps to get the electric current value. First, the
signal in mA has to be converted into a voltage. The conversion can be done
by using a shunt resistor. The voltage drop across the resistor can be converted
back to current using V = I ∗R, where V is voltage, I is current and the
resistance R. An analogue-to-digital converter then translates the signal into a
digital signal. This prototype has a MCP3428 current receiver1. It integrates
the two circuits mentioned above and provides output over a digital I2C signal2.
1https://store.ncd.io/product/mcp3428-4-channel-4-20ma-16-bit-current-receiver-with-
iot-interface/
2https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/user-guide/UM10204.pdf
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Initial prototype
43
Because there is no fixed internet on site, communication with the cloud must
wirelessly occur. The requirements for the connection are that it must be possi-
ble to send a request to the server every second with the lowest possible latency
and that remote SSH access is available to control the prototype. Tree proto-
cols were compared in this study; LoRa, NB-IoT[SWH17] and LTE-M[DBP16].
LoRa has the advantage that no subscription fees need to be paid to use the net-
work. On the other hand, it uses a community network which can be unstable.
Another disadvantage of LoRa is that because of the 10 % duty-cycle rule in
the best case, the EU does not allow data to be sent every second, which means
that LoRa is no longer an option for this prototype[the]. The specifications of
NB-IOT and LTE-M specify that the latency is between 1.5 and 10 seconds for
NB-IoT, compared to 10-15 milliseconds for LTE-M. This means that the final
choice for the communication protocol falls on LTE-M for its availability and
low latency.
A computer must be present to process the data.
This computer must also
be able to run a machine learning model that can predict the flexibility at
the pumping station based on the sensor values. A suitable computer for this
application is the Raspberry Pi. This relatively cheap computer supports the
I2C protocol to read out the current receiver. The Pi runs Raspbian, a UNIX-
based operating system that supports various programming languages. Below,
it shows how the various components work together. The parts are connected
according to Fig. 4.1. For the LTE modem, a WaveShare module3 was chosen
that can be used as an extension shield for a Raspberry Pi.
Figure 4.1: The connection scheme of a prototype based on a Compulab IOT-
GATE-iMX8.
3https://www.waveshare.com/wiki/SIM7080G_Cat-M/NB-IoT_HAT
==PAGE:54==
44
Prototype
The current receiver communicates the data via the I2C protocol. The device
has several configurable options, such as a measurement resolution. The device
can read 16 bits at 15 samples per second, 14 bits at 60 samples per second or
12 bits at 240 samples per second. For this application, 16-bit is most suitable
because of its high resolution, and 15 samples per second are enough in terms of
speed. Furthermore, the module has a power gain parameter. This parameter
determines if the module should read 0-20, 4-20 or 0-40 mA. Through I2C, the
gain is set to a setting that corresponds with 4-20 mA.
The network module should be connected via the Raspberry Pi’s General-
Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) header pins. GPIO pins are physical interfaces
for connections between the Raspberry Pi and external circuit boards or other
devices. After several attempts, the network module does not establish a re-
liable connection with the Raspberry Pi.
Some pins have a permanent 3 V
signal, which causes the network module to reboot continuously. Alternatively,
the network module can be connected via a USB connection. By default, the
network module is not supported by a driver in Raspbian. Therefore, using the
module via the Point-to-Point (PPP) protocol has been made. With the PPP
protocol, the Raspberry Pi runs a call-up script that connects to the internet
provider through a series of Hayes commands (also called AT-commands). After
the connection is established, a new network interface is available to access the
internet.
The Raspberry Pi reads the I2C values from the current reader. The measure-
ments are the raw readings of the analogue-digital chip on the electric current
reader and are translated to mA utilizing a curve-fitting method. From this
point, the measurements in mA can be mapped to the suitable sensor unit.
For example, in the case of a water height meter, 0 meters is 4 mA, and the
maximum value of 5 meters is 20 mA. Furthermore, The Pi also runs a virtual
private network (VPN) client. This VPN is necessary because the LTE provider
does not allow port forwarding by default. Without port-forwarding, there is
no remote connection possible. The VPN solves the remote connection problem
because every device that connects to the VPN is on the same virtual network
and can communicate with each other. This prototype is tested at one of the
test sites. Whilst the 4-20 mA signal readouts work in certain conditions, it is
not stable enough to be used as a prototype. The following flaws are reported:
1. The LTE module was supposed to be connectable as an extension shield
for the GPIO pins. However, on the Raspberry Pi, it did not work because
the LTE module kept restarting itself, although appropriately connected.
2. The LTE module connected through USB has no native driver support.
Therefore, a PPP call-up script has to be used to establish a connection
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Proposed prototype
45
with the LTE provider. This solution is slow and unreliable: latency varies
between 450 and 600 ms, and there is a high package drop. Speed tests
on other LTE-enabled devices yielded latencies well below 30 ms without
package drop. All tests are performed simultaneously, at the exact physical
location (test-site) and on the same network (Telenor Denmark LTE).
3. The 4-20 mA current receiver is connected through breadboard wires,
which are not robust and can potentially create a short circuit when they
get loose.
A new prototype is researched to tackle the shortcomings of the initial prototype.
4.2
Proposed prototype
New requirements are proposed to ensure that the flaws of the initial prototype
are not encountered:
• The prototype must be able to have a 100 percent up-time for two weeks.
During these two weeks, the prototype uninterruptedly uploads measure-
ments and is open to SSH connections.
• The product should be self-contained, meaning that all hardware (exclud-
ing a power supply) should be inside or directly on the device’s chassis.
This means that breadboard wires to external modules (e.g. LTE, ana-
logue input) are no longer allowed.
• Feature to connect to a VPN server to allow simple remote access.
• Ideally, the device should have some form of industrial certification, mean-
ing that it is designed for 24/7 operation.
One of the systems that adhere to the above requirements is an IoT gateway
made by Compulab: IOT-GATE-iMX8. The iMX8 is an industrial Linux mi-
crocomputer. This device can be ordered with a configurable feature set and
has options to include a built-in 4G/LTE modem and two analogue 4-20 mA
inputs4.
4https://www.compulab.com/products/iot-gateways/iot-gate-imx8-industrial-arm-iot-
gateway/
==PAGE:56==
46
Prototype
Figure 4.2: The proposed prototype.
The system supports various Linux distributions as operating systems, and
whilst there are some differences between distributions, they will most likely
not affect the system’s functionality. The system will be installed for this pro-
totype with Debian, a well-known Linux distribution supporting Python and
VPN software. The SIM card goes inside the prototype, and a python script
periodically reports sensor values to the cloud. The system is a self-contained
device designed for 24/7 monitoring in an industrial setting. It, therefore, is ex-
pected to be a more robust solution than the earlier proposed prototype based
on the RPi.
At the time of writing, the iMX8 is available in its required configuration at
resellers in Denmark and Israel. However, delivery time may be longer due to
international chip shortages. The InGateway902 5 is the proposed alternative
in case the iMX8 is unavailable. Likewise, the InGateway902 has built-in 4-20
mA analogue input ports and 4G/LTE support for the internet.
5https://inhandgo.com/products/ingateway902-industrial-cellular-gateway
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Flexibility estimation
A prerequisite of participating in ancillary services is that beforehand is known
how flexibility can be offered at any time in the following day. With PSTs, this
is heavily dependent on the inflow. Since the inflow is not known in advance,
an estimation should be made. This chapter presents several machine learning
and mathematical strategies to predict flexibility for the day ahead or for the
immediate following minutes. The predictions can be used for participation in
FCR-D.
==PAGE:58==
48
Flexibility estimation
The aim is to link the pumps to a frequency response service. A requirement for
this is that the PSTs can offer operational flexibility. Flexibility is a function
of the amount of power reduction (in kW) and the amount of time an electri-
cal appliance can be scaled down or shut down without violating its critical
conditions. In the context of PSTs means that the tanks should not overflow.
For the study on predicting flexibility, only measurements from pumping stations
with only local catchment as inflow were considered. In this type of PSTs, almost
all inflow peaks are caused by downstream PSTs that pump sewage water uphill.
Since this behaviour can be influenced and calculated, it is not necessary to
predict these peaks. It is much more interesting to predict how much the local
catchment will be, as this reveals the actual load on the sewage network. As
illustrated in Fig. 1.1, three PSTs remain with only local catchments: 232, 233
and 238. Since 238 has the fewest measurement errors, it was decided to apply
the flexibility prediction to this PST.
On the historical measurements, the DPT calculated the inflow using Eq. (3.4).
This allows us to know the inflow on the system from each historical time point.
Based on the inflow, an estimation can be made that estimates how long the
pump can run at a specific power reference until the tank is empty. Different
measures of regression should be taken into account. On the one hand, it is
essential to determine the flexibility a day ahead, as this is needed to bid for
hours in the day-ahead market. On the other hand, it is also essential to estimate
flexibility in real-time so that in case of a frequency event, it is known how much
each pump in a portfolio can contribute to the agreed power response in a bid
a day before.
5.1
Day-ahead flexibility estimation
The first step in training a day ahead model is to shape the data correctly.
For the day ahead model, the amount of flexibility that can be offered must be
predicted for each hour. As flexibility is an inflow function, it is sufficient to
predict the amount of inflow for each hour in the following day. The DPT was
used to calculate the estimated inflow values based on the difference in water
level and to convert the dynamic time intervals to hourly time intervals. The
features that are used for training the models are listed in Table 5.1 on the next
page.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Day-ahead flexibility estimation
49
Table 5.1: Data attributes that will be used for training.
Name
Description
Type Data-
type
Source
Month
Month number (1-12)
nominal
int
sensor
Day of Week
Day number in week (0-7)
nominal
int
sensor
Hour of Day
Hour number (0-23)
nominal
int
sensor
Prcp. (-1 Hour) Precipitation: previous hour ratio
float Meteostat
Prcp.
Precipitation
ratio
float Meteostat
Features including the month, day-of-week, and hour-of-day attributes are im-
portant. There is typically more load on the system in the mornings and less
on weekends. It is important to include the dates to let the model grasp these
trends. Since machine learning algorithms can only work with numerical vec-
tors, the date objects must be converted into numerical values. There are several
methods to do this. A popular method is to use a one-hot encoding. However,
the problem with this method is that the dimensionality of the data is increased
significantly, which can lead to a curse of dimensionality [VF05]. Instead, the
day itself could be used; however, this gives another problem. Day 2 is as close
to day 1 as to day 365 due to the cyclic behaviour of dates. This structure
of dates is obvious to humans, but it is not for machine learning models. To
overcome this issue, we opted to translate the dates into sinus and cosinus val-
ues using trigonometry. For every date feature, two columns are added: one
for the sinus calculated by eq. (5.1) and one for the cosinus calculated by eq.
(5.2), where value x denotes the time attribute (day-of-week, hour-of-day) that
is replaced by its cosine and sinus equivalent.
∀x ∈column : sin

2 ∗π ∗x
max(column)

(5.1)
∀x ∈column : cos

2 ∗π ∗x
max(column)

(5.2)
The attributes listed in Table 3.3 are pair-wise compared using Pearson’s cor-
relation metric[Kir08]. The purpose of the correlation matrix is to gain insight
into how similar data attributes are and to get an indication of the most im-
portant data attributes for predicting inflow.
The training attributes in the
matrix are supplemented by an additional value: the target value inflow, which
is separated from the training attributes by a solid line.
==PAGE:60==
50
Flexibility estimation
Figure 5.1: A correlation matrix between all machine learning data attributes
and the target value (inflow).
The motor power and Baltic Sea tide have been added to the correlation matrix
(separated by a dashed line) because an external consultancy firm found a 91
per cent correlation between the number of operational hours of a PST and
the Baltic Sea tide, as explained in 3.4. The agency looked at PST 257, for
which we have no data. The sea tide correlation could not be identified with
the measurements of PST 238, as the correlation between the tide is -3.11,
respectively.
Another important thing to note is the correlation between inflow and day
of year and hour of the day.
This confirmed the belief that seasons have a
significant impact on the load of the system as well as the time of the day.
Furthermore, it is interesting to see that precipitation -1 hour has a higher
correlation than precipitation, which can be explained by water dynamics, as
the rainwater needs time to reach the sewage system.
After the data was shaped, various machine learning models were chosen and
examined. The target value, inflow, is a continuous attribute and, therefore,
a regression problem. The following regression algorithms are discussed: (1)
Decision Tree[MI87], (2) Random Forest Regressor[Bre01], (3) XGBoost[CG16]
and (4) LightGBM [KMF+17].
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Day-ahead flexibility estimation
51
1: Decision Tree) The first model is a decision tree for regression, also called
a regression tree. A regression tree is a decision model that consists of nested
if-else conditions, called splits, and is used to predict continuous-valued outputs.
Each split has a condition on one or more attributes of the measurement. These
branches can be stacked several times, forming a top-to-bottom tree of decision
points. If an input measurement fulfils a condition in a split, then the inflow
prediction goes into a different branch. Using this way, a measurement will find
a way from top to bottom through a decision tree. After every last branch, a
predicted inflow is presented. This predicted inflow is the mean inflow of all
training measurements that share the same conditions as the given input mea-
surement.
Building the tree is an iterative process in which different compositions of
branches are evaluated. A mean squared error (MSE), shown in Eq. 5.3, is
calculated for each composition and works as a performance measure.
This
means that the branch composition with the lowest MSE has the predicted in-
flow (from train data) closest to the true inflow. The branch composition with
the lowest MSE is applied as the final decision tree. It is important to find
suitable parameters for the regression tree, such as maximum tree depth, as it
prevents the model from over-fitting.
Over-fitting is a phenomenon in which the learning system tightly fits the train-
ing data, resulting in inaccurate outcomes for newly predicted data. There are
several ways of detecting and mitigating over-fitting. Firstly, to detect over-
fitting, splitting the dataset into the train, validation and test set is considered
good practice.
The train set is the data on which the actual training takes
place.
The validation set helps to improve the model performance by fine-
tuning the model at each training step. The test informs the final accuracy
after completing the training phase. In regression trees, an over-fitting problem
can be reduced by limiting the number of levels in a tree because it increases
the number of training samples in the final branches. Other measures are in-
troducing a minimum number of samples for each branch. Finding the optimal
values for these parameters is difficult to do manually. Therefore, a grid search
algorithm[LBL04] with three-fold cross-validation and 100 iterations has been
executed. The grid search algorithms is a best-effort algorithm that iteratively
finds the best parameters.
MSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(xi −yi)2
(5.3)
==PAGE:62==
52
Flexibility estimation
2: Random forest) The second model is an ensemble method called the random
forest regressor. The base of this regressor is a set of independently trained
decision trees. Each decision tree is trained, as explained in the section above
(1), with the only difference being the training data. Each decision tree’s data
for training is a bootstrapped dataset of the same size as the original training
set[DH97]. Also, each decision tree uses a random number of features of the
original training set. In the end, multiple regression trees are trained on ran-
domly selected training samples and selected features. The regression trees work
together to make predictions, calling at a random forest. When a measurement
is passed to the random forest, each tree in the forest makes a prediction. After,
the final prediction is the average overall predictions made by the regression
trees. The grid search algorithm is applied to find optimal parameters.
3: XGBoost) The third model is called Gradient Boosted Trees, called XGBoost.
Similarly to the random forest, it is an ensemble method based on decision trees.
XGBoost differs from Random Forest in how the trees are built and how the
output is combined. Instead of training multiple independent trees, XGBoost
uses a range of trees that supplement each other. The trees are sequentially
added until the overall model does not improve anymore. The advantage of this
iterative approach is that the new models are focused on correcting the previ-
ous model’s weaknesses. With independently trained models, like the random
forest, each separate decision tree can end up with the same weakness. The
process of improving prior models is called gradient boosting. The output value
is the output of the last tree in the sequence.
4: LightGBM) The last machine learning model is the recently introduced Light-
GBM library.
Similarly to XGBoost, it uses a gradient boosting approach.
LightGBM is considered significantly faster than XGBoost, within theory equiv-
alent performance.
Each of the four regression models is tested against each other by feeding the test
data-set into each model and comparing the outcome with the true inflow using
the MSE (Eq. 5.3). The test dataset was not exposed to any models during the
training phase. The figure below shows the differences in MSE between each
described model and a baseline model: the mean.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Day-ahead flexibility estimation
53
Random Forest Decision Tree
XGBoost
LightGBM
Mean
Models
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Mean-squared error
Results of Different Models Compared 
Figure 5.2: Four regression models compared to the measurement’s mean. The
lower the mean squared error, the better the predictions.
The LightGBM yields the overall best results, with a MSE of 0.036. The hy-
perparameters used for this model are as follows:
• L1 regularization term on weights (reg_alpha): 0.01
• Maximum tree leaves for base learners (num_leaves): 200
• Minimum number of data needed in a child leaf (min_child_samples): 50
• Boosting learning rate (learning_rate): 0.01
• Number of boosted trees to fit (n_estimators): 100
The figure on the next page illustrates the forecast for 24 hours on a typical
day. The estimates are made with the best model, LightGBM:
==PAGE:64==
54
Flexibility estimation
00:00 03:00 06:00 09:00 12:00 15:00 18:00 21:00 00:00
Hour of day
0.1
0.2
0.3
Inflow [L/s]
Inflow Prediction on a Day Without Rain
Predicted
True
Figure 5.3: A LightGBM model predicted twenty-four hours of inflow com-
pared to the true inflow. No rainfall is recorded for the presented
day (June 19, 2021).
Rainy days are typically more challenging to predict, exposing less frequent
events in the dataset. The figure below presents predictions made for a typical
rainy day:
00:00 03:00 06:00 09:00 12:00 15:00 18:00 21:00 00:00
Hour of day
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Inflow [L/s]
Inflow Prediction on a Rainy Day
Predicted
True
Figure 5.4: Twenty-four hours of inflow predicted by a LightGBM model com-
pared to the true inflow. Rain is recorded for the presented day
(August 27, 2021), making it harder for the model to predict the
inflow.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Real-time flexibility estimation
55
From the figures, it can be seen that the model predicts a reduced water inflow at
night; and that between six and nine o’clock in the morning, there is an increase.
The increase can likely be addressed by morning routines (e.g. people using
showers and toilets). However, the model cannot predict exceptional situations
with, for example, rainfall. The machine learning model does not predict the
water inflow spikes from the true inflow data shown in Fig. 5.4. The model can
predict general trends, such as fluctuations over time. The predictions can be
used to determine how big the load will be on the sewage network, which is the
most important factor in whether it will be possible to participate in frequency
response services for any given hour.
After the day ahead predictions are made, the bids can be made. Once the
bids are settled, it is known in which hours the PST may have to reduce or
cease power usage. When such a reduction or cease event occurs, the flexibility
estimation predicts how many minutes a PST can be turned off before risking
a tank overflow.
5.2
Real-time flexibility estimation
The real-time flexibility estimation is the ratio of flexible power and time. More
specifically, it defines how much one of these variables can be manipulated with-
out endangering the device’s critical application. The system’s future load must
be known to calculate the ratio of flexibility; in the case of a PST, that is the
future inflow.
Similarly to models trained in the day-ahead flexibility predictions (section 5.1),
the date features have been transformed according to eq. (5.2) and (5.1) and
a random grid search with 100 iterations is applied to find optimal hyper-
parameters for every model.
The two models that are compared are a random forest regressor and a Light-
GBM model, similarly to the day ahead prediction models. The MSE (5.3) of
these models have been compared to a baseline model, which yields the mean
of the dataset. The difference with the day-ahead model is that the data for
this model has a higher sample rate of 1 sample per 30 seconds, compared to an
hourly sample rate for the day-ahead predictions. For example, this is required
if a prediction has to be made for the next 15 minutes. The results of the two
models are shown in Fig. 5.5.
==PAGE:66==
56
Flexibility estimation
Random Forest
LightGBM
Mean
Models
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Mean-squared error
MSE in Inflow Prediciton of Different Models Compared 
Figure 5.5: Three regression models compared to the measurement’s mean.
The lower the mean squared error, the better the predictions.
The best model is the LightGBM, the same as the one used for the day ahead
prediction. The model has an MSE of 0.04. Although the same algorithm is
applied as in the day ahead predictions, the hyper-parameters that are used for
training differ. The hyper-parameters that have been used are as following:
• L1 regularization term on weights (reg_alpha): 0.0
• Maximum tree leaves for base learners (num_leaves): 50
• Minimum number of data needed in a child leaf (min_child_samples: 50
• Boosting learning rate (learning_rate): 0.05
• Number of boosted trees to fit (n_estimators): 200
The predicted short-term inflow can be translated into a real-time estimation of
flexibility. The estimated flexibility is highly dependent on the water inside the
tank at the moment of estimating. In Fig. 5.6 the flexibility has been compared
at different water levels of PST 238, which has a maximum volume of 1300 L.
The top left corner of the figure offers extended flexibility with little power; this
flexibility could be used for EA if enough is aggregated with other reserves. On
the other side, at the bottom right, there is much power, but for a bit of time,
this flexibility could also be used for EA, but for a limited time. Another thing
that can be noted from this figure is that a higher water volume level results in
more flexibility because the pump can run at a higher power reference. It must
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Real-time flexibility estimation
57
be pointed out, though, that this plot’s flexibility is for a maximum of an hour.
In the consequent hour, the tank is empty and has to refill.
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
Power Reference [%]
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
Time [min]
Flexibility in One Hour
Water volume at start: 100L
Water volume at start: 300L
Water volume at start: 500L
Water volume at start: 700L
Water volume at start: 900L
Water volume at start: 1100L
Figure 5.6: Flexibility is a ratio between power and time, with each line rep-
resenting a different water level. The power reference is given as
a percentage of power reduction.
==PAGE:68==
58
Flexibility estimation
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
Coordination
To participate in FCR-D with PSTs, a protocol must be embraced to ensure
that all PST work together to supply AS. Collaboration is needed to ensure that
enough power is delivered for a time span. To further benchmark practical fea-
sibility, the real-world timings are recorded for enabling and disabling the pumps
over a cloud interface.
==PAGE:70==
60
Coordination
Protocols are a way to ensure that different entities ’speak’ the same language
and thereby can work together on the same task. Participation in FCR-D is a
task that cannot be done with a single PST because a single PST’s flexibility is
insufficient. To make FCR-D participation work, multiple PST must work to-
gether to ensure that the portfolio of devices offers enough power for an agreed
period when needed. A protocol should be developed to allow PST collabora-
tions. An important design decision for designing a protocol in a multi-agent
system, like the PST system, is whether coordination happens on a central
device or more individual level. This chapter further explains the two protocol
approaches, supplemented by real-world timing experiments with one of the two
protocols. FCR-D is a time-critical service where participants need to respond
within seconds. Therefore, tests with a real drive and mobile communication
technologies are performed to ensure that future AS participation is practically
feasible.
6.1
Protocol
This section presents two protocols that enable aggregated device participation
in FCR-D. The first protocol is a centralised method where the cloud measures
the frequency of the electricity network and sends the new power reference to
all participating devices. The second method is more decentralised, where all
devices measure the frequency and only communicate through the cloud if some-
thing unexpected happens. This chapter compares both strategies and gives
recommendations on which protocol to use. In addition, timing experiments are
performed with one of the protocols.
An FCR-D participant must meet the energy grid specification to participate in
FCR-D. A detailed description of these specifications is given in section 1.2. The
two most important specifications when designing a protocol for FCR are the
delay of the signal and where and how to measure the grid frequency. As FCR-D
is time-critical, applied methods must work within the specified boundaries. At
the same time, the used methods should align with local regulations and laws,
as we are dealing with critical infrastructure. Different protocols for controlling
PSTs can be framed into roughly two types: a centralised and decentralised
approach. Both have their characteristics, upsides and downsides. This section
presents the most important differences between the two methods.
The first is a centralised protocol, where a cloud environment makes all decisions.
In the portfolio of devices, only one device has to send the frequency to the
cloud. All devices send their status of flexibility to the cloud every minute. A
one-minute time interval is enough for this application because the flexibility
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Protocol
61
does not change significantly within a minute. When the frequency drops below
the threshold, the cloud calculates the new power reference using the droop
curve presented in Fig.
1.6.
The new power reference is sent to all flexible
devices.
The decentralised protocol is less dependent on the cloud.
Here, all devices
respond to the frequency of the grid.
However, each device must access an
accurate grid frequency measurement device. This protocol works that every
minute all devices in the portfolio transmit their flexibility to the cloud. The
cloud assigns several devices to be in FCR mode. This means that these devices
are responsible for reacting when the frequency drops below the threshold. The
devices participating in FCR mode are thereby accountable for choosing a new
power reference on the droop curve.
Both protocols have their advantages and disadvantages. In the case of the cen-
tralised protocol, there is more control and overview, and there is only a need for
one frequency sensor, which can save costs. On the other hand, the decentralised
protocol can require less communication with the cloud—this protocol results
in less delay. To investigate whether the extra delays of the centralised protocol
meet Energinet’s requirements, two test setups are developed to measure the
average propagation delay.
This is not the only delay but the only variable
delay within the protocol. The computation time should be uniform with the
code complexity and the ramping time of a drive is a configurable factor.
==PAGE:72==
62
Coordination
6.2
Timing
Remotely sending an instruction to reduce power takes time. A message must
be compiled and sent over a (sometimes unstable) mobile connection. Later,
it is received and forwarded by a cloud interface, and finally, the pumps need
time to set the new reference. This section describes the timings of the above
process using propagation tests. This benchmark consists of two parts: the first
part tests the communication between a computer and cloud interface over a
mobile connection, which emulates a cloud that sends a new reference speed to
a local controller of the PST. Later in this section, we include another part that
tests the ramp speed: the time needed to change the pump reference speed. By
summing up the time required by the two parts, we can conclude the total time
needed for the process of sending a new reference speed to the pump over a
cloud-enabled infrastructure.
See Fig. 6.1 below, which shows the test setup. To make the test as realistic
as possible, we let a computer send a message via the MQQT protocol to an
Azure virtual machine in the cloud. The reason for using MQQT is that large
vendors’ frequency measurement device also sends messages via MQQT. Later,
the cloud sends an MQQT message back to the computer. The total round trip
time can be computed from the message back-and-forward sending.
Figure 6.1: Centralised protocol propagation delay test.
The round-trip time has been tested with three different network technologies.
This is because there is not always a fixed internet connection where the pumps
are installed. Therefore, an extra delay due to wireless communication must
be considered. The three network technologies used in the test are fixed fibre
optics, 3G (DC-HSPA+) and 4G (LTE+). The results are based on 41 samples
per network technology.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Timing
63
Fiber
Network 4G
Network 3G
Network technology
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Time delay in ms
Comparison of Propagation Delay 
Figure 6.2: The propagation delay of different network technologies in the
centralised network protocol.
The results are relatively close. Fibre is the fastest, but even 3G is fast enough
but has a more extensive spread. However, the propagation delay is not the only
delay. The same test was also performed with an actual motor (simulating a
pump) using a Danfoss cloud gateway to get a better picture. The trial followed
a similar process as described in fig. 6.1. However, the cloud sends a real power
reference to the Danfoss Cloud instead of a dummy message. The Danfoss Cloud
instructs the drive with the drive’s new reference speed. A real drive in a lab
environment is used for the second trial.
==PAGE:74==
64
Coordination
DTU cloud
MQTT
0
t
1t
2
t
3
t
4
t
Acts as a 
measurement device
Propagation delay = 
4
0
i
i
t
=å
Figure 6.3: Centralised protocol delay test including drive.
The results over again, 41 samples per technology, are shown in fig. 6.4. From
this figure, the delays inside the Danfoss Cloud are irregular; they range from
half a second to three seconds. Delays like these can likely be decreased by
omitting the Danfoss cloud; however, this scenario is not tested.
Fiber
Network 4G
Network 3G
Network technology
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Time delay in ms
Comparison of Propagation Delay with Danfoss Cloud
Figure 6.4: The propagation delay of different network technologies in the
centralised network protocol, including the Danfoss Cloud.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Timing
65
To determine which protocol is better depends on which devices are in the port-
folio. If the total delay cycle is known for the devices inside the aggregation
portfolio and they fall within Energienet’s delay requirement, a centralised pro-
tocol is favoured. Centralisation gives more control since you have one single
entity controlling all devices. In addition, in case of a failure, the centralised pro-
tocol can restore quicker. Lastly, it can also be cheaper since only one frequency
measurement sensor is needed. Despite the decentralised protocol in which every
device needs a frequency sensor. However, the decentralised protocol is better
if the lowest latency is desired.
==PAGE:76==
66
Coordination
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 7
Simulation
Unlocking flexibility in wastewater pumps is very complex. This is because you
do not influence the system’s load and always have to be available for pumping
when there is suddenly too much wastewater in the tank. To get the best possi-
ble insights into the behaviour of a wastewater pump participating in flexibility
services, we decided to develop a simulator. In this simulator, different scenar-
ios can be compared. The scenarios include variances in the pump’s power, the
number of pump stations, the size of the tank and the load on the system. The
simulation presents how the system reacts to FCR-D events. This chapter will
explain how the simulation works and what assumptions are made.
==PAGE:78==
68
Simulation
Participating in FCR-D is impossible without a thorough study of the effect
on the system. Since wastewater systems are critical infrastructure, you can
not easily mess with their settings to see the actual impact. For this reason,
a simulation has been developed to test specific hypotheses without requiring
access to real PSTs.
In the literature, several studies used a simulation of
PSTs to test their hypothesis.
In [FBR+19], a simulation is used to see if
a reinforcement learning algorithm can reduce a PST’s energy consumption
by changing the frequency of the pumps considering uncertain forecasts for
wastewater inflow. Furthermore, it [MKS+06] presents research in load shifting
where their results are evaluated in a simulation. The simulation which comes
closest to this work is the simulation of [GID22]. However, this work does not
include variable motor speeds and FCR-D events. This leads to the decision to
develop a new simulator.
Several decisions have been made before starting the development of the simula-
tion. One of these decisions is if the simulation should be discrete or continuous.
In a continuous simulation, there are no defined time-based steps. In contradic-
tion, a discrete simulation runs in predefined steps, in which every step repre-
sents a change in the simulation’s state. For this thesis, a discrete simulation
strategy is chosen because there is no need for the fine granularity offered by a
continuous simulation. Another reason is that the measurements are also given
in discrete timestamps, with an interval of four seconds after the processing
phase by the DPT. In addition, a decision should be made on the framework.
There are frameworks out there such as Simulink1, simio2 or SimPy3 which all
support discrete event simulation. In this work, SimPy is used.
SimPy makes use of python generators. Each process can be defined as a gen-
erator. During the life of a process, these processes generate events that have
a delay.
SimPy ensures that all events in the simulation are in sync.
The
simulation consists of six classes, as shown in Fig. 7.1 on the following page.
1https://www.mathworks.com/products/simulink.html
2https://www.simio.com/
3https://simpy.readthedocs.io/
==PAGE:79==
7.1 Configuration
69
Figure 7.1: Class diagram of the simulator.
Starting with the Simulator class, this class has the overall control. This class
reads the configuration file and forms a cloud, grid, and several PST objects.
The cloud object controls the PSTs. The PST object operates the pump and
tank. The PST has an auxiliary class called the inflow sampler, which generates
an inflow pattern for the pump as realistically as possible during the simulation.
Similarly, the grid object has a grid sampler. The grid sampler simulates the
electricity net and generates grid frequencies based on real-world data.
7.1
Configuration
Before starting the simulation, it must be configured according to the desired
simulation scenario. This is done using a YAML file. YAML is a human-readable
language for data serialisation. It is often used for configuration files and in
applications where data is stored or sent. The global configuration parameters
are:
Table 7.1: General Simulator Parameters
Name
Description
Type
Sample rate
Speed of simulation
Int
Duration
Duration of simulation
Int
Output path
Results directory
String
Bid
bid in kW
Int
==PAGE:80==
70
Simulation
The sample rate determines how many simulation steps 1 second is. If it is set to
10, each step takes one-tenth of a second. The duration is the time over which
the simulation is run. By default, this is set to 24 hours. During the simulation,
a lot of data is generated. Through the output path, it is possible to specify
where the files are written to. Finally, the bid parameter sets the height of the
bid. The default is 300 kWh, which complies with the minimum bid size for
FCR-D.
Furthermore, there are the parameters for the PSTs. These can be divided into
two groups. The first group are general parameters which apply to all PSTs.
Table 7.2: PST Simulator Parameters
Name
Description
Type
Same inflow rate
All stations have the same load
Boolean
Maintain power
PST keeps power reference if not flexible
Boolean
Output path
Results directory
String
Bid
bid in kW
Int
The same inflow rate parameter is a boolean. All PSTs in the simulation have
the same inflow profile if set to true. However, if set to false, each pump station
will get a random inflow profile from a selected month. The maintain power
parameter is also a boolean. This parameter ensures that pumps that are not
flexible in case of an FCR event do not fluctuate in their power consumption
if possible. If this feature is disabled, the non-flexible pumps use as much or
as little power as necessary. The second configuration group is specific to each
PST. The PST-specific parameters are listed below:
Table 7.3: PST Specific Parameters
Name
Description
Type
Capacity
Tank size of PST in L
Int
Start volume
Water volume at simulation start
Int
Limit lower
Lower water limit of the tank
Int
Limit upper
Upper water limit of the tank
Int
Target volume
Target water volume for the tank
Int
Power
Maximum pump power in kW
Int
Scale
Multiplier of load on the system
Int
The capacity parameter is given in litres and determines how much water can be
stored in the tank. When starting the simulation, the start volume parameter
==PAGE:81==
7.1 Configuration
71
indicates how full the tank is.
The limit upper and limit lower parameters
indicate the safety margin of the tank. These limits should prevent the tank
from overflowing or the pump from pumping itself dry. The power parameter
determines the maximum power of the pumping station. Furthermore, there
is the target volume parameter. This parameter sets the strive value for the
tank.
The pump always tries to keep the tank at the target volume.
The
scale parameter determines the load on the system. The higher the scale, the
more inflow the pump station will receive. As last, there are two parameters to
configure for the inflow sampler:
Table 7.4: Inflow Generator Parameters.
Name
Description
Type
Month
The month to be sampled from
Int
Sample method
Method of sampling load on the system
String
The month parameter determines from which month the data gets sampled; this
can have a significant influence since moths with more rain have a higher inflow
typically. The sample function is how the inflow sampler receives the sample
from the data. There are three options here a historic sampler, a period mean
sampler or the distribution sampler. These sample methods are described in
detail in the next section.
==PAGE:82==
72
Simulation
7.2
Inflow sampling
Before the inflow sampler is explained, more needs to be explained about the
inflow sampler’s data. The simulation was applied to two data sources for the
inflow: PST 238 and PST 240.
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
00:00
Time of day
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Estimated inflow (L/s)
PST 238: Inflow throughout the day
Inflow source:
Single day (May 10, 2020)
Mean (May 2020)
Figure 7.2: The inflow with PST 238 as a data source shows the inflow to be
used for the simulation at each time of the day. Two inflow sample
sources are shown here: (1) the historical sampler for a random
day (May 10, 2020) and (2) the mean inflow of the whole month
of May 2020.
The first data source is PST 238 (Kjærnes). The DPT processes the measure-
ments to convert the variable time interval between measurements to fixed time
intervals of 5 minutes. PST 238 receives water from underlying PSTs and sew-
erage from local buildings. Since PST 238 does not have inflow sensors and
the outflow sensors are subject to data inaccuracies, the inflow is determined
using Eq 3.4, in which the inflow is determined based on volume differences (at
each measurement) in the tank. A time interval of 5 minutes has been chosen
because of the slow rise of water in the tank and because smaller intervals result
in a noise caused by the tank’s water dynamics that has small (unimportant)
fluctuations in the tank’s water level.
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Inflow sampling
73
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
00:00
Time of day
0
10
20
30
40
50
Estimated inflow (L/s)
PST 240: Inflow throughout the day
Inflow source:
Single day (May 10, 2020)
Mean (May 2020)
Figure 7.3: The inflow with PST 240 as a data source shows the inflow to be
used for the simulation at each time of the day. In contradiction
to 7.2, the inflow is calculated using outflow instead of tank height
differences; resulting in more spikes.
A second data source is PST 240 (Ostekarret). This PST has inflow from PST
239 and from a set of other PSTs located in Sandvig, Bornholm, of which no
measurements are available. It has no inflow from adjacent buildings. Unlike
PST 238, PST 240 has reliable outflow values. The outflow values can there-
fore be used as ’inflow’ for the simulation. This advantage is that faster time
intervals are possible, making it better to simulate short peaks and troughs. A
disadvantage of PST 240 is that it only has access to approximately one month
of sensor values, compared to 9 months for PST 238. The inflow sampler is
compatible with both data sources, and the preferred data source can be set in
the configuration file. The sampler ensures that an inflow value is provided for
each time step, generated using one of the three methods, which is also specified
in the configuration file. The three methods are further introduced below:
(1) The first method is the historical sampler. This method takes one month,
specified in the configuration file, and picks for each simulated PST a random
day in that month. Since the simulation is usually set up for one 24-hour period,
it is convenient to load one 24-hour period of inflow data. When the simulation
starts, an inflow measurement closest to the simulation step is loaded at each
step.
For example: Assume a sample rate of 1 sample per second, at time
step 100, the simulation is at (101/1) 101 seconds, corresponding to timestamp
00:01:41. Suppose the inflow value interval is 4 seconds, then the nearest inflow
value is at 100 (25*4) seconds, which is then sampled. An advantage of the
==PAGE:84==
74
Simulation
historical sampler is that original data is consumed. This preserves any peaks
and other trends. Think of heavy rainfall or sudden activity of local industry.
This trend is visible in Fig. 7.3 due to the many peaks and troughs compared
to the alternative: the mean.
(2) The second method takes the average of a specified month. Assuming the
month has 31 days, the sampler will take an average of the 31 samples at each
time point. The advantage is that there is a balanced inflow pattern, which
is more realistic for large pumping stations with many inflow sources.
The
disadvantage is that any peaks and troughs are not recorded. Therefore, the
method also can reduce the time frame of the average.
The method has a
parameter which indicates how many days an average should be chosen, thus
reducing the blurring of peaks.
(3) A final method is a more sophisticated method that creates a distribution
table for each point of time in 24 hours. The rows are each moment in a day for
which measurements are available. The columns are the percentiles 0 to 100.
Each cell contains the value of the n-th percentile at the given time. Like the
historical sampler, the stochastic sampler searches for the nearest inflow mea-
surement for each simulation time. The column, or n-th percentile, is chosen at
random. When sampling, a limit is given, which indicates from which distribu-
tion part the sample may be taken. The limits are used to prevent the sampler
from picking the largest outliers. The figure below visualises the distribution of
water inflow at any exact time of the day:
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentile
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Estimated inflow (L/s)
Inflow percentile distribution at May 10, 2020 09:00
Inflow
Sample limits 40th-60th percentile
Sample limits 20th-80th percentile
Figure 7.4: The stochastic sampler limits prevent the sampler from going too
far from the median, thereby sampling many spikes and thoughts.
Two different limits are shown in the figure above.
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Inflow sampling
75
In Fig. 7.4, percentile 50 corresponds to the median. A limit between the 40th
and 60th percentile means that the stochastic sampler may choose one random
percentile between 40 and 60, after which the value on the blue line belonging to
the selected n-th percentile is sampled. The red dotted line indicates the limits
between percentiles 20 and 80, whereby any value on the blue line between the
red dotted lines can be sampled. The larger the limits, the further you can
deviate from the median. This is visible in the figure below, where the inflow of
limits [40-60] are compared with [20-80]:
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
00:00
Time of day
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Estimated inflow (L/s)
PST 238: Stochastic inflow at May 10, 2020
Inflow source:
Percentile limits [20-80]
Percentile limits [40-60]
Figure 7.5: The stochastic inflow sampler sampled the inflow values using two
different limiters.
As shown in Fig.
7.5, larger limits result in more peaks and unpredictable
behaviour, while smaller limits are closer to the median.
The historical sampler (method 1) is used in further research, which corresponds
best to real-world data. The simulation is most realistic if pumps are chosen
that have the same gain as PST 238 or PST 240, respectively. In real-life, larger
pumping stations typically have a more balanced inflow. If larger pumps are
chosen in the simulation, it is better to take an average of several days (method
2).
==PAGE:86==
76
Simulation
7.3
Grid sampling
The grid data is based on two weeks in May of the DK2 grid data. This data
has a sampling frequency of every second. That means if the sample rate of the
simulation is one, every step of the simulator corresponds to a new frequency
sample. The day selected by the simulator greatly influences the simulation’s
outcome, as seen in fig. 7.6 there is a lot of variance in the frequency.
00:00
05:33:20
11:06:40
16:40
22:13:20
Time
49.2
49.4
49.6
49.8
50.0
50.2
Frequency[hz]
Frequency during the day
Avg Frequency
Max Frequency
Min Frequency
FCR Event Threshold
Figure 7.6: Min-max and average frequency during a day over 14 days.
==PAGE:87==
7.4 Technical details
77
7.4
Technical details
With the configuration clear, we can see what the simulation looks like. Using
the sequence diagram in fig 7.7, all the steps are explained.
Figure 7.7: Sequence diagram of the steps in the simulator.
The simulation starts with the run() method. Here the configuration is read
in. Consequently, a cloud object is created. After, all PST objects are created.
Finally, the grid object is initiated. In all these objects, a loop is started that
runs as long as the simulation duration. Each iteration through the loop equals
one step in the simulation.
The cloud requests the frequency from the grid at every iteration. The grid
==PAGE:88==
78
Simulation
samples a new frequency every iteration from the grid sampler. The grid sam-
pler is an auxiliary class that contains two weeks of frequency data. Using a
random function, one day is selected, and depending on the simulation step, the
corresponding frequency of that moment is returned. Back in the cloud object,
it depends on the state of the simulation and what happens next.
See the state diagram in fig. 7.8. By default, the cloud is in normal mode.
However, if the frequency drops below 49.9 Hz, the FCR mode gets enabled. It
will stay in this mode until the frequency restores or R, calculated in Eq. (7.2)
reaches 1, or n, the current time in the hour, reaches 3600. In the case of R = 1,
the cloud will not respond to frequency drops until 15 minutes have passed.
Figure 7.8: Different states the cloud can be in depending on the frequency.
In the case of the FCR mode, the cloud calculates how much power it needs
to deliver to the grid. The calculation is done using formula (7.1), where freq
is the grid frequency and fcrpower is the power in kW that has to be delivered
according to the frequency.
fcrpower =



(49.9 −freq) ∗2.5 ∗bid
freq < 49.9 & freq ≥49.5,
bid
freq < 49.5
0
freq ≥49.9
(7.1)
R =
1
15 · 60
min(n,3600)
X
t=1
fcrpower−t, If R = 1, then we allow to rest for 15
mins, then R = 0
(7.2)
==PAGE:89==
7.4 Technical details
79
The required power must be distributed equally over all available pumps. There-
fore, each PST is asked whether it is flexible or not. Two conditions should be
met before the pump is regarded flexible. The first condition is that the PST
must be able to handle the inflow for the next fifteen minutes without pumping.
The second condition is that the PST must be able to maintain its current pump
speed without fully emptying the tank. In this simulator, an assumption is made
that the inflow is known for the next fifteen minutes. This will, of course, not
be the case in real life and has to be done using a forecast model.
To calculate the total flexible power available, the sum is made for every pump
(p) ∈Pflex.
flexpower =
X
p∈Pflex
ppower
(7.3)
If flexpower < fcrpower than the simulation reports a warning that the fcrpower
demand can not be fulfilled. In case there is enough flexible power available,
every PST has to reduce its power to the new power reference ppower using
eq, (7.4). Every pump records its power consumption before the FCR-D event
named pnormalP ower.
According to pnormalP ower, power reduction is evenly
distributed among the PSTs.
∀(p) ∈(Pflex) : ppower = pnormalP ower −pnormalP ower
flexpower
∗fcrpower
(7.4)
To prevent fluctuations in power consumption during an FCR-D event, non-
flexible PSTs are asked to maintain their current power consumption. If non-
flexible PSTs change their consumption, the flexible PSTs have to compensate
for the change. This fluctuation can lead to a situation where the requested
FCR-D power cannot be met.
After the cloud has dealt with the possible FCR-D event, the tank level for each
PST must be updated using the inflow and pump power reference. In case there
is no FCR-D event, the PST determines its power through Eq.(7.5), where the
average inflow over the past 15 min is pavgInflow15Min in L/s and the kW per
L/s outflow by pgain.
∀(p) ∈(Pflex) : ppower = pavgInflow15Min ∗pgain
(7.5)
Thereafter, the water level in the tank is updated using Eq. (7.6) where pinflow
==PAGE:90==
80
Simulation
is the inflow in L/s, and pwaterLevel the water volume in the tank in L.
∀(p) ∈(Pflex) : pwaterLevel = pwaterLevel + pinflow −ppower ∗pgain
(7.6)
After the water level is updated, a cycle in the simulation ends. The simulation
time is increased by one, and the new cycle starts. After the desired simulation
time has been reached, the simulation stores the data in CSV files. Per PST,
the data from table 7.5 is available. Additionally, the cloud generates a CSV
file with the results containing parameters presented in table 7.6.
Table 7.5: Description of the simulation data for every PST.
Attribute
Description
Unit
time
Time of cycle
hh:mm:ss
tank volume
The amount of water inside the tank
L
inflow
Incomming water on that cycle
L/s
flexibility
If the pump is flexible on that cycle
boolean
power consumption
Power consumption of the pump
kW
fcr power
Power provided during an fcr event
kWh
overflow
Tank overflowed at this cycle
boolean
underflow
Tank underflowed at this cycle
boolean
for mode
PST is in FCR-D mode at this cycle
boolean
Table 7.6: Description of the simulation data used for the cloud.
Attribute
Description
Unit
time
Time of cycle
hh:mm:ss
frequency
frequency of the grid
Hz
provided fcr
Total provided power during an FCR-D event.
kW
7.5
Results
PST 240 is the last PST in a chain of PSTs, as can be seen in Fig. 2.1. This PST
only receives water from the preceding PSTs and thus has no local catchment.
It is also the most powerful PST and, therefore, interesting to investigate how
much flexibility it can provide. In the typical situation, the PST ramps the
motor to full power if the water level inside the tank reaches a threshold. This
is not optimal if the PST should be used in FCR. The fluctuation of power
can hurt the total flexibility. Instead, constant power consumption is preferred.
==PAGE:91==
7.5 Results
81
With this simulation, it should become clear whether changing the behaviour of
the PST can improve the stability of the power consumption and thus lead to
better flexibility. However, it must also be researched what the effects are on the
water level inside the tank to ensure the PST can operate safely. Potentially, it
can also be an option to increase the tank size to unlock better power stability.
To find the answers, four research questions have been formulated for PST 240:
• What is the flexibility if the power reference is static for every hour? This
means that for each hour in a day, the power cannot change for one hour.
It is thereby only possible to adjust power by transitioning from one hour
to the next hour.
• What is the required tank size if the power consumption is static for every
hour?
• What is the flexibility if the power reference is static for the whole day?
The power reference is then the same throughout the day.
• What is the required tank size if the power reference is static for the entire
day?
To investigate these questions, several assumptions were made:
• Future inflow is known.
• The simulation is performed on data of PST 240 between May 7th, 2020
and May 31st, 2020.
• Original data samples have a four to six seconds interval, which is re-
sampled to a fixed four seconds interval.
• Tank size is flexible.
• Gain of the motor is 1.39 kW per L/s, with a maximum power of 21.5 kW.
In Fig. 7.9, the average power per hour over 24 days can be seen. The power
consumption is also the maximum potential flexibility in terms of power. It
can be seen that the power consumption is lowest early in the morning, and
the power consumption peaks between 10 and 11 kW. The power consumption
correlates one on one with the inflow. This explains the dip around 4 and 5
because most people are asleep. An average power consumption calculated over
the whole day is 4.3 kW, which is surprisingly low regarding the maximum PST
power is 149 kW.
==PAGE:92==
82
Simulation
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
00:00
Time
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Power [kW]
Average power consumption
Figure 7.9: Average power consumption over 24 days, where the power refer-
ence changes every hour.
Changing the power reference to change every hour affects the water volume
inside the tank. PST 240 does not use more than 7, 000 L of its tank capacity
in regular operation; however, we estimate the tank size to be 35, 000 L after
viewing it on Bornholm. Unfortunately, we are unable the get the exact specifi-
cations. The effect of running the pump with a static power reference for every
hour is shown in fig. 7.10. It can be seen that the tank reaches a maximum of
82, 000 L and a minimum of 22, 000 L. This means that applying this strategy
requires a tank size of at least 60, 000 L. However, this is based on 24 days in
May 2020. To get a better estimate, the simulation has to be run over a year to
capture the behaviour of all the seasons.
==PAGE:93==
7.5 Results
83
00:00
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
Water Volume in Tank[L]
Water Volume Inside Tank
Avg Water Volume
Max Water Volume
Min Water Volume
Target Water Volume
Figure 7.10: Average, min and max water volume over 24 days inside the tank,
where the power reference changes every hour.
In addition to changing the power reference per hour, a second experiment has
been performed. In this experiment, the power reference only changes per day,
giving an even more stable power consumption. This results in average power
consumption during the day of 4.3 kW over 24 days. Fig. 7.11 shows the effect
on the water tank. This strategy requires a significantly bigger tank. Over the
24 days the simulation has run, at least a 290.000L tank is required. This is
almost ten times the size of the current tank and is most likely not worth the
investment.
==PAGE:94==
84
Simulation
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time
350000
400000
450000
500000
550000
600000
Water Volume in Tank[L]
Water Volume Inside Tank
Avg Water Volume
Max Water Volume
Min Water Volume
00:00
Figure 7.11: Average, min and max water volume over 24 days inside the tank,
where the power reference changes once a day.
FCR Event Simulation
The simulator can also simulate how a portfolio of PSTs reacts if it participates
in FCR-D. To study this behaviour, the following setup has been simulated:
• 25 PSTs
• All PSTs have a tank size of 100.000 L
• Gain of the motor is 1.39 kW per L/s, with a maximum power of 30 kW
• The bid on the FCR-D market for this simulation is 100 kW
With this setup, we want to study the following questions:
• Can a portfolio of 25 PSTs participate in a 100 kW bid?
• How does an FCR event affect the power consumption?
In fig. 7.12 two, metrics of the simulation have been plotted. The line in blue
represents a simulation run without any FCR events, so the grid stays at 50 Hz.
==PAGE:95==
7.5 Results
85
The line in orange is the same portfolio of devices but with FCR events. The
graph shows clearly the rippling effect of the total power consumption when an
FCR event happens. After the event, the PSTs start to consume more power
to equal the impact of the FCR event. For this day, the portfolio can sustain
a bid of 100 kW every hour; however, whether it’s possible is highly dependent
on the inflow. More simulations must be run on different days for more precise
validation.
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
00:00
Time
60
80
100
120
140
160
Power [kW]
Total Power Consumption
Operation with FCR
Normal Operation
Figure 7.12: Total power consumption of the portfolio, compared with and
without FCR events.
==PAGE:96==
86
Simulation
7.6
Usage
One way to use the simulation is to start the main script (Simulation.py) inside
a command-line interface. The simulation loads the default configuration and
starts the simulation. The results are right after saved to the output directory,
which consists of a set of comma-separated files. Each file consist of statistics for
each PST defined in the configuration. The simulation is intended to be used as
a tool for future researchers or engineers who want to know whether an existing
or future water distribution network is applicable in FCR-D; a more user-friendly
interface has been developed. A graphical user interface has been built on top
of the simulation, allowing easy configuration parameter adjustments.
Figure 7.13: Left: display to adjust the simulator parameters. Right: set up
for each PST in the simulation.
==PAGE:97==
7.6 Usage
87
Figure 7.14: The above plots are displayed after a simulation has finished.
It describes when power is injected and the maximum number
of kW that can be injected at any time. Lastly, it shows the
estimated water inflow. The sliders can zoom in at specific hours
of the day.
==PAGE:98==
88
Simulation
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 8
Discussion and conclusion
==PAGE:100==
90
Discussion and conclusion
This research aims to get more knowledge about the application of PSTs in
ancillary services and to be more precise in FCR. This study is based on a data
set containing seven PSTs located north of Bornholm. The sensor measurement
recording time-span ranged from a month up to 1.5 years. After analysing the
data, it became clear that the data was not consistent. The sample rates were far
from constant, which is problematic if the measured values are defined in time-
based units. The inconsistency causes significant uncertainty in the inputted
values. Imagine the following case where three samples are missing between
second 1 and 17 in a system with a sample rate of 1 every 4 seconds. The first
sample measures an outflow of 8 L/s and the last measurement at the second
17 measures 0 L/s. The missing values can be imputed by following the trend,
resulting in sample 5 being 6 L/s, the second 9 being 4 L/s, and the second
13 being 2 L/s. However, in reality, it could be that at second 5, the outflow
was already at 0 L/s; this results in a potential water volume difference of 36
L in only 16 seconds. Considering how often this happens, it is likely that it
negatively affects the data quality. In addition, there are measurement errors.
Without cleaning the data, any proper modelling is not possible. Therefore a
DPT is developed.
The data of PSTs can be improved by utilising the DPT. This tool looks for two
types of errors; faulty sensor values and contextual errors. The faulty sensor
values are found by comparing the values to a set of reference values. This is
done with a rule based validation method. After applying the tool, errors in the
measurements get smaller, but it must be noted that it is never better than the
real correct measurements. The second type of error is errors which are detected
because they violate one or more constraints. These constraints are obtained by
system knowledge. For example, there cannot be outflow without pump activity.
These contextual errors are fixed by replacing them with a correct previous or
successive measurement.
The data delivered from the PSTs is not enough to model correctly. One crucial
attribute that is not recorded at the PSTs in inflow. However, this measurement
can be approximated by calculating the derivative of the water level. The prob-
lem is that the tank’s water level will decrease if outflow exists, but this does
not mean there is no inflow. To counter this problem, an alternative formula
is proposed to tackle this issue. This results in a good approximation of the
inflow. Although, installing an inflow sensor is recommended because this pre-
vents rippling inflow patterns causing wave-forming inside the tank and rough
estimations during measurements with outflow.
Additional to inflow, weather measurements have been added to the data set.
During the analysis phase, it was found that precipitation has an extreme effect
on the water level inside the tank. This trend can be explained because the
water enters the sewage system.
==PAGE:101==
91
During the research of this thesis, a prototype was developed to improve future
data quality. The prototype was a device built from the ground up, with a Rasp-
berry Pi as a base. The prototype suffered from several issues, among which it
could not establish a stable internet connection. On top of that, the prototype
was not rugged enough for the wooden PST structures on Bornholm. After a
real-world tests, it could be concluded that there should come a more industrial
all-in-one solution. This led to research on several existing self-contained solu-
tions. The iMX8 from Compulab has been proposed as a good prototype and
can be installed on the demo site in the future.
With the cleaned data set, two types of inflow estimation models have been
built. The day-ahead prediction model is trained on a sample rate of one sample
an hour. The model aims to predict a rough load profile for the day ahead.
The real-time model was trained on a data set with a sample rate of 1 sample
every 30 seconds, and its goal was to predict the inflow for the next hour. A
hyper-parameter study has been performed to train these models, selecting the
best parameters and algorithms.
For both models, this best algorithms is a
LightGBM. Both models give a decent prediction and consider patterns such as
seasonality and hour of the day. However, the model cannot predict spikes that
deviate much from the expected inflow profile. A follow-up study could research
the use of recurrent neural networks such as Long-Short-Term-Memory[HS97].
Finally, a simulation has been built to test various scenarios. The first simulation
simulates the effect of changing the power reference of the motor hourly or even
daily. This is desired behaviour because constant power consumption is desirable
if the system participates in FCR-D. Hourly power reference changing results in
need for a bigger tank. The simulation showed a tank of 100,000 L would suffice.
However, when the power reference was set to change daily, a tank of 290,000
L was needed. This likely is not worth the investment. In another simulation,
a portfolio of 25 pumps was simulated while participating in FCR-D. This has
been shown successful, although it was only simulated on a single day, and it is
probably not worth the effort of aggregating 25 pumps to get only 100 kW of
flexibility, due to the cost of installing gateways for every station. Therefore, an
interesting follow-up could be to study PSTs in more urbanised areas, as these
PSTs on Bornholm are likely much smaller. A future work of this simulation
could also include more accurate motor modelling. In the current simulation,
the power consumption and outflow are linear, while in reality, this should come
closer to an exponential curve. This can lead that the power consumption at
lower power references will increase. Another thing which would be interesting
to include in the simulation is the cascading effect of PSTs that flow into each
other.
To conclude, participating in FCR-D with the PSTs presented in this report is
probably not worth the required investment, due to their small power and small
==PAGE:102==
92
Discussion and conclusion
tanks. Although, under the same principles, it can be interesting to research
bigger PSTs in the mainland of Denmark. With the results presented in this
work, such as the simulator, other potential AS can be investigated, such as
load shifting to save on energy costs.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[AFH22]
Mads Almassalkhi, Jeff Frolik, and Paul Hines. Packetizing
the power grid: The rules of the internet can also balance
electricity supply and demand. IEEE Spectrum, 59(2):42–47,
2022.
[Ant16]
Anthony Papavasiliou. Ancillary services: Quantitative energy
economic, April 2016.
[Bre01]
Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32,
2001.
[Bun08]
Simon Bunn. Pump scheduling optimization in four us cities:
Case studies. In Water Distribution System Analysis Sympo-
sium, pages 1–12, 03 2008.
[BW14]
M. Behandish and Z.Y. Wu. Concurrent pump scheduling and
storage level optimization using meta-models and evolution-
ary algorithms. Procedia Engineering, 70:103–112, 2014. 12th
International Conference on Computing and Control for the
Water Industry, CCWI2013.
[CG16]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost. In Proceedings of
the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, aug 2016.
[DBP16]
Samir Dawaliby, Abbas Bradai, and Yannis Pousset.
In
depth performance evaluation of lte-m for m2m communica-
tions. In 2016 IEEE 12th International Conference on Wire-
==PAGE:104==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
less and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
(WiMob), pages 1–8, 2016.
[DH97]
Anthony Christopher Davison and David Victor Hinkley. Boot-
strap methods and their application.
Number 1. Cambridge
university press, 1997.
[Dou21]
Erin Douglas.
Gov. greg abbott wants power companies to
"winterize." texas’ track record won’t make that easy., Feb
2021.
[DZPMKP18]
Giulia De Zotti, S. Ali Pourmousavi, Henrik Madsen, and Niels
Kjølstad Poulsen.
Ancillary services 4.0: A top-to-bottom
control-based approach for solving ancillary services problems
in smart grids. IEEE Access, 6:11694–11706, 2018.
[ea04]
T. W. Group et al.
Ancillary services unbundling elec-
tricity products—an emerging market.
Union Electr. Ind.-
EURELECTRIC, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[Enea]
Energinet.
[Eneb]
Energinet. Oversigt over systemydelser.
[FBR+19]
Jorge Filipe, Ricardo J Bessa, Marisa Reis, Rita Alves, and
Pedro Póvoa. Data-driven predictive energy optimization in
a wastewater pumping station. Applied Energy, 252:113423,
2019.
[GBCC20]
John Glassmire, Hamideh Bitaraf, Stanislav Cherevatskiy, and
Dario Cicio. Using energy storage to stabilise grids and in-
crease revenues. In CIRED 2020 Berlin Workshop (CIRED
2020), volume 2020, pages 484–486, 2020.
[GID22]
Daniel Gebbran, Hans Henrik Ipsen, and Tomislav Dragičević.
Multi-energy system cloud control: Modeling, analysis and val-
idation of water and electrical power nexus in bornholm island.
2022.
[GN17]
Samuel Glismann and Frank Nobel. A framework for ancillary
services design. In 2017 14th International Conference on the
European Energy Market (EEM), pages 1–6, 2017.
[HRR20]
Max Roser Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado. Energy. Our
World in Data, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/energy.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term
memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[Kir08]
Wilhelm Kirch, editor.
Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient,
pages 1090–1091. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2008.
[KMF+17]
Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finely, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen,
Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly
efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 30 (NIP 2017), December
2017.
[Kou21]
Kouno. Bornholm energi og forsyning,. June 2021.
[LBL04]
Steven M LaValle, Michael S Branicky, and Stephen R Linde-
mann. On the relationship between classical grid search and
probabilistic roadmaps. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 23(7-8):673–692, 2004.
[LKB21]
LKB. Agreement on the supply of balancing services without
energy supplies. February 2021.
[Man14]
Pierluigi Mancarella.
Mes (multi-energy systems):
An
overview of concepts and evaluation models. Energy, 65:1–17,
2014.
[MAPS15]
Ruben Menke,
Edo Abraham,
Panos Parpas,
and Ivan
Stoianov.
Approximation of system components for pump
scheduling optimisation. Procedia Engineering, 119:1059–1068,
2015.
[MAPS16]
Ruben Menke,
Edo Abraham,
Panos Parpas,
and Ivan
Stoianov.
Demonstrating demand response from water dis-
tribution system through pump scheduling. Applied Energy,
170:377–387, 2016.
[MI87]
Dan H. Moore II. Classification and regression trees, by leo
breiman, jerome h. friedman, richard a. olshen, and charles
j. stone. brooks/cole publishing, monterey, 1984,358 pages,
$27.95. Cytometry, 8(5):534–535, 1987.
[MKS+06]
FP Maturana, Radhika Kotina, Raymond Staron, Pavel Tich`y,
and Pavel Vrba. Agent-based water/waste water control sys-
tem architecture. In IADIS International Conference Applied
Computing, volume 57, 2006.
[nas21]
Extreme winter weather causes u.s. blackouts, Feb 2021.
[nex]
Frequency containment reserve (fcr): Definition.
==PAGE:106==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[OPK18]
Konstantinos Oikonomou, Masood Parvania, and Roohallah
Khatami. Optimal demand response scheduling for water dis-
tribution systems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informat-
ics, 14(11):5112–5122, 2018.
[Ost14]
Avi Ostfeld. Water Supply System Analysis: Selected Topics.
INTECH, 2014.
[Pir10]
Ali Mehdipour Pirbazari. Ancillary services definitions, mar-
kets and practices in the world. In 2010 IEEE/PES Trans-
mission and Distribution Conference and Exposition: Latin
America (T&D-LA), pages 32–36, 2010.
[RHW+08]
Bart Roossien, Maarten Hommelberg, Cor Warmer, Koen Kok,
and Jan-Willem Turkstra. Virtual power plant field experiment
using 10 micro-chp units at consumer premises.
In CIRED
Seminar 2008: SmartGrids for Distribution, pages 1–4, 2008.
[RLHC08]
Nicholas John Randon, Jonathan Lawry, Kevin Horsburgh,
and Ian D. Cluckie. Fuzzy bayesian modeling of sea-level along
the east coast of britain. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems,
16(3):725–738, 2008.
[RPLLPTAO21] David Ribó-Pérez,
Luis Larrosa-López,
David Pecondón-
Tricas, and Manuel Alcázar-Ortega. A critical review of de-
mand response products as resource for ancillary services: In-
ternational experience and policy recommendations. Energies,
14(4), 2021.
[SHHA11]
J. T. Saraiva, N. Correia H. Heitor, and R. Araújo. Ancillary
services - the current situation in the iberian electricity market
and future possible developments. Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Eur.
Energy Market (EEM), pages 556–561, May 2011.
[spi]
[SWH17]
Rashmi Sharan Sinha, Yiqiao Wei, and Seung-Hoon Hwang.
A survey on lpwa technology: Lora and nb-iot. Ict Express,
3(1):14–21, 2017.
[TAST20]
Ronald Tulus, Didit Adytia, Nugrahinggil Subasita, and Dede
Tarwidi. Sea level prediction by using seasonal autoregressive
integrated moving average model, case study in semarang, in-
donesia. In 2020 8th International Conference on Information
and Communication Technology (ICoICT), pages 1–5, 2020.
[the]
Duty cycle.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[the12]
India blackouts leave 700 million without power, Jul 2012.
[TKA17]
Shinsuke Takahashi, Hiroshi Koibuchi, and Shingo Adachi.
Water supply operation and scheduling system with elec-
tric power demand response function. Procedia Engineering,
186:327–332, 2017. XVIII International Conference on Water
Distribution Systems, WDSA2016.
[VF05]
Michel Verleysen and Damien François. The curse of dimen-
sionality in data mining and time series prediction. In Inter-
national work-conference on artificial neural networks, pages
758–770. Springer, 2005.
[VG18]
Sadegh Vejdan and Santiago Grijalva. The value of real-time
energy arbitrage with energy storage systems. In 2018 IEEE
Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pages 1–
5, 2018.
[VGJG+20]
Morteza
Vahid-Ghavidel,
Mohammad
Sadegh
Javadi,
Matthew Gough, Sérgio F. Santos, Miadreza Shafie-khah, and
João P.S. Catalão. Demand response programs in multi-energy
systems: A review. Energies, 13(17), 2020.
[was]
Danish environmental protection agency: Wastewater.
[WYC+21]
Can Wang, Hongliang Yu, Lin Chai, Huikang Liu, and Binxin
Zhu. Emergency load shedding strategy for microgrids based
on dueling deep q-learning. IEEE Access, 9:19707–19715, 2021.
[XPM21]
Shoudong Xu, Junzheng Peng, and Xian Meng. Research and
application of optimal load shedding based on thermal sta-
bility overload of power system. In 2021 IEEE Asia-Pacific
Conference on Image Processing, Electronics and Computers
(IPEC), pages 401–404, 2021.
[YCH20]
Yunjun Yu, Zhenfen Cai, and Yushui Huang. Energy storage
arbitrage in grid-connected micro-grids under real-time market
price uncertainty: A double-q learning approach. IEEE Access,
8:54456–54464, 2020.
[YDL+19]
Peihong Yang, Xiaoling Dong, Ya Li, Li Kuang, Jihong Zhang,
Bin He, and Yao Wang. Research on primary frequency reg-
ulation control strategy of wind-thermal power coordination.
IEEE Access, 7:144766–144776, 2019.
[Yoo89]
J.P. Yoon. Techniques for data and rule validation in knowl-
edge based systems. In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Con-
ference on Computer Assurance, ’Systems Integrity, Software
Safety and Process Security, pages 62–70, 1989.
