==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Multi-turbine wind farm layout optimization on 
existing site with variable hub heights using a 
gradient-based approach
Lucía San Juan Flavián
DTU Wind Energy-M-0555
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0555 
July 2022
Project period: 
February - July 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Katherine Dykes
Rafael Valotta Rodrigues
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Lucía San Juan Flavián
Title:
Multi-turbine wind farm layout optimization on 
existing site with variable hub heights using a 
gradient-based approach
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to the constant and necessary increase of wind energy in the global energy market share,
continuous improvements in wind farm design are essential to keep this technology at the
forefront of the world’s renewable energy production. This study performs several optimiza-
tions in which both the position and the hub heights of the turbines are evaluated within an
existing wind farm. For that, three optimizations with three diﬀerent objective functions were
performed. Furthermore, each of these optimizations was performed under three approaches;
one two-step sequential optimization where the design variables were evaluated one after the
other, and two integrated where the design variables were evaluated simultaneously, for diﬀer-
ent initial conditions. The study shows that model performance (for the three optimizations)
is best served when it takes into account the turbine locations and the hub heights simulta-
neously, as it balances the trade-oﬀs in how each one aﬀects the objective functions, namely
the AEP, the energy density or the LCOE of the wind farm. However, this optimization has
also led the integrated approaches to encounter local optima, enhancing the importance of
selecting the right gradients i.e. the initial conditions of the problem, notably when performing
gradient-based optimizations. This thesis demonstrates that much of the beneﬁt in AEP opti-
mization comes from optimizing the hub heights and particularly from staggering them along
the wind farm, so the wake of the upstream turbines would not aﬀect the downstream ones,
increasing their power production by more than 20 % for the sequential case and close to 10 %
for the integrated one. A similar outcome is also the result of the energy density optimization,
for which the AEP improvement is the main driver. Indeed, the area reduction is minimal
compared to the increase in the AEP, especially in the case of the integrated optimizations,
from a 16.74 % improvement of the energy density in the ﬁrst approach, 16.73 % of that
improvement comes from an increase in the AEP while only 0.8 % from a reduction in area.
Moving towards ﬁnancial objectives, a similar outcome is obtained: while the total costs of
the wind farm increase (due to an increase in the average hub heights of the wind turbines)
the AEP still manages to increase and compensates for the raise in the initial expenditures,
obtaining an LCOE reduction of 5 to 13 % for the three optimizations. This decrease in the
LCOE is positive, but the increase in the initial expenditures of the wind turbines is certainly
negative and highlights one of the main drawbacks of varying the hub heights of the turbines
within the same wind farm.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I have to thank my thesis supervisors, Rafael Valotta and Katherine Dykes.
Without their assistance and dedicated involvement in every step throughout the process, this
thesis would never have been accomplished. I would like to thank you very much for your
support and especially Rafael, for always pushing me to do better and better.
I would also like to show gratitude to the rest of the Wind Energy Systems Engineering
department at DTU Wind Energy, especially to Javi, as well as to my colleagues from the
optimization course. To Maria and Alejandro, for their academic but also emotional support.
I will forever cherish the moments we spent together during the past four months.
My time at university has come to an end -for now- and I have many people to thank for
sticking through all this time, for listening, tolerating me but also accepting all the versions
of myself that have been ﬂourishing over the past six years. I cannot begin to express my
gratitude and appreciation for my friends, for the ones that are still there or that I have met
along the way, as well as to the ones that no longer are with me, all of you played an important
role in the process of becoming who I am today.
Lastly, my family deserves endless gratitude, for always being besides me even when it was not
physically possible. To my father, for being my role model, to my mother for being my biggest
fan and always believing in me, even when I could not do it myself, and to my sister for being
my best friend for life. I would also like to thank Alex for always being there no matter what,
onto a new chapter together.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
State of the art of wind farm optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Challenges of wind farm optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Challenges of wind farm hub height optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
LCOE metrics for wind farm design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
9
3.1
PyWake
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
TOPFARM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Approaches of the model and workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Assumptions and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Results and Analysis
25
4.1
AEP Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Energy Density Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
LCOE Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusions
57
6
Future work
58
Bibliography
59
A Methodology
I
A.1
Validating area computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
B Results and Analysis
II
B.1
AEP evolution over the optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
B.2
Energy density evolution over the optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
B.3
LCOE evolution over the optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
V
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1.1
Global weighted-average LCOE by technology, 2010-2020. Data obtained from
[2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Schematic of wake eﬀect between turbines with identical and diﬀerent hub
heights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.1
PyWake Overview [25] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Location of the Lillgrund oﬀshore wind power plant [27] . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Lillgrund wind farm layout and wind rose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Power and Thurst curves for the wind turbines deﬁned in the problem . . . . .
12
3.5
TOPFARM Structure [36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
Lillgrund problem: boundaries and spacing constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Lillgrund wind farm and respective convex hull . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8
Thesis workﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1
Initial and optimized layout for the sequential AEP optimization . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Single AEP distribution for the sequential optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Hub height distribution for the sequential AEP optimization . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
27
4.4
Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
cont. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Initial and optimized layout for the ﬁrst integrated AEP optimization
. . . . .
29
4.6
Single AEP distribution for the ﬁrst integrated AEP optimization
. . . . . . .
29
4.7
Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated AEP optimization
. . . . . . .
30
4.8
Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
30
4.9
Hub heights seen from the ground for wd=270◦after optimization 2a . . . . .
31
4.10 Single AEP distribution for second integrated optimization . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.11 Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for the second integrated opti-
mization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.12 Hub height distribution for the second integrated AEP optimization . . . . . .
33
4.13 Hub heights after optimization 2b of certain wind turbines seen from the ground
for wd=270◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.14 Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
34
4.15 Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for the sequential optimization
.
36
4.16 Initial and optimized area of the wind farm for the sequential optimization
. .
37
4.17 AEP and Area evolution for the sequential optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.18 Hub height distribution for the sequential optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.19 Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
39
4.20 Initial and optimized area of the wind farm for approach 2a
. . . . . . . . . .
40
VI
==PAGE:7==
4.21 AEP and Area evolution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.22 Initial and optimized layout for the ﬁrst integrated optimization . . . . . . . .
41
4.23 Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
42
4.24 Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
42
4.25 Initial and optimized area of the wind farm for approach 2b
. . . . . . . . . .
43
4.26 AEP and Area evolution for the second integrated optimization
. . . . . . . .
44
4.27 Initial and optimized layout for the second integrated optimization . . . . . . .
45
4.28 Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
45
4.29 Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
46
4.30 Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for approach 1 . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.31 Single AEP distribution for the sequential optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.32 Hub height distribution for the sequential optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.33 Single CAPEX distribution for the sequential optimization . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.34 Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for approach 2a
. . . . . . . . .
51
4.35 Single AEP distribution for LCOE optimization - approach 2a
. . . . . . . . .
52
4.36 Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
52
4.37 Single CAPEX distribution for second integrated optimization . . . . . . . . .
53
4.38 Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for approach 2b
. . . . . . . . .
54
4.39 Single AEP distribution for LCOE optimization - approach 2b . . . . . . . . .
54
4.40 Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
55
4.41 Single CAPEX distribution for second integrated optimization . . . . . . . . .
55
A.1
Easy example for formula validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
A.2
Code extract from method validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
B.1
AEP evolution over the problem iterations for the three approaches . . . . . .
II
B.2
Energy Density evolution over the problem iterations for the three approaches .
III
B.3
LCOE evolution over the problem iterations for the three approaches
. . . . .
III
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
3.1
Constant and default values set in the Generic Wind Turbine model . . . . . .
11
3.2
Starting conditions for the sequential optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Starting conditions for the ﬁrst integrated optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Starting conditions for the second integrated optimization . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Comparison of results from the three approaches for the AEP optimization
. .
35
4.2
Breakdown of the objective function before and after optimization for approach 1 38
4.3
Breakdown of the objective function before and after optimization for approach
2a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Breakdown of the objective function before and after optimization for approach
2b
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Comparison of results from the three approaches for Energy Density Optimization 46
4.6
Comparison between hub height and CAPEX for the sequential optimization
.
50
4.7
Comparison of results from the three approaches for LCOE Optimization
. . .
56
VIII
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The year 2020 oﬀered a sharpened reality of the state of our planet. The COVID-19 pandemic
has brought greater recognition of the consequences of human development in the natural
world and the cascading eﬀects these events can cause on global economies, lifestyles and
security. The need for a green transition to replace fossil fuel technologies from our energy
mixes is now vital. For that purpose, several technologies have been developed during the
past decades, allowing the growth of renewable energy deployment on the scene. With such
growth, the costs of newly added renewable capacity have decreased to more competitive
levels, to the point that since 2010 their estimated costs have been lower than the cheapest
fossil fuel-ﬁred option in each respective year [1]. As ﬁgure 1.1 illustrates, the Levelized Cost
of Electricity (LCOE) from solar and wind power has fallen signiﬁcantly. This deployment of
renewable energy has come together with the imposition of global targets under international
climate actions such as the Paris Agreement (2018) which sets the record straight to achieving
net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.
Figure 1.1: Global weighted-average LCOE by technology, 2010-2020. Data obtained from [2]
In line with the commitment to global climate action, wind energy has taken great signiﬁcance
in the electricity marketplace. According to the latest report published by the Global Wind
1
==PAGE:10==
Energy Council (GWEC) [3], the cumulative global wind power generation capacity was at 837
GW at the end of 2021, a year in which the industry reached its second-best benchmark with
almost 94 GW of capacity added globally. Besides, 21.1 GW of oﬀshore wind capacity was
commissioned last year, three times more than in 2020, making 2021 the best year in oﬀshore
wind history and bringing its market share in new global installations to 22.5%. Nonetheless,
GWEC reports that an four times as much generation will be needed annually by 2030 to keep
the trajectory towards net zero by 2050.
For wind turbine technology to remain a competitive energy source, its performance in terms of
energy production and costs must be in constant improvement, meaning that detailed planning,
modeling, and optimization are required to guarantee both technical feasibility and ﬁnancial
competitiveness among the rest of the energy sources. However, the number of disciplines and
range of scales of physics that conduct the wind industry is large and makes system design
very complex [4]. To balance the multiple trade-oﬀs that come with the design of wind energy
projects, a systems engineering approach is necessary. According to K. Dykes and R. Meadows,
the goal of this discipline is to bring together all these single sub-disciplines involved and achieve
the best possible solution among a wide range of possibilities [5]. The desired improvements
in wind farm design can be performed through some optimization techniques, among which
can be found the Multidisciplinary Design Analysis Optimization (MDAO) and Multi-Objective
Optimization (MOO). The purpose of this thesis is to implement these methods by considering
new design variables and including them in the optimization of the power production of the
wind farm.
Innovations regarding the computation of these optimizations have also been
implemented, always looking at improving the performance of the models used.
One of the main trade-oﬀs when referring to wind farm design is the inevitable wake eﬀect,
caused by the upstream wind turbines on the downstream ones, see ﬁgure 1.2. According
to M.S. Adaramola and P. Krogstad [6], depending on the distance of separation between
turbines, the loss in power caused by wake eﬀects can vary from about 20 to 46% of the
total power production of the wind farm. As the wake recovers after a certain distance from
the rotor, one could locate the turbines further apart from each other to mitigate this issue,
but this approach would only increase the cabling costs and land use, increasing the capital
expenditures of the project. By addressing this issue, a balance between cost reduction and
maintaining reasonable power production has to be achieved.
(a) With identical hub heights
(b) With diﬀerent hub heights
Figure 1.2: Schematic of wake eﬀect between turbines with identical and diﬀerent hub heights
2
==PAGE:11==
This thesis suggests an approach to decrease these wake eﬀects and further accelerate the
deployment of oﬀshore wind energy in the transition to a sustainable energy system. The
approach consists in optimizing the actual layout of the Lillgrund wind farm, located between
Sweden and Denmark, by continuously varying the turbines’ hub-heights in order to mitigate
wake interference, improve the Annual Energy Production (AEP), and reduce the Levelized
Cost of Energy (LCOE) of the wind farm. Such an approach is based on already existing
studies that have investigated this approach with promising results. Stanley and Ning [7]
explored the impact of tower sizing and tower height with the purpose of the decreasing costs
of a wind farm, using a gradient-based optimization with analytical gradients. Similar work
was performed by Archer et al. [8], who looked into the beneﬁts of hub height optimization
on the AEP of an already existing wind farm. All these studies have proved that using multiple
types of wind turbines in a wind farm can help increase the capacity factors of real and future
projects well beyond what is currently feasible. These investigations will be analyzed on a
deeper level in chapter 2.
1.2
Research Questions
In order to ﬁnd a solution to the problems presented earlier, the following questions will be
addressed along the report:
How can the energy production of a wind farm be optimized by implementing multiple
wind turbine heights within the same site?
What are the eﬀects of varying the wind turbine types in wind farm layout optimization?
What would be the result of the optimization if, instead of the AEP, the Energy Density
was optimized?
What is the impact of such innovation, this time, in terms of cost metrics (LCOE)?
An additional set of questions will be analyzed to answer the main research questions.
- How sensitive is the model to a change in the initial conditions?
- In what way the sequential optimization diﬀers from the integrated one where the three
design variables are evaluated at the same time?
1.3
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2
Chapter 2 presents the state of the art of wind farm optimization and walks through the
evolution of the diﬀerent optimization methods in wind farm design that exist to this date. An
insight into the latest work on multiple hub height optimization and its beneﬁts will also be
described, to introduce the topic of the thesis. Finally, the section brings up the importance
of adding an economic dimension to wind farm optimization.
Chapter 3
The report continues by introducing the methodology used, the theoretical framework, and a
description of the optimization tools that are used in the project. An overview of the site will
also be given, ﬁnishing with the problem formulation.
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 4
This chapter will show the results and analysis of the layout optimization in TOPFARM,
following the workﬂow presented in the previous chapter. The initial or baseline conditions will
be compared to the optimized results. Both the sequential and the integrated optimizations
will also be studied front to front.
Chapter 5
Finally, an answer to the research questions presented earlier will be given, along with a
summary of the main takeouts of the results presented in Chapter 4.
Chapter 6
Furthermore, insight on the possible improvements or future investigations related to the thesis
are suggested.
4
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1
State of the art of wind farm optimization
The need of performing wind farm optimization became apparent when large-scale and espe-
cially oﬀshore wind farms emerged. As the initial investment required to set up these kinds of
projects was very large, ﬁnding the optimal conﬁguration in terms of placement of the turbines
became of vital importance. Hence, progress in the engineering and planning of wind farms
was seen. According to Chowdhury [9] the engineering and planning of a wind farm include
critical decision making regarding (1) the layout of the turbines on the site, (2) the number
of wind turbines to be installed, and (3) the type of wind turbines to be installed. Since 1992,
researchers like Mosetti et al. [10] - who wrote the ﬁrst paper in wind farm optimization - have
addressed the problem. This group of pioneer researchers presented a new approach to the
optimization of large wind farms by modifying the position of the wind turbines and looking
at extracting the maximum energy for the minimum installation costs. Since then, multiple
contributors have conducted similar investigations, some looking to reﬁne the methods and
algorithms already existing or ﬁnding new ones and others looking at optimizing other metrics.
Nowadays, numerous papers have been written giving an overview of all the diﬀerent opti-
mization algorithms that exist. Some of them have been developed speciﬁcally for wind farm
optimization and their performances are evaluated in a wide range of situations, without really
designating which is the best for the wind farm problem [11]. Recent projects like TOPFARM
have also focused on developing tools that incorporate all the existing algorithms into a single
framework, in order to keep the computational time and the complexity of the problem within
reasonable limits. As Réthoré et al. summed up in [11]: "the optimization of a wind farm can
be deﬁned as the process of ﬁnding the positions of the wind turbines that maximize the value
of some objective function". In other words, given a predeﬁned area, on land or oﬀshore, the
goal of wind farm optimization is to determine where to place the wind turbines in order to
get the best output from them.
2.2
Challenges of wind farm optimization
The restricted spatial extension of a wind farm represents one of the main challenges of
wind farm design. Because the position of the wind turbines on the site is constrained by the
boundaries of the wind farm, certain turbines have no option but to be positioned in the wake of
others, reducing their power production. These challenges have driven the scientiﬁc community
to explore other optimization techniques with the purpose of mitigating those issues. According
5
==PAGE:14==
to PJ Stanley and Ning [7], three main methods exist to decrease wake interactions among
wind turbines in a wind farm: layout optimization, active control, and turbine design. Those
three disciplines must be optimized and well designed in order to improve the performance of
a wind farm. From these, one will be the subject of this thesis, as the layout of the wind farm
as well as certain properties of the turbines will be optimized, therefore, the other disciplines
will be assumed as optimized for the construction of the problem.
The optimization problem of wind turbine distribution along the site will be the ﬁrst optimiza-
tion method addressed in this study. Mosetti et al. [10] enumerate the diﬀerent challenges
that need to be tackled when building a layout optimization model, which consist of (1) the in-
ﬂuence that the wind turbines have on each other - in form of wake eﬀect -, (2) the stochastic
behavior of the wind in terms of direction and intensity and (3) the importance of extracting
the maximum energy by minimizing costs. Above all, layout optimization is challenged by
certain constraints that also need to be taken into account in the model in order to get the
optimal solution. These constraints include (1) the boundaries of the problem, regarding the
extension of the site or the wind distribution, (2) the ability to model the behavior of the wind
farm, (3) structural properties of the turbines or environmental characteristics of the site, (4)
the spacing distance between the turbines along the site, and (5) the computational boundaries
of the model, as it should be able to conveniently calculate the optimal solution by exploring
a feasible number of iterations. These aforementioned constraints will constitute important
trade-oﬀs that, when taken into account, can deeply modify the results of the problem.
Furthermore, work regarding wind farm design optimization has been revised as it will be the
second optimization method that will be studied in this report. This ’new generation’ of wind
farm optimization is presented by P.Graf et al. [12] in their paper, where the complexity of
a layout optimization is increased after adding two types of wind turbines to the model, one
for higher and another one for lower wind speeds. Results show a 20% increase in the AEP
from the baseline condition. Dykes and Stanley [13] performed a similar research in 2017
using an analytical gradient approach and minimizing the Cost of Energy (CoE) of a wind
farm where the hub heights of the turbines were varied within two height groups during the
optimization. The model was constrained by height and diameter boundaries for the rotors as
well as by structural properties of the tower, in order to make the results more realistic. They
obtained a promising 4.9 % reduction in the CoE, compared to a wind farm with homogeneous
hub heights. The same authors investigated [14] the beneﬁt of having wind turbines with
multiple hub heights from an economic perspective, this time by combining it with multiple
rotor diameters. Findings pointed out that when the rotor diameters and the hub heights are
optimized at the same time, a reduction of the CoE in the range of 4% to 13% compared
to the baseline case was achieved, and increased further on to 22% - 41% by optimizing the
rotor diameters and the hub heights independently.
2.3
Challenges of wind farm hub height optimization
The latest research eﬀorts on wind farm optimization have shown that implementing diﬀerent
types of wind turbines in the same wind farm accounts for a powerful solution to the challenges
that constitute large-scale wind power installation. Chowdhury et al. [9] employed a particle
swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm to prove the eﬀectiveness of this methodology by applying
it to the design of a 25-turbine wind farm in North Dakota, where several wind turbines of
diﬀerent sizes, costs, and characteristics were assembled on the same site.
A remarkable
improvement of 6.4% in the wind farm capacity factor was accomplished when the layout and
6
==PAGE:15==
the turbine selection were simultaneously optimized. Later on, Chen et al. [15] investigated
the eﬀect of using wind turbines with diﬀerent hub heights on the overall output power. A
nested genetic algorithm was used to analyze three diﬀerent wind conditions. The results
of this study demonstrated again that using diﬀerent hub heights of wind turbines increased
signiﬁcantly the power generation, compared to a wind farm with uniform hub heights. To
complete these works, this thesis will focus precisely on the variation of the hub heights of the
turbines that compose the same wind farm. No other parameter deﬁning the type of turbine
will be altered, just the hub heights will be increased.
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is a powerful tool that, even though it encompasses
expensive computational costs, it has helped the existing literature to identify important trends
on wind farm design, and especially on hub height optimization. For instance, various Large-
Eddy Simulation (LES) studies (see, e.g. Archer et al. [16], and Stevens et al. [17]) have
shown that horizontal staggering improves wind farm eﬃciency while signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the
dominant ﬂow structures. It is known from experiments like the one performed by Chamorro
et al. [18] that vertical staggering can improve wind farm performance. Besides, Abkar and
Porté-Agel [19] have shown that the wake expansion in the horizontal direction is faster than
in the vertical direction. As the wake recovery is slower in the vertical direction, it is more
eﬀective to displace wind turbines in the vertical direction such that they are outside the
wake of upstream turbines, even though the vertical displacement of turbines is limited by the
turbine height that can be achieved.
Furthermore, this study gets inspiration from a recent paper by Andreas Wolf Civarra et al.
[20], which showed the potential of multi-hub height optimization in a wind farm. The study
relied on recent work that explored driving down the LCOE of a wind farm by allowing multiple
wind turbines in a single wind farm, with diﬀerent hub heights, rotor diameters and rated
powers. The optimization demonstrated that much of the beneﬁt in hub height optimization
is brought by the overall increase of the hub heights which, which when coupled with the wind
shear, decreased the overall LCOE of the wind farm by improving the AEP and the internal
rate of return (IRR) - a ﬁnancial metric related to the LCOE. Therefore, the study proves
that implementing multiple hub heights in the same wind farm is beneﬁcial not only regarding
the power production of the farm but also in terms of costs, as the turbines with lower hub
heights entail the use of less material and thus lower capital costs. It concludes by stating
that reducing the number of turbines to a discrete set of two or three types of turbines retains
nearly all the beneﬁts of staggering and is additionally more aligned with limitations related to
manufacturing and logistics. These limitations will also be kept into account for the present
paper.
Archer et al. [8] proposed another optimization method using a greedy algorithm. The paper
explains why lowering the hub heights of the downstream turbines can positively aﬀect the
power production of those turbines, as they are no longer immersed in the wake of the upstream
turbine. However, the study highlights one of the main challenges when it comes to hub height
diﬀerentiation: wind shear. Due to shear eﬀect, the wind speeds are generally stronger at higher
hub heights, which implies the possibility of yielding more energy than at lower hub heights,
negatively aﬀecting the power production of shorter turbines. Therefore, it is important to
ﬁnd a compromise between wake mitigation and the available wind resources when designing
the wind farm by choosing the right hub heights and locations. The optimization algorithm
ended up with an optimal layout in which the hub height of each turbine was equal to either
the minimum hub height or the maximum hub height and no value in between was assigned
7
==PAGE:16==
to any of the turbines. The AEP of the optimized wind farm with multiple hub heights was
approximately 2% (10 GWh) higher than of a wind farm with homogeneous hub heights.
Nevertheless, these new optimization techniques add extra complexity to the problem, by in-
corporating new disciplines into the model. As the number of disciplines increases, the number
of design variables in the optimization problem increases as well. While some algorithms scale
better than others, adding more design variables makes the optimization problems more dif-
ﬁcult and computationally expensive to solve in most scenarios [4], making the optimization
sometimes not worthy of trying. On another note, adding a new dimension to the problem can
also change its nature. For example, in a model where the wind turbine locations are expressed
in form of a grid representing the wind farm, the design variables are considered continuous.
However, in the same problem, the hub heights can be evaluated as a discrete design vari-
able due to manufacture speciﬁcations. If the two analyses are combined, the optimizer must
conform to the least common denominator and use a method that is valid for both types
of variables, for instance, a gradient-free method instead of other automatic diﬀerentiation
methods, which can be time-consuming and error-prone. J. Martins et al. [21] addressed this
multidisciplinary issue in their paper, and agree that gradient-based optimization with analytic
gradients is an eﬀective tool for solving problems with large dimensional design spaces. The
present paper will employ this same method to conduct the series of optimizations.
2.4
LCOE metrics for wind farm design
The ﬁrst studies related to wind farm optimization performed during the ﬁrst decades of the
last century were mostly focused on considering the energy production of the wind farm as
the optimization target. Later work [11] proved that this point of view would only give partial
results and, to get a real optimal design it was necessary to implement an objective function
that accounted for both the energy yield of the plant and the costs of this one. However,
this approach makes optimization problems more complicated: by adding cost functions, wind
farm optimization problems adopt a new multi-disciplinary dimension, requiring even more
complex models and optimization methods. For this, the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) is
a good objective function because it reﬂects the overall goal of wind energy production and
also accounts for all the multidisciplinary trade-oﬀs when a coupled analysis is performed.
LCOE is a commonly-used metric that calculates the cost of generating a unit of electricity for a
certain technology. Technologies with diﬀerent capital recovery periods can be compared easily
using LCOE as the overall costs over the lifetime of the project are discounted to a present
value [22]. This metric is calculated by dividing the total costs, including expenditure costs
(CAPEX), Operation and Maintenance costs (O&M) and fuel costs by the energy production
of the wind farm over the lifetime of the project [23]. It evaluates the impact of the costs of
the wind farm project on the overall electricity production. The lower this value is, the more
proﬁtable the project will be.
There have been several attempts to provide reliable cost projections for wind-generated elec-
tricity based on diﬀerent sizes of turbines, but due to the always growing learning curve of wind
energy, the costs of this technology have been diﬃcult to predict and thus the cost models
used in the optimization problems sometimes lack accuracy, introducing uncertainty in the
model [24]. As Thesauro et al. [11] mention in their analysis of the work performed during
the last decades, future research should focus on this matter to get more meaningful results.
8
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Methodology
In this chapter, the main simulation and optimization tools used in this thesis will be presented,
as well as the problem and the diﬀerent approaches that have been attributed to it, before
presenting the results of the optimizations.
3.1
PyWake
PyWake is an open-source wind farm simulation tool implemented in Python capable of cal-
culating wind farm ﬂow ﬁelds, power production, and annual energy production (AEP) of
wind farms. PyWake works around a Wind Farm Model, initialized by deﬁning a Site and a
Wind Turbine object. Once initialized the wind farm model is able to calculate how the wake
propagates within the wind farm and quantify the interactions between the turbines, returning
as result the calculated eﬀective wind speed of the wind farm, the power production of each
turbine, their thrust coeﬃcient or the AEP. Finally, PyWake includes useful plotting features
such as wind farm wake distribution and wind rose of the site.
Figure 3.1: PyWake Overview [25]
9
==PAGE:18==
3.1.1
Site
For a given position, reference wind speed, and wind direction, the object Site in PyWake
provides the local wind condition in terms of wind speed, wind direction, turbulence intensity
(TI) as well as the probability of combination of wind direction with wind speed, i.e. the
wind’s frequency direction and the two parameters used for the Weibull distribution (namely
the scaling factor A and the form factor k). Furthermore, Site is responsible for calculating
the down-wind, cross-wind, and vertical distance between wind turbines. The wind rose of the
site is also given by the object and contains the wind speed and the wind directions frequency
(expressed in %) which varies over 360 degrees and is divided into 12 bins. For this project, a
real site has been used for the simulations: the Lillgrund wind farm, whose information is in
the PyWake site repository.
Lillgrund oﬀshore wind farm
The Lillgrund oﬀshore wind power plant is located in a shallow area of Öresund, 7 km oﬀthe
coast of Sweden and 9 km oﬀthe coast of Denmark (ﬁgure 3.2). The wind power plant is
situated 7 km south of the Öresund bridge, which connects Copenhagen and Malmö. It is
comprised of 48 Siemens SWT 2.3 turbines, each rated at 2.3 MW, resulting in a total wind
power plant capacity of 110 MW and generating an average AEP of 330 GWh meeting the
electricity demand of more than 60 000 homes [26]. When the farm was commissioned in
December 2007 it was the third largest wind farm in the world. It is laid out in a standard
grid formation with rows and columns spaced at 4.3 and 3.3 rotor diameters respectively.
Figure 3.2: Location of the Lillgrund oﬀshore wind power plant [27]
The 115 meter-high wind turbines and the round transformer station in Lillgrund are located
about 10 km oﬀthe coast and are visible on the horizon from the shore. The Weibull parameters
of the wind rose (ﬁgure 3.3b) have been extracted from the "lillgrund" Site object in PyWake
and are based on seven months of measurements made between 06/2012 - 01/2013. As ﬁgure
3.3a shows, the turbines are placed in the way of the dominant wind direction (W, SW). The
"hole" visible in the center of the wind farm is due to the presence of shallow waters
10
==PAGE:19==
(a) Lillgrund Layout
(b) Wind rose of the site
Figure 3.3: Lillgrund wind farm layout and wind rose
3.1.2
Wind Turbines Model
For a given wind turbine type and eﬀective wind speed (wse f f ), the WindTurbines object
provides the power and thrust coeﬃcient (CT), as well as the wind turbine hub height (h) and
diameter (D). PyWake contains a few predeﬁned turbines, e.g. the V80 from Hornsrev1, the
3.35 MW from IEA task 37 as well as the DTU10 MW, but it is also possible to deﬁne an
arbitrary one with the class GenericWindTurbine. The Generic Wind Turbine model calculates
the power and the thrust curves of a pitch regulated wind turbine by providing diﬀerent inputs
like the turbine’s hub height, diameter or nominal power. As the turbine type will be varied
along the problem, this study implements the GenericWindTurbine class to deﬁne the wind
turbines of the wind farm. The designed turbines are based on the original Siemens SWT2.3
MW that are already placed in the existing site with the following characteristics:
Parameter
Problem input
Unit
Turbulence Intensity (TI)
0.1
-
Air density (ρ)
0.125
kg/m3
CPmax
0.49
-
Constant CT
0.8
-
Constant gear loss
1
%
Variable gear loss
14
%
Generator loss
3
%
Converter loss
3
%
Rated power (Pnom)
2300
kW
Diameter
93
m
Reference hub height
65
m
Table 3.1: Constant and default values set in the Generic Wind Turbine model
With the previous inputs, the power and thrust curves obtained for the wind turbines deﬁned
in this study are shown in the following ﬁgure.
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: Power and Thurst curves for the wind turbines deﬁned in the problem
Rotor Average Model
For big wind turbine rotors, since the wind speed varies in elevation, it is understandable that
not all the points of the rotor will see the same wind speed at the same during the rotation.
In PyWake the default setup is that the wind speed is detected at the center of the rotor
leading to inaccurate evaluations since the increase of the wind speed with the altitude is
neglected. To overcome this, the study implements the Rotor Average Model available in
PyWake to deﬁne the wind turbine model. With this feature, diﬀerent ways can be used to
evaluate the wind speeds that reaches the swept area of the turbines rotor. In this project,
the "GQGridRotorAvg" has been applied by deﬁning a grid of 4x3 cartesian grid points using
the Gaussian quadrature coordinates and weights.
Turbulence Model
A turbulence model in PyWake calculates the added turbulence in the wake from one wind
turbine to its downstream turbines or other sites in the wind farm. There are several available
models, most of them based on the IEC standards and developed by researchers on the ﬁeld.
The present thesis uses the STF2017TurbulenceModel which corresponds to Steen Frandsen
model implemented according to IEC61400-1, 2017 and weight according to Frandsen’ s thesis
[28].
3.1.3
Engineering Models
Wind turbine wake modeling concentrates on characterizing the ﬂow behind wind turbines.
According to [29], there are two main physical phenomena of interest in the wake: (1) the
momentum (or velocity) deﬁcit, which causes a reduction in the power output of the down-
stream turbines, and (2) the increased level of turbulence, which gives rise to unsteady loading
on downstream turbines. In Pywake, the interaction between the wind ﬂow and the turbines
in the wind farm is deﬁned by the Engineering Models. They are built in by the combination
of one wind farm model with a wake deﬁcit model, a superposition model, and optionally a
blockage deﬁcit and turbulence model. The wind farm model deﬁnes the procedure that deter-
mines how wake and blockage deﬁcits propagate in the wind farm. Two models are available:
PropagateDownwind and All2AllIterative, for all the simulations, this study will employs the
PropagateDownWind model. The Wake Deﬁcit Model calculates the wake deﬁcit from one
wind turbine to the other downstream turbines or sites of the wind farm. Several common
models are available, in this speciﬁc project the BastankahGaussian model is implemented, ac-
cording to Bastankhah M. and Porté-Agel F. in [30]. Finally, the superposition model deﬁnes
12
==PAGE:21==
how the wakes from the diﬀerent sources will be summed up. For this study, the superposition
model has been kept by default as SquareSum, which sums up the wake deﬁcit from each
turbine quadratically.
3.2
TOPFARM
The use of TOPFARM in this thesis is justiﬁed because it represents a powerful wind farm
optimization tool. As mentioned in the previous chapter there are Computational Fluid Dy-
namics (CFD) models of variable complexity suitable enough for computing wake ﬂow ﬁelds,
like the ones presented in [31], [32], [33] and [34]. However, those models are limited by their
heavy computational costs and thus, are not convenient for wind farm optimization. In this
context, TOPFARM is a tool fast enough to perform wind farm optimizations since it relies
on analytical engineering models, like the ones presented and compared by S. J. Andersen et
al. in [35].
TOPFARM is a DTU Wind Energy Python package for optimization of wind farm design and
operation strategies in both onshore and oﬀshore applications. It is a framework that brings
together all the diﬀerent models employed to perform optimizations of diﬀerent wind turbine
technologies. It addresses many diﬀerent stakeholders as well as diﬀerent disciplines. TOP-
FARM models were created to become a fast and eﬃcient tool oriented solely for optimization
purposes. It is ﬂexible and reliable, as models are supported on their own, allowing recon-
ﬁguration and adequacy for each method and problem. The structure of TOPFARM is very
similar to that of a basic optimization problem,
Figure 3.5: TOPFARM Structure [36]
TOPFARM relies on OpenMDAO models for optimization problems and also wraps up the
PyWake package for easy computation of the annual energy production (AEP) with diﬀerent
wake models. TOPFARM can solve many diﬀerent types of problems: layout optimizations,
turbine-type optimizations, etc. Many of the most common wake and cost models are built-in,
but users also have the option to couple their own wake or cost model for custom optimiza-
tions. As mentioned, TOPRFARM models include a wide span of variables and disciplines and
integrate a whole range of models and methods. The current models include:
• Energy Production and Control
• Cost and Finance Models. As mentioned in chapter 2, the metrics involved in these
kinds of models are very challenging yet necessary as they can trigger the sensitivity of
13
==PAGE:22==
the problem. Costs can carry a lot of uncertainty, as usually design and manufacturing
companies do not make their cost models public. TOPFARM implements an empirical
cost model (based on public data) that is developed to be useful for any type of wind farm
prototype. The DTU Cost Model is based on real oﬀshore wind farm data and although
the data starts to become ancient (collected in 2017) there is a new focus on building
new process-based models that capture more detailed costing for both land-based and
oﬀshore information.
• Load Surrogates and Constraints.
Surrogate models are used to run a complex
problem. They extract the outputs and inputs of the model to adapt it to a simpler one.
• Hybrid and Market Models. The sizing of wind-solar-storage hybrid power plants
(HPP) is one of the main focuses of these types of models.
The TopFarmProblem object is the top-level object for performing optimizations. Deﬁning a
problem in TOPFARM involves specifying the following: (1) design variables, (2) a cost
component - equivalent to the objective function calculator, (3) an optimization driver,
(4) constraints and (5) a plotting component to show the evolution and results of the
optimization. Once initialized, the TopFarmProblem incorporates a method called optimize
that runs the optimization. The TOPFARM problem components will be described next.
3.2.1
Design variables
The design variables are the inputs of the problems that will be altered during the optimization.
They are the elements that have an inﬂuence on the objective function and which, by changing
during the optimization, allow to return the optimal solution. In the TOPFARM problem, the
design variables are the position of the wind turbines, by default.
In this problem, the wind turbine types and their locations will be evaluated both separately
and together in the same problem. Hence, the design variables are set to be the following
wind farm properties: the x and y coordinates of the 48 wind turbines on the site and the hub
height h of each of these ones.
3.2.2
Drivers
The optimization driver is used to perform the numerical optimization.
In mathematical
optimization, it would be equivalent to the model or method used to solve the problem.
TOPFARM includes several easy drivers that work out of the box as well as custom optimization
drivers that can also be coupled into a workﬂow. The default driver is the EasyScipyOptimize
driver, which by default uses the SLSQP (Sequential Least Squares Programming) gradient-
based algorithm built into Scipy. It is also the most commonly used driver in this project. This
driver requires the speciﬁcation of tolerance and a maximum number of iterations, set to 10−6
and 150 respectively for the entire problem.
Gradient-based methods are well suited for wind farm design optimization as they are easily
scalable to a larger number of design variables. TOPFARM supports three methods for com-
puting gradients: ﬁnite diﬀerences - a method that works out of the box in most cases and is
fast for small problems (used by default in drivers like SLSQP), complex step - a more accurate
one but also useful in most situations, and algorithmic or automatic diﬀerentiation (AD) - a
method that delivers the exact result by performing a two-step automatic diﬀerentiation pro-
cess with the biggest accuracy and lowest computational time. This last method is commonly
used in TOPFARM to perform AEP optimizations using the PyWakeAEPCostModelCompo-
nent class.
14
==PAGE:23==
Algorithmic Diﬀerentiation
Algorithmic diﬀerentiation (AD), also known as computational diﬀerentiation or automatic
diﬀerentiation, is an approach based on the systematic application of the chain rule to computer
programs (see [37]). As said earlier, the derivatives computed with AD match exactly the
precision of the function evaluation which makes this method the most attractive for the
optimization of wind farms, since its multi-disciplinarity character and a vast number of design
variables and gradients require precision and ﬁnding the optimal solution among a wide feasible
region. The cost of computing derivatives with AD can be proportional to either the number
of variables or the number of functions, depending on the type of AD, making it ﬂexible, in
their book Engineering Design Optimization J.R.R.A. Martins and A. Nings [38] outline the
basic theory of this method and explore its implementation in practice.
In PyWake, the AD method is applied by using the package Autograd, developed by Stanford
researchers [39]. Autograd is a project to bring automatic diﬀerentiation to Python, Numpy,
and Scipy code written using the facilities that this modern scientiﬁc computing framework
oﬀers. Autograd can handle Python code containing control ﬂow primitives such as for loops,
while loops, recursion, if statements, closures, classes, list indexing, dictionary indexing, arrays,
array slicing, and broadcasting. It can also diﬀerentiate most of Numpys functions, and some
of the Scipy library. As it needs its own NumPy, namely autograd.numpy, to work, in PyWake,
the autograd wrapper deﬁned in pywake.utils.gradients, handles this NumPy replacement au-
tomatically. All it requires is to use from pywake import np instead of the standard import
numpy as np. This approach allows an easy switch to single precision for faster simulation.
3.2.3
Boundaries and Constraints
The constraints in an optimization problem are the limitations that are set upon the design
variables. By adding these, the problem becomes more bound and it becomes harder to get
the exact optimal result. In gradients-based methods, constraints can cause the optimization
to ﬂounder in local minima or maxima and prevent ﬁnding the optimal solution. There are
three major types of constraints, boundaries, equality, and inequality constraints. The ﬁrst
ones are the most constraining ones, whereas the second ones give more room for ﬁnding
the optimal result but often need to be deﬁned at the beginning by initial conditions, which
represent other criteria that need to be met by the optimization.
In wind farm design, the most common constraints are spacing constraints between turbines
and boundaries of the wind farm. As this problem intends to vary the location of the wind
turbines, a boundary constraint delimiting the border of the wind farm is set, as well as a
spacing constraint to avoid the turbines to be placed too close to each other and make the
simulation more realistic (ﬁgure 3.6).
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Lillgrund problem: boundaries and spacing constraints
Additionally, a boundary constraint on the hub heights was also set, so their values could only
vary in a range limited by a lower and an upper boundary, these values were ﬁxed to 82 m
for the lower boundary and 160 m for the upper one, so the scope was large enough to see
changes in the design variables.
3.2.4
Cost Component
The cost component is the object that calculates the objective function for the optimization
(e.g., AEP). As mentioned at the beginning of this section, TOPFARM counts with a large
assortment of cost component models, able to calculate many diﬀerent aspects of a wind
farm, although it is also possible to create a custom cost model in order to evaluate a special
objective function as long as it is deﬁned properly using the CostModelComponent class.
In this study, three diﬀerent objective functions will be evaluated, two will assess the energy
production of the wind farm and the last one will bring an economic approach to the subject
in order to analyze how the wind farm model would change when the monetary aspect is
taken into account. For that, three diﬀerent cost components will be used, and they will be
explained in the following sub-sections.
Annual Energy Production (AEP)
The annual energy production (AEP) of a wind turbine (or a wind farm) is the energy produced
by this one per year at a given site. To compute the AEP it is necessary to combine the power
curve of the wind turbine, such as the one shown in ﬁgure 3.4, with a probability density
function for the wind velocities characterized by the Weibull function [40]:
h(V) = k
A
(V
A
)(k−1)
exp
(
−
(V
A
)k)
(3.1)
For this problem, the A and k parameters are given by table 3.1 in the previous section. The
AEP is then computed as the sum of the power extracted by a wind turbine at each wind
speed, multiplied by the probability of that wind speed at the site and by the number of hours
in a year, as shown in equation 3.2.
AEP = 8760·
N−1
∑
i=1
1
2 (P(Vi+1 +Vi))· f (Vi < Vo < Vi+1)
(3.2)
16
==PAGE:25==
where:
f (Vi < Vo < Vi+1) =
(
exp
(
−Vi
A
)k
−exp
(
−Vi+1
A
)k)
In PyWake, the AEP for the wind farm is calculated by accounting for the wake model, the
site, the wind turbine properties (including hub heights), and the position of the turbines (x,y).
The idea of performing this optimization is to maximize the energy production of the wind
farm, by relocation of the turbines and/or by changing their hub heights.
Energy Density
An important factor for the energy production of a speciﬁc site is the so-called energy density.
The energy density of an oﬀshore wind farm shows how much energy is produced per km2.
Both technical-economic issues and regulatory frameworks inﬂuence the energy density of a
wind farm project. In this report, the energy density of a wind farm is deﬁned as the ratio of
the wind farm’s power production to its ground area (A). It is expressed in gigawatts-hour per
square kilometer (GWh/km2) such that,
Energy Density = AEP
A
(3.3)
For this speciﬁc problem, the area of the wind farm is computed by means of geometrical
relations. Given a ﬁnite set of points, i.e. the location of the wind turbines in the wind farm,
the convex hull of the wind farm layout was determined. In mathematics, the convex hull of a
set of points S is namely the minimum convex polygon so that any point of S is either inside
this polygon or at its border [41]. It is generally given by the intersection of all the lines joining
two constituent points. On a 2D plane, the convex hull of a single point is the single point
itself, while for two distinct points it is the line containing them, for three non-collinear points,
it is the triangle that they form, and so on. A good visual explanation would be assimilating
the points to nails on a wooden board with a rubber band stretched around them to enclose
all the points. Lillgrund’s convex hull has also been represented in ﬁgure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Lillgrund wind farm and respective convex hull
There are several methods that compute convex hulls, this paper will focus on the Graham
scan algorithm. This algorithm ﬁnds all the external vertices of the polygon from the set of
points, here, these points are the positions of the turbines at each iteration. Since the layout
will change during the optimization, the position of the vertices of the polygon formed by the
turbines is unknown, thus the Graham scan is needed to ﬁnd those speciﬁc positions. The
procedure in Graham’s scan is as follows:
17
==PAGE:26==
1. Initialize an empty data stack, that will contain the convex hull points
2. Pick a starting point and add it to the stack
3. Sort the rest of the points in counterclockwise order around the starting points
4. Sweep through the sorted points
5. Add each new point to the stack and then check if the hull is still convex after adding
the new point
6. If any points create concave angles, if they are lying inside the hull, delete them
In Python, the Scipy Spatial library computes convex hulls using the Qhull library simply by
providing the x and y coordinates of the turbines. Certain characteristics of this library are the
identiﬁcation of the vertices of the convex hull as well as calculation of the polygon’s area,
these two aspects will be used to compute the area of the wind farm during each iteration of
the problem.
To validate this technique, a simple problem is presented in Appendix A.1, to make sure that
the technique used is accurate and that the area is being calculated correctly.
The distances between neighboring wind turbines deﬁne the wind farm’s turbine spacing,
usually, dependent on the prevailing wind direction. Turbine spacing is a critical issue due to
the already mentioned wake eﬀect. In fact, if turbines are placed too close to each other,
the park eﬃciency will be reduced. Studies in European sea regions [42] have demonstrated
that increasing the installed power per land surface area (i.e. decreasing the average wind
turbine spacing) has an inverse eﬀect on the total extracted power per turbine and thus on its
power production. In the current work, the problem seeks to optimize the wind farm’s energy
production from a "land-use" point of view, with the purpose of minimizing the extension of
the wind farm, which would also decrease the costs of this one.
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE)
The LCOE is the third and last objective function of the performed optimizations in this
project. The Levelized Cost of Energy is a commonly-used metric that calculates the cost
of generating a unit of electricity for a certain technology. It represents the average revenue
per unit of energy that would be required by a project owner to recover all investment and
operating costs. It is computed by dividing the total costs of production of the wind farm by
the total energy produced (usually the AEP), as shown in the following equation:
LCOE =
∑t=T
t=0
TCt
(1+d)t
∑t=T
t=0
AEPt
(1+d)t
(3.4)
where:
TCt are the total costs in a period t of the project (e.g. CAPEX, O & M Costs, cabling
costs...)
AEPt is the energy production during the period t
T is the lifetime of the project (in years)
d is the discount rate of the wind farm project
18
==PAGE:27==
In this project, TOPFARM’s DTU cost model is responsible for calculating the LCOE, by
specifying the inputs related to the economic evaluation of the wind farm.
These inputs
are used to estimate the project costs by means of diﬀerent cost functions, all part of the
main DTU Cost Model class, that calculate e.g. the NPV, CAPEX or the Cash Flow of the
projects. The scope of this thesis does not include the break up of all these diﬀerent functions
in TOPFARM, as they have only been used to calculate the LCOE equation 3.4, presented
below. Nevertheless, the aforementioned expenditure classes depend on certain parameters,
speciﬁc of each wind farm project. For this case, they have been kept at their default values,
and some have been extracted from the technical report of the studied wind farm such that:
• Distance from shore = 10 km
• Project duration = 25 years
• Rated rotational speed = 8 rpm
• Water depth (of the entire site) = 10 m
3.3
Approaches of the model and workﬂow
To conduct this study, a total of twelve optimizations have been performed where three dif-
ferent objective functions were evaluated. These optimizations are diﬀerentiated in two ap-
proaches that use diﬀerent optimization techniques to perform the layout and hub height
optimizations of the wind farm. The workﬂow of the project is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.8. The
results of each optimization will be analyzed separately as well as discussed together to compare
both approaches.
Figure 3.8: Thesis workﬂow
The purpose of performing these two case studies is evaluating to what extent the design
variables inﬂuence each other. The goal is to compare both techniques in terms of increase of
the wind farm’s characteristic objective functions but also in terms of computational eﬃciency.
The results of these optimizations will be discussed in the following section.
The results
will also compare the baseline cases with the optimized solutions. The idea of performing
both integrated and sequential optimizations is also to comment on the diﬀerent beneﬁts or
drawbacks of each method.
To perform the vast majority of the optimizations, especially under the second approach, a
High Performance Computing tool has been employed in order to increase the eﬃciency of the
19
==PAGE:28==
models and reduce their computational times. For that, the Sophia HPC cluster from DTU was
used. The Sophia HPC cluster consists of 516 computational nodes of which 484 are 128 GB
RAM nodes and 32 are 256 GB RAM nodes, in total the amount of RAM available is 69 TB.
Each node is a powerful x86-64 computer, equipped with 32 physical cores (2 x sixteen-core
AMD EPYC 7351). The nodes are interlinked by InﬁniBand and 10 Gbps Ethernet networks,
however in this thesis only one node at a time was used.
Furthermore, Sophia uses the Slurm cluster management and job scheduling system. Com-
putations on Sophia are executed through interactive Slurm sessions or via batch compute
job scripts. The usage of particular computation resources available on Sophia is governed
by speciﬁcation of a job queue, or partition in Slurm lingo, which can be done either on the
command line or via a batch job script that is submitted to the scheduler with the sbatch
command. The diﬀerent compute nodes are organized in job queues/partitions, which can be
requested and used openly as long as there are free nodes to use.
3.3.1
Approach 1 - Sequential optimization
For this ﬁrst scenario, a workﬂow is proposed that includes three stages of optimization, in
which each stage of the optimization is made of a sequential optimization where the objective
function is maximized or minimized for two diﬀerent types of design variables such that:
1. Layout optimization + Hub height optimization maximizing AEP
2. Layout optimization + Hub height optimization maximizing Energy Density
3. Layout optimization + Hub height optimization minimizing LCOE
The turbine placement optimization allocates the turbines in the best positions it can ﬁnd
aiming at maximizing the power output. These positions are then passed onto the hub height
optimization, which performs the same task. The two types of design variables are again
evaluated sequentially for the energy density and LCOE optimization. In a way, the three opti-
mizations are completely independent from each other, however, the initial AEP of the energy
density and LCOE optimizations was set to be the resulting AEP of the ﬁrst optimization, this
was done in the form of a constraint in the TOPFARM problem. The goal of this is to obtain
a baseline case always higher than the previous one as well as saving some computational time
for the latter two optimizations.
For the whole set of optimizations, the input parameters and optimization set-up are almost
identical, but it is worth mentioning that the layout optimization employs an automatic dif-
ferentiation methodĺon PyWake (autograd) as the driver to compute the AEP of the wind
farm, whereas the rest of the problems employ SLSQP based on ﬁnite diﬀerentiation built in
Scipy. The idea of this thesis was to perform all the optimizations in the same way and with
the same driver, however, the main reason why autograd has not been used for the follow-
ing approaches is that the PyWakeAEPCostModelComponent component in TOPFARM to
compute AEP optimizations does not support the use of design variables other than x and
y. Therefore, in the case of the integrated optimizations, deﬁned by x, y and h, it has not
been possible to use it, since only the version of autograd using x and y has been released.
An important milestone in this thesis would have been to implement the third design variable
in the PyWakeAEPCostModelComponent, however, given the time frame of the thesis, there
had been no time or resources to develop the aforementioned feature.
20
==PAGE:29==
The mathematical formulation of the problems is described in detail as follows.
maximize
AEP
w.r.t
xi,yi
and
hi
∀i ∈{1,2,...,nwt}
subject to
boundary constraints
d ≥2.5D ⇒spacing constraints
lb ≤hi ≤ub
maximize
AEP/A
w.r.t
xi,yi
and
hi
∀i ∈{1,2,...,nwt}
subject to
boundary constraints
d ≥2.5D ⇒spacing constraints
lb ≤hi ≤ub
AEP ≥AEPopt1
minimize
LCOE
w.r.t
xi,yi
and
hi
∀i ∈{1,2,...,nwt}
subject to
boundary constraints
d ≥2.5D ⇒spacing constraints
lb ≤hi ≤ub
AEP ≥AEPopt1
(3.5)
where:
nwt is the total number of wind turbines
d is the distance between the turbines
lb,ub are the lower and upper boundary constraints
AEPopt1 is the resulting AEP from the AEP optimization
The starting conditions for the performed optimizations have been set as shown in table 3.2.
where the main parameters of the turbines for the ﬁrst optimization are the standard values
of the SWT 2.3 - 93 wind turbine already installed in the wind farm. Now, for the hub height
optimization, two initial values are set: 82 and 115 m (this last one corresponds to the actual
height of the turbines in the wind farm). Half of the turbines will start with one height while
the other half will start with another. The result of this change is evaluated in the following
section with the rest of the results. The reference height (href ) has been set to 65 m, as this
was the value set for the met mast at which the wind data have been taken.
Parameter
Starting condition
Number of turbines (nwt)
48
Starting hub height (h)
82/115 m
Starting positions (x,y)
site’s initial layout
Hub height lower bound (lb)
80 m
Hub height upper bound (ub)
160 m
Table 3.2: Starting conditions for the sequential optimizations
21
==PAGE:30==
3.3.2
Approach 2 - Integrated optimization
In this scenario, the three design variables of the problem (x, y and h) are evaluated simul-
taneously. By integrating them in the same optimization ﬂow, the array of possible solutions
of the problem becomes wider and thus, the problem becomes more complex.
Integrated
optimizations are used for solving complicated optimization problems which, according to
[43], are characterized by having at least one of the following properties: non-convex, non-
diﬀerentiable, non-continuous, and computationally intensive. The added complexity of this
optimization problem is related to an enlargement of the feasible region. Hence, the number
of possible solutions also intensiﬁes. By increasing the number of design variables, ﬁnding the
optimal solution becomes more computationally expensive: the possibilities rise up to 483 for
each wind speed and wind direction of the site.
Nevertheless, the idea of performing this integrated optimization comes from the will of pon-
dering how much the design variables inﬂuence each other when ﬁnding the optimal solution.
Furthermore, it is also interesting to study the improvement the integrated optimization has
on the total power production or expenditures of the wind farm, compared to the baseline
cases of the original or the sequential problem.
The objective functions evaluated in this approach will also be the AEP, the Energy Density
and the LCOE, and likewise for the previous scenario, the three optimizations stages cannot
be considered independently, as the results of the one optimization will be the inputs of the
next one such that they are inter-dependent:
1. Layout and hub height optimization maximizing AEP
2. Layout and hub height optimization maximizing Energy Density
3. Layout and hub height optimization minimizing LCOE
The optimization inputs remain similar to the sequential optimization, although the constraints
regarding turbine spacing are increased in the Energy Density and LCOE optimizations to bind
the problem more. As for the ﬁrst approach, three optimizations will be performed, one after
the other. The problem formulation is detailed as follows,
maximize
AEP
w.r.t
xi,yi,hi
∀i ∈{1,2,...,nwt}
subject to
boundary constraints
d ≥2.5D
spacing constraints
lb ≤hi ≤ub
maximize
AEP/A
w.r.t
xi,yi,hi
∀i ∈{1,2,...,nwt}
subject to
boundary constraints
d ≥2.5D
spacing constraints
lb ≤hi ≤ub
AEP ≥AEPopt1
(3.6)
22
==PAGE:31==
minimize
LCOE
w.r.t
xi,yi,hi
∀i ∈{1,2,...,nwt}
subject to
boundary constraints
d ≥2.5D
spacing constraints
lb ≤hi ≤ub
AEP ≥AEPopt1
(3.7)
As ﬁgure 3.8 shows, this second approach is further divided into two scenarios in which the
initial conditions of one of the design variables - the hub heights - are diﬀerentiated. On one
side, the starting values of the hub heights will be diﬀerent for every other turbine, resulting
in a staggered layout in which half of the turbines will start with one height while the other
half will start with another, just like for the ﬁrst the sequential optimization approach. On
the other side, the whole set of turbines will start with the same hub height. When it comes
to gradient-based optimization, studies have proved that diﬀerent starting points can lead to
completely diﬀerent ﬁnal solutions [44]. One of the goals of this thesis is to show to what
degree the solution sequences depend on the initial solution.
Approach 2a - variable starting conditions
The ﬁrst case contemplated for this second approach concerns, as mentioned, staggering the
initial hub heights of the wind farm. This will modify the gradients of the optimization problem,
modifying as well the baseline values and results of the optimization. The initial hub heights
will be varied continuously starting from two initial values: 80 m and 115 m. These input
values are, in fact, identical to the sequential optimization.
Parameter
Starting condition
Number of turbines (nwt)
48
Starting hub height (h)
82/115 m
Starting positions (x,y)
site’s initial layout
Hub height lower bound (lb)
80 m
Hub height upper bound (ub)
160 m
Table 3.3: Starting conditions for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
Approach 2b - uniform starting conditions
The second optimization case concerns the same integrated optimization this time with uniform
starting conditions. The initial hub heights has been set to 115m which is the actual hub height
of the SWT 2.3 turbines of the Lillgrund wind farm, such that:
Parameter
Starting condition
Number of turbines (nwt)
48
Starting hub height (h)
115 m
Starting positions (x,y)
site’s initial layout
Hub height lower bound (lb)
80 m
Hub height upper bound (ub)
160 m
Table 3.4: Starting conditions for the second integrated optimization
23
==PAGE:32==
3.4
Assumptions and Limitations
In this section, the assumptions regarding the study and limitations related to the model in
TOPFARM are described.
• Simplicity of the layout: In the problem, the boundary and spacing constraints are
deﬁned in a very simple way. In fact, the location of the turbines within an oﬀshore wind
farm is very dependent on the sea-bottom conditions and depth of the waters which here
have been considered as constant for the entire site.
• Stochastic behavior of the wind: The wind variation has not been taken into account
for the site, and the turbulence intensity has been set to a constant value, which is not
accurate.
• Turbine design parameters: In the performed optimizations, only the design parame-
ters of the wind turbine have been modiﬁed without considering the structural properties
of these ones. In fact, resizing the tower implies changes in the dynamics of the wind
turbine components (tower, blades...) that might cause limitations in the manufacture
or even the unfeasibility of the wind turbine in reality.
• Modelling inconsistencies: Some comparisons that will be made along the results part
are not totally accurate, as diﬀerent optimization methods/algorithms have been used.
The problems with only the turbine locations were optimized with automatic diﬀerenti-
ation models while the integrated or hub height optimizations used ﬁnite diﬀerences.
• Economical part: There are several assumptions made for the economical part that
limit the accuracy of it as well. First of all, a constant energy price was taken into
account for the whole duration of the project, without considering market ﬂuctuations.
Also, the inﬂation is excluded in the cost of energy. The water depth of the site was
considered constant, but it it possible that this value could change along the wind farm.
Lastly, an arbitrary rated rotational speed of the wind turbines was considered, as the
real parameter was not available for the Siemens SWT-2.3.
24
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Results and Analysis
4.1
AEP Optimization
4.1.1
Approach 1: Sequential optimization
In this part, the results of the sequential optimization of the AEP are presented. As mentioned
before, this optimization was done in two steps, ﬁrst of all, the layout of the wind farm was
optimized by considering the x and y position of the wind turbines as design variables. Secondly,
the hub heights of these were evaluated to perform the same AEP optimization. The baseline
or initial AEP of the wind farm was 317.32 GWh. Figure 4.1 displays the original layout of
the wind farm compared with the resulting wind turbine distribution after the optimization.
Figure 4.1: Initial and optimized layout for the sequential AEP optimization
As can be seen, the turbines have moved remarkably, although the original layout seems to
be somehow maintained. The ’empty’ area in the layout is still visible on the new disposition
and indicates that the x and y design variables must have found a local optimum around those
coordinates thus the optimized layout does not show any wind turbine in that area either,
25
==PAGE:34==
which also indicates that the original layout was already optimized. Nevertheless, the ﬁgure
shows that most of the turbines have ’migrated’ towards the edges of the wind farm and/or
the dominant wind direction. This can be seen notably in turbines 44, 14, and 37 which
were close to the boundaries of the wind farm. This displacement has been translated into an
increase in the AEP, as it will be presented in ﬁgure 4.2 further on.
Indeed, the AEP, especially for the second stage of the optimization, has increased signiﬁcantly.
This is mainly due to the second row of wind turbines (starting from the left) which have been
placed closer to the upstream ones in the space between them in order to avoid the wake
eﬀect produced by their upstream ones (see turbines 44 and 30). The ﬁrst row, on the other
hand, remains undisturbed. These newly positioned turbines have a singular AEP of around
8.2 GWh while before the optimization they could not yield more than 7.8 GWh. With this
gain, the AEP during this ﬁrst part of the sequential optimization has increased to 327.62
GWh which is 3 % more than the baseline value.
The AEP for each turbine along the two optimizations is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
The most
important increase was seen for the second part of the optimization (ﬁgure 4.2c), whereas the
ﬁrst one only increased the AEP by 3 %. The evolution of the AEP along the optimizations
can be seen in ﬁgure B.1a in the appendix B.
(a) Baseline case
(b) AEP layout optimization
(c) AEP hub height optimization
Figure 4.2: Single AEP distribution for the sequential optimization
With the optimized layout shown above, the sequential optimization continued as the hub
heights of the turbines were modiﬁed to get an even higher AEP. As mentioned in the previous
chapter, the initial hub heights of the turbines were varied so the optimization would have
diﬀerent starts for each design variable, the hub heights were therefore distributed as shown
26
==PAGE:35==
in ﬁgure 4.3, alternated. During the optimization, they were varied from a lower boundary of
Hmin = 82 m and an upper one, Hmax = 160 m.
Figure 4.3: Hub height distribution for the sequential AEP optimization
Although the hub height of each turbine could be any value from Hmin to Hmax, the optimization
problem came to an optimal layout in which all turbines are set at the lower or the upper bound
of the problem, no value in between. With this outline, the AEP of the optimal wind farm
was found to be 384.85 GWh, i.e. approximately 17 % improvement from the previous one
and 21 % of the baseline case. It is clear that by staggering the wind turbine heights along
the wind farm, the wake eﬀect induced in the downstream turbines by the upstream ones
decreases eﬀectively. With this set-up, the model ﬁnds a way of avoiding the wake eﬀect of
the wind farm, by placing the wind turbine rotors as far as possible from each other. As the
wake maps in ﬁgure 4.4 show, the downstream turbines are no longer in the wake of nearby
turbines, which explains the signiﬁcant increase in the AEP, especially for these ones.
The following ﬁgure illustrates the changes seen in the wake ﬂow from the turbines in the
wind farm for the two prevailing wind directions. As can be seen, the wake loss due to this
eﬀect has decreased. Indeed, it has also been quantiﬁed and while the initial wake losses of
the wind farm were at 18.8 %, they lie at 17.2 % after the optimization.
(a) Before optimization for wd=270◦
(b) After optimization for wd=270◦
Figure 4.4: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
27
==PAGE:36==
(c) Before optimization for wd=225◦
(d) After optimization for wd=225◦
Figure 4.4: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
cont.
Although the last optimization shows much more improvement in the AEP, it is important to
keep in mind that the problem is somehow inaccurate as the upper bound of 160 m set for
the hub heights for a 93 m rotor diameter results somewhat not viable from a structural point
of view. This tower height with a signiﬁcantly smaller rotor can cause intensive loading in the
blades that could not only decrease the power production of the turbine but also damage it,
something that has not been taken into account in this problem and that, if considered, would
be a constraint to the problem, which would lower the AEP of the wind farm.
4.1.2
Approach 2a: Integrated optimization for varied initial condi-
tions
The results of the ﬁrst integrated optimization for maximizing the AEP are presented. For this
scenario, the three design variables (x, y, and h) were evaluated simultaneously. Furthermore,
in this approach, the initial hub heights of the wind turbines have also been staggered. This
modiﬁcation of the initial conditions concerning the baseline case already increases the initial
AEP of the wind farm in comparison to its initial layout, corresponding to the baseline AEP
of the previous optimization (ﬁgure 4.2a). Indeed, the AEP of Lillgrund in its original form
was found to be 317.32 GWh whereas the baseline AEP of the current optimization is already
362.93 GWh.
After performing the optimization, an optimized AEP of 391.27 GWh was
obtained, resulting in an 8 % increase from the baseline value and a 23 % increase compared
to the original layout. This increase is in part due to an improvement of the layout of the wind
farm, shown in ﬁgure 4.5.
28
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.5: Initial and optimized layout for the ﬁrst integrated AEP optimization
The resulting layout is similar to the one obtained after the sequential optimization. Indeed
as ﬁgure 4.5 shows, the original layout is somehow maintained, although it seems like more
turbines have been shifted, especially the ones located in the second vertical line (starting
from the left), which have been moved forward to directly face the wind coming from the
dominant direction (W, SW). These turbines are precisely those that have experienced the
greatest increase in their singular AEP, since, by being advanced, they no longer bear with the
wake caused by the upstream turbines. As it can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6, these wind turbines
went from generating an AEP of 8.0 GWh to more than 8.5 GWh. Moreover, the ﬁgure shows
that the average AEP of the turbines in the baseline case is around 7.0 GWh per turbine
whereas the new layout has increased to a production that surpasses the average of 8.0 GWh
per turbine.
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.6: Single AEP distribution for the ﬁrst integrated AEP optimization
The previous plots demonstrate the major inﬂuence that upstream turbines have on down-
stream ones, so much that if the latter are positioned more in front, aligned with the upstream
turbines, the AEP of the wind farm increases considerably. Furthermore, this AEP increase is
29
==PAGE:38==
also a result of the hub height diﬀerence set between the turbines, as the wind ﬂow coming
towards the downstream turbines is not aﬀected by the turbines in front that much, as their
rotors are at diﬀerent heights. This can be noticed in the wake plots in ﬁgure 4.8, for which
the wake maps with the eﬀective wind speeds of each turbine of the wind farm are plotted
for the two main wind directions of the site. These show that it is enough to place the rotors
at a lower altitude to recover most of the energy production lost from a single turbine due to
wake eﬀect.
Figure 4.7: Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated AEP optimization
As the ﬁgures in 4.8 show, the wake of every turbine is avoided by the re-location of certain
turbines away from the wake of others, which explains the AEP increase seen previously.
(a) Before optimization for wd=270◦
(b) After optimization for wd=270◦
(c) Before optimization for wd=225◦
(d) After optimization for wd=225◦
Figure 4.8: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
30
==PAGE:39==
Figures 4.8a and 4.8b as turbines number 43, 39, 34, and 28 on the second line as well as
23, 15 have been moved forward or to the side and thus, they are not aﬀected by the wake of
their upstream turbines at all. Hence, it can be concluded that the layout adjustment of this
optimization has successfully improved the power production of the turbines and has achieved
the mitigation of wake in certain areas, the reduction in the wake losses was similar to the
previous approach, from more than 18.4 % to 17.2 % of the wind farm’ s AEP.
Moreover, it can be seen that the wind turbines that are still apparently aﬀected by the near
wake of others in the wind farm, see a higher wind speed than the non-optimized case. As it
can be seen in ﬁgures 4.8c and 4.8d, turbine number 4 is still visibly aﬀected by the wake eﬀect
of turbine 5, but the wind speed that reaches the rotor is approximately 7 m/s whereas before
the optimization it was down to 5 m/s. It seems that the recovery speed is faster after the
optimization, which is due to the diﬀerence in the hub heights. The hub height distribution
of the turbines in the wind farm displayed in ﬁgure 4.7 shows indeed that turbine 4 has a hub
height of 160 m while turbine 5 is placed at 80 m, conﬁrming that the ﬂow arriving at the
latter is not altered by the horizontal propagation of the wake induced by the turbine in front.
Once again, the resulting hub height distribution is alternated between Hmin and Hmax with
no values in between. Furthermore, the layout is arranged in a way that when two turbines
end up one ahead of each other, the one in front has the lowest hub height (80 m) while the
rotor of the one behind is at 160 m, this outline is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.9 which displays the
ﬁrst 12 turbines of the wind farm seen from the ground (at x = 0).
Figure 4.9: Hub heights seen from the ground for wd=270◦after optimization 2a
The beneﬁts of this type of wind farm design are clear, the fact of staggering the hub heights
within the same wind farm not only allows to mitigate wake interactions between the turbines
but also allows to place them closer together, economizing space and reducing the land (or
sea) use of the wind farm.
At last, this ﬁrst integrated optimization has proved that considering the three design variables
altogether allows to tackle all the problems at the same time, obtaining an optimal solution
in every iteration, compared with evaluating them one at a time. A compromise that suits
all the diﬀerent constraints was found and suits better the challenges that were raised at the
beginning of the study. This might be one of the main advantages of integrated optimization, in
comparison with the sequential one, which engaged one problem at a time without considering
all the feasible outcomes.
Nonetheless, this problem brings out certain limitations and contradictions that could be a
problem for the energy yield of the wind farm. On one hand, and as mentioned previously, the
tower sizing does not take into account structural and safety properties that would aﬀect the
construction of such wind turbines, yet a minimum ground clearance for the lower tip of the
rotor has been taken into account. On the other hand, and even though a minimal spacing
between the turbines has also been considered, the spacing between the turbines should be
31
==PAGE:40==
larger to deal with cabling issues and other wind ﬂow matters that were not contemplated
here.
4.1.3
Approach 2b: Integrated optimization for uniform initial con-
ditions
In this part, the results of the third and last AEP optimization are presented. This optimization
was characterized by having diﬀerent initial conditions than the previous integrated optimiza-
tion. As only the initial conditions have been varied, the obtained results are not expected to
be extremely diﬀerent from the ones presented before.
To start with, the baseline AEP of the problem is signiﬁcantly higher, again, than the original
AEP of the wind farm. Indeed, the initial AEP for this second integrated optimization is 351.19
GWh, and although the baseline AEP from approach 2a was certainly higher, it has increased
by 11 % in comparison to the original value. The result of this optimization gave an optimized
AEP of 387.03 GWh, which corresponds to a total increase of 10 % from the baseline value.
This increase is seen in ﬁgure 4.10 where the singular AEP for each turbine of the wind farm
was calculated before and after the optimization. The ﬁgure shows a general trend of increase
in the turbines’ AEP, similar to the one presented in ﬁgure 4.6.
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.10: Single AEP distribution for second integrated optimization
This increase has been the result of a relocation of the turbines along the wind farm such that
the layout has been expanded towards the boundaries of this one, more than in the previous
case. As it can be seen in ﬁgure 4.11 the turbines that were located close to the borders
of the wind farm have moved towards them, away from neighboring turbines, and close to
the dominant wind direction. Additionally, the ones that were far from the boundaries, like
turbines 20 or 34, were moved also in the direction of the strongest wind resource (so W,
SW), increasing their individual power production.
32
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.11: Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for the second integrated optimiza-
tion
While the AEP for this optimization has experienced a gain of 10 %, the previously analyzed
integrated optimization only increased by 8 % its AEP, however, the resulting value was higher
(391 GWh against 387 GWh). This diﬀerence in results between one approach and another
is given by the initial conditions of each problem. While in the previous one, the turbines had
each diﬀerent initial conditions, in this case, all the turbines started at the same value of hub
height, 115 m. This diﬀerence is the main reason why the optimization result was lower for
the latter case since the problem probably encountered a local maximum, and therefore all the
iteration values converged to that value of AEP.
Figure 4.12: Hub height distribution for the second integrated AEP optimization
Due to this diﬀerence in the initial conditions, a diﬀerent hub height distribution has been
found for this scenario. As ﬁgure 4.12 shows, the hub heights for this optimized layout are
more staggered, and they diﬀer from the boundary values set at the beginning of the problem
and towards which all the turbines were converging in the previous cases. This outline might
have been the reason why the total AEP of the wind farm was lower than for the other
integrated, as the average hub height of the wind farm is lower, and because there may be
more interference between the turbines since the diﬀerence in height between the rotor is not
as important. These interferences can be seen in ﬁgure 4.13, where three diﬀerent heights for
33
==PAGE:42==
the turbines are visible, unlike for the previous optimization in which the turbine heights were
distributed between only two values.
Figure 4.13: Hub heights after optimization 2b of certain wind turbines seen from the ground
for wd=270◦
Finally, the wake maps are displayed to evaluate the wake losses of the wind farm with this new
layout. As ﬁgure 4.14 illustrates, the wind ﬂow propagated after the turbines of the ﬁrst row
has a higher wind speed than for the previous integrated optimization, which indicates that the
wake mitigation for this optimization has been more eﬃcient, but since the average hub height
of the turbines is lower, they are not able to harness that much power from the wind due to
shear eﬀect. Nonetheless, the gain in the free stream velocity of the turbines downstream is
still better than the baseline case and allows to conclude that one of the main goals of this
study, which was decreasing the wake eﬀect along the wind farm, has been achieved. The
calculated wake losses were eventually reduced from 23.1 % to 20.6 %.
(a) Before optimization for wd=270◦
(b) After optimization for wd=270◦
(c) Before optimization for wd=225◦
(d) After optimization for wd=225◦
Figure 4.14: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
34
==PAGE:43==
This second approach to the integrated optimization has proven, from a theoretical point of
view, the inﬂuence of gradients in optimization problems that employ gradient-based methods.
Both integrated optimizations had the same input parameters and setup, however, their results
were diﬀerent. Case 2a gave a better AEP, although the wake losses in the wind farm seemed
more important while optimization 2b obtained a lower AEP but lower wake losses. By varying
the initial conditions of the design variables in the same problem, the objective function explores
a wider feasible region and does not stumble into local optima. Hence, it is safe to say that
a correct selection of the initial conditions of a problem is crucial, as it can deeply aﬀect the
outcome of the optimization problem. Indeed, if these are not chosen correctly or studied, the
optimization results can be lower than what they actually are, hence the problem would not
be optimized correctly.
4.1.4
Summary of results
Lastly, the overall results of these AEP optimizations are presented below, in order to appreciate
the diﬀerence between the three approaches and extract general conclusions. It is safe to
say that the goal of this section is not to point out which method or approach is better
but simply to confront them and analyze their assets and trade-oﬀs.
It is clear that the
integrated optimizations provided better results but their computational times were higher.
Computational expenses are an important trade-oﬀthat needs to be considered as they suppose
a big inﬂuence on the viability of a project. Therefore, and after seeing the results of both
techniques, the multidisciplinarity of this problem suggests that an integrated optimization
could provide a better outcome for the optimizations.
Approach
Baseline value [GWh]
Optimized value [GWh]
Increase [%]
Computational
time (in cluster) [h]
Sequential
Optimization
317.32
384.85
21.0
8
Integrated Optimization -
varied hub heights
362.93
391.28
8.0
22
Integrated Optimization -
uniform hub heights
351.19
387.03
9.0
23
Table 4.1: Comparison of results from the three approaches for the AEP optimization
As the wind turbines have been moved further from the neighboring ones, the downstream
turbines start to become unexposed to the upstream wake. This aﬀects positively the power
production of these turbines as it has been proved in all cases. On the other hand, due to
shear eﬀect, lowering the hub height of certain wind turbines infers a reduction in their power
production as they experience a lower wind speed. Thus, the goal of this optimization was to
ﬁnd a compromise between the height of the turbines and their ability to generate maximum
power, which has successfully been met as the AEP of the wind farm for the three cases has
increased with respect to the original AEP of Lillgrund.
4.2
Energy Density Optimization
In this part, the results from the energy density optimizations are presented. These opti-
mizations were carried out in the same way as for the AEP optimization case presented in
the previous section, with three diﬀerent approaches: one sequential optimization and two
integrated ones with diﬀerent initial conditions.
35
==PAGE:44==
4.2.1
Approach 1 - Sequential optimization
The ﬁrst optimization performed in this section was the sequential optimization. As equation
3.3 shows, when evaluating the energy density as the objective function, two diﬀerent functions
are being evaluated simultaneously: AEP and area. To improve the energy density of the wind
farm, the AEP of the latter has to increase, whereas the area has to decrease. This is where
the design variables of the ﬁrst part of this optimization are confronted. On one side, the x and
y coordinates of the turbines have to be adjusted so the surface occupied by the wind farm is
reduced which comes down to placing the turbines closer together. But on the other side, the
previous section proved that the AEP increases by moving the turbines away from each other.
Therefore, this optimization poses a certain contradiction that demands the design variables
to ﬁnd a compromise between the diﬀerent aspects that constitute the energy density, in order
obtain optimum value from it.
The results of the ﬁrst part of the sequential optimization show a low increase in the energy
density, from a baseline value of 71.3 GWh/km2 to just 72.6 GWh/km2 consisting of an
increase of only 1.82 %. To comprehend the reason for this result, it is necessary to analyze
the diﬀerent components of the energy density separately, i.e. the area and the AEP as well as
the state of the design variables before and after the optimization. The initial and optimized
layout is plotted here below.
Figure 4.15: Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for the sequential optimization
As can be seen, the turbines have moved signiﬁcantly from their initial positions. The turbines
placed in the northernmost part of the wind farm seem to have migrated further from their
initial position, towards the bounds but also closer to each other. This occurrence is seen in
the ﬁrst line of turbines, as instead of being placed in the same line to face the wind directly,
turbines 44, 33, and 39 have only moved subtly towards their neighboring turbines, to stay
closer together. The same situation can be noticed for turbines 2, 3, and 4, on the ﬁrst line
starting from the right, their optimized positions have been moved closer to turbine number 1.
This interesting change in the x and y coordinates of the turbines has resulted in a reduction in
the wind farm area of 0.82 %, causing the energy density to increase but only slightly. Figure
4.16 shows the area diﬀerence from the baseline and the optimized case.
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.16: Initial and optimized area of the wind farm for the sequential optimization
These results indicate that the 1.82 % increase of the energy density in this ﬁrst stage is not
only due to the area optimization but also to an increase in the AEP. According to table 4.2
the AEP for the ﬁrst stage of the sequential optimization was increased by 1.83 % from its
baseline value of 333.12 GWh to 339.22 GWh. After the second part, a ﬁnal AEP of 388.85
GWh is obtained. These results imply that the AEP has a higher inﬂuence on the variation
of the energy density, which can also be appreciated in ﬁgure 4.17. The horizontal line in the
ﬁgure indicates the iteration at which the ﬁrst sequential optimization ends and when the next
one starts.
Figure 4.17: AEP and Area evolution for the sequential optimization
For the second part of the optimization, the layout of the wind farm is maintained while the
hub heights of the turbines are altered in order to continue optimizing the energy density.
Since the x and y coordinates remain constant, the area of the wind farm is also stable for
the whole optimization and thus only the AEP varies. The results of this second part of the
sequential optimization indicate a much higher gain of 14.64 % in the energy density, and thus
a total improvement of 16.74 % for the complete optimization (see table 4.2).
37
==PAGE:46==
Baseline value
Optimized value
Gain
AEP [GWh]
333.12
388.85
+ 16.73 %
Area (km2)
4.67
4.63
- 0.82 %
Energy Density [GWh/km2]
71.33
83.28
+ 16.74 %
Table 4.2: Breakdown of the objective function before and after optimization for approach 1
As the ﬁgures show, the main cause of the increase in energy density of the wind farm is the
AEP, which in this second part has increased signiﬁcantly. After re-location of the turbines
in the wind farm, this is mainly due to the hub height diﬀerence between the turbines. With
this optimized setup, the wake eﬀect in the wind farm has been mitigated, allowing the wind
turbines to harness more power from the wind ﬂowing towards them. As ﬁgure 4.18 shows,
the distribution of the hub heights for the turbines in the wind farm is very similar to the one
resulting from the AEP optimizations, with half of the turbines placed at the highest possible
altitude, 160 m and the other half at 80 m, the lowest possible one. The ones that have been
placed at the highest altitude correspond to the ones that are either facing the dominant wind
direction and that can produce more power thanks to the eﬀect of wind shear, but also to
the ones placed further and more advanced from their downstream turbine, to avoid inducing
interference in the ﬂow of the following turbines. This can be appreciated in ﬁgures 4.19, as
turbines 20 or 18 have a higher hub height because their downstream turbines are placed in
the far wake of these and thus their ﬂow is not interrupted by theirs.
Figure 4.18: Hub height distribution for the sequential optimization
The other half of the turbines are placed at 80 m above the ground and although the wind
shear will prevent them from getting the most power out of the wind, they are placed facing
the dominant wind direction, either on the ﬁrst line upstream or far from their neighboring
turbine so their power production is also maximized. Furthermore, by giving a closer look at
the previous ﬁgure, it seems like the turbines that have been relocated or that have moved
the most around the wind farm are precisely those with a lower hub height.
38
==PAGE:47==
(a) Before optimization for wd=270◦
(b) After optimization for wd=270◦
(c) Before optimization for wd=225◦
(d) After optimization for wd=225◦
Figure 4.19: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
For this ﬁrst approach, results have shown that the AEP optimization is somehow more relevant
in the improvement of the power density than the area, although this one was successfully
decreased after the optimization. Indeed, contrary to what could have been thought, increasing
the AEP by re-location of turbines or hub height optimization has a bigger impact on the energy
density than decreasing the area of this one, proving that wake eﬀect is one of the biggest
trade-oﬀs that wind farm design faces and by overcoming it, in one way or another, it increases
the energy production of the farm considerably.
4.2.2
Approach 2a - Integrated optimization with changing initial
conditions
In this part, the results from the ﬁrst integrated optimization are analyzed. Unlike the previous
approach, in this case, the three design variables were evaluated at the same time. As seen
for the previous set of optimizations, the integration of hub heights as the third variable into
the optimization can have an important impact on the results, particularly on the AEP. Fur-
thermore, this integrated optimization starts by varying the initial hub heights of the turbines,
as done previously.
The baseline case of this second optimization is, as expected, already higher than the one of
the sequential optimization. This is due mainly to the hub height diﬀerence at the beginning
of the optimization, which enhances the initial AEP of the wind farm by mitigating part of
the wake eﬀect caused by upstream turbines. The initial energy density for this optimization
is 77.48 GWh/km2 and is optimized up to a value of 83.11 GWh/km2 which represents an
39
==PAGE:48==
increase of 7.26 %. As it has been said, the energy density is a ﬁgure that depends on two
factors, the area and AEP of the wind farm. The table below shows the contribution of each of
these components to the increase of the energy density, showing their baseline and optimized
value, to demonstrate the inﬂuence of these factors on the optimization results.
Baseline value
Optimized value
Gain
AEP [GWh]
361.80
388.05
+ 7.26 %
Area [km2]
4.67
4.65
- 0.46 %
Energy Density [GWh/km2]
77.48
83.11
+ 7.26 %
Table 4.3: Breakdown of the objective function before and after optimization for approach 2a
The ﬁrst thing that can be noticed is that the area of the wind farm has not decreased
substantially throughout the optimization, only 0.46 %. Indeed, to optimize the land use and
energy density of the wind farm, the surface occupied by the turbines should be reduced, but
no signiﬁcant changes can be appreciated when these results are plotted, as seen in ﬁgure
4.20.
Figure 4.20: Initial and optimized area of the wind farm for approach 2a
A decrease in the area comes with an increase in the energy density, which is essentially what
this optimization aims for. However, the decrease in the area was relatively small compared
to the increase observed in the AEP (ﬁgure 4.21). Indeed, the AEP has increased by almost
7.3 %, and, together with the small decrease in area, explains the increase of almost 7.3 %
in the energy density, leading to an acceptable result overall. Therefore, the ﬁrst important
takeout of this analysis is that the AEP contributes way more to the increase of the energy
density as it was capable of compensating for the low decrease in area. The increase over the
iterations of the problem is displayed here below and shows how the AEP curve remains over
the most of the time, being the factor that contributes the most to the optimization of the
energy density.
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.21: AEP and Area evolution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
Now this increase in the AEP can be explained, in the ﬁrst place, by a re-location of the
turbines. As seen before, the x and y coordinates of the wind turbines are varied during the
optimization in order to ﬁnd an optimal power production. The previous AEP optimization
demonstrated that the further the turbines went away from each other, the more their pro-
duction would rise, which is why the previous problems showed resulting layouts where the
turbines tended to go towards the boundaries of the wind farm. Figure 4.22 shows the resulting
layout from the energy density optimization for this speciﬁc approach. Although the turbines
haven’t moved as much as in ﬁgure 4.5 it is possible to see a general tendency for the turbines
oriented towards the dominant wind direction to move closer to the farm’s border, rather than
staying close to each other, explaining the small area decrease but also the AEP increase.
Figure 4.22: Initial and optimized layout for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
Nonetheless, that AEP increase is not due exclusively to this minimal re-location of turbines.
41
==PAGE:50==
While the turbines remain almost in their original positions, their hub heights have varied
concerning the baseline case. As it can be seen in ﬁgure 4.23, the hub height distribution of
the turbines along the wind farm has changed in a similar way to that of the previous cases,
they have been staggered between neighboring turbines so ones are facing the wind ﬂow at a
lower altitude while the ones behind have higher hub heights and thus are not aﬀected by the
wake of the upstream turbines. This distribution has been proved to be the optimal one and
explains why it’s repeated here, with the design variables varying between Hmin and Hmax.
Figure 4.23: Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
Furthermore, these results also lead to prove that by adding this third variable into the op-
timization, the x and the y coordinates of the turbines play a minor role as design variables
and so explains why the optimization shifts from changing the layout of the wind farm to alter
the hub heights of the turbines, since it is a much more eﬃcient way to increase the energy
production of the wind farm.
(a) Before optimization for wd=270◦
(b) After optimization for wd=270◦
(c) Before optimization for wd=225◦
(d) After optimization for wd=225◦
Figure 4.24: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
42
==PAGE:51==
The optimization of the turbine hub heights is the main responsible for the increase in the
AEP of the wind farm and thus the energy density of this one, due to the reduction of the
wake eﬀect thanks to the hub height diﬀerence as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.24.
Lastly, these results have shown again the major inﬂuence of the AEP over the area and how
this ﬁgure determines the course of the optimization. Indeed, the three design variables were
combined to improve the power production of the wind farm as the main measure, the resulting
layout and hub height distribution show how the x and y coordinates of the turbines evolve
around the hub heights to ﬁnd an optimal compromise between area reduction and power
generation, with little success compared to the other design variable. Furthermore, better
results were obtained compared with the sequential optimization, conﬁrming the advantages
of including the hub heights of the turbines as design variables in the optimization, as varying
them within the same wind farm contributes to an increase in the energy density of this one.
4.2.3
Approach 2b - Integrated optimization with uniform initial con-
ditions
This section covers the last approach performed for the energy density optimization, the results
will be presented hereupon. Correspondingly to approach 2b for the AEP optimization part,
the outcome for this optimization is not so diﬀerent from the approach explained right above,
as only the starting conditions of the problem are varied. Nonetheless, fewer improvements
regarding the energy density of the wind farm were found.
From a baseline value of 75.21 GWh/km2, lower than the baseline value for the previous
approach, the energy density of the wind farm after this second integrated optimization was
found to be 76.51 GWh/km2 which is 1.71 % higher than the baseline value. A higher decrease
in the wind farm’s area, with respect to the previous approach, has contributed to this growth
of the energy density, however, slight changes can be appreciated when the baseline and
optimized area are displayed in ﬁgure 4.25.
Figure 4.25: Initial and optimized area of the wind farm for approach 2b
The table below displays a comparison between the baseline and optimized values for both
the AEP and the are of the wind farm, allowing to appreciate the small decrease in the area.
43
==PAGE:52==
Such table also allows to determine which is the ﬁgure that holds the bigger impact on the
evolution of the energy density.
Baseline value
Optimized value
Gain
AEP [GWh]
351.19
357.15
+ 1.70 %
Area [km2]
4.67
4.63
- 0.92 %
Energy Density [GWh/km2]
75.21
76.51
+ 1.71 %
Table 4.4: Breakdown of the objective function before and after optimization for approach 2b
As table 4.4 shows, the energy density increase has been reasonably lower than for the previous
optimization (only 1.7 % against the 7 % increase of the previous), but as mentioned the area
decrease has been higher. Both the baseline and optimized AEP values were also lower than
for the previous cases and imply that the problem might have encountered a local minimum,
explaining why the results were not optimal. Furthermore, ﬁgure 4.26 displays the evolution of
both functions over the optimizations, although minor changes are appreciated, the behavior
of the diﬀerent ﬁgures compounding the energy density can still conﬁrm the hypothesis that
has been proﬀered in this section, as the AEP seems to have a greater inﬂuence on the energy
density of the wind farm and therefore its evolution predominates over the one of the area.
Figure 4.26: AEP and Area evolution for the second integrated optimization
The resulting layout of the optimization is shown in ﬁgure 4.27. The movement of the turbines
in the wind farm is considerably greater than for the previous approach, in which the turbines
barely moved. Here, it seems like the turbines have shifted to improve their power production
rather than decreasing the area of the wind farm and so no major changes regarding area
reduction can be seen.
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.27: Initial and optimized layout for the second integrated optimization
Regarding the hub height distribution of the turbines in the wind farm, no signiﬁcant changes
were found. The hub heights of the turbine were kept at their initial value of 115 m. This
is partly due to the encounter of local maxima in the problem. To ﬁx this, a diﬀerent choice
of initial conditions, as well as a diﬀerent set of maximum iterations and tolerance for the
problem, could have solved it and more meaningful results would have been obtained. The
distribution is shown in ﬁgure 4.28
Figure 4.28: Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
The eﬀectiveness of wake mitigation for this problem is plotted in the wake maps in ﬁgure
4.29. As it can be seen, although the improvement of the objective function has not been
very important, the main objective of the optimization which was reducing the wake eﬀect by
changing the layout and the hub heights of the turbines in the wind farm has been achieved.
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) Before optimization for wd=270◦
(b) After optimization for wd=270◦
(c) Before optimization for wd=225◦
(d) After optimization for wd=225◦
Figure 4.29: Wake maps before and after the optimization for two diﬀerent wind directions
4.2.4
Summary of results
The performance of two diﬀerent types of optimization (sequential and integrated) in this
part has led to very similar results.
Indeed, the energy density values obtained are very
similar in some cases and even, for the last approach, they were lower than the sequential
optimization, something that had not been seen so far. However, the diﬀerence could be seen
in the computation times, in fact, as can be seen in table 4.5 the sequential optimization
took much less time than the other two cases as the last one did not even manage to deliver
optimal results. The integrated optimizations take over than four times more time to compute
the optimal values, as the range of possibilities among the feasible region is certainly higher.
Therefore, after this analysis, it is not possible to identify which of the three methods would
be the most appropriate from a quantitative point of view.
Approach
Baseline value [GWh/km2]
Optimized value [GWh/km2]
Increase [%]
Computational
time (in cluster) [h]
Sequential
Optimization
71.33
83.98
17.73
5.68
Integrated Optimization -
varied hub heights
77.48
83.12
7.26
26.01
Integrated Optimization -
uniform hub heights
75.21
76.50
1.71
18.50
Table 4.5: Comparison of results from the three approaches for Energy Density Optimization
Lastly, the common takeout from these three optimizations is that the AEP of the wind farm
has a higher inﬂuence on the energy density than the wind farm area. Indeed, as the problem
46
==PAGE:55==
was severely constrained for the x and y coordinates (spacing and boundary constraints) the
area of the wind farm could not be decreased as much, whereas the AEP for some cases was
signiﬁcantly increased, reaching values almost as high as the ones presented in the previous
section. For that, the improvement in the energy density of the wind farm is essentially due to
an increase in the power production of the wind turbines, either because they were displaced
towards other parts of the wind farm where they could yield more energy from the wind, or
because of the hub height variation, which allows mitigating the wake eﬀect caused by the
turbines. Finally, this optimization has shown once again the importance of choosing the right
initial conditions when using a gradient-based approach in an optimization problem as the
gradients can encounter local optima, depreciating the global optimum result.
4.3
LCOE Optimization
For this ﬁnal section, a brief cost optimization was performed and the results of this one are
analyzed here below. By adding a cost dimension to the problem, this one becomes more
realistic and complete, as other elements that had not been taken into account in the previous
optimizations, like the project duration, or the water depth of the site, have to be considered.
The cabling costs have not been included in the model, as their impact on the overall costs of
the wind farm was negligible, especially since the turbine displacements have a lower inﬂuence
on the problem outcome, compared to the other design variable.
4.3.1
Approach 1 - Sequential optimization
For this ﬁrst approach, a sequential optimization is performed. As seen previously, it is divided
into two stages, one where only the layout is optimized to minimize the LCOE, followed by
another one in which the hub heights are optimized from the previously obtained layout.
The x and y coordinates of the turbines along the wind farm can inﬂuence the levelized cost
of energy of the wind farm in several ways. Their location in the wind farm determines the
cable use of these and increases the capital expenditures of the project, aﬀecting negatively the
LCOE. However, since this problem does not take those costs into consideration, the reduction
of the LCOE in this part is mainly due to an increase in the AEP of the wind farm after the
re-location of the turbines. As seen previously, the placement of the turbines in accordance
with their neighboring ones inﬂuences the occurrence of wake eﬀect, which decreases the
energy production of the wind farm, increasing the LCOE. For the ﬁrst stage of the sequential
optimization, this re-location of the turbines (shown in ﬁgure 4.30) has contributed to a
reduction in the LCOE of 2.6 %, from a value of 0.108 EUR/kWh to 0.105 EUR/kWh.
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.30: Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for approach 1
The new layout displayed shows certain similarities to the one obtained for the ﬁrst sequential
AEP optimization, as the turbines located in the second line of the wind farm have moved
towards the edges of this one to maximize their power production. Moreover, the turbines
located in the middle of the wind farm show a tendency to shift so they form a vertical line with
their neighboring turbines, a behavior that has not been seen before for any previous approach.
This can be seen, for instance, with turbines 27, 20, and 21, aligned in the third line of the
wind farm (starting from the left) with turbines 42, 38, 34, and 14. As the layout has no
impact on the cost model of the problem, this might be due to an attempt to compensate for
an increase in the costs by increasing the individual AEP of these wind turbines.
The resulting turbine distribution seems odd and rather anarchic, with several turbines perhaps
too close to each other and a very distinctive design compared to the original. In reality, the
layouts of wind farms usually present a more orderly layout, since it is easier and less costly
than a disorderly one, especially in terms of assembling and logistics, which are elements that
have not been taken into account here and explain the results of the problem.
Together with the optimization of the hub heights, the AEP of the wind farm has increased
from a baseline value of 352.75 GWh (similar to the one seen in section 4.1) to 386.92 GWh.
As ﬁgure 4.31b shows, certain turbines have approached the borders of the wind farm, facing
the prevailing wind direction, producing more power, which increases their AEP and thus the
total AEP of the wind farm.
48
==PAGE:57==
(a) Baseline case
(b) LCOE layout optimization
(c) LCOE hub height optimization
Figure 4.31: Single AEP distribution for the sequential optimization
Further on, the AEP keeps increasing as the hub heights of the wind farm start to be optimized.
A comparison between ﬁgures 4.31c and 4.32 shows that the turbines with a higher hub height
generate a higher AEP, regardless of their position in the wind farm. Indeed, certain turbines
that after the ﬁrst sequential optimization could not produce more than 7.5 GWh, show, after
increasing their hub heights in the second optimization, a production of more than 8 GWh.
Due to the eﬀect of wind shear, the wind speed is higher at higher altitudes and thus the
wind turbines can generate more power, added to the fact that the diﬀerence in hub heights
reduces to some extent the negative eﬀect of the wake in the wind farm.
The hub height distribution shown in the following ﬁgure is very similar to the ones obtained
for the previous optimizations, most of the turbines end up with either the highest or the
lowest hub height possible, with the average hub height of the wind farm being 120 m.
Figure 4.32: Hub height distribution for the sequential optimization
49
==PAGE:58==
This distribution has also contributed to a decrease in the LCOE of the wind farm, so to
evaluate to what extent the hub heights have inﬂuenced the overall costs, the total CAPEX
and the individual CAPEX per turbine for this optimization is shown in ﬁgure 4.33.
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.33: Single CAPEX distribution for the sequential optimization
Contrary to what was expected, the total CAPEX of the wind farm was increased by 2.7 %
from its baseline value, which is unfavorable to the LCOE of the wind farm. This increase in
CAPEX is actually due to the increase in the average hub height of the turbines: at the start
of the optimization, the hub height distribution varied from 82 m to 115 m, resulting in an
average hub height of 98.5 m whereas after the optimization the resulting average is of 120
m. The studied cost model only considers the hub heights and the number of wind turbines
in the wind farm to calculate the CAPEX and thus, as the average hub height of the wind
turbines is higher, so is the cost of the wind farm.
The previous ﬁgure shows the layout of the wind farm as a function of the CAPEX, which can
also be observed in table 4.6, conﬁrming that higher CAPEX are found for higher hub heights.
Furthermore, the table indicates that the CAPEX is not proportional to the hub height of
the turbines, as can be seen, for a much lower hub height, the CAPEX of the turbine is only
slightly lower than for the higher hub height possible. A more thorough study of the DTU Cost
model would be necessary to fully determine the factors and the other elements that inﬂuence
the cost of the turbines.
Hub heights [m]
CAPEX [M EUR]
80
2.98
160
3.29
Table 4.6: Comparison between hub height and CAPEX for the sequential optimization
This increase in the CAPEX has nevertheless been compensated by the increase in the AEP
which has been more powerful and signiﬁcant. Thanks to that, the total LCOE value of the
wind farm was reduced to a value of 0.094 EUR/kWh, so a total decrease of 13.24 % which
shows that the cost increase has been somehow neglected, as the AEP increase was much
higher.
50
==PAGE:59==
4.3.2
Approach 2a - Integrated optimization with changing initial
conditions
For this approach, the three design variables were evaluated simultaneously in order to minimize
the LCOE of the wind farm. While for the other approach, the design variables were studied
sequentially, this time they will be inﬂuencing each other so the resulting layout and hub height
variation will certainly diﬀer, as a bigger compromise between the design variables needs to
be met. Additionally, the initial conditions of this problem varied from turbine to turbine, so
some of them get a starting hub height of 82 m while others start at 115 m.
The initial LCOE of the problem was found to be 0.099 EUR/kWh, slightly lower than for
the previous approach, because, with the staggered hub heights, the turbines can yield more
power and thus increase the AEP of the wind farm, which in turns decreases the LCOE. After
the optimization, the LCOE decreased by 6.21 % to a value of 0.093 EUR/kWh, slightly lower
than the previous optimization. This decrease is the result of a change in the layout and the
hub heights of the turbines in the wind farm, the evolution of each of these will be evaluated
as follows.
Figure 4.34: Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for approach 2a
Firstly, the initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for this optimization is presented in
ﬁgure 4.34. The turbines show less displacement compared to the previous one, as the hub
heights were also playing an important role in the problem. Nevertheless, it can be seen that
certain turbines were moved, once again, towards the boundaries of the wind farm, to harness
more power from the wind and increase their AEP.
As ﬁgure 4.35 shows, the turbines on the second line from the left have been shifted to the
ﬁrst line, and their AEP has increased from around 7.75 to 8.25 GWh since they no longer
are aﬀected by the wake of the upstream turbines. The total AEP of the wind farm has
increased signiﬁcantly, and the obtained values are similar to the ones obtained for the AEP
optimization for the same approach. This increase of almost 10 % highlights the key role it
has in the overall results, in this cost model. The majority of the turbines have been shifted
in order to magnify their power production rather than decrease their production costs.
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.35: Single AEP distribution for LCOE optimization - approach 2a
The hub height distribution of the turbines in the wind farm constitutes another key element
in the reduction of the LCOE of the wind farm. Indeed, the costs of a wind turbine with a
lower hub height are minor, as the materials, maintenance, manufacture, or transportation are
lower. However, a lower turbine is unable to produce that much power and thus its AEP would
be lower, aﬀecting the overall LCOE of the wind farm. The hub height distribution of the
baseline and the new layout of the wind farm for the optimization are shown in ﬁgure 4.36.
Figure 4.36: Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
As for the previous optimizations, the subsequent hub height distribution for this ﬁrst integrated
optimization was divided in two, with half of the turbines at their maximum height possible
and the other half at the lowest. In terms of costs, a similar distribution is found, as can
be seen in ﬁgure 4.37: the capital expenditures observed only vary between two values, as
expected, the CAPEX is higher for higher turbines.
52
==PAGE:61==
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.37: Single CAPEX distribution for second integrated optimization
Unsuitably, the optimized CAPEX from this optimization turned out to be higher than the
baseline case, which is not the desired result. Indeed, the problem is modeled so the total costs
of the wind farm would be reduced and so the LCOE could also be decreased. However, as
the average height of the turbines has increased, the costs of each turbine have also increased,
which has led to an increase in total costs since the model only depends on the hub heights.
Nevertheless, the increase has been lower than for the sequential optimization, which proves
that by considering the three design variables at the same time, it is more likely to obtain
a better solution for the optimization, as the objective function is more constrained but also
compensated.
As concluded previously, the increase in the costs did not have a signiﬁcant impact on the
objective function, since it managed to decrease considerably with respect to its initial value.
This conﬁrms once again the dominance of the AEP over the other functions, as well as the
deﬁciency of the cost model.
4.3.3
Approach 2b - Integrated optimization with uniform initial con-
ditions
The last optimization of this report is presented here. The second integrated optimization was
performed, in the same conditions as the rest of the previously explained approaches, but this
time looking at minimizing the LCOE of the wind farm.
The baseline LCOE of this problem was 0.104 EUR/kWh, higher than the previous one, as the
average hub height of the turbines of the wind farm was higher, and thus so the turbine costs.
Indeed, the initial hub heights of the turbines were set at the same height for the entire wind
farm giving an average hub height of 115 m for the turbines. After the optimization, an LCOE
of 0.098 EUR/kWh was obtained which contributes to a decrease of 5.19 % from the baseline
value. The optimized LCOE is not as low as the optimized value from approach 2a, and this
tendency has been seen already for the three previous optimizations, which validates the fact
that varying the initial conditions of the diﬀerent design variables increases the feasible region
of the problem, allowing for better combinations and thus better outcomes of the optimization.
As shown previously, this decrease is in part due to a change in the x and y coordinates of the
turbines along the wind farm, this change is shown in ﬁgure 4.38.
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.38: Initial and optimized layout of the wind farm for approach 2b
As it can be seen, the displacement of the turbines in the wind farm from their original values
has been similar to the ones presented in this section for the other optimizations. Certain
turbines have been aligned vertically, especially the ones on the two last lines of the wind farm
(starting from the left). Furthermore, the ones that were directly facing the wind direction
have been advanced to the ﬁrst row on the left, in order to remain unaltered by the wake of
the upstream turbines. This shifting of the turbines has contributed to increase the AEP of
the wind farm signiﬁcantly (see ﬁgure 4.39) as well as to decrease its costs.
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.39: Single AEP distribution for LCOE optimization - approach 2b
Nonetheless, the third design variable of this problem has also contributed greatly to the
optimization of the LCOE. As it can be seen from ﬁgures 4.39 and 4.40 the AEP of each
turbine is related to their hub height, as the wind turbines characterized by having lower
hub heights are also characterized by generating a lower AEP. Moreover, the following ﬁgure
can be compared to the same one displayed in the previous section, for the case of the AEP
optimization (ﬁgure 4.12). Indeed, it is observable that for the AEP optimization, half of the
turbines were at their maximum height and the other half were at their minimum whereas in
this case, they are all placed at the lowest possible hub height. As the goal of this optimization
54
==PAGE:63==
was to minimize the costs of the project, a compromise between the placement of the turbines
and maintaining them at a low hub height was made, in order to reduce the costs of the
turbines.
Figure 4.40: Hub height distribution for the ﬁrst integrated optimization
Figure 4.41 just conﬁrms the main takeouts extracted from this last optimization. As ﬁgure
4.40 shows, after the optimization all the turbines in the wind farm have a hub height of
80 m, corresponding to a value of 2.98 MEUR, the lowest CAPEX value found for this wind
farm in all the optimizations. This reduction in the initial expenditures allows the LCOE to
decrease signiﬁcantly, but points out again the importance of choosing the right gradients for
the optimization. Compared to the previous integrated optimization, the optimized AEP of
the wind farm is much lower and the LCOE reduction was not that signiﬁcant, meaning also
that the total costs of the wind turbines are still high, even for the lowest hub heights.
(a) Baseline case
(b) Optimized case
Figure 4.41: Single CAPEX distribution for second integrated optimization
Furthermore, it indicates that the optimization might have encountered a local minimum,
preventing it from ﬁnding the actual global optimum of the problem.
4.3.4
Summary of results
Implementing the inﬂuence of costs in this optimization has allowed to give a new approach to
the problem posed before, by adding new variables such as the cost of energy production, or
the duration of the project, this new dimension has provided new results, which had not been
observed before. For instance it has shown a diﬀerent placement of the turbines and it has been
seen that the more AEP they produced, the more the LCOE would decrease, something positive
55
==PAGE:64==
for the wind farm. However, an increase in costs was also observed when the distribution of
the hub heights was irregular, as the average height of the turbines increased. Therefore,
these LCOE optimizations were based on ﬁnding a compromise between energy production
and turbine cost reduction but, contrary to what might have been expected, the ﬁnal values
of the design variables, especially of the hub heights were very similar to those of the AEP
optimization, which means that the inﬂuence of the AEP on the LCOE is greater, in this
case, than the costs and that the increase of the AEP prevailed even if the turbine costs were
slightly increased. The following table summarizes the evolution of the LCOE for the three
approaches.
Approach
Baseline value [EUR/kWh]
Optimized value [EUR/kWh]
Decrease [%]
Computational
time (in cluster) [h]
Sequential
Optimization
0.108
0.094
13.24
2.9
Integrated Optimization -
varied hub heights
0.099
0.093
6.22
29
Integrated Optimization -
uniform hub heights
0.104
0.098
5.19
27
Table 4.7: Comparison of results from the three approaches for LCOE Optimization
Once more, the computational time of the integrated optimization is huge compared to the
one of the sequential optimization, and surprisingly the results of the latter are very similar.
However, the gradients evolution of the optimizations shown in appendix B.3 indicate that the
integrated optimization could still perform better if the maximum number of iterations or the
tolerance of the problem were improved. However, and due to the time frame of the study,
the results obtained were similar for both types of optimizations. Indeed, this manifests as
well how heavy the LCOE computations are.
The last one of these optimizations has shown a diﬀerent result on the hub heights distribution
of the wind farm, while the two others showed an heterogeneous distribution with half of the
turbines at their maximum height and the others at the lowest, this one presents an uniform
arrangement. However, while this diﬀerence is considerable in terms of power production (as
the AEP of the two integrated approaches is quite diﬀerent), it is not so important in terms of
costs or CAPEX. Indeed, the total CAPEX of the ﬁrst integrated optimization is 4 % higher
while the AEP is 11 % higher. This proves that hub height variation along a single wind farm
is extremely beneﬁcial for the power production and constitutes an interesting opportunity
but, at the same time, it is costly which reduces its business attractiveness and its feasibility
perhaps from an industry point of view.
56
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
Optimization methods using gradient-based approaches can be beneﬁcial to determine the
optimal layout and distribution of the turbines in the wind farm for their high ﬁdelity and ability
of optimization in multi-disciplinary systems with a large number of design variables. In this
study, several optimizations were performed on the Lillgrund wind farm aiming at maximizing
its power production and energy density, and minimizing the cost of energy (LCOE) by varying
the location of the turbines as well as their hub heights.
This thesis has proved that the wind farm’s power production is severely aﬀected by the
occurrence of wake eﬀects, which disrupts the ﬂow of the downstream turbines and decreases
their energy output. The ﬁrst part of this study managed to reduce this eﬀect and therefore
increase the total power production of the wind farm by rearranging the turbines in the space
so that they were placed in the prevailing wind direction and away from the nearest turbines.
However, this layout adjustment has not had a signiﬁcant impact on the improvement of the
AEP as the new distribution of the hub heights has had. Results show that by staggering the
turbines with two diﬀerent hub heights, the AEP of these increases considerably and the wake
eﬀect is remarkably mitigated. The results of the energy density optimization showed how the
hub height diﬀerence plays a key role in the improvement of the objective function. At the same
time, the area reduction that came from the re-location of the turbines was minimal for all three
optimization cases. Moreover, for the last optimization, the LCOE improvement was mainly
due to the AEP increase, since some of the main costs were increased due to the increase in
the average hub height of the turbines. The energy density and LCOE optimizations revealed
that the AEP increase is usually the major force driving wind farm design optimizations.
Moving forward, this thesis also focused on studying the performance of two types of opti-
mization: a sequential one, in which the design variables were evaluated consecutively, and an
integrated one, in which they were all considered at the same time. In all cases, the sequen-
tial optimizations have proven to be useful and practical although the interaction between
the diﬀerent types of design variables can not be estimated, and therefore the outcome of
the optimizations was not optimal. Thus, and despite the higher computational costs, this
study has proved that an integrated optimization provides generally better results, as long as
the gradients or initial conditions of the problem are well chosen. If that is not the case the
problem can encounter local optima which worsens the results and seals the optimization ﬂow.
57
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6
Future work
To conclude this thesis, it is safe to mention some of the limitations of the models that could
have been avoided, as well as certain improvements that could be done in the future in order
to reﬁne these optimizations.
First of all, regarding the choice of initial conditions for the problem, it could be interesting
to vary the initial hub heights diﬀerently, instead of doing it arbitrarily. A good approach
can be varying the hub height between upstream and downstream turbines and studying their
evolution over the iterations. This way, it could reduce the risk of falling or encountering local
minima.
One of the main work streams for this study is undoubtedly the implementation of the au-
tograd method for diﬀerent design variables in TOPFARM, other than the turbine positions.
This method is much faster in terms of computational eﬃciency and allows to ﬁnd the optimal
result much more easily. Unfortunately, due to the time framework of this thesis, the imple-
mentation was not possible and thus only ﬁnite diﬀerences methods could be used to perform
the optimizations that include a third design variable in the model.
Lastly, a more thorough approach to the two objective functions can be done. First of all, the
area of the wind farm could be computed using a diﬀerent method and thus more signiﬁcant
changes might be seen. With these changes, the beneﬁts of reducing the land use in terms
of costs, but also the environment or logistics could be studied. For instance, the possibility
of adding a hybrid plant with P2X in the available can be studied. Regarding the costs, more
constraints as well as other Balance of System (BOS) parameters could be added to the model
to increase the weight and importance of the costs in the problem.
58
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Abu Dhabi International Renewable Energy Agency. “Renewable Power Generation Costs
in 2020”. In: 2021. isbn: 9789292603489.
[2]
IRENA. Renewable Costs 2020 Infographic. 2022. url: https://infogram.com/renewable-
costs-2020-infographic-1h7k230d0vdeg2x.
[3]
J. Lee and F. Zhao. “Global Wind Energy Report 2021”. In: Global Wind Energy Council,
2021. url: https://gwec.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/GWEC-Global-Wind-
Report-2021.pdf.
[4]
Paul Veers. Wind Energy Modeling and Simulation, Volume 2 - Turbine and System.
Institution of Engineering and Technology. Institution of Engineering and Technology
(IET), 2020. url: https://app.knovel.com/hotlink/toc/id:kpWEMSVTS2/wind-
energy-modeling/wind-energy-modeling.
[5]
K. Dykes and R. Meadows. Applications of Systems Engineering to the Research, Design,
and Development of Wind Energy Systems. 2011. url: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy12osti/52616.pdf.
[6]
M.S. Adaramola and P.-Å. Krogstad. “Experimental investigation of wake eﬀects on wind
turbine performance”. In: 2011. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2011.01.024.
[7]
A. P. J. Stanley and A. Ning. “Coupled wind turbine design and layout optimization
with non-homogeneous wind turbines”. In: 2019. doi: 10.5194/wes-4-99-2019.
[8]
Ahmadreza Vasel-Be-Hagh and Cristina L. Archer. “Wind farm hub height optimization”.
In: 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.03.089.
[9]
Souma Chowdhury et al. “Optimizing the arrangement and the selection of turbines for
wind farms subject to varying wind conditions”. In: 2013. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.renene.2012.10.017.
[10]
G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and B. Diviacco. “Optimization of wind turbine positioning in
large windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm”. In: 1994. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0167-6105(94)90080-9.
[11]
Angelo Tesauro, Pierre-Elouan Rethore, and Gunner Chr Larsen. “State of the art of
wind farm optimization”. In: Proceedings of EWEA 2012 - European Wind Energy
Conference & Exhibition. European Wind Energy Association (EWEA), 2012. url:
http://events.ewea.org/annual2012/.
[12]
Peter Graf et al. “Wind Farm Turbine Type and Placement Optimization”. In: IOP
Publishing, 2016. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/753/6/062004.
[13]
Andrew P.J. Stanley, Andrew Ning, and Katherine Dykes. “Optimization of turbine
design in wind farms with multiple hub heights, using exact analytic gradients and
structural constraints”. In: 2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.2310.
59
==PAGE:68==
[14]
Andrew Stanley, Andrew Ning, and Katherine Dykes. “Beneﬁts of Two Turbine Rotor
Diameters and Hub Heights in the Same Wind Farm”. In: 2018. doi: 10.2514/6.2018-
2016.
[15]
Ying Chen et al. “Wind farm layout optimization using genetic algorithm with diﬀerent
hub height wind turbines”. In: 2013. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2013.
02.007.
[16]
Cristina L. Archer, Sina Mirzaeisefat, and Sang Lee. “Quantifying the sensitivity of wind
farm performance to array layout options using large-eddy simulation”. In: 2013. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/grl.50911.
[17]
Xuan Dai et al. “A three-dimensional dynamic mode decomposition analysis of wind farm
ﬂow aerodynamics”. In: 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.03.160.
[18]
Leonardo P. Chamorro et al. “Variable-sized wind turbines are a possibility for wind farm
optimization”. In: 2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.1646.
[19]
Mahdi Abkar and Fernando Porté-Agel. “Inﬂuence of atmospheric stability on wind-
turbine wakes: A large-eddy simulation study”. In: 2015. doi: 10.1063/1.4913695.
[20]
Andreas Wolf Ciavarra et al. “Wind farm optimization with multiple hub heights using
gradient-based methods”. In: IOP Publishing, 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/
1742-6596/2265/2/022012.
[21]
J.Gray et al. “Automatic Evaluation of Multidisciplinary Derivatives Using a Automatic
Evaluation of Multidisciplinary Derivatives Using a Graph-Based Problem Formulation in
OpenMDAO Graph-Based Problem Formulation in OpenMDAO”. In: 2014. doi: http:
//hdl.lib.byu.edu/1877/3666.
[22]
Szymon Jozef Wawrzyniak. “Optimization of wind farm layout design for value-based
and proﬁtability-based objectives, Optimering af vindmølleparkdesign til værdibaserede
og lønsomhedsbaserede mål”. 2021.
[23]
T. Ashuri et al. “Multidisciplinary design optimization of oﬀshore wind turbines for
minimum levelized cost of energy”. In: 2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.
2014.02.045.
[24]
L.Fingersh, M.Hand, and A.Laxson. Wind Turbine Design Cost and Scaling Model. 2006.
url: http://www.osti.gov/bridge.
[25]
DTU Wind Energy. PyWake Documentation. 2018. url: https : / / topfarm . pages .
windenergy.dtu.dk/PyWake/.
[26]
Vattenfall makes progress on milestone wind power project. 2007. url: https://www.
nsenergybusiness.com/news/newsvattenfall_makes_progress_on_milestone_wind_
power_project/.
[27]
Joakim Jeppsson, Poul Erik Larsen, and Åke Larsson. Technical Description Lillgrund
Wind Power Plant. 2008. url: https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/servlets/purl/979747.
[28]
Frandsen and Sten Tronæs. “Turbulence and turbulence-generated structural loading in
wind turbine clusters”. English. In: 1188(EN). Risø-R-1188(EN). 2007. isbn: 87-550-
3458-6.
[29]
Tuhfe Göçmen et al. “Wind turbine wake models developed at the technical university
of Denmark: A review”. In: 2016. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.01.113.
[30]
Majid Bastankhah and Fernando Porté-Agel. “A new analytical model for wind-turbine
wakes”. In: Special issue on aerodynamics of oﬀshore wind energy systems and wakes.
2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.01.002.
[31]
Pierre-Elouan Réthoré et al. “Veriﬁcation and validation of an actuator disc model”. In:
Wind Energy 17.6 (2014), pp. 919–937.
==PAGE:69==
[32]
Niels Troldborg et al. “A simple atmospheric boundary layer model applied to large eddy
simulations of wind turbine wakes”. In: Wind Energy 17.4 (2014), pp. 657–669.
[33]
Rafael V Rodrigues and Corinne Lengsfeld. “Development of a computational system to
improve wind farm layout, Part I: model validation and near wake analysis”. In: Energies
12.5 (2019), p. 940.
[34]
Rafael V Rodrigues and Corinne Lengsfeld. “Development of a computational system to
improve wind farm layout, part II: Wind turbine wakes interaction”. In: Energies 12.7
(2019), p. 1328.
[35]
Søren Juhl Andersen et al. “Comparison of engineering wake models with CFD simu-
lations”. In: Journal of physics: Conference series. Vol. 524. 1. IOP Publishing. 2014,
p. 012161.
[36]
DTU Wind Energy. TOPFARM Documentation. 2018. url: https://topfarm.pages.
windenergy.dtu.dk/TopFarm2/index.html#.
[37]
Andreas Griewank and Andrea Walther. “Evaluating Derivatives”. English. In: Other
Titles in Applied Mathematics. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2008.
isbn: 978-0-89871-659-7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9780898717761.
[38]
Joaquim R. R. A. Martins and Andrew Ning. Engineering Design Optimization. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2021. doi: 10.1017/9781108980647.
[39]
Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan P Adams. “Autograd: Eﬀortless gradients
in numpy”. In: ICML 2015 AutoML workshop. Vol. 238. 5. 2015.
[40]
Martin Otto Laver Hansen. Aerodynamics of wind turbines. Earthscan, 2015. isbn:
9781138775077.
[41]
Robert Laurini. “5 - Geographic Relations”. In: Geographic Knowledge Infrastructure.
Ed. by Robert Laurini. Elsevier, 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-78548-
243-4.50005-0.
[42]
Rasmus Borrmann et al. “Capacity densities for European oﬀshore win farms”. In:
Deutsche WINGUARD, 2018. url: https://vasab.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/
06/BalticLINes_CapacityDensityStudy_June2018-1.pdf.
[43]
Chen Li et al. “Integrated optimization algorithm: A metaheuristic approach for compli-
cated optimization”. In: 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.11.043.
[44]
Xin-She Yang. “3 - Optimization algorithms”. In: Introduction to Algorithms for Data
Mining and Machine Learning. Ed. by Xin-She Yang. Academic Press, 2019. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817216-2.00010-7.
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Methodology
A.1
Validating area computation
The following ﬁgure displays an easy geometrical ﬁgure, a rectangle. The area of this ’dummy’
rectangle created out of a total of eight points can be determined by a quick mental calculation.
Figure A.1: Easy example for formula validation
Being the formula for calculating the area of a rectangle: L×l The resulting area of the ﬁgure
presented above is thus: 3×2 = 6m2.
Now, using Scipy’s ConvexHull class as shown here below, the printed area is also 6 m2 (also
displayed in ﬁgure A.1), proving that it is a valid method that will be useful to determine the
area of the wind farm.
Figure A.2: Code extract from method validation
I
==PAGE:72==
Appendix B
Results and Analysis
B.1
AEP evolution over the optimization
The evolution of the ﬁrst objective function studied in this thesis is presented here below, for
the three diﬀerent approaches. The vertical dashed line indicates the end of the ﬁrst sequential
optimization, marking the beginning of the ﬁrst one.
(a) Sequential optimization
(b) First integrated optimization
(c) Second integrated optimization
Figure B.1: AEP evolution over the problem iterations for the three approaches
B.2
Energy density evolution over the optimization
In the same way, the evolution of the energy density through the iterations of the model for
the three diﬀerent approaches is depicted below.
II
==PAGE:73==
(a) Sequential optimization
(b) First integrated optimization
(c) Second integrated optimization
Figure B.2: Energy Density evolution over the problem iterations for the three approaches
B.3
LCOE evolution over the optimization
The following ﬁgures display the evolution of the LCOE along the iterations of the three
optimizations performed in this thesis.
(a) Sequential optimization
(b) First integrated optimization
(c) Second integrated optimization
Figure B.3: LCOE evolution over the problem iterations for the three approaches
==PAGE:74==
