==PAGE:1==
Microfabrication and 
characterization of oxide gratings
Marc Bernet Garcia, s202955
July 2022
DTU Nanolab
Supervisors
Prof Rafael Taboryski, DTU Nanolab
Kristian Buchwald, Ibsen Photonics
Co-Supervisor        Dr. Chantal Myrielle Silvestre, DTU Nanolab
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Microfabrication and characterisation of oxide gratings
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Marc Bernet Garcia
Supervisors:
Prof. Rafael J. Taboryski & Prof. Henri Jansen, DTU Nanolab
Kristian Buchwald & Chantal Myrielle Silvestre, Ibsen Photonics A/S
Copyright: Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization (Nanolab), Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, Ørsteds Plads - Building 347, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
info@nanolab.dtu.dk
www.nanolab.dtu.dk
&
Ibsen Photonics, Ryttermarken 17,DK-3520 Farum, Denmark
www.ibsen.com
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Marc Bernet Garcia - s202955
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the presented project a new approach on the large-scale fabrication of nanoscale
oxide gratings for an optics company is showcased. Masking materials for the etching
of transparent oxides are now getting pushed to the limit of their capabilities due to low
resistance to fluorinated plasma, and in the case of Ibsen Photonics, the development
of a metal hard mask as an alternative process was considered. This project covers the
microfabrication and characterisation of the mask material and its capability to function
as a mask for etching gratings made of various types of oxides. The material selected
for such an endeavour was Cr, given its proven high selectivity towards oxides and
easy processing. The resulting mask has been proven to showcase an excellent profile
when patterning, and a more than acceptable selectivity and side-wall angle (SWA),
which are the main takeaway parameters that affect the final product’s quality.
A
uniformity analysis of the process was performed given the industrial-scale application of
the fabrications scheme, once again showing values acceptable for production upscaling
and lay the foundation for a production scheme shift.
Keywords: Hard mask, Plasma etching, Oxide grating.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
This project has proven a bit harder than usual, given my unusual personal circum-
stances during such.
The following work could not have been possible without the
constant support of those who care about me and my academic career, so I would like
to thank the following.
First, my supervisors and cosupervisors, Rafael Taboryski, Henri Jansen, Kristian Buch-
wald and specially Chantal Myrielle Silvestre, who has proven to be an amazing super-
visor/mentor/colleague throughout the duration of the project. I sincerely believe there
is still much more work for us to do all together.
Secondly, Ibsen Photonics and the whole grating team for the opportunity given, spe-
cially Henrik Skov Andersen for the first contact, and DTU Nanolab for the large
amount of help, knowledge and tools necessary for this thesis. I would also like to
include all of the professors and associates that have been part of my education during
my Physics & Nanotechnology MSc.
Then, I would like to thank all of my friends, to the new ones and the old ones, to the
ones besides me and the ones that care about me from hundreds of miles away, as their
support and friendship has proven to be the foundation of my well-being.
And finally, I must thank my family. The toughest of moments require the most loving
people, and I believe that to be the reason I achieved all I have done so far.
I dedicate this work to all of you.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
The current project is submitted as a requirement for completing the master thesis
for the Physisc Nanotechnology master’s program, track in Nanosystems Engineering,
conducted by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis constitutes a
35 ECTS workload conducted in the Nanolab group in the National Centre for Nano
Fabrication and Characterization (DTU Nanolab) jointly with Ibsen Photonics, under
the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Rafael J. Taboryski (DTU), Prof. Henri Jansen (DTU
& IMEC), Kristian Buckwald (Ibsen Photonics) and Chantal Myrielle Sylvestre (DTU
& Ibsen Photonics). It is the result of more than six months of work, performed from
January 2022 to July 2022.
This report constitutes the culmination of several very hectic months of work, which I
could only refer to as the biggest learning experience of my life. Academically, I have
been subject to an extensive development of my own skills and knowledge, and I see
this as the living proof of the two years spent on my education in nanoscience. The
project has encountered many obstacles in its way, starting off by the Nanolab tools,
followed by some inexplicable phenomena and capped off by lots of waiting time. All
issues were chances for me and my colleagues to prove that the scientific method and
a structured approach are the solution to most concerns on the way, and the fact that
the main objectives were met can attest to so.
I would like to then proudly present the work below as the product of my own effort
and all other parties involved.
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
In alphabetical order
AFM
Atomic Force Microscope
AR
Aspect Ratio
BARC
Bottom Anti-Reflective Coating
DC
Duty Cycle
DE
Diffraction Eﬀiciency
DGFF
Dynamic Gain Flattening Filters
DRIE
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
DoE
Design of Experiment
DoFo
Dose-Focus
DoTu
Dose-Tuning
DUV
Deep-Ultra Violet
DWDM
Dense Wave Division Multiplexing
EDS
Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
ICP
Inductively Coupled Plasma
NA
Numerical Aperture
RETs
Resolution Enhancement Techniques
RIE
Reactive Ion Etching
ROADM
Reconfigurable Optical Add Drop Modules
OEM
Original Equipment Manufacturer
OES
Optical Emission Spectroscopy
PEB
Post-Exposure Bake
PECVD
Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapour Deposition
PDL
Polarization Dependant Loss
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SWA
Side-Wall Angle
XPS
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
ix
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Approval
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgments
v
Preface
vii
Abbreviations
ix
Contents
xii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Ibsen Photonics’ Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Contribution to the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background & Grating theory
3
2.1
Theoretical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Experimental Methods
15
3.1
Process Flow Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Stock Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
DUV Lithography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
Pattern Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.5
Oxide Deep Etch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.6
Hard Mask Strip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Device Characterization
39
4.1
Final Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:14==
4.1.1
Selectivity and Sidewall Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Diffraction Eﬀiciency Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
State of the art comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Conclusions
47
6
Further Outcome
48
6.1
Ibsen’s future project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.1.1
Alternative Hard Mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.1.2
Hard Mask Stack Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.3
DUV Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Industrial PhD Projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
51
A Appendix: Patterning Description
57
B Appendix: Process Flow
59
C Appendix: Fused silica material properties
67
D Appendix: Risk-Benefit Assessment on hard mask material selection 69
E Appendix: Design of Experiment
72
F Appendix: Endpoint detection
74
G Appendix: EDS Measurements
76
H Appendix: XPS Measurements
78
I
Appendix: Project Plan
81
I.1
Original Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
I.2
Project Plan Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Ibsen Photonics’ Project
Ibsen Photonics is a well-established company that has been the staple in the sup-
ply of OEM spectrometers and transmission gratings with high and consistent quality
throughout the past 30 years. These gratings are used in a broad range of applica-
tions in diverse industries such as Telecom, sensing, lasers and spectroscopy, and their
spectrometer modules are used in sensor systems and spectroscopy applications such
as absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy, Optical Coherence Tomography, Raman
Spectroscopy, and Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy.
In the constant search for innovation and expansion of its product line, the company has
found some limitations when it comes to the mass production of transmission gratings,
given the obstacles presented by their development facilities. These limitations come
as a product of the current tools used for the etching of the structures in their Farum-
based cleanroom as well as the extremely pushy lithographic step performed on DTU’s
facilities.
In order to attain a more robust and uniform process for further fabrication of gratings,
Ibsen has invested resources onto developing a new process flow that might increase
both the quality of their products as well as the yield of such processes. These potential
advances come as an opportunity for academic research in the study of hard masking
materials for the etching of transparent oxides, as well as the study of scalable high-
uniformity-high-selectivity etching via Reactive Ion Etching.
This project presents itself as the first step towards the redefinition of a fabrication
scheme that encompasses many other processes whose optimization may prove beneficial
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
towards nanosystems engineering and nanofabrication. Its objective is then to present
and validate a working process flow in the fabrication of such gratings, whilst pointing
out its weak points and building upon these.
The new proposed approach presented in this thesis is based in the usage of metal hard
masks. These have become a trendy solution for the future generation of lithography
processes, as these require hard masks with higher resistance to fluorinated plasma,
as well as materials that can be easily wet stripped after pattern transfer process to
prevent dry etch damage to the substrate underneath [1]. The designed mask will try
to solve the current problems faced by Ibsen Photonics: poor selectivity towards the
oxide stack to be etched, reduce tool requirements during lithography, faceting during
etching and, higher etch rate which would consequently increase the throughput. The
presented work will aim at validating a process flow for the confection of such masks,
and take the first steps towards establishing a new mean of production for the company.
1.1.1
Contribution to the project
As the continuation of an ongoing Industrial Project, the contribution that will be
presented here includes the execution of a target process flow, as well as its optimization,
troubleshooting and failure analysis.
The presented work will be put into perspective with an extensive overview of the
theoretical background necessary for the comprehension of the devices and their perfor-
mance, as well as the previous work on the design of the Postdoctoral Industrial Project
associated to the company.
2
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background & Grating theory
In the following chapter the basic foundation for the understanding of the optical phe-
nomena involved in transmission spectroscopy, as well as the different applications to
which they are associated will be presented. When it comes to the nanofabrication pro-
cedure, the precedent works as well as the state of the art will be presented for further
context.
2.1
Theoretical background
Fist studies on the theory regarding diffraction gratings was introduced by Lord Rayleigh
as early as 1874 [2], where he introduced his primitive yet innovative manufacturing
process of gratings for photography copying. Ever since this first few papers, the theory
behind grating diffraction has been formalized in many works [3][4], as well as its many
fabrication methods [5][6][7].
The phenomenon of diffraction was first observed back in 1665 by Francesco Maria
Grimaldi [8], where, as a wave passes a barrier, the wavefront is distorted at the bound-
ary edge. If the wave passes through a gap, more obvious distortion can be seen and as
the gap width approaches the wavelength of the wave, the distortion becomes even more
obvious. This phenomena is known as diffraction, and we call diffraction gratings the
multi-slit surface distorting the aforementioned wave. Being more specific to the case,
when light passes through a diffraction grating, the emerging wavefront constructively
interfere to produce a diffraction pattern with intensities peaked in certain directions.
These directions are strongly dependent on both the slit spacing and wavelength of the
incident light. Consequently, surfaces with well-defined slit locations can be used to
direct light of certain wavelengths into specific directions.
3
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & GRATING THEORY
Figure 2.1: Grating cross-section sketch, highlighting its main physical parameters.
To characterize a grating the physical parameters to consider are the following (refer to
Figure 2.1):
• The grating period is defined as the distance between the many, equally spaced
grating grooves (or grating lines). The inverse of the grating period is the grating
resolution, typically given as the number of grating lines per mm.
• The depth of the grating is the distance from the top of the grating line to the
bottom of the grating grooves. In the case of fused silica transmission gratings
this is often called the etch depth.
• The duty cycle of the grating is defined as the linewidth divided by the grating
period.
• The aspect ratio (AR) of the grating is defined as the ratio between the depth
and the linewidth. A high aspect ratio describes a deep grating groove.
• The grating profile is a general term for the shape of the grating grooves, which
could be rectangular, sinusoidal, trapezoidal or more complex, in each case being
quantifiable by additional parameters that will not be described here.
So, diffraction gratings provide the ability to separate wavelengths based on the angle
that they emerge from the grating, and this is the characteristic that is exploited in
its many applications that we will discuss. The basic grating equation determines the
discrete directions into which monochromatic light of wavelength λ is diffracted. The
4
==PAGE:19==
2.1. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
5
equation is shown below:
mλ = ∆· (sin(θI) + sin(θD))
(2.1)
where light of wavelength λ is incident at an angle θI and diffracted by the grating
(with a grating period ∆) along a set of angles θD. In this case, m is the diffraction
order (where m is an integer), and its orders correspond to the different directions where
light is diffracted. For transmission gratings the zeroth order would correspond to light
transmitted and for reflection gratings it would be the reflected beam, as θI and θD
are equal and opposite. These directions are discrete for perfect monochromatic light,
but for polychromatic light one has a dispersion of light so that each wavelength agrees
with the grating equation. A diagram of such phenomenon is shown in Figure 2.2.
As to other grating properties that can be described, the following must be mentioned:
Beam-splitting, dispersion and diffraction eﬀiciency. As described in the grating equa-
tion, a grating has beam-splitting properties. At normal incidence the grating equation
is reduced to:
mλ = ∆· sin(θD)
(2.2)
Interestingly, when the -1 order diffraction angle is equal to the incidence angle, called
Bragg configuration, the equation is reduced to:
λ = 2∆· sinθ
(2.3)
which can entail a high eﬀicient beamsplitter as only the 0 and -1 order will be trans-
mitted for 2/3 ≤λ/∆≤2.
Dispersion is the ability of the grating to separate wavelengths.
A high dispersion
means that there is a high angular separation between the diffracted wavelengths, which
translates to a high resolution or compact design of an optical system, a highly desired
feature. Angular dispersion is given by the following equation:
dθD
dλ = sin(θI) −sin(θD)
λ · cos(θD)
(2.4)
Finally, the amount of light that a grating directs into a specific direction – or diffraction
order – is termed diffraction eﬀiciency. A precise prediction of diffraction eﬀiciency can
only be calculated by solving the set of Maxwell equations for the given illumination
combined with upheld boundary conditions of the given grating. Diffraction eﬀiciency
5
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & GRATING THEORY
Figure 2.2: Transmission grating diagram (top).
Transmission grating-based spec-
troscopy setup diagram (below), next to Ibsen’s ultra-compact PEBBLE spectrometer.
6
==PAGE:21==
2.2. TECHNOLOGY
7
is defined as the proportion of the incident light that is present in a specific diffraction
order. This is also known as absolute diffraction eﬀiciency [3].
In many applications, when we aim at the angular dispersion of wavelengths, parameters
such as the ones just described become paramount for an optimal performance. In order
to understand the dimensions of the gratings we must obtain for this project, we first
should set the framework for the solutions and applications Ibsen provides.
2.2
Technology
As of today, Ibsen’s production is centered around fused silica transmission gratings.
Fused silica transmission gratings suppose an ideal solution in some cases given their
environmental stability, low thermal expansion coeﬀicient and temperature sensitivity,
high power damage threshold, great design flexibility, absence of complex absorption
issues which provide more homogeneous DE values over the spectral band, high diffrac-
tion eﬀiciency combined with high dispersion and high tolerance to illumination angle
of incidence [9][10][11]. The current fabrication process’ success is showcased in Ibsen’s
many marketable products, as well as their wide range of applications. The important
material properties of fused silica can be seen in Appendix C.
When it comes to applications, Ibsen Photonics provides platforms and solutions using
transmission gratings for the following:
• Spectrometry: The principle of operation of a spectrometer grating is the fol-
lowing: incident illumination is diffracted in the grating and the wavelengths are
dispersed leaving the grating. Transmission gratings offer a number of benefits
in this filed, such as: a compact and flexible design, alignment and wavefront
error reduction, high eﬀiciency for high resolution gratings and a higher, more
broadband eﬀiciency than comparable reflection gratings.
• Laser pulse compression: Another type of grating that is based on the dis-
persive property of gratings is the pulse compression grating. Using an identical
grating pair, a temporally chirped pulse is dispersed in a first grating. The second
grating recollimates the wavelengths, which due to the dispersion from the first
grating have traveled different distances, with the long wavelength end having
traveled further and therefore been delayed while the short wavelength end of
the bandwidth has caught up. A main benefit of 100% fused silica transmission
gratings is that no other materials boast the same power handling capabilities as
fused silica. As power requirements increase, this benefit is gaining importance
as the conventionally utilized metallic reflection gratings reach their limits and
break down.
7
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & GRATING THEORY
• Telecom Gratings: A specialized, dispersive grating is the telecom grating –
basically a narrow-band spectrometer grating. In telecom DWDM (Dense Wave-
length Division Multiplexing) networks, free-space optical modules utilize diffrac-
tion gratings as demultiplexers, either for demultiplexing units, or as the initial
component in ROADM (Reconfigurable Optical Add Drop Modules), DGFF (Dy-
namic Gain Flattening Filters) or DC (Dispersion Compensation) modules. This
application is characterized by a requirement for high dispersion within a narrow
bandwidth (for example 1525-1575 nm), and with extremely demanding require-
ments to diffraction eﬀiciency and polarization independence. Fused silica grating
technology has been applied to this application, and have achieved gratings with
95% DE and 0.05 dB PDL (Polarization Dependant Loss). Being 100% dielectric,
these gratings are furthermore ideal with respect to Telcordia requirements, as
they contain no polymers, glues or epoxies.
• Phase masks/ Beam-Splitters: The grating applications described above all
utilize the dispersive property of gratings. As gratings also have the property
that a discrete wavelength illumination will be diffracted into several discrete
diffraction orders according to the grating equation – beam-splitting applications
of gratings also abound. Transmission gratings’ high power handling capabilities
and environmental stability, combined with the possibility of grating periods down
to 200nm, make fused silica transmission gratings ideal for space, astronomy and
scientific applications.
• Achromatic grating interferometer: In this case, a set of two gratings create
an interference pattern that is defined by a master grating. The complexity of
using two gratings instead of a single accomplishes low spatial coherence of the
illumination, which is key given that with low wavelength lights sources, low
grating periods can be generated.
On the other hand, many aspects of the nanofabrication process become more complex
given the chosen material for transmission gratings. However,the advantages present
themselves as an incentive for development and further study of techniques for the
production processes of fused silica transmission gratings.
The production stage can be divided into two major processes: the grating patterning in
photoresist and the following transfer of the photoresist-based grating into fused silica.
The current lithographic step is based on Stepper Deep UV (DUV) Lithography. DUV
lithography has been regarded as an extremely precise and scalable patterning process
ever since the late 90s [12], and has become a staple in the fabrication scheme of
many companies partnering with DTU. The Stepper available at DTU (Canon FPA-
3000 EX4) is able to transfer structures with a critical dimension down to 200 nm
8
==PAGE:23==
2.2. TECHNOLOGY
9
with an enormous speed; in one hour, it can transfer nanostructures to more than
50 wafers of a diameter of 8”, corresponding to an area of 1.5 m2. The tool is thus
interesting for researchers allowing “large area” nanostructured devices as well as for
companies allowing rapid large-scale production of nanostructured components. The
current limitation being faced is the fact that the technical limit of the machine is pushed
to pattern resist thicker than 1000nm, given the poor selectivity that DUV resist shows
towards oxides[13]. This makes it so that with the patterning and exposure, obtaining
an optimal resist profile is particularly challenging.
This leads us to the second stage of the manufacturing, which is Deep Reactive Ion
Etching (DRIE) step. The non-optimal exposure then translates into a pattern transfer
of this poor resist profile into the oxide. The previous will then yield a poor etch profile,
aggravated by the fact that dry etching will produce facets on the grating profile (as
seen on Figure 2.4), which will completely change the optical properties of the device.
It is now the objective of this project to overcome the present DUV resist limitations,
which reduces the robustness of the fabrication process, as well as limits the development
of new products with deeper structures. We can define the limitations of the current
process flow as:
1. Poor selectivity of resist towards etched oxides (∼1 : 1)
2. Technical and physical limits of DUV Lithography Stepper reached, thicker resist
is not a possibility
3. Low etch rate from current RIE tool
4. Low uniformity and poor control of the sidewall
5. Faceting of oxides on etching
6. Influence of parameters unknown
Figure 2.3: Schematics of the current Ibsen process, with the first patterning step and
the dry etching into the oxides using resist as a mask.
9
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & GRATING THEORY
Figure 2.4: SEM image of a cross section of test structure made in fused silica using
the deep plasma etch process. The faceting is seen by the sloping angles at the top of
the etched feature sidewalls. The sample shown was cleaved. Images taken from [14].
10
==PAGE:25==
2.3. LITERATURE REVIEW
11
2.3
Literature Review
The designated Ibsen Photonics industrial project aims at replacing the current process
flow for a more robust hard-masking approach. The benefits of a hard masking material
would be an increase in selectivity as well as a reduction of the DUV resist thickness
which would ease the exposure step.
As for the etching phase, it is addressed by
transferring the DRIE process over to an Inductively Coupled Plasma RIE (RIE-ICP).
The key differentiation between RIE-ICP and RIE is the separate ICP RF power source
connected to the cathode that generates DC bias and attracts ions to the wafer. Thus,
with RIE-ICP technology it is possible to decouple ion current and ion energy applied to
the wafer, enlarging the process window. The ICP is employed as a high density source
of ions which increases the ionisation of the species in the plasma, whereas a separate
RF bias is applied to the substrate to create directional electric fields near the substrate
to achieve even more anisotropic etch profiles [15]. This approach is expected to increase
the etch rate of the targeted oxides, as well as improving the control on the sidewall
angle and increase uniformity of the etch with proper optimization of the process. Then,
with the need of a proper design of the process flow, a thorough literature review and a
powerful knowledge base is required. In this case, selection of the materials, tools and
steps to follow becomes relevant, and the selection will be made clear in this section.
As a first objective of the overall project, the selection of the hard mask material required
its own benefit-risk assessment, by cataloguing all previously known and established
masking materials literature, defining a set of pros and cons that will be consequently
weighed and assigned with a value to each mask candidate (process shown in Appendix
D). After such a study the materials are displayed in Diagram 2.5. This risk-benefit
assessment was not part of the Master project presented in this thesis, but these in-
formation provide a clarification as to why we investigate Cr in this project. The risk
assessment and the study of potential hard mask was performed as part of the larger
overall project.
At first glance, Cr seems to be the safest option showing the best potential. The other
candidates found suitable, mainly Al2O3 and Si, are to be considered as options for
alternative designs should Cr be insuﬀicient for our purpose. Suitable options such as
Ni [16] were discarded, along with all other materials that are not currently allowed in
Nanolab’s cleanroom facilities. The most relevant articles with Cr hard mask etching
are shown in Table 2.1 (all references cited). All Cr-based masks present similarly high
selectivity even in different etching chemistries. Si masks showed lower selectivity and
required for much thicker masking material [13][17][18], and although Al2O3 has shown
good selectivity [19], the risk of faceting and the lack of information on etching of Ta2O3
redirected attention towards Cr. All data suggests for this last one to be the optimal
candidate for study, as it not only shows good selectivity towards SiO2 on previous
literature [20][13][21], but also towards Ta2O5 [22].
11
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND & GRATING THEORY
Figure 2.5: Risk-Benefit assessment table. All parameters can be foudn in Appendix
D.
Reference
Etch material
Etching Chemistry
Selectivity
B. Li et al.
SiO2
C4F8
21
T. Ichiki et al.
SiO2
SF6
35
X. Li et al.
SiO2
C4F8
22
A. Mutallib et al.
Ta2O3
CHF3
28
Table 2.1: Literature review reference table. The mentioned works can be found in
the bibliography [13][22][20][21], and represent the benchmark for the deep etching of
oxides in this project. The etch material, chemistry and the selectivity are displayed
next to the author.
12
==PAGE:27==
2.3. LITERATURE REVIEW
13
On the other hand, there are some problems that will have to be addressed when it
comes to using such a material for hard masking:
1. Reflectivity of the Cr surface might pose as a problem for patterning.
2. The etching of oxides with a conductive metal mask might induce its faceting.
3. Previous trials by Ibsen Photonics showed signs of micromasking due to diﬀiculties
in stripping procedures.
These obstacles will be taken into account throughout the project and the process
flow was to be designed circumventing these known issues, as well as dedicating efforts
during characterization to prevent these. Such arguments and resolutions will be further
developed on and resolved on following sections.
13
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Experimental Methods
In the following chapter we will discuss the different stages of the fabrication process,
as well as the design of a working process flow, troubleshooting of the different pre-
sented issues and characterization of every step throughout. A quick overview on the
theoretical aspects of every process/equipment used will be included in every section.
3.1
Process Flow Overview
In the definition of the process flow we must take int account the optimization of the
different stages of the fabrication, as well as all of the testing and troubleshooting
procedures to perform.
The initial idea is to conduct and optimize the etching of two distinct grating patterns
on a series of stacked SiO2 and Ta2O5 wafers, as disposed in Table 3.1. The two patterns
for the gratings are the smaller 665nm pitch structures, with 32% duty cycle (DC), and
2393nm pitch structures with 60% DC (information on the patterns can be found in
Appendix A). We will refer to the first one as Design 1 (908d) and the second one as
Design 2 (937d). These dimensions were chosen given that Ibsen’s transmission gratings’
dimensions range in between those two limits. So, if the process can be optimized for
both, a unified approach can be consolidated.
The design of the 6’ test wafers for this project can be seen in Figure 3.2l. A set of pairs
of the two different patterns with adequate spacing will give us enough information on
uniformity along the dimensions of the used 6’ wafer substrates. A subset of fused silica
wafers from the stock will be set to be processed as control wafers. These are to be
used as the basis for the development of Design of Experiment (DoE) etching to fine
tune existing recipes. The basics of DoE can be found in Appendix E.
15
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Figure 3.1: Process flow diagram.
Figure 3.2: Wafer design, with highlighted dicing lines. These cuts will be performed
using a DISCO, Automatic Dicing Saw, DAD 321.
16
==PAGE:31==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
17
Figure 3.3: 908d pattern (Design 1) and 937d (Design 2) theoretical description.
The original fabrication process goes as follows:
1. Deposition of SiO2 and Ta2O5 layers on fused silica substrate via Plasma En-
hanced Chemical Vapour Deposition (PECVD).
2. Deposition of Cr hard mask via E-Beam Evaporation
3. Backside deposition of a −Si via PECVD for electrostatic clamping.
4. BARC spinning, followed by DUV Resist spinning and consequent exposure and
development.
5. Pattern transfer of Cr hard mask via DRIE.
6. DRIE of the oxide stack.
These steps will be thoroughly described and its optimization process will be shown. A
diagram of the process can be seen in Figure 3.1.
3.1.1
Stock Material
The required substrates for the project are to be taken from Ibsen Photonic’s stock.
One set of fused silica wafers, and a set of SiO2/Ta2O5 stacked wafers, which we will
call ”stack” wafers for convenience.
The stack wafers consist of 7 stacked pairs of
SiO2/Ta2O5 layers, deposited via PECVD by an outsourced company (description of
the layers in Table 3.1). The produced stack was designed in order to image the etch
rates easily, and it does not resemble in any way the design for Ibsen’s final products.
17
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Layer Item
Material
Thickness (nm)
Tolerance (%)
Layer 1
Ta2O5
325
±3
Layer 2
SiO2
167
±3
Layer 3
Ta2O5
325
±3
Layer 4
SiO2
167
±3
Layer 5
Ta2O5
325
±3
Layer 6
SiO2
167
±3
Layer 7
Ta2O5
325
±3
Refractive index 1545nm
SiO2
1451
±0,005
Refractive index 1545nm
Ta2O5
2084
±0,005
Stress compensation layer
SiO2
950
±3
Table 3.1: Stack wafer description of the different layers, from topmost (Layer 1).
3.1.2
Deposition
The processing of the stock material begins with the deposition of the pertinent layers
on the frontside of the wafer. The Temescal E-Beam Evaporator was the selected tool
for a uniform deposition of the Cr hard mask. E-Beam evaporation is a form of physical
vapor deposition in which a target anode is bombarded with an electron beam given off
by a charged tungsten filament under high vacuum. The electron beam causes atoms
from the target to transform into the gaseous phase. These atoms then precipitate into
solid form, coating everything in the vacuum chamber with a uniform thin layer of the
anode material.[23]
The target thickness was set to 200nm at a deposition rate of 0.2nm/s. Given the
expected etch rate of Cr on our oxide deep etch step (14 nm/min, depending on features
size and etch load, as per DTU Nanolab previous knowledge), 200nm were considered
to be more than enough to have a meaningful remaining mask thickness after the etch
which would allow us to evaluate a selectivity. The deposition rate of 2/s will provide
us a dense enough layer to perform as a hard mask effectively. Further optimisation
of the hard mask thickness is required in the future, as its thickness can certainly be
greatly diminished, thus reducing processing time and cost.
With further testing, a couple of steps into the process flow, stack wafers had expe-
rienced an aggressive bowing that manifested itself with extremely high He leak test
pressures (around 150mTorr/min). This warping is believed to be caused by the in-
trinsic stress from the PECVD-deposited oxide stack and the added tensile stress from
the Cr hard mask (as well as the compressive stress from the a −Si backside, that
was deposited further into the process). A diagram explaining the different forces in
play can be seen in Figure 3.4. This major drawback was resolved by removing the Si
backside, and depositing an equal amount of Cr with the same tool and parameters as
18
==PAGE:33==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
19
Figure 3.4: Diagram of the tensile and compressive forces exerted on the wafer. The
topmost metal layer exerts a tensile stress, whilst the a −Si backside exerts a compres-
sive stress.
a stress compensation layer. This layer would inevitably replace the previously planned
a−Si backside, given that the only purpose it served was to provide a conductive back-
side that was allowed on the tools used in the developed process flow for electrostatic
clamping. The Cr layer deposition on the backside could only be done after mutual
agreement with the fabrication lab and after cross-contamination evaluation. As Cr on
the backside could have been a cross-contamination concern for some machine.
Wafer
Description
No mask
No backside
Cr Mask
No backside
Cr Mask
a-Si Backside
Cr Mask
Cr Backside
Maximum Z
value (µm)
45.5
106
129
50.3
Table 3.2: Measurement of wafer Z deflection with KLA-Tencor P17 stylus profiler. All
measurements were performed along the X and Y axis od the wafer, defined by the flat.
Wafer stress measurements were performed with a KLA-Tencor P17 stylus profiler in
order to confirm and quantify the bowing of the samples. The conducted measurements
can be seen in Table 3.2. The metal backside was seen to reduce the bowing by a
considerable amount, and He leak up tests on all machines confirmed that the present
bowing was not a threat to clamping (He leak test reduced to 40mTorr/min). It must
be noted that the frontside Cr layer is not enough to ensure electrostatic clamping in
all tools, as this hard mask may diminish too much at some point in our etch test, hence
the absolute necessity of a conductive backside.
3.1.3
DUV Lithography
The following step to the process is the patterning via DUV Lithography. DUV Lithog-
raphy is based on stepper technology, a type of projection lithography that can rapidly
repeat or step a pattern across a substrate [24]. It has optics that reduce the image
19
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
on the mask, called a reticle, when it is projected onto the substrate. In projection
lithography, DUV light interferes with the pattern, which is established on the reticle
(mask) and produces a far-field diffraction image at the entrance pupil of the projection
lens (see Figure 3.5). The lens combines the light in its focal plane within the resist
where it interferes again in order to create a pattern. At least the zeroth and the first
order of the diffracted light must enter the projection lens in order to transfer an image
of the reticle pattern into the resist. In the described process, the image size is reduced
by a distinct reduction factor (usually 4 or 5) [25].
Figure 3.5: DUV Stepper diagram with its many parts (Image source [26]).
For the realistic case of a partially coherent light source, we can express such partial
coherence with the partial coherence factor σ (where 0 < σ < 1). As mentioned, at
least the zeroth and the first order of the diffracted light must enter the projection lens
in order to transfer an image of the reticle pattern into the resist, thus implying the
existence of a maximum illumination angle of the reticle Θmax, which relates to σ as
σ = sin(Θmax)
NA
(3.1)
Here NA is the numerical aperture of the projection lens, given by the refractive index
of the medium, and the half of the opening angle of the maximum cone of light, hence
20
==PAGE:35==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
21
being described as NA = nsin(Θmax) .
The ability of the first order to enter the projection lens determines the half-pitch
resolution R the areal image also known as the diffraction-limited resolution.
R = a
2 = k1λ
NA
(3.2)
with
k1 =
1
2(σ + 1)
R expresses the best possible half-pitch resolution of a periodic pattern with a pitch
determined by the geometry of the optical system, which is increasing for increasing
σ. This phenomena allows for the improvement of the resolution of the target patterns,
and opens up numerous techniques dedicated to exploiting such characteristics. These
are called Resolution Enhancement techniques (RETs). [15]
In the presented project, the features provided by these stepper tools allows for the
successful patterning of gratings of the dimensions intended. Additionally, in contrast
to the mainly used techniques for small feature patterning, E-Beam Lithography, DUV
Stepper lithography offers an industrially-friendly working speed and area of exposure.
[24]
As in any other lithographic process, we must first spin the resist that will be developed
later on.
For this project the chosen resist was DUV M35G [27], which is a thick
positive DUV resist, designed for 0.25 µm technology. With optimized dose and focus
parameters, line and space patterns down to 180 nm and iso patterns < 170nm have
been demonstrated on DUV exposure equipment. The thickness of this resist is critical
to the process at hand, as it must be chosen to be thick enough for it to withstand
as the mask for the DRIE-ICP Cr etch step, and thin enough for the exposure to be
successful. Given that a study on the resist selectivity during pattern transfer is due,
the set resist thickness was set at 1000nm, with a potential optimization further into
the project. Commonly, a bottom anti-reflective coating (BARC) is deposited onto the
substrate surface prior to the resist coating in order to prevent back-scattered light
from the substrate. This coating proves indispensable for the processed wafers, as the
Cr top most layers’ reflectivity is high enough to disrupt exposure. The spun BARC
coating was set at 90nm, and there should be a period of 24hrs in between the spinning
of BARC and the resist. This 24h period is stated as a company requirement to cool
down the BARC layer before spinning of the resist, as previous processes by Ibsen
reported negative effects when spinning over warm BARC.
21
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
In order to assess the ranges that should be targeted for the required Dose and Focus
tests (DoFo and DoTu), a custom photolithographic simulation software is used as well
as some control wafers. These suggested a final dosage probing in between 240 J/m2
and 360 J/m2, as well as a Focus Offset between -0.8 and 0.1 . The jobfile description
for the Stepper is described in the layout shown in Figure 3.6.
The final Dose and Focus Offset parameters used are described in Table 3.3.
Figure 3.6: Dose and focus offset jobfile layout description. The chips will be exposed
independently with the seen parameters, for further study of the development of the
resist and profile quality.
Dose (J/m2)
Focus Offset
Control wafers
340
-0.4
Stack wafers
280
-0.3
Table 3.3: Dose and focus offset final values after tuning. The selection of the values
was based off of visual inspection of the chips and AFM measurement to test the
development of the resist.
The consequent development was conducted, with a 90 second post-exposure bake
(PEB) and and 60 seconds of development.
In Figure 3.7 a picture of the control
wafers after the whole lithographic process can be seen.
22
==PAGE:37==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
23
The uniformity of the resist across of the wafer is not perfect, and some defects such
has resist thickness variation, as well as comet defects can be observed on some wafers.
Though, most of the defects did not significantly affect our process.
Indeed, the resist thickness variation would be more of a concern in the current Ibsen
process flow, as the process engineers rely on the resist mask for the deep etching
of structures. In this project, as we use the Cr layer as a hard mask for the deep
etch, the lack of uniformity is not as critical, as we only require enough resist for the
pattern transfer onto the Cr.
We then must note that for the optimization of the
resist thickness, as the uniformity increases due to less resist being used (exposure and
development eased by the thickness to be developed), the more severe will be avert
effects of the resist such as the ones previously mentioned.
Once the lithographic step is completed, we then must move onto the pattern transfer
into the Cr layer for the stack wafers. The control wafers will be kept for the deep
oxide etch process as a control benchmark to monitor potential machine drifting across
time. The study of the machine drift will not be part of this work.
(a) Control wafer 49535 picture after
lithography.
(b) Stack wafer 48219 picture after lithog-
raphy.
Figure 3.7: Pictures taken of both control and stack wafers after DUV exposure and
development. Resist non-uniformity and adverse phenomena can be appreciated in some
areas of the wafers. The difference in colour between both samples can be attributed
to the Cr layer presence in the stack wafer. When it comes to the control wafer, the
pink colour comes from the a-Si backside, as the sample is completely transparent.
23
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
3.1.4
Pattern Transfer
In this following section, we will discuss the pattern transfer of the DUV Lithography
exposed pattern onto the deposited Cr layer. In this section we will study the following
items: ICP Cr etch selectivity towards Cr, ICP Cr etch uniformity and finally Cr
pattern profile after etch.
The first step of the pattern transfer is to etch away the bottom antireflective coating
(BARC) that was left after development of the resist. We must remember that during
exposure on the Stepper tool, the BARC layer does not undergo any polymerization
process, and thus remains insenstive to the resist developement step and needs to be
fully removed using DRIE to access the underlaying Cr layer.
The basics and foundation of DRIE will be explained on the following section when
discussing the oxide etch. For now, we will point out that the BARC etch is conducted
with the parameters specified on Table 3.4. The etch time for the BARC was defined
using end-point detection.
Parameters
BARC Etch
Time (mm:ss)
1:35
O2 (sccm)
40
Pressure (mTorr)
5
Coil Power (W)
200
Platen Power (W)
20
Temperature (ºC)
20
Table 3.4: Table of recipe parameters for DRIE BARC Etch.
The endpoint detection system is based on optical emission spectroscopy (OES), which
uses light emitted from the plasma during etching processes to detect by-products [28].
When the etch reaches a stop layer the plasma chemistry changes and detection of
this difference indicates an ‘end-point’. This scheme comes with many advantages, as
it detects when features with varying sizes on the same wafer (that naturally etch at
different rates) reach a stop layer at different times during the process, it improves wafer
yields through the provision of repeatable end-pointed processes and reduces the need
for costly and destructive cross-sectional wafer analyses.
In the case of our BARC etch, we can monitor the different by-products associated
to the etching of BARC (in our case carbon-based products), and determine a precise
etch stop to reduce undercuts. The monitorization of the BARC etch and the endpoint
detection layout can be found in Figure 3.8. The optimal etching time for the 90nm
BARC layer was found to be around 1min and 35s, and after imaging of the cross
section, as seen in Figure 3.9, we could see no presence of BARC.
24
==PAGE:39==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
25
Figure 3.8: Endpoint detection signal of BARC etch. The initial BARC etch endpoint
can be seen at 55s. The endpoint can be identified as a slight decrease in the C2 median
signal, as we are etching away the carbon-based layer. This duration was deemed not
long enough to remove the coating in following etches, as the endpoint was not clear
enough. An additional 40s of etching were enough to remove the BARC layer completely
(see Appendix F).
From the characterization of the SEM images seen in Figure 3.9, we conclude that the
resist profile is uniform all around the wafer to allow for a good pattern transfer into
the Cr, even with the effects from non-optimal spinning and stitching. Naturally, given
the difference in size (and hence, loading) between both patterns, the steeper SWA and
higher resist thickness for the design 2 pattern is much better for our purpose. Once
the stack wafers have been BARC-etched, it is now time to execute the pattern transfer.
For this purpose the SPTS PRO-ICP Metal etcher was used.
It is necessary to first lay out a basic introduction to etching, more specifically RIE.
This is a type of dry etching that uses chemically reactive plasma to remove material
deposited on wafers. Dry etching processes were invented back in 1967 [29], and has
ever since pushed research in the micro and nanofabrication field heavily. The RIE is
a parallel plate capacitive coupled plasma system, where the top electrode is grounded
and the bottom electrode is connected to an RF generator through a matching network
that works as a blocking capacitor. With an RF alternating potential the polarity is
changing on the bottom electrode. In principle the electrons will be attracted to the
bottom electrode when the polarization is positive and the ions will be attracted when
the electrode is of negative polarization. But when the frequency of the alternating
potential is very high, the ions are too heavy to travel across the plasma in that time
frame only the electrons will reach the electrode.
Due to the blocking capacitor a
negative potential will build up on the bottom electrode and when equilibrium has
25
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
been reached the potential on the platen is at an average negative potential called the
DC bias (VDC).
(a) Resist profile design 1, chip 7E
(b) Resist profile design 2, chip 7J.
(c) Resist profile design 1, chip 7E.
(d) Resist profile design 2, chip 7J.
Figure 3.9:
SEM cross-section of the two gratings patterns after BARC etch of
WFR48219. All samples were cleaved with a dicing saw, and coated in a thin layer
of gold for 15sec for imaging purposes. Both the Cr and Oxide layers can be seen in
the images, as well as the BARC coating underneath the resist.
Given the previous statements, most of the time the bottom electrode will be negatively
charged and the electrons will be repelled from it, so that almost no electrons exists
in the nearest region of the electrode (ion sheathe). No collisions with electrons will
happen here, including the excitations, and consequently no light is coming out from
this part (dark space). Only when the cathode potential is above zero electrons will flow
to the bottom electrode. Because of the average potential difference between the plasma
and the bottom electrode the ions coming into the ion sheath are accelerated toward
the bottom electrode and will bombard a sample laying on that electrode. The larger
a VDC the stronger the bombardment will be. This ion bombardment is involved in the
26
==PAGE:41==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
27
etching process and gives the physical contribution to the etch. The actual chemical
reaction in the surface of our target is the following:
1. The radicals or the reactive species are created in the plasma by dissociation.
2. These radicals are not electrically charged and will therefore move around by
diffusion.
3. Some will get close enough to the sample surface to be adsorbed on the surface.
4. A reaction may take place between the sample and the radical to form a reaction
product.
5. The reaction product may desorb from the surface.
6. And the product may diffuse into the plasma to be pumped out.
Both of these mentioned phenomena, physical and chemical etching, take place in com-
mon etching practices, and will constitute the driving factor of study when understand-
ing the optimal parameters and settings for the pattern transfer and the oxide deep
etching of the wafers in this project.
In the case of the ICP etching tools used in this project, although the principles are the
same, the chamber layout differs from the common RIE system. In the ICP chamber,
a coil is wound around the upper part of the chamber which is made of a nonmetallic
material so that the magnetic field easily penetrates into the chamber. If an RF gener-
ator is connected to the coil, it generates a cylindrically symmetric magnetic field that
changes polarity with the RF generator. If a gas is introduced into the chamber, elec-
trons will be ripped off the atoms and start to oscillate back and forth while the atoms
remain relatively immobile. The process is similar to one in the RIE chamber, but
here there are no electrodes inside the chamber. This enables us to obtain high density
plasma without problems of corrosion and power lost through dissipation. The plasma
created by the coil does not have any preferred direction (the RIE plasma did have one
because of the grounded upper electrode). An RF generator is therefore connected to
the platen electrode so that ions from the plasma may be driven towards it in order to
assist in the etching process. This last variable will also constitute a parameter of high
importance during the study of the etching.
When it comes to the project at hand, the common Cr etching recipe developed by
Nanolab staff was used. This is based on Chlorine-Oxygen chemistry, which has been
shown to provide highly anisotropic etches suitable for our purpose [30][31]. The pa-
rameters used for the Cr etch are shown in Table 3.5.
27
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Parameters
Cr Etch
PR Strip
Cl2 (sccm)
65
0
O2 (sccm)
15
100
Pressure (mTorr)
15
5
Coil Power (W)
300
800
Platen Power (W)
15
50
Temperature (ºC)
50
50
Table 3.5: Table of parameters for the Cr etching recipe and the photoresist strip recipe.
The process is finished off with a photoresist removal step, as it is pertinent for the study
of the mask’s properties when etching into the stack. The bare Cr mask will develop
a native Cr2O3 layer, which has been shown to present similar etching resistance as
Cr [32]. The etching of both the Cr and the photoresist are monitored with endpoint
detection to ensure full removal and the associated data can be seen in Appendix F.
The removal step was performed with the parameters shown in Table 3.5.
Chlorine-based chemistry processes are prone to the creation of chlorine by-products
that might get stuck to the metal mask’s walls [16]. With the photoresist removal step,
we get rid of some of these in a controlled way, using oxygen plasma.
Figure 3.10: Photography of WFR48225 after pattern transfer and photoresist stripping
in ICP Metal Etch.
After the pattern transfer process, the stack wafers’ look can be seen in Figure 3.10. A
consequent study of the selectivity towards Cr and uniformity during pattern transfer,
as well as an assessment of the Cr profile were performed. The results can be seen in
Figure 3.11 and Table 3.6 . The results show a good enough selectivity towards Cr
28
==PAGE:43==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
29
that may lead to an optimization of resist usage. Additionally, the uniformity of the
etch (the closer to 1, the more uniform), as well as the Cr profile result suﬀicient for
the oxide deep etch step, which will be discussed in the following section. Uniformity in
all processes is a property of high industrial interest, and the desire for a straight mask
profile comes from the fact that it is needed in order to also have a straight profile on
our grating and avoid faceting [14], a straight mask profile is required. The uniformity
was calculated in the following way:
Uniformity(%) = Max(R) −min(R)
2 · ˆR
(3.3)
with R being the data subset from which we want to calculate its uniformity.
WFR48199
Mean resist height
before pattern
transfer (nm)
808
Resist uniformity
before pattern
transfer (%)
91
Mean resist height
after pattern
transfer (nm)
475
Resist uniformity
after pattern
transfer (%)
89,5
Selectivity
1,7
Table 3.6: Results from measurement of resist height via AFM before and after pattern
transfer and resist stripping in ICP Metal Etch.
These results conclude there is a potential for improvement in the design of the mask,
and ratify the feasibility of the project.
29
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
(a) Cr mask profile design 1, chip 1G.
(b) Cr mask profile design 2, chip 1H.
(c) Cr mask profile design 1, chip 9G.
(d) Cr mask profile design 2, chip 1H.
Figure 3.11: SEM cross-section of the different grating patterns after pattern transfer
in ICP Metal Etch of WFR50148. All samples were cleaved with a dicing saw, and
coated in a thin layer of gold for 15sec for imaging purposes. The imaged wafer is a
quartz wafer.
3.1.5
Oxide Deep Etch
Once pattern is transferred, a study of the oxide deep etch using DRIE is performed.
In this section we will evaluate the performance of the previously determined recipes
via DOE (study performed by Chantal Myrielle Silvestre), and catalogue the pertinent
parameters: Ta2O5 etch rate, SiO2 etch rate, etch profile and selectivity towards oxides.
The DRIE tool is an RIE-ICP, whose purpose is the etching of silicon oxides or nitrides
on 6” wafers. The working principles of this system has been explained in the previous
section. An extensive Design of Experiment (DOE) study was performed on the etching
of Ta2O5 and SiO2 in this particular tool earlier as part of the overall Ibsen’s project,
as there were no previous working recipes for the targeted materials. The DoE was
performed on fused silica wafer using resist as a mask, e.g. the current Ibsen process
30
==PAGE:45==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
31
Recipe Number
03
07
12
14
C4F8 (sccm)
15,8
9,4
5,3
3,1
He (sccm)
79
281
92
94
H2 (sccm)
5,3
9,4
2,6
3,1
Pressure (mTorr)
1,73
4,47
1,6
1,5
Coil Power (W)
2500
2500
3250
2500
Platen Power (W)
300
300
250
200
Temperature (ºC)
20
20
20
10
Time (min)
20
20
20
25
Table 3.7: Parameters for the working oxide deep etch recipes in DRIE.
flow. More information on DOE can be found in Appendix E. The more promising
working recipes resulting from the DoE were tested as part of this project and their
resulting etches outcomes are summarized in Table 3.7 and 3.8 and Figures 3.12 and
3.13.
It is clear that the current chemistry works as an etching agent for the oxides, but it is
now a future objective to extract information from these screening results and conduct a
series of experiments to fine tune the important variables to etch a stack of Ta2O5/SiO2.
From the images shown we can conclude that the platen power, pressure and gas ratio
are the ones of heavy importance. Their effects can be further observed in Figure 3.13c,
where the lower temperature likely promote the polymerization of species by increasing
the condensation of the fluorocarbon layer. In turn, this leads to overpassivation of the
grating, resulting in a very slow etch with a jagged bottom of the trench (where we
can still see some remnant fluorinated species). When it comes to platen power, it is
believed to have a heavy influence on the faceting issue that all samples are presenting
(change of the SWA in the mask layer), as platen power will determine the field lines
that are the cause of such.
Regarding the previously mentioned SWA, all measured chips presented a SWA higher
than the established target of <10º set for the overall project. It is known that the
etch rate of Ta2O5 is much slower than that of SiO2 [22], so one would expect a certain
manifestation of such fact when etching a multistack. During experiments conducted by
Ibsen Photonics on parallel projects, both bulk Ta2O5 and SiO2 exhibited SWA <10º
these same recipes, but on the results shown all SWA measurements were over that
target. The current hyphothesis for that observation might raise from the fact that the
SWA is determined by the ratio between Ta2O5 and SiO2 being etched rather than by
the process parameters. A larger presence of Ta2O5 might lead to higher SWA angles
given its slower etch rate, but that can only be confirmed with the appropriate exper-
iments, which did not fall within the objectives of this project nor was the necessary
stock material available for such.
31
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
(a)
Etch
profile
design
2,
recipe
03,
WFR48212
(b)
Etch
profile
design
2,
recipe
07,
WFR48222
(c)
Etch
profile
design
2,
recipe
12,
WFR48221
(d)
Etch
profile
design
2,
recipe
14,
WFR48210
Figure 3.12: SEM cross-section of chip 3D after oxide deep etch in DRIE-Pegasus 4.
All samples were cleaved with a dicing saw, and coated in a thin layer of gold for 20sec
for imaging purposes. The different SiO2 (darker) and Ta2O5 layers (brighter) of the
stack can be observed.
32
==PAGE:47==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
33
(a)
Etch
profile
design
1,
recipe
03,
WFR48212
(b)
Etch
profile
design
1,
recipe
07,
WFR48222
(c)
Etch
profile
design
1,
recipe
12,
WFR48221
(d)
Etch
profile
design
1,
recipe
14,
WFR48210
Figure 3.13: SEM cross-section of chip 1G after oxide deep etch in DRIE-Pegasus 4.
All samples were cleaved with a dicing saw, and coated in a thin layer of gold for 20sec
for imaging purposes. The different SiO2 (darker) and Ta2O5 layers (brighter) of the
stack can be observed.
33
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Design 1
Design 2
Recipe #
03*
07
12
14
03
07
12
14
Mean etch
rate (nm/min)
32
38
28
18
81
61
52
32
Mean etch
SWA (º)
17,5
13
11,5
15,41
18
11
11
11,5
Mean mask
thickness (nm)
NA
101
113,5
138
150
160
169
188,5
Mean mask
SWA (º)
NA
34
36,5
29,97
41
37
37
26
Etch
uniformity (%)
68,5
75
74
58
93
95,5
91
90,5
SWA
uniformity (%)
53
84
69
77
93
89,5
84,5
83,5
Mask
uniformity (%)
NA
68
83,5
74,5
93,5
87
88,5
94,5
Selectivity
towards stack
NA
6,5
5,5
5,8
25,7
25,4
25,4
34,4
Table 3.8: Measurements from cross section after oxide deep etch recipes in DRIE-
Pegasus 4. All measurements were taken after dicing and gold sputtering the selected
imaging chips referenced in Figure A.2 via SEM. *Disclaimer: the etch on Design 1
with Recipe 03 reached the bottom and consequently stopped on it own early in the
process, due to the high SWA. The remaining etch time ended up etching away all of
the mask. Numbers must be taken accordingly as a reference.
34
==PAGE:49==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
35
All in all, from the given recipes we can observe a variety of responses to the different
parameters, with heavy variations in etch depth, and more notoriously SWA, depending
on the wafer location. Further study and a dedicated DoE must be performed in order
to conclude a best practice.
3.1.6
Hard Mask Strip
In this last section of the fabrication process flow, the target is to successfully strip the
Cr hard mask from the stack wafers and avoid any Cr presence that might tamper with
the optical properties of the grating. One of the main concerns of the project was the
presence of contaminants on the oxide gratings top after stripping of the metal mask
caused by the potentially poor removal of the Cr mask.
In order to conduct the stripping procedure two methods were considered: dry etching
and wet etching of the Cr mask. The DRIE-ICP tool used for Cr pattern transferring
can also be used for stripping away the metal mask, and endpoint detection can be used
to determine the duration of the stripping. Alternatively, wet etching presents itself as
a fast, industrially-scalable technique. The wafers can be submerged in a commercially
available solution of ceric ammonium nitrate, perchloric acid and nitric acid (Chromium
Etch 18, p28667, OSC Organo SpezialChemie GmbH), with occasional gentle shaking
to avoid redeposition of flakes on top of the structures and get a clear visible endpoint.
The drawbacks to both of these approaches are the fact that no etching of the backside
without damaging of the structures is possible in the DRIE-ICP, and when it comes
to wet etching, the reusability of the chromium etchant solution (specifically by other
parties in different projects) makes the process prone to particle contamination.
Figure 3.14: Photography of wet chemically stripped sample from WFR48212.
No
apparent presence of contaminants or remnants is seen, sample looks transparent and
gratings appear colourful.
In Figures 3.15 we can see the results of stripping on the samples. No presence of the
original Cr mask is present, and an extremely subtle rounding of the features due to
the overetch can be seen. The optimization of the stripping time can be executed in
order to reduce such effect, although the consequences of an overetch during stripping
does not put the integrity of the structure profile in jeopardy.
35
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
(a) Design 1 pattern after stripping.
(b) Design 2 pattern after stripping.
Figure 3.15: SEM images of stripped stack wafer samples (WFR48212) after 18min of
etch on solution ”Chromium Etch 18”.
In order to conduct a study of the chemical composition of the samples before and
after stripping of the mask, two techniques were initially considered: Electron Diffrac-
tion Spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometry (XPS). Whilst EDS
presents itself as a quick technique for bulk characterization, initial tests on chemically
stripped samples showed a constant presence of Cr across the sample, which led us
to believe that the presence of a disproportionate Oxygen signal was drowning the Cr
signal, and the data analysis software recognized an unfounded presence of Cr. All
EDS tests can be seen in Appendix G.
On the other hand, XPS is an extremely surface-sensitive method whose system also
allows for a depth profiling experiment, which proves really beneficial in the presented
project. XPS relies on a well know principle namely the photo-electric effect, which
was explained by Einstein in 1905 [33]. When a surface is bombarded with photons
with suﬀicient energy an electron may adsorb all the energy of the photon and be able
to escape the solid with a kinetic energy reflecting the photon energy as well as the
bonding energy of the electron. This phenomenon allows us to extract the composition
of material surfaces, the relative abundances of these components on surfaces, and the
chemical state of polyvalent ions by measuring the binding energies of elements.
In the following study we conducted a depth profiling experiment on different samples
to rule out the presence of Cr contamination on the stripped samples. In order to
establish a benchmark for both certain presence and non-presence of Cr a non-stripped
wafer sample and a glass lamella were measured alongside the stripped samples for
reference purpose. The depth profiling measurement was ran for 2998 seconds for the
wet chemistry-stripped samples and 995 seconds for the dry chemistry-stripped samples.
36
==PAGE:51==
3.1. PROCESS FLOW OVERVIEW
37
The results are shown in Figure 3.16.
In the right side results of Figure 3.16 we can see from the absence of characteristic
peaks of Cr at 576.5eV and 587eV on all samples but the reference non-stripped Cr
sample that the presence of Cr in stripped samples is not likely. All of the data from
the XPS measurement can be seen in Appendix H.
From these results we can conclude there is no apparent presence of Cr contamination
inside the sample, and from topside view examination, it does not seem as there are any
noticeable Cr nanoparticles (which we will mention in the next section). The diffraction
eﬀiciency (DE) measurement on the final device characterization will then give us an
insight as to whether the etching and stripping was successful enough to meet company
standards.
37
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Figure 3.16: XPS signals of Ta 4f and Cr 2p after 2998s of ion beam etching (995s for
the ICP sample).The associated peaks of Tantalum determine the expected presence
of Ta2O5 on our stack’s first few nanometers. When it comes to Cr, we can see the
associated metal Cr and CrO peaks on our Cr reference sample, whereas we cannot
on the stack sample.
38
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Device Characterization
4.1
Final Characterization
In the following section we will compare the different results obtained when it comes to
the 4 etching recipes tested, comment on the viability of these when it comes to Ibsen’s
process flow and requirements, comment on diffraction eﬀiciency measurements, and
finally, compare the obtained results with the previously mentioned state of the art.
The stack samples have been successfully processed and etched with a working process
flow, thus validating it in the process. This constituted the major objective of this
thesis project, leading up to the next step on the overall Ibsen project. In the following
section the resulting gratings will be reviewed and an assessment on further actions
based on the results will be done.
4.1.1
Selectivity and Sidewall Angle
The two main figures of interest for Ibsen as a producer of spectroscopic solutions is
the sidewall angle (SWA) of their gratings and the oxide etch selectivity (for suﬀicient
etch depth), as these will be the one that determine the grating’s eﬀiciency and working
characteristics. The target SWA for Ibsen’s project was SWA < 10o and when it comes
to selectivity Soxide−Cr > 20.
The characterization of the tested recipes, as seen in Table 3.8, is now a powerful tool
to identify and move onto an optimal process flow that will provide for a steep SWA
whilst keeping a high selectivity.
From these observations, we then consider recipe
07 and 12 to be the best behaved in both aspects, showing a promising selectivity
with a considerably good uniformity, whilst keeping the SWA as low as possible when
39
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION
compared to the other recipes. In the case for the tested recipes, a difference in the etch
profile of the chips closer to the wafer edge when compared to the more central ones
exists. This effect may be studied further to uncover the phenomena that drive such
disparity. A breakdown of the etching’s uniformity and measurements can be seen in
the wafer heat maps in Figures 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3. The values seen were measured from
the sample’s SEM cross-section images. All values have been calculated for both design
1 (908d) and design 2 (937d). Additionally the wafer mappings of the etch rate, etch
SWA and selectivity can be seen. The wafer heat map gives out information on where
do we obtain better/worse (green/red) values for the purpose at hand.
The differences we can see in the etch depths and SWA throughout the different positions
of the wafer is a giveaway of imbalances when it comes to the main etching parameters
(pressure, gas presence, ICP uniformity) coming from the chamber geometry and tool
setup. However, the uniformity is well kept over 90% for Design 2 when it comes to
etch depth and 80% for the SWA. Given that the etching procedure is much more
problematic for the smaller Design 1, the uniformity values are lower, as expected.
This difference in etch rates between both designs we previously saw in Table 3.8 is
thought to be due to the difference in the amount of material to be etched in both
cases. Even though the local loading in the smaller design is higher (32% DC), the fact
that the overall linewidth is much smaller makes it so that the presented etch rate will
be slower. Given this fact, both designs cannot and should not be compared result-wise,
but they become a useful tool to address different problems in different scales.
The information that becomes relevant when analyzing the results is the correlation
in between the recipe parameters (Table 3.7) and the resulting etch characterization
(Table 3.8). What we can initially see is that a higher amount of etching gases, C4F8,
leads to higher etch rates with sub-optimal selectivity. If we reduce the amount of
these and lower the temperature, as we do in recipe 14, then we can see the decrease of
the etch rate due to higher passivation. This becomes an issue as a slower etch might
lead to a higher SWA. Moreover, the additive gas, H2, can also have an important role
during the oxide etch, as it will promote the creation of HF gas, which is volatile and
does not have any effect during the etch. Because of the trade-off that can be seen in
between selectivity and SWA (higher etch rates lead to low SWA but poorer selectivity,
according to the results), these gases become target variables of the follow-up study to
optimise SWA and selectivity.
40
==PAGE:55==
4.1. FINAL CHARACTERIZATION
41
Figure 4.1: Heat map of the etch rate for the four tested recipes.
41
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 4.2: Heat map of the selectivity for the four tested recipes.
42
==PAGE:57==
4.1. FINAL CHARACTERIZATION
43
Figure 4.3: Heat map of the SWA for the four tested recipes.
43
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION
4.1.2
Diffraction Eﬀiciency Measurement
Given the circumstances of the project and the stock at hand, it was not possible
to accomplish any measurements on diffraction eﬀiciency of the confectioned gratings,
however, the measurement itself is worth mentioning so the reader can understand its
importance, relevance and why was it not possible to conduct these tests.
To give an insight into this measurement, we must first introduce the idea. Diffraction
eﬀiciency is the performance of diffractive optical elements in terms of power throughput.
It is a measure of how much optical power is diffracted into a designated direction
compared to the power incident onto the diffractive element of grating [3].
If the
diffracted power is designated with P and the incident power with P0 the eﬀiciency η
reads:
η = P
P0
(4.1)
The diffraction eﬀiciency of a grating can be specified in two ways:
• The absolute eﬀiciency is defined as above and relates the power diffracted into
a particular order to the incident power.
• The relative eﬀiciency relates the power diffracted into a particular order to the
power that would be reflected by a mirror of the same coating as the grating,
therefore attributing to inevitable reflection losses at the grating but not caused
by ineﬀicient diffraction itself.
A typical eﬀiciency measuring apparatus consists of the different parts shown in Figure
4.4. As a result of this measurement we can obtain a plot of the eﬀiciency against the
wavelength, thus giving us an insight as to how well does the device diffract onto its
different orders.
This measurements constitute the finish line of the project when it comes to the func-
tionality of the device. Unfortunately, as exciting as they sound, these do not constitute
the main objectives of this fabrication project, as the interest in this case lays on the
fabrication process, its variables and resulting grating profiles. Moreover, the stack
wafers used for this thesis are comprised of multilayers that were not designed with the
intention of being neither commercialized nor optically attractive.
44
==PAGE:59==
4.2. STATE OF THE ART COMPARISON
45
Figure 4.4: Typical monochromator-mode eﬀiciency measuring apparatus diagram.
4.2
State of the art comparison
In Section 2, current state of the art articles were referenced as a benchmark for the
project. In Table 4.1 we can see a direct comparison of this project’s results put up
against the given references when it comes to Selectivity and SWA. The results show
an advantage in the presented process flow when it comes to selectivity and SWA. It
must also be mentioned that the current project gives an overview on the uniformity of
the process across a 6’ wafer, which further increases the complexity and risk of failure
next to small chips.
More importantly, when compared to the current Ibsen’s process flow, it can be ob-
served that both the selectivity and the SWA are within the target ranges for company
standards. With the presented fabrication scheme, the following benefits have been
identified:
1. Potential for the reduction of resist thickness, which may lead to defect decrease
and yield increase
2. Mask uniformity improvement, leading to yield increase
3. Potential for the reduction of Cr mask thickness, which may lead to straighter
SWA
4. Major reduction in wafer processing time
45
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 4. DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION
Reference
Etched material
Etch Chemistry
Selectivity
SWA (º)
B. Li et al.
SiO2
C4F8
21
11
T. Ichiki et al.
SiO2
SF6
35
13
X. Li et al.
SiO2
C4F8
22
15
A. Mutallib et al.
Ta2O3
CHF3
28
-
Recipe 03
SiO2/Ta2O5
C4F8
26
18
Recipe 07
SiO2/Ta2O5
C4F8
25
11
Recipe 12
SiO2/Ta2O5
C4F8
25
11
Recipe 14
SiO2/Ta2O5
C4F8
34
11
Table 4.1: Comparison of literature with the current project on etching of oxides with
a Cr mask. The recipes used in this project are highlighted in red, and the displayed
values are those of the design 2 pattern, as the scale of these structures compares best
with the proposed literature (15-50µm).
On the other hand, some weakpoints were exposed in the process which will require
further study:
1. The built-in stress from the multi-stack layer deposition requires for an extra
stress compensation layer on the backside of the wafer (same thickness as mask)
2. Stitching errors are still present in the lithography step and these may translate
to bad pattern transfer. However, it has been seen not to be a troublesome defect
in most products by Ibsen Photonics.
3. Mask consumption in Design 1 is a major issue, as the passivation on the sidewall
should be suﬀicient not to consume the mask from the sides
4. Faceting is still a concern, given that the observed SWA changes from oxide to
mask.
These points are taken into consideration and some workarounds and potential modifi-
cations will be presented up next to counter some of these phenomena.
46
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
The objective set for this project was to provide a working process flow for patterning
and transferring a hard mask into a stack, with the intent to shift the fabrication scheme
of gratings for a well-renowned company in the business of spectroscopy.
In the current work we have presented a new approach based on the use of a Cr hard
mask. The developement of the process flow was conducted, as well as the many adjust-
ments and improvements to work around the encountered issues. The aforementioned
process flow consisted of an initial deposition of the hard mask metal on both sides of
the target wafer, followed up by a lithographic step that enabled the consequent Cr
pattern transfer via chlorine-chemistry. A fluorine-based deep oxide etch then leads the
process, with a final mask stripping step. Every mentioned step was monitored and
tuned in order to be able to constitute the validity of the whole process flow. The full
process flow can be found in Appendix B.
In the end, the resulting gratings present excellent selectivity with the given working
recipes, and its SWA falls within a range that can lead to improvement towards the
establishment of working process flow for deept etch of oxide.
As a counterpart, the weakpoints of the process were highlighted, with stress and
faceting being the biggest concerns. These will be addressed accordingly in the fol-
lowing chapter and alternative methods will be proposed for further improvement.
In conclusion, the objective to set a working process flow within the scope of the new
fabrication scheme of Ibsen was met, setting a new standard for transparent oxide
patterning and grating nanofabrication.
47
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6
Further Outcome
6.1
Ibsen’s future project
The objectives of the overall Ibsen project were not intended to be met by this thesis
project, but the alignment with these must be acknowledged in some way. The process
flow was successfully developed, and the next step towards completion of goals is to
execute a DOE study on the etching recipes, in order to reduce the SWA and improve
selectivity, whilst keeping high uniformity for the given oxide stack.
Once targets
are met, an assessment of the diffraction eﬀiciency must be performed.
This final
measurement will provide a definitive sentence as to whether the device is production-
worth, as well as setting a final yield to the process.
Following up, the whole fabrication scheme must be translated into Ibsen’s cleanroom
facilities. Taking into account the various differences in recipes induced by changes in
gas chemistry, chamber geometry and overall conditions. This process is to be seen as
a relatively long-term goal.
Other than the future in this project, many other potential modifications and alterna-
tives present themselves as interesting projects that can further look into developing
innovative nanofabrication tools for grating technology. Some of the more interesting
ones will now be presented.
6.1.1
Alternative Hard Mask
In the current project, the selection of the material for the hard mask was executed after
a rigorous literature-based risk-benefit assessment. The considered masking materials
are not all possible materials that could be used when hard-masking. The two main
48
==PAGE:63==
6.1. IBSEN’S FUTURE PROJECT
49
requirements for the hard mask to fit the criteria to become good masking materials
for oxides is to have good selectivity when etching with carbon fluorides and to be easy
to pattern. All other considerations can be seen in Appendix D.
Other possible materials were discarded given they were not granted access to DTU
Nanolab’s facilities. Other masking materials such as ceramics [34], organic masks [35]
and various other metals [36] could have been also a subject of study in this project.
Further study into the incorporation of said materials is to be done.
6.1.2
Hard Mask Stack Design
The more complex possibilities that current deposition methods offer opens up a whole
new dimension of hard mask design. Materials can be stacked to create tailored hard
masks that may adapt to overcome each other’s weakpoints. Many different configu-
rations have been designed and used for specific nanofabrication processes [37][38][39],
and in that same fashion, a Cr hard mask may benefit from the presence of protection
layers and such.
In particular, the addition of a top Si layer would benefit the patterning process because
of the protection it would offer the underlaying Cr from the oxygen plasma exposure
it may be subject to. Another possible issue that may be solved via hard mask stacks
could be faceting. The presented solution by Huff and Pedersen [14] is to increase the
thickness of the mask accordingly, but the grating width on the design 1 pattern is
small enough for chemical etching of the mask’s sides to make this effort futile. The
proposed solution would be to add masking layers that hinder the interaction of the
electro-potential electrical fields that surround the patterned Cr layers and the electrical
fields directing the high-energy ions from the plasma to the substrate surface. Further
study would be required on the matter, where pertinent simulations and optimization
of mask layers’ composition and thickness could be performed taking into account the
results of this project.
6.1.3
DUV Exposure
As previously mentioned, the optimization of the lithography step represents a step
in the direction of an eﬀicient workflow when it comes to grating nanofabrication. All
together with Prolith simulations and the fine tuning of the resist thickness, it is possible
to decrease the feature size of the gratings, as well as the uniformity of the resist
thickness, which all in all will increase the production yield.
The lithography step can further be improved by exploiting the aforementioned RETs
one can decrease and sharpen the features on grating patterns, all while keeping the
process’ duration under industrial standards.
49
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 6. FURTHER OUTCOME
6.2
Industrial PhD Projection
As a final touchpoint of the thesis a potential Industrial PhD stemming from the current
project will be presented.
Ibsen Photonics differentiates itself by being a high quality provider of 1-D oxide trans-
mission gratings. The work that is being done as of now intends to push the envelope
on the fabrication of this product and accomplish major benefits in terms of quality and
throughput. However, as the process develops some of the improvement points made
throughout the report may lead to the innovative idea of 2-D Gratings.
2-D Gratings can be achieved by overlaying the two 1-D structures we would typically
expose during lithography. The fact that we dispose of the Stepper tool and its RETs
makes it so that there is potential for producing such structures with a product-oriented
approach on 6’ wafers using a metal hard mask.
As of now, 2-D gratings have been used in applications such as positioning and metrol-
ogy, which require exceptional accuracy [40]. 2-D grating pose as an alternative for such
systems the semiconductor, precision manufacturing, and biological imaging industry.
Many other optical applications can be exploited and further studied, such as high order
diffraction suppression [41][42], diffraction enhancement [43] and X-ray Phase-Contrast
Imaging [44].
Additionally, many of the current solutions Ibsen Photonics offers with 1-D gratings
can also be explored with 2-D gratings, offering an insight on potential improvements
and/or modifications.
This study will benefit both academia and industry, deep diving onto an innovative
type of device with many potential applications, fabricated via cutting edge technology
and techniques with a production-friendly approach.
50
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1] Murirathna Padmanaban, Joon Yeon Cho, Huirong Yao, Douglas McKenzie, Al-
berto Dioses, Salem Mullen, Elizabeth Wolfer, and Kazunori Kurosawa. Functional
properties of novel metallic hard masks. Journal of Photopolymer Science and Tech-
nology, 26(2):231–238, 2013.
[2] Lord Rayleigh. Xii. on the manufacture and theory of diffraction-gratings. The
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science,
47(310):81–93, 1874.
[3] Christopher Palmer and Erwin G Loewen. Diffraction grating handbook. 2005.
[4] Calvin H Wilcox. Scattering theory for diffraction gratings, volume 46. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2012.
[5] Masato Okano, Hisao Kikuta, Yoshihiko Hirai, Kazuya Yamamoto, and Tsutom
Yotsuya.
Optimization of diffraction grating profiles in fabrication by electron-
beam lithography. Applied optics, 43(27):5137–5142, 2004.
[6] Daiji Noda, Makoto Tanaka, Kazuma Shimada, Wataru Yashiro, Atsushi Momose,
and Tadashi Hattori. Fabrication of large area diffraction grating using liga process.
Microsystem technologies, 14(9):1311–1315, 2008.
[7] UU Graf, DT Jaffe, EJ Kim, JH Lacy, H Ling, JT Moore, and G Rebeiz. Fab-
rication and evaluation of an etched infrared diffraction grating. Applied Optics,
33(1):96–102, 1994.
[8] F. Cajori. A History of Physics in Its Elementary Branches: Including the Evolu-
tion of Physical Laboratories. Macmillan, 1899.
[9] Kristian Buchwald. Fused silica transmission gratings. Ibsen Photonics, 2007.
[10] Tina Clausnitzer, Jens Limpert, Karsten Zöllner, Holger Zellmer, Hans-Joerg
51
==PAGE:66==
52
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fuchs, Ernst-Bernhard Kley, Andreas Tünnermann, Marco Jupe, and Detlev Ris-
tau. Highly eﬀicient transmission gratings in fused silica for chirped-pulse amplifi-
cation systems. Applied Optics, 42(34):6934–6938, 2003.
[11] HT Nguyen, BW Shore, SJ Bryan, JA Britten, RD Boyd, and MD Perry. High-
eﬀiciency fused-silica transmission gratings. Optics letters, 22(3):142–144, 1997.
[12] Gerard de Zwart, Martin A. van den Brink, Richard A. George, Danu Satriasapu-
tra, Jan Baselmans, H. Butler, Jan B.P. van Schoot, and Jos de Klerk. Performance
of a step-and-scan system for DUV lithography. In Gene E. Fuller, editor, Optical
Microlithography X, volume 3051, pages 817 – 835. International Society for Optics
and Photonics, SPIE, 1997.
[13] Xiao Li, King Yuk Chan, and Rodica Ramer. Fabrication of through via holes
in ultra-thin fused silica wafers for microwave and millimeter-wave applications.
Micromachines, 9(3):138, 2018.
[14] M. Huff and M. Pedersen. Electrical field-induced faceting of etched features using
plasma etching of fused silica. Journal of Applied Physics, 122(2):023302, 2017.
[15] David Lishan. Plasma etching: Comparing pe, rie and icp-rie. 10 2020.
[16] Michael Pedersen and Michael Huff.
Plasma etching of deep high-aspect ratio
features into fused silica. Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 26(2):448–
455, 2017.
[17] T Akashi and Y Yoshimura. Deep reactive ion etching of borosilicate glass using
an anodically bonded silicon wafer as an etching mask. Journal of Micromechanics
and Microengineering, 16(5):1051, 2006.
[18] Kai Kolari, Ville Saarela, and Sami Franssila. Deep plasma etching of glass for
fluidic devices with different mask materials. Journal of Micromechanics and Mi-
croengineering, 18(6):064010, 2008.
[19] Wei-Tang Li, DAP Bulla, and Rod Boswell.
Surface oxidation of al masks for
deep dry-etch of silica optical waveguides. Surface and Coatings Technology, 201(9-
11):4979–4983, 2007.
[20] Takanori Ichiki, Yoshinari Sugiyama, Takekazu Ujiie, and Yasuhiro Horiike. Deep
dry etching of borosilicate glass using fluorine-based high-density plasmas for mi-
croelectromechanical system fabrication. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology
B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phe-
nomena, 21(5):2188–2192, 2003.
52
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[21] Bo Li, Cun Li, Yulong Zhao, Chao Han, and Quanwei Zhang. Deep reactive ion
etching of z-cut alpha quartz for mems resonant devices fabrication. Microma-
chines, 11(8):724, 2020.
[22] M Firdaus A Muttalib, Ruiqi Y Chen, SJ Pearce, and Martin DB Charlton. Opti-
mization of reactive-ion etching (rie) parameters for fabrication of tantalum pentox-
ide (ta2o5) waveguide using taguchi method. In EPJ Web of Conferences, volume
162, page 01003. EDP Sciences, 2017.
[23] P. A. Savale. Physical vapor deposition (pvd) methods for synthesis of thin films:
A comparative study. Archives of Applied Science Research, 8:1–8, 2016.
[24] Steven J Holmes, Peter H Mitchell, and Mark C Hakey. Manufacturing with duv
lithography. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 41(1.2):7–19, 1997.
[25] Pattern Definition with DUV-Lithography at DTU Danchip. Technical University
of Denmark. DTU Sustain Conference 2014 ; Conference date: 17-12-2014 Through
17-12-2014.
[26] Nikon.
Fabricating
high-precision,
multifunctional
semiconductors.
https://www.nikon.com/products/semi/technology/story02.htm.
[27] JSR Micro. Technical report: M35g. DTU Nanolab, 06 2011.
[28] Oliver Ansell, Richard Barnett, Thomas Haase, Ling Xie, Steve Vargo, and Dave
Thomas. Claritas tm—a unique and robust endpoint technology for silicon drie pro-
cesses with open area down to 0.05%. In 2014 IEEE 27th International Conference
on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), pages 459–462. IEEE, 2014.
[29] S. M. Irving. A dry photoresist removal method. Journal of the Electrochemical
Society, 114:213C, 1967.
[30] A.P. Milenin, C. Jamois, R.B. Wehrspohn, and M. Reiche. The soi planar photonic
crystal fabrication: patterning of cr using cl2/o2 plasma etching. Microelectronic
Engineering, 77(2):139–143, 2005.
[31] Daniel Staaks, Zhaoning Yu, Scott D. Dhuey, Simone Sassolini, Kim Y. Lee, Ivo W.
Rangelow, and Deirdre L. Olynick. Temperature and oxygen concentration effects
on anisotropy in chromium hard mask etching for nanoscale fabrication. Journal
of Vacuum Science & Technology A, 37(6):061306, 2019.
[32] Ferhat Aydinoglu, Faycal Saﬀih, Ripon Kumar Dey, and Bo Cui. Chromium oxide
as a hard mask material better than metallic chromium. Journal of Vacuum Science
53
==PAGE:68==
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
& Technology B, 35(6):06GB01, 2017.
[33] A. Einstein. Über einen die erzeugung und verwandlung des lichtes betreffenden
heuristischen gesichtspunkt. Annalen der Physik, 322(6):132–148, 1905.
[34] Munirathna Padmanaban, JoonYeon Cho, Takanori Kudo, Dalil Rahman, Huirong
Yao, Douglas McKenzie, Alberto Dioses, Salem Mullen, Elizabeth Wolfer, Kazuma
Yamamoto, Yi Cao, and YoungJun Her. Progress in spin-on hard mask materi-
als for advanced lithography. Journal of Photopolymer Science and Technology,
27(4):503–509, 2014.
[35] Kazuhiko Komura, Yoshi Hishiro, Goji Wakamatsu, Yoshio Takimoto, Tomoki
Nagai, Tooru Kimura, Yoshikazu Yamaguchi, Tsutomu Shimokawa, Greg Breyta,
Noel Arellano, Srinivasan Balakrishnan, Luisa D. Bozano, Ananthakrishnan
Sankaranarayanan, Krishna M. Bajjuri, Daniel P. Sanders, Carl E. Larson, Anuja
DeSilva, and Martin Glodde. Spin-on organic hardmask for topo-patterned sub-
strate. In Thomas I. Wallow and Christoph K. Hohle, editors, Advances in Pattern-
ing Materials and Processes XXXI, volume 9051, pages 284 – 290. International
Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2014.
[36] S. Vigne, S. Delprat, M. Chaker, and J. Margot. Investigation of nickel as hard
mask for patterning multicomponent oxide materials in chlorine plasmas. Journal
of Applied Physics, 114(10):103303, 2013.
[37] Zhongmei Han, Emma Salmi, Marko Vehkamäki, Markku Leskelä, and Mikko
Ritala. Metal oxide multilayer hard mask system for 3d nanofabrication. Nan-
otechnology, 29(5):055301, jan 2018.
[38] J. Paul, M. Rudolph, S. Riedel, X. Thrun, S. Wege, and C. Hohle. Evaluation of an
advanced dual hard mask stack for high resolution pattern transfer. In Ying Zhang,
Gottlieb S. Oehrlein, and Qinghuang Lin, editors, Advanced Etch Technology for
Nanopatterning II, volume 8685, pages 193 – 203. International Society for Optics
and Photonics, SPIE, 2013.
[39] Jae Chang Jung. Composition for an organic hard mask and method for forming
a pattern on a semiconductor device using the same, Jun 15AD.
[40] Yunfei Yin, Zhaowu Liu, Shan Jiang, Wei Wang, Hongzhu Yu, Wenhao Li, and
Jirigalantu. Grating-based 2d displacement measurement with quadruple optical
subdivision of a single incident beam. Opt. Express, 29(15):24169–24181, Jul 2021.
[41] Lina Shi, Ziwei Liu, Tanchao Pu, Hailiang Li, Jiebin Niu, and Changqing Xie. Two
Dimensional Gratings of Connected Holes for High Order Diffraction Suppression,
54
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
pages 55–74. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019.
[42] Ziwei Liu, Lina Shi, Tanchao Pu, Hailiang Li, Jiebin Niu, Guanya Wang, and
Changqing Xie. Two-dimensional gratings of hexagonal holes for high order diffrac-
tion suppression. Opt. Express, 25(2):1339–1349, Jan 2017.
[43] Urs U. Graf. Enhanced diffraction eﬀiciency of two-dimensional phase gratings.
Opt. Express, 26(25):32739–32742, Dec 2018.
[44] Margarita Zakharova, Vitor Vlnieska, Heike Fornasier, Martin Börner, Tomy
dos Santos Rolo, Jürgen Mohr, and Danays Kunka.
Development and charac-
terization of two-dimensional gratings for single-shot x-ray phase-contrast imaging.
Applied Sciences, 8(3), 2018.
[45] Steven A Weissman and Neal G Anderson. Design of experiments (doe) and pro-
cess optimization. a review of recent publications. Organic Process Research &
Development, 19(11):1605–1633, 2015.
55
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Appendix: Patterning Description
Ibsen Photonic’s products range from 178nm to 2500nm wavelength spectrometers.
That is exactly the reason why in the presented project, the gratings were prepared
in chips consisting in pairs of gratings. One of the gratings we call 908d and the other
we call 937d. The description of these patterns can be seen in Figure A.1. The groove
opening on the 908d is about 390nm, with a duty cycle of 32% and a 665nm pitch. The
groove opening on the 937d is about 604nm, with a duty cycle of 60% and a 2393nm
pitch. In this report we will refer to the 908d pattern as design 1 and the 937 pattern
as design 2. We must mention that these values are theoretical and then will have to
be taken with a certain tolerance given that we will have some SWA to our structures.
The wafer design was presented previously in Figure 3.2, and in Figure A.2 the different
chips that were analyzed can be seen.
57
==PAGE:72==
58
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX: PATTERNING DESCRIPTION
Figure A.1: 908d pattern (Design 1) and 937d (Design 2) theoretical description.
Figure A.2: Wafer design labelling and highlighting of chips to analyze.
58
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
Appendix: Process Flow
See next page.
59
==PAGE:74==
 
Revision 
Hard mask for etch of Ta2O5/SiO2 
2.1 
LM Project: 87703 Industrial Post-doc 
Company: Ibsen Photonics A/S 
Contact email 
Contact person 
Contact phone 
chasil@dtu.dk or csi@ibsen.com    
Chantal Silvestre 
52769482 
Batch name 
Date of creation 
Date of revision 
690 & 694 
20-04-2021 
10-06-2022 
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 1 of 7 
 
Objectives 
Create a method for etching quartz wafer using DUV resist as a masking material.  
Revision information 
 
01-03-2021 
Rev. 1.0 
Document creation 
07-09-2021 
Rev. 1.1 
Chip indexing added 
Change BARC etch time to 75 s 
21-09-2021 
Rev. 2.0 
Process flow for SiO only.  
Complete dicing method 
Add resist removal clean 
28-09-2021 
Rev. 2.1 
Add resist height measurement method in section 4.0 
Create section for characterization 
Move chip indexing on first page.  
28-10-2021 
Rev. 2.2 
Update dicing pattern and chip of interest 
10-06-2022 
Rev. 3.0 
Update with hard mask step.  
 
 
 
Chip indexing 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
Revision 
Hard mask for etch of Ta2O5/SiO2 
2.1 
LM Project: 87703 Industrial Post-doc 
Company: Ibsen Photonics A/S 
Contact email 
Contact person 
Contact phone 
chasil@dtu.dk or csi@ibsen.com    
Chantal Silvestre 
52769482 
Batch name 
Date of creation 
Date of revision 
690 & 694 
20-04-2021 
10-06-2022 
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
Wafer design (with dicing lines) 104 chips 
 
 
 
Process flow chart 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
Rev. 
Date of 
revision 
Contact email 
Dry etching of quartz with DUV resist 
2.1 
6-Jul-22 
chasil@dtu.dk or 
csi@ibsen.com    
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 3 of 7 
 
Approximate result of Dose Tuning after DUV patterning on quartz with dose 340 mJ/cm2.  
 
DC 32% (908d) – P 667 nm 
 
Groove 
opening: 
~390nm 
Aspect 
ratio: 3.72 
 
 
DC 60% (937d) – P 2439 nm 
 
Groove 
opening: 
~604mm 
Aspect 
ratio: 2.53 
 
 
 
 
Fig
ure 
Caption 
Figure 
 
1 
 After DUV 
development 
 
2 
 After BARC 
etch 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
Rev. 
Date of 
revision 
Contact email 
Dry etching of quartz with DUV resist 
2.1 
6-Jul-22 
chasil@dtu.dk or 
csi@ibsen.com    
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 4 of 7 
 
3 
 After pattern 
transfer 
 
 
*Note, the used wafer for this image is not multilayer 
4 
 After etch 
 
Comments:  Drawing only valid for stack SiO2/Ta2O5. Remove stack for pure SiO2 testing.  
 
 
Objectives ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Revision information ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1 
1 
Preparation.................................................................................................................................................................. 5 
1.1 
Wafer preparation .............................................................................................................................................................. 5 
2 
Cr mask ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
2.1 
Cr deposition ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
3 
Cr backside deposition ................................................................................................................................................. 5 
3.1 
Cr deposition ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
3.2 
Inspection ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5 
4 
DUV Lithography .......................................................................................................................................................... 5 
4.1 
DUV + barc spinning ............................................................................................................................................................ 5 
4.2 
Dose tuning ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
4.3 
Development....................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
4.4 
Defining dose ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
4.5 
Exposure .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5 
4.6 
Visual inspection ................................................................................................................................................................. 5 
5 
BARC etch .................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
5.1 
Resist height ........................................................................................................................................................................ 5 
5.2 
BARC Etch ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5 
5.3 
Resist height ........................................................................................................................................................................ 6 
6 
Cr etch ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
6.1 
Cr etch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6 
6.2 
Resist strip ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
7 
SiO2 / Ta2O5 etch .......................................................................................................................................................... 6 
7.1 
SiO2 etch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6 
8 
Characterization ........................................................................................................................................................... 6 
8.1 
Dicing................................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
8.2 
Imaging sample preparation ............................................................................................................................................... 6 
==PAGE:78==
 
Rev. 
Date of 
revision 
Contact email 
Dry etching of quartz with DUV resist 
2.1 
6-Jul-22 
chasil@dtu.dk or 
csi@ibsen.com    
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 5 of 7 
 
8.3 
Gold coating ........................................................................................................................................................................ 7 
8.4 
Inspection ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7 
8.5 
Data analysis ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
 
 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation 
All wafers 
1.1 Wafer 
preparation 
Wafer box 
Take the wafers from the Ibsen stock and bring 
them in the cleanroom. Unwrap wafer box only 
in gowning area. Place the wafer in a 6” wafer 
box holder. 
Note the wafer IDs on the boxes 
 
Separate box for initial test, DoE 
and backup. 
 
2 Cr mask 
 
2.1 Cr deposition 
Temescal 
Recipe: Cr 
Deposition rate: 2 Å/s 
Thickness: 200nm 
 
 
3 Cr backside deposition 
 
3.1 Cr deposition 
Temescal 
Recipe: Cr 
Deposition rate: 2 Å/s 
Thickness: 200nm 
 
Same thickness on the backside 
to avoid warping.  
3.2 Inspection 
Microscope + 
visual 
inspection 
Inspect front surface for presence of 
particulates/defects. 
Inspect all wafers surface and write 
down any observation of 
particulate/ defect.  
 
• Wafer IDs: all wafer  
4 DUV Lithography 
 
4.1 DUV + barc 
spinning 
Süss Spinner-
Stepper 
Barc: 7031 – Ibsen BARC 90 nm 
DUV: 7023 – Ibsen M35G 1000nm 
 
Let the BARC cool down 1 day.  
 
NOTE spin all wafers at the same 
time.  
4.2 Dose tuning 
DUV Stepper 
Recipe: csi_dotu.job 
 
 
Use one of the spun wafer.  
4.3 Development 
TMAH Stepper 
Recipe: 1003 DCH PEB_90s and DEV_60s 
 
4.4 Defining dose 
AFM 
Measure resist profil of DoTu wafer 
The dose and focus is good if we 
are fully developped (= flat 
bottom). We do not look at the 
duty cycle at this stage of the 
project. 
4.5 Exposure 
DUV Stepper 
Recipe: use parameters found from Dose 
Tuning AFM measurement.  
 
[2022-05-10]: 280 mJ/cm, Focus -0.3 
 
4.6 Visual 
inspection 
 
Perform visual inspection of exposed wafer 
 
5 BARC etch 
 
5.1 Resist height 
AFM1 
Measure chip of interest for resist height 
before BARC etch 
One wafer per batch 
5.2 BARC Etch 
Pegasus 4 
Recipe:  BARC02 
Time: 95 sec 
O2: 40 sccm 
Pressure: 5mTorr 
Spacer: 30 mm 
Use end-point to control end of 
BARC.  
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
Rev. 
Date of 
revision 
Contact email 
Dry etching of quartz with DUV resist 
2.1 
6-Jul-22 
chasil@dtu.dk or 
csi@ibsen.com    
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 6 of 7 
 
ICP: 200 W 
Platen: 20W 
 
5.3 Resist height 
AFM1 
Measure chip of interest for resist height after 
BARC etch 
 
One wafer per batch 
 
6 Cr etch 
 
6.1 Cr etch 
ICP metal 
etcher 
Cl2: 65 sccm 
O2: 15 sccm 
Pressure: 15 mTorr 
Coil power: 300 W 
Platen power: 15 W 
Temperature: 50 
Etch time: 8.5 sec (end-point detected earlier, 
but we let over etch for safety margin) 
Etch rate:  25 nm/min 
Selectivity toward resist: 1,73 
 
 
 
6.2 Resist strip 
ICP metal 
etcher 
Recipe:  PR strip 
Time: 50s approx. 
O2: 100sccm 
Pressure:  5mTorr 
Coil Power: 800W  
Platen: 50W 
 
 
 The resist is stripped in-situ in the 
ICP metal etcher.  
7 SiO2 / Ta2O5 etch 
 
7.1 Stack etch 
Pegasus 4 
Variable parameters.  
ICP power 
Platen power 
Sum flow (i.e. pressure) 
Gas ratio 1 
Gas ratio 2 
Temperature 
 
Constant values:  
Spacer: 30 mm 
APC: open (100%) 
 
Use different recipe to test the 
outcome. Use preliminary result 
recipes.  
8 Characterization 
 
8.1 Dicing 
Dicing saw 
Dice wafer across.  
• 210um thickness remaining for cross-section 
• Make cut-out in the blue tape around chip of 
interest 
• 1st line 6.5 mm 
• 2nd line 19.5 mm 
• Repeat 10x to cut all chip of interest.  
 
 
 
8.2 Imaging sample 
preparation 
 
Cleave chips of interest (see chip indexing drawing 
above). Cleaving should be performed to avoid 
crushing the grating lines.  
 
Take the chip of interest and mount them on cross-
section holder. Remember to write down ID name to 
keep track of the position.  
Maximum 8 chips on the cross-section holder.  
 
==PAGE:80==
 
Rev. 
Date of 
revision 
Contact email 
Dry etching of quartz with DUV resist 
2.1 
6-Jul-22 
chasil@dtu.dk or 
csi@ibsen.com    
 
Not confidential 
 
Page 7 of 7 
 
8.3 Gold coating 
Au sputter 
Sputter gold on cross-sections chips (20 sec) 
 
8.4 Inspection 
SEM 1 
Measure the following values: 
• 
Etch depth 
• 
Resist thickness leftover 
• 
Profile angle  
• 
Period 
• 
Line width 
 
Use BSD detector for imaging 
Ta2O5/SiO2.   
8.5 Data analysis 
JMP 
Report value in JMP files 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
Appendix: Fused silica material
properties
For a broad range of demanding applications, fused silica is an ideal material. This
Appendix includes selected, important material properties of fused silica.
Mean expansion coeﬀicient
5, 1 · 10−7K−1 (0-100ºC)
Figure C.1: Fused silica transmission spectrum.
67
==PAGE:82==
68
APPENDIX C. APPENDIX: FUSED SILICA MATERIAL PROPERTIES
Wavelength (nm)
Refractive index
193
1,56077
248
1,50855
266
1,49968
325
1,48164
351
1,47672
442
1,46622
488
1,46301
532
1,46071
633
1,45702
800
1,45332
1064
1,44963
1550
1,44402
Table C.1: Fused silica refractive index in the near ultraviolet, visible light and near
infrared wavelengths.
Temperature (ºC)
Softening temperature
1600
Annealing temperature
1100
Max. Working temperature - short term
1200
Max. Working temperature - continuous
950
Table C.2: Fused silica thermal properties.
68
==PAGE:83==
Appendix D
Appendix: Risk-Benefit Assessment
on hard mask material selection
The risk-benefit assessment (RBA) that was conducted to select the hard mask material
will be presented in the following Appendix.
The procedure followed for the RBA is the following: a series of potential risks and
benefits is catalogued, and a certain weight is assigned to each of them depending on
how much does it affect the possibilities of success of the project. The assigned values
can be the following: 3 for critical effect for project success, 2 for moderate effect for
project success and 1 for marginal effect for project success.
Once that is addressed, the positive/negative impact of every risk/benefit is also given
a value from -0.8 to 0.8. This value, together with the probability associated to each
risk/benefit (which is dependant on every hard mask candidate and based on previous
knowledge), will build up a final score.
SCORE = PROBABILITY · IMPACT
SCORE (i.e. colour scale) is defined by the risk severity range. It indicates the impact
of the risk on the product objectives.
This score is then weighed with the forementioned project success weights, and we call
that the SEVERITY.
SEV ERITY = PROBABILITY · IMPACT · WEIGHT
Given all of these values we can build up the charts presented in Figures D.1 and D.2,
and finally decide on which masking material to use.
69
==PAGE:84==
70
APPENDIX D. APPENDIX: RISK-BENEFIT ASSESSMENT ON HARD MASK
MATERIAL SELECTION
Figure D.1: RBA chart showing the normalized scores from pros and cons with respect
to the benchmark (resist). We can see that the further left we go, the less possible
failure becomes, and the further up we go, the more benefits we find to the candidate.
70
==PAGE:85==
71
Figure D.2: RBA chart showing the normalized risk-benefit average of every candidate.
This number can be obtained by calculating the average severity of all pros and cons,
normalized by the average value for resist.
Given these results, the candidate that was chosen to be the most beneficial whilst still
being a safe choice was Cr.
71
==PAGE:86==
Appendix E
Appendix: Design of Experiment
Design of experiments (DOE) is a systematic, eﬀicient method that enables scientists
and engineers to study the relationship between multiple input variables and key output
variables. It is a structured approach for collecting data and making discoveries. [45]
A DOE was performed prior the project presented in this thesis, and consisted in the
systematic study of 6 dry etching parameters on pure fused silica wafer. The selected
key inputs and outputs were the ones seen in the Fishbone diagram on Figure E.1.
The presented approach led to a total of 30 recipes to be tested for the DOE. All of
these were performed on identically treated wafers, and then characterized accordingly
to the key output variables.
The outcome of the DOE led to the 4 recipes which were tested in this thesis on
a Ta2O5/SiO2 stack substrate.
These 4 tests were seen as a screening test for the
behaviour of etch stack and the base for the next step of the overall project.
72
==PAGE:87==
73
 
Sample 
Design 
Duty cycle 
Period 
Etched material 
Substrat material 
Substrat thickness 
Characterisation 
Method 
Operator 
Machine 
Cleanliness 
Conditionning 
Supplier 
Etch parameters 
Filling gas (He, Ar) 
Temperature 
Active gas (C4F8, SF6, CHF3…) 
Pressure 
ICP power 
RF power 
Gas ratio 
Additive gas (H2, O2) 
Tool parameters 
Geometry 
ICP frequency 
Spacer 
Pressure control (APC)  
Chuck size  
Cooling pressure  
Clamping (ESC, mech.)  
SWA 
Etch rate 
Uniformity 
6 DOE  parameters 
Temperature (0, 10, 20 C) 
Pressure (1.5, 4.5, 9 mTorr) 
ICP Power (2500, 3250, 4000 W) 
RF Power (100, 200, 300 W) 
He/C4F8 (5, 17.5, 30) 
C4F8/He (1,2,3) 
 
All the others are kept constant, or 
monitored. 
Matching unit pos. / reflected power  
Mask material 
Stack dep. method 
Figure E.1: Fishbone diagram of the considered parameters for the DoE. The high-
lighted red parameters were the key inputs, with SWA, etch rate and uniformity being
the key outputs.
73
==PAGE:88==
Appendix F
Appendix: Endpoint detection
In the following Appendix the characteristic endpoint detection spectra of the various
processes will be showcased in order to confirm the validity of the process flow steps.
Figure F.1: Cr endpoint signal during pattern transfer in ICP Metal Etch of wafer
48220. The decrease in signal denotes that the pattern transfer is complete.
74
==PAGE:89==
75
Figure F.2: Endpoint detection signal of additional BARC etch. The endpoint can
be identified as a slight decrease in the C2 median signal, as we are etching away the
carbon-based layer, in this case however. In this case, the endpoint became unclear and
the initial 55s required for the etching of the BARC (Figure3.8) required the additional
40s shown in the plot.
75
==PAGE:90==
Appendix G
Appendix: EDS Measurements
The conducted EDS measurement resulted unfruitful, given that the visual endpoint
of the Cr etch did not match the EDS signal. The chips that can be seen in Figure
G.2 were subject to Cr wet etch for a specific duration, and then were analyzed using
EDS-SEM via Aztec software. The associated spectra to one of these signals can be
seen in Figure G.1.
Figure G.1: EDS spectrum of 4min-wet-etched sample of Cr on SiO2. The lower energy
peak of CrLα1,2 cam be seen to overlap with the OKα1 peak, whilst the higher energy
CrKα1 and CrKβ1 are not powerful enough to ensure presence of Cr.
76
==PAGE:91==
77
Figure G.2: Results of the analysis of the EDS-SEM signal for Cr. The given images
correspond to the mapping Cr signal measured in every chip (positioned respectively
with regards to the location in the wafer), represented in % of pixels that surpassed
the colour threshold that indicated presence of Cr. The analyzed chips originally had a
200nm Cr top layer, over a thermally grown 1000nm SiO2 layer on bulk Si, and these
were specifically developed to analyze the contamination of species after wet stripping.
77
==PAGE:92==
Appendix H
Appendix: XPS Measurements
In the following section the XPS Depth profiling measurements will be reported.
Figure H.1: XPS measurement and comparison of the different samples analyzed. The
description of these was made in the Hard Mask Strip subsection. The shown spectra
correspond to the XPS measurement of samples after 2998 seconds of ion beam cluster
etching for the wet chemistry-stripped samples and 995 seconds for the dry chemistry-
stripped samples.
78
==PAGE:93==
79
Figure H.2: XPS depth profiling measurement of fused silica reference lamella. In these
plots we can see the evolution of the different signals over time during the ion beam
etching.
Figure H.3: XPS depth profiling measurement of Chromium reference sample (Cr top
layer over Si substrate). In these plots we can see the evolution of the different signals
over time during the ion beam etching.
79
==PAGE:94==
80
APPENDIX H. APPENDIX: XPS MEASUREMENTS
Figure H.4: XPS depth profiling measurement of wet chemically stripped stack sample
(18min Chromium etch 18), probing the unpatterned surface. In these plots we can see
the evolution of the different signals over time during the ion beam etching.
Figure H.5: XPS depth profiling measurement of wet chemically stripped stack sample
(18min Chromium etch 18), probing the grating surface. In these plots we can see the
evolution of the different signals over time during the ion beam etching.
80
==PAGE:95==
Appendix I
Appendix: Project Plan
I.1
Original Project Plan
Introduction
The oxides gratings manufactured in this project are made using deep reactive ion etch-
ing (DRIE). To successfully etch oxide gratings using this technique, a mask with good
selectivity must be used. This project will cover the microfabrication and characterisa-
tion of the mask material and its capability to function as a mask for etching gratings
made of various type of oxides. The project is defined in 7 main phases:
I. Literature review
In this first stage of the project, literature with regards to the topic will be reviewed.
Plasma etching principles, projection lithography and spectrometry gratings basics must
be understood and reviewed in order to have a complete understanding of the physical
processes involved. A literature review for the best materials for hard mask must also be
performed to defined the best candidates.The pertinent literature for the understanding
of the utilized machinery and tools must also be reviewed. Finally, one must also get
familiarized with different processes and variations in terms of chemistry, conditions
and materials regarding hard masks for oxide gratings. The literature review stage will
be placed up first in the plan, but it will be considered a continuous effort.
II. Hard Mask/Backside Deposition
The study of hard mask materials for oxide gratings is performed on 6” quartz wafers.
Many tests will be needed to evaluate the performance of the mask through screening
studies and possibly Design of Experiment (DOE). Therefore, a certain number of
81
==PAGE:96==
82
APPENDIX I. APPENDIX: PROJECT PLAN
wafers must be prepared ahead.
Given that these wafers are mostly non conductive, in order to be able to get clamped
onto specific tools, we must deposit a conductive backside layer.
When it comes to the hard mask, the deposition of the material onto the wafers must
be performed all throughout the initial stages of the project. Defining the appropriate
tool, as well as depositing the material will be conducted.
III. Lithography
Training on the different DUV Lithography tools must be firstly performed. The selec-
tivity towards the masking materials must be determined using pertinent characteriza-
tion measurements. In the current process flow it is important to know whether a good
pattern transfer is achievable with an appropriate resist thickness. Establishing a solid
lithography step ensures the feasibility of the following processes.
IV. Hard Mask Etching
After establishing a good lithographic step, one must pattern the mask and characterize
the pattern transfer. This step will be perform using plasma dry etching. Different
plasma chemistries maybe be used during this step, and the definitive process will be
defined via screening test etches and a possible DoE to further tune the parameters.
V. Oxide stack etch
The existing recipe for etching the SiO2 and Ta2O5 gratings stack will be put to test
using the newly developed hard mask.
Every wafers will be further analysis with SEM microscopy.
The parameters to be
documented will be amongst others: etch depth, mask thickness, profile angle, period
and line width. Once these parameters are catalogued the feasibility of the stack with
desired dimensions will be considered and reviewed.
VI. Ibsen Process Flow
This stage will be performed if the time frame of the project allows for it. The stage will
be centered around the adaptation of the obtained process flow into Ibsen’s facilities.
The etching instruments and chemistries at Ibsen are different, which suggests that all
parameters may be slighly off. It is then our mission to adapt the process flow with the
knowledge acquired to this new environment, so that the fabrication of gratings with
Cr hard masks can be passed on to the production stage. This part of the project is
meant to be ongoing even during the presentation of the thesis.
82
==PAGE:97==
I.1. ORIGINAL PROJECT PLAN
83
VII. Writing
The writing stage will begin 3 months before closure of the project, and progress ac-
cording to the advances of it.
Milestones
1. Hand-in the Project Plan on Februrary 23rd 2022.
2. Use DoE and other similar methods to identify the working principles of the
chemical and physical processes that affect the fabrication.
3. Develop a reliable process flow for oxide grating etching using Cr hard masks.
4. Hand-in the Master Thesis on July 24th 2022.
5. Develop a reliable process flow for oxide grating etching using Cr hard masks on
Ibsen’s facilities.
83
==PAGE:98==
84
APPENDIX I. APPENDIX: PROJECT PLAN
Month
TBC
Week
W5
W6
W7
W8
W9
W10 W11 W12 W13 W14 W15 W16 W17
W18
W19
W20
W21
W22
W23
W24
W25
W26
W27
W28
W29
W30
TBC
Milestones
1
2
3
4
5
Writing
Oxide stack etch
Tasks
February
March
April
May
June
July
Ibsen Process Flow
Literature review
Hard Mask/Backside 
Deposition
Lithography
Hard Mask Etching
84
==PAGE:99==
I.2. PROJECT PLAN ASSESSMENT
85
I.2
Project Plan Assessment
When it comes to the main objective of the thesis project, the development of a work-
ing process flow at DTU Nanolab for the fabrication of oxide gratings as well as its
characterization, has been met. We will now go over the different milestones set and
give an updated Gantt chart for the project at hand. As an addition to said chart, the
mask strip and contamination study was included.
1. Hand-in the Project Plan on Februrary 23rd 2022. Hand-in deadline was met
successfully.
2. Use DoE and other similar methods to identify the working principles of the chemi-
cal and physical processes that affect the fabrication. The working phenomena and
the positive/negative effects of processes during fabrication have been identified
and solved accordingly.
3. Develop a reliable process flow for oxide grating etching using Cr hard masks.
A structured approach allowed for the development of a process flow which is
reliable and validated by results.
4. Hand-in the Master Thesis on July 24th 2022. Hand-in deadline has been met
successfully.
5. Develop a reliable process flow for oxide grating etching using Cr hard masks
on Ibsen’s facilities. The current process flow has been developed only for DTU
Nanolab’s facilities, and the far-fetched objective of transferring means onto Ibsen
Photonics’ cleanroom is yet to be taken on.
85
==PAGE:100==
86
APPENDIX I. APPENDIX: PROJECT PLAN
Month
TBC
Week
W5
W6
W7
W8
W9
W10 W11 W12 W13 W14 W15 W16 W17 W18 W19
W20
W21
W22
W23
W24
W25
W26
W27
W28
W29
W30
TBC
Ibsen Process Flow
Milestones
1
2
3
4
5
Writing
Hard Mask/Backside Deposition
Lithography
Hard Mask Etching
Oxide stack etch
Mask strip & Contamination study
Tasks
Literature review
February
March
April
May
June
July
86
==PAGE:101==
Marc Bernet Garcia, July 2022
Spread love <3
