==PAGE:1==
Building cross­platform mobile applications
with focus on UX­design
Master Thesis
Yousef Aqil Mohsen
2022
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Building cross­platform mobile applications with focus on UX­design
Master Thesis
9th August, 2022
By
Yousef Aqil Mohsen, S185206
Supervised by
Birger Andersen and Henrik Tange, DTU Engineering Technology.
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU
Lyngby Campus, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Thanks my supervisors Birger Andersen and Henrik Tange for guiding me in this project.
I would also send a special thanks to DBC Digital for supporting me throughout the
project and providing a use case project that I could work on.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
More people access the web from mobile devices than from desktop today. This has
resulted in many companies considering providing their products as apps instead of
websites. This is due to the fact that apps generally deliver better user experience than
websites. This thesis explores the app development process for companies with limited
experience in that area. The focus of the project is on two main aspects: UX design
in mobile applications and the process of choosing an app development framework for a
company in the industry. The conclusions of the thesis is based on literature research,
interviews, expert assessment and tests with actual users. Børnebi↵en.dk and the com-
pany behind, DBC Digital, are the use case in the project. The project resulted in a
design recommendation that is based on the conducted research and tests, as well as an
implementation of that design as a working app for smartphones and tablets. Further-
more, the thesis provides a recommendation for DBC Digital on which app development
framework is the most suitable for them considering, economical cost, time to market,
adaptation to the companies stack of technologies and skills of employees as well as the
ﬁnal user experience.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Framework
3
2.1
UX Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
What is UX? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
UX in Apps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Evaluation of UX Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Children’s Role in Designing new Technology . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.5
Children’s Psychology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.6
Discovering new Content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.7
Animations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
App Development Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Development Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.2
App development options in the industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.3
Native App Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.4
Hybrid App Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.5
Cross-platform App Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.6
Test in Apps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Use Case: Børnebi↵en
25
3.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Understanding the Current Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.2
The Company Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.3
Target Group Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.4
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Phase one: from Web to App Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Phase two: Designing new Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.3
Prototypes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
ii
==PAGE:6==
3.3.1
Choosing App development framework for DBC Digital
. . . . . .
42
3.3.2
From ReactJS to React Native . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.3
Integration with Existing Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.4
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.1
Usability Test of the Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.2
Expert review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Discussion
52
4.1
User test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.1
New Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.2
Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.3
General Behavior & Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.4
Error factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.5
New persona
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2
Children’s role in the development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3
Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusion
58
Bibliography
60
A Usability test results
64
B Interview with UX-expert
72
C Interview with React Native developer
79
iii
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Mobile device usage is dominating over desktop usage in recent years. Based on a study
done on data from Google Analytics, 71% of the global web usage in 2020 came from
either mobile or tablets. While only 29% came from desktops.1
This development comes as a result of the improvement of the cellular network speed
and the hardware of the mobile devices as well as the accessibility fact of using a mobile
device.
Companies in the software industry strive and compete to keep their users, deliver value
for them and attract new potential users. UX is considered one of the leading value
proposition for many companies today [MSA22].
With the increased use of mobile devices and the importance of delivering adequate user
experience, some companies face new challenges in choosing the right app development
framework.
Choosing an app development framework can be a risky process for a company to take.
Factors such as UX, cost of development, time to market, adaption to existing technology
in the company and other factors are relevant in the decision making process when
choosing a software technology.
In this project I will look at the app development process with focus on user experience
design and app development technology choice.
1.1
Background and Scope
This project was done in collaboration with DBC Digital A/S2. DBC Digital is software
company that specializes in producing and maintaining metadata and digital product
for public danish libraries. National bibliographic services such as bibliotek.dk, ﬁlm-
striben.dk, faktalink.dk and forfatterweb.dk are all delivered by DBC Digital.
DBC Digital has recently launched a video-on-demand service for children called Børnebi↵en.dk.
The service provides content for children that is already available on Filmstriben.dk. The
objective of separating Børnebi↵en from Filmstriben was to provide a children friendly
1https://www.perﬁcient.com/insights/research-hub/mobile-vs-desktop-usage
2https://www.dbc.dk/
1
==PAGE:8==
interface that can enhance the user experience for the users.
Børnebi↵en is currently only available as a website. Due to various reasons, DBC Digital
is considering building the service as an app.
In this thesis I will use Børnebi↵en as a use case to explore app development technologies
and UX design for apps. The output will be a suggestions for DBC Digital for improve-
ments of the UX of Børnebi↵en as well as which app development framework is most
suitable for the project and the company.
The scope of the project is to build the actual app with all the current features on the
web version as well as implementing new features that could improve the product.
1.2
Problem Deﬁnition
In this project I will try to explore the app development process. I will mainly focus on
two phases; UX-design and choosing an app development framework.
In the technical part I will analyze the current app development technologies and
make an informed choice based on the company’s technology stack, future support for
those technologies, development time and without compromising the user experience.
In the UX part I will aim to research UX for children and design features that can
improve the children’s ability to discover unfamiliar content in the app.
1) UX-design
Which challenges are faced in the app development process when working on UX-design.
How can we improve the current system and add features that would improve the user
experience?
2) Technologies
Here, I will try to analyze the current app development technologies and help the com-
pany choose the most suitable framework for them. Which app development approach
would be most suitable for DBC Digital? (considering economic costs, time to market
and adaptation to the company’s stack of technologies).
1.3
Objectives and Methods
I will use Børnebi↵en as an example project to analyze and implement the theory frame-
work that I have researched.
For the app development technology part, I will use research to map the current app
development frameworks and interviews with companies from the industry with the ob-
jective of understanding their reasoning of choosing their app development frameworks.
For the user experience part, I will conduct target group research and use theoretical
UX-frameworks to try and improve the design of Børnebi↵en. By conducting user tests,
I will try to ﬁnd usability problems in the product and ﬁnd undiscovered user needs.
These results will be used to derive implementation suggestions for future development.
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Framework
In this chapter, I will present general and special theoretical frameworks on user expe-
rience and app development frameworks.
2.1
UX Design
In this section I will introduce some of the literature, User experience frameworks and
other academic studies that I have deemed relevant for this project.
2.1.1
What is UX?
The term user experience, or UX, ﬁrst appeared in Donald Norman’s book The Design
of Everything [Nor88]. User experience is all the interaction that the user has with the
a product. UX includes the emotions, usability, aesthetic and other factors that e↵ect
the way the user feels and interacts with the product.
“UX is focused on the user’s journey to solve a problem; UI is focused on how a
product’s surfaces look and function.”1
User Experience is used today as an umbrella term for all the interaction that the user
has with the a company and it’s products [NN22]. UI is the interface of the product and
plays a signiﬁcant part in the user experience as all. UX considers more factors such as
the ease of using the product, which emotions are generated while using the product.
A movie review example given in the deﬁnition of UX by NNgroup illustrates that very
well.
As an example, consider a website with movie reviews. Even if the UI for ﬁnding
a ﬁlm is perfect, the UX will be poor for a user who wants information about a small
independent release if the underlying database only contains movies from the major stu-
dios.[NN22]
1Former Google Ventures partner Ken Norton, https://www.rysen.com.au/user-experience/ui-vs-ux/
3
==PAGE:10==
User Experince can be explained by three main factors that must be met. Usefulness,
ease and delight [All22].
Firstly, the user main needs must be met. The UI must solve the task that the user
wants to accomplish. E.g. in a video streaming app, the user needs to be able to ﬁnd
and stream content. Usefulness is considered to be the most important aspect of UX. If
the user needs are not met, then the user experince is bad.
Secondly, the UI most be easy and intuitive to use. To use the same video streaming
example, the user should be able to ﬁnd content and stream with ease. For new users,
the product should be intuitive and easy to learn. Complicated user ﬂows result in bad
user experience.
Finally, the service should be delightful to use. [Nor03] A study showed that the
visual appearance of an interface a↵ected the conception of how useful the service is.
[MK95] The participants in the study conceived the interfaces that had a ”better” visual
appearance as more useful.
User centred design
User centered design, UCD, is a four phased iterative design process that aims to involve
the user in each phase of the process.
UCD consists of four phases: understand, specify, create and evaluate. First phase is
to understand the users behavior and problems including why and how they would use
the product. This phase is an investigative method and can include interviews, surveys
and other user research methods. The second phase is to specify the user needs and
requirements. Later we design a prototype that fulﬁlls those requirements.
Finally we conduct user tests to evaluate the satisfaction of the user requirements and
identify possible problems that could be improved in the next iterations. User centered
design provides a clear understanding of users needs and focuses on involving the user
in an early stage of building the product.
Figure 2.1: The four phases of User centered design [UXo22b]
4
==PAGE:11==
The Design Thinking process
Design thinking is an iterative process that can help us understand the end users and
design solution that would fulﬁll their needs. Using this process will ensure the early
involvement of the end users in the product development which will result in better
usability and building something that actually matches the users needs.
The design thinking process consists of ﬁve phases: empathize, deﬁne, ideate, proto-
type and test. In the empathize phase, interviews and user research is conducted. The
objective here is to understand how the users currently solve their problem and which
obstacles they face. Next we take that user research and try to deﬁne the problem that
we are trying to solve. Now that we have understood the users pains and deﬁned the
problem, we can start brainstorming ideas. With the knowledge from the previous two
phases we can now try to ﬁnd innovative solutions that can solve the user’s problems.
From the ideation, we create prototypes that can be tested with the end users to get
feedback.
Design thinking is a non-linear process. Meaning that we can jump in between the
phases with no particular order.
Figure 2.2: The ﬁve design thinking phases [UXo22a]
The di↵erence between UCD and Design Thinking?
User centered design and the design thinking process have a lot of similarities including
designing the product around the user’s needs.
Although there is a di↵erence in the principles of each of them. User centered design
focuses on the users and building the optimal user experience for them.
Meanwhile
Design Thinking uses abductive reasoning and solution-focused strategies. Abductive
reasoning is used to tackle problems a↵ecting the process, function and design of the
product.
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: Di↵erences and similarities between UCD and Design Thinking [UXo21a]
Personas
User research is present in various design methods, including the design thinking and
UCD approaches. A way of demonstrating the conducted research is by using personas.
A persona is a ﬁctional character that represents a user group. The persona is given
human attributes like name, age, role etc. and can also have detailed attributes like
photo, day in the life of, attitudes and beliefs [Mar18]. The persona helps the other
stakeholders and the organization to bring the description of the user group to a simple
and human level.
2.1.2
UX in Apps
There are a few things to have in mind when designing for mobile Apps. App design
is normally used for devices with smaller screens: smartphones and tablets. An UX
designer should keep the following considerations in mind when designing apps.
Fewer visible information
App devices, especially mobile phones, are much smaller than a regular desktop and
laptop screens.
This means that less information is shown to the user at any given
time which requires the users to rely on their short term memory to make sense of the
information presented to them [NB13].
Internet speed
While desktop users normally use either WiFi or cable to connect to the internet, App
users usually access the internet from cellular networks like 3g, 4g or 5g. Cellular net-
works generally have slower internet speed than the prior mentioned. Hence it is impor-
tant for the UX designer to have that in mind to avoid slow loading interfaces. [NB13]
Slow loading speed is one of the most impactful factors on the user experience and will
6
==PAGE:13==
a↵ect the users over all perception of the system. Avoiding that issue can be done by the
designer and the software developer. The designer could e.g. prevent showing too much
data that could take longer to download. The engineer could take choices that will opti-
mize the loading speed. One of the choices could be using the GraphQL API instead of
the widely used REST-API. [Sim21] GraphQL is a technology for fetching data between
a client and a server. It was developed by Facebook 2 back in 2012 specially for their
App to optimize its performance on cellular networks by only fetching the data that is
requested by the frontend. This technology could be considered in apps that require a
large amount of internet fetching.
Early registration must die
In Jacob Nielsen and Raluca Budiu’s Mobile Usability [NB13], it is advised to not ask
the user to login or sign up as the ﬁrst thing in the app.
If the user has not used
the app before, they will think twice before spending time registering for the app. It
is therefore recommended to only require logging in and signing up when necessarily
needed. This will easy the process and reduce the time of the user spending on the app
before deciding if it is something for them. Twitter recently rolled out an update that
applies this concept.3
Control options
Phones and tablets use di↵erent controls than a standard desktop and laptop and this
should be considered when designing for small screen devices. While desktops have a
mouse and a keyboard, app devices have touch screens and screen keyboards for the
control.
This is a major factor in User Experiences and should be considered when
designing the interface.
Navigation
There are two commonly used types of navigation in mobile apps: bottom navigation
and the hamburger menu. These are the main navigation that most users are familiar
with from other applications. Following the same navigation pattern as what the user
is familiar with, will improve the ease of using the app [UXo21b].
2Now Meta
3https://techcrunch.com/2022/08/01/use-twitters-ios-app-without-signing-up-for-an-account-in-
twitters-latest-test/
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: Two main of navigation: bottom navigation(left) and burger menu(right).
[UXo]
When designing navigation for mobile, platform should be taken into consideration.
While it is not a problem on iOS devices, bottom navigation on Android entail some UX
problems as it will be close to the system buttons. [B16]
Figure 2.5: Example of a bottom navigation on Android [UXo21b]
2.1.3
Evaluation of UX Design
Evaluation of an UX-design can be done in multiple ways. In this section usability tests
and expert evaluations will be presented.
Usability Test
Testing a design is a widely used method in UX design. Testing a design before the
technical implementation, can help to ﬁnd usability problems in an early stage of the life
cycle of the app development and software development in general. The testing element
is used in di↵erent UX design methods such as Design thinking (2.1.1), User Centered
Design and other approaches.
8
==PAGE:15==
There are three main goals of usability testing: ﬁnding usability problems in the
design, ﬁnding opportunities and learning about the users.
Usability test vs User test
Usability test and user test are used interchangeably. They essentially mean the same
concept. User test can although be misunderstood to mean testing the user. Which is
not what user test is about. The user is never tested. It is the design that is tested. I
will use the term usability test in the rest of this report.
The Setup of Usability Test
A usability test consist of three main elements; a facilitator, a list of tasks and a
participant. The facilitator, also called moderator, is the person that moderates the test
and ensures that the participant knows what they are asked about. The participant
is the user that is testing the design. The tasks are the user ﬂows that the facilitator
wants to test. E.g. a task could be to ask the user to create a proﬁle in the system and
login. While the participant is performing the task, the moderator observes the actions
and reactions of the participant. The user and/or the device screen is recorded during
the test. This requires the consent of the user and can be a more expensive setup to
use. A more inexpensive way of ensuring that the moderator does not miss the users
feedback, is to get assistance by another person to write notes during the test. This way,
the facilitator can focus on moderating the test, while the helper observes and writes
notes.
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: The ﬂow of information in Usability tests [Mor19]
The diagram above shows the information ﬂow in the test. The facilitator administers
tasks and interviews the participant while observing their reactions and behavior. The
participant performs the task given to them and gives direct and indirect feedback.
Types of Usability Test
The following are some of the ways that a usbaility test can be conducted.
Lab Test
Lab test is conducting the test in a professional and controlled environment. The setup
could be in a company’s oﬃces or similar place where the participant can conduct the
test. This type of test is usually expensive to conduct as it requires environment setup
and hiring test participants. The main beneﬁt of this test is giving in-depth information
about the user behavior on the design.
Remote Test
This type of usability test is conducted online through a video call between the moder-
ator and the participant. The main beneﬁt of this test is that the participant is using
the product in their own environment and own device that is familiar to the participant.
This test is less expensive than the lab test as it doesn’t require a physical enviorment
setup. Presumably, the hiring cost will be less than the lab test as it requires less e↵ort
and time from the user to conduct the test.
10
==PAGE:17==
Hallway Usability Test
A third way of conducting a usability test is doing so in a public place with no prior
planning with the participant. The moderator here goes to a public place like a library, a
cafe or similar, and asks people if they want to participate in the test. The main beneﬁt
of this test is the cost. As it is more likely to get participant in exchange for small gifts
such as co↵ee or candy [UXo17]. Using this method can be arbitrary, as there is a risk
that the participant is not in the target group of the product.
Number of Users to Test with
According to the Nielsen Norman group, the ideal number for usability tests are 5
persons [UXo00]. Through a wide reasarch, Jakob Nielsen and Thomas K. Landauer,
developed a mathmatical equation to ﬁnd how many usability problems could by found
by a given number of user tests[NL93].
The equation below ﬁnds the percentage of
usability problems found, u, when the total number of problems in a system i N and n
number of users.
N(1 −(1 −L)n)
L is the percentage of found problems per one user test. According to the same
study, the typical average number for L is 31%. The graph below is plotted with L =
31%.
Figure 2.7: The percentage of usability problems discovered against the number of tests
conducted. [UXo00]
The curve shows that all the usability problems in a system can be discovered by
conducting a study with 15 users. Nevertheless, Jakob Nielsen, argues that it is better
to conduct 3 di↵erent studies with 5 users, than it is to conduct one study with 15
users [UXo00]. The goal of the usability test is to discover the problems and afterwards
redesign the solution to solve them. However, we can not be one hundred percent sure
that the new design will solve the problem or if it will create other usability problems.
11
==PAGE:18==
Spreading the test across multiple iteration will ensure that the redesigns and solution
found are validated by the usability tests. The optimal ratio for number of users to test
is found to be 3 to 5 users per test [UXo94].
Expert Assessment
Another way of evaluating a UX design is by letting an external expert assess the design.
This assessment can be done by a professional agency4, an expert in the ﬁeld5 of the
product or another UX designer. This method is described in Gregersen Wisler-Poulsen
book Usability [WP17]. The book is written for website usability, but the expert assess-
ment method can be used on other user interfaces than websites.
The expert assessment can be diveded into two parts; Information architecture and
interaction design [WP17].
Information Architecture
Information architecture includes how the website is structured. The following are some
of the aspects that the expert should look at when assessing the information architec-
ture.
Information structure
The grouping of the information and the hierarchy of the data.
Navigation
Which navigation options does the user have. Is there indication on where there users
currently are on the interface?
Naming
The words and language used in the UX. This includes naming of navigation items,
buttons, page titles and similar places.
Search
If there is a search option, it should be easy to use. It should provide the user useful
results that match the search query.
Interaction Design
In this part of the assessment, the expert examines the user ﬂows and the technical
functionality that the website/app provides. The expert looks at what the website/app
provides to the user and why the user is using this product. The expert then selects user
ﬂows or functionality to assess.
A common type of design evaluation is the heuristic evaluation.6 Here a set of design
heuristics, or principles, are systematically checked in the design. Jakob Nielsen’s 10
4Det Digitale Folkebibliotek has used a profesional agency to asses their current system to ﬁnd de-
sign problems. Link: https://detdigitalefolkebibliotek.dk/nyheder/next/nyt-grunddesign-laes-reviewet-
af-bibliotekernes-nuvaerende-hjemmesideloesning
5E.g. letting a libarian assess a library book website. Or a pharmacist assess a pharmacy IT-system
6https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-to-conduct-a-heuristic-evaluation/
12
==PAGE:19==
heuristics are widely used in expert evaluations. [WP17]
Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics
The following are the 10 heuristics of Jakob Nielsen. 7
1 System status
The design should always communicate the ﬂow status to the user. Whenever the system
is loading, the current screen/page path, location etc., should be visible to the user.
2 Link between the system and the real world
The naming should always follow the users vocabulary. Never use words that can appear
too technical and confuse the user.
3 User control and freedom
The user will eventually take unintended actions. The user should always have the op-
tion to go back to previous state or start over whenever an action is made.
4 Consistency
There should be a general and consistent design and use of naming. The user should
never be in doubt about if di↵erent naming or function can do the same functionality.
5 Prevent errors
The system should always strive to prevent errors from occurring. More e↵ort should
be put in preventing errors in occurring in ﬁrst place than showing error messages.
6 Recognition is better than recollection
The amount of data that the user should memorize from previous views should be mini-
mized. The user should rather recognize patterns of the interface rather than memorizing
information that needs to be used in future interactions.
7 Flexibility and eﬃciency in use
Shortcuts that improve the eﬃciency of the user in the system should be easy to discover
for new users.
8 Aesthetic and minimalistic design
The general design should be minimal. Any information that is not relevant for the user,
will compete for the users attention with the actual relevant information. Hence only
relevant information should be included in the design.
9 Guide the user discover errors and recover from them
Error messages should speak the users language, indicate the problem and the possible
solution for that problem.
7https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-to-conduct-a-heuristic-evaluation/
13
==PAGE:20==
10 Help and documentation
Optimally, no help or support is needed to use the system. Although, if needed, the user
should be able to ﬁnd documentation and help to solve their problems.
Metrics for the assessment
The assessment of the system can be noted in a log-table. Stating which heuristic was
violated, where in the design, a description of the problem, how critical it is and a
solution to solve it.
Heuristic number
Location
Problem
Seriousness
Solution
Table 2.1: Example of a Log-table
Every problem found should be assigned a number from 1 to 4 indicating how critical
the problem is. The table below shows what each number means.
1
Cosmetical problem that won’t a↵ect the functionality of the system, but should be solved when possible
2
Not critical problem. That makes it harder to understand user ﬂows in the system. It should be ﬁxed as soon as possible
3
Serious problem that should be solved as soon as possible.
4
Catastrophic problem that will make it impossible to complete some action. Should be ﬁxed immediately.
Table 2.2: Seriousness of a problem should be indicated by a number from 1 to 4
Number of Experts
The assessment can be done by one or multiple experts. Jacob Nielsen have done re-
search on how many problems an expert can ﬁnd on average. According to a study that
Nielsen has done, one expert can ﬁnd 35% of the problems while 5 experts can ﬁnd 75%
of the problems in a design. The recommendation of the NN group is to use 5 experts.
2.1.4
Children’s Role in Designing new Technology
According to a research done by University of Maryland, children can play 4 di↵erent
roles in developing technology[Dru02]. Children can have the role of the user, tester,
informant or design partner.
As user, the child uses the app while an observer notes the child’s interaction with the
interface. Doing so, the designer would learn more about the faults and success from
the user. The observation process can be done in a similar way.
As tester, children help test the prototype of features that are not implemented or re-
leased yet.
Direct feedback or observation from an adult is then used to assess the
prototypes.
14
==PAGE:21==
As informant, children play a role in multiple stages of the technology development pro-
cess. Children can be asked to test prototypes before they are developed, use already
developed features as user and participate in the design process as a partner.
The children’s role as design partner is similar to the role of an informant. Nevertheless,
the role as design partner entails other functions. As design partner, the child partici-
pates in the research and has the same rights as stakeholder in the design process as an
adult. The child can give input and critique about the design.
Figure 2.8: Four roles of children in developing new technology [Dru02]
2.1.5
Children’s Psychology
According to Piaget’s theory of cognitive development, children’s cognitive abilities de-
velop through 4 di↵erent stages. In each stage, children develop and use new ways of
thinking. [GO16]
The target group of Børnebi↵en, which is children between 3-7 years, falls under the
Preoperational stage.
15
==PAGE:22==
Stage
name
Age
characteristic
1
Sensorimotor stage
0 to 2 years
Trial and error method,
2
Preoperational stage
2 to 7 years
Animism, symbolic functioning, curiosity
3
Concrete operational stage
7 to 11 years
Logical thinking, reversibility
4
Formal operational stage
ages 12 and up
Abstract thinking, hypothetical thinking,
Table 2.3: Piaget’s four stages of cognitive development
Children in the Preoperational stage have one or more of the following characteristics.
Animinism
Animinism, is believing that azoic objects have life and consciousness. E.g., a child in
the Preoperational stage can believe that a drawing of an animal has a life and feel-
ings as the real animal. On Børnebi↵en.dk, there are serveal object and illustrations
that could be reused to convey a speciﬁc user experience purposefully. [show picture of
Børnebi↵en’s popcorn/clouds illustraion]
Symbolic functioning
Symbolic functioning refers to the children’s ability to connect symbols to meaning in
communication. This is very helpful to know considering that an app usually has mul-
tiple symbolic icons. E.g. in the navigation bar.
curiosity
In the Preoperational stage the child also starts developing curiosity for its surroundings
and hence asking questions about what it encounters. This information can be used to
make a design that can spark curiosity in children [GO16].
2.1.6
Discovering new Content
The content discovery features in a video on demand service can be a very important
factor in it’s user satisfaction[Vem20].
Content discovery UX can be divided into to parts. Suggesting the right type of
content and the way that content is presented. Suggesting the right types requires an
adequate recommendation system that can suggest that something would meet the users
preferences. The recommender can actively a↵ect the users satisfaction with the service.
[Vem20]
Another aspect of new content discovery is the UX design of features that could put
more focus on the recommended content [And17]. In her thesis, Maja Anderson deﬁned
parameters that could help the users of video streaming service for children to discover
new content [And17].
The conclusion stated that highlighting an element can create an attention hierarchy
which will make the user more likely to choose the highlighted option.
16
==PAGE:23==
It was also concluded that grouping content will give the user the freedom to choose after
their preferences. The grouping can be based on age groups, themes, type of content
etc..
2.1.7
Animations
Animations is a tool that can be used to improve the user experience. Animations can be
used for multiple purposes like giving feedback, loading indicators, transition when navi-
gating between screens, communicating state changes or as attention grabbers. [UXo20]
Animations can generally make the app look more professional and ”cool”[Lac18]. An-
imations take time to ﬁnish and that could be used as a tool to distract the user from
the initialization and loading times. Having an animation while the data loads instead
of a blank display would give an impression that the time taken to load the data is less.
Hence it would signiﬁcantly increase the user experience [Lac18].
As mentioned earlier, delight is one of three parts that contribute to good user experi-
ences (2.1.1). Using animation is a form of delight and beauty that could, when used
correctly, help achieve that.
Using animations should be done purposefully. Using animations that could remove the
attention from the functionality and real purpose of the application would potentially
harm the product.
17
==PAGE:24==
2.2
App Development Approaches
In this section I will research and present modern App development approaches.
2.2.1
Development Process
The app development process follows the traditional system development life cycle,
SDLC. The SDLC consists of seven phases. Planning, analysis & requirement deﬁni-
tion, design & prototype, implementation, testing, deployment & integration and main-
tenance.
Figure 2.9: System/software development life cylce - SDLC [Pre21]
These stages are recurrent in most used software development methods like the water-
fall, the agile and spiral methods [Hal22]. During the analysis & requirement deﬁnition
stage, an app development approach is chosen. In the following sections, I will explore
the common app development frameworks, their impact on user experience and ﬁnally
list some of the common ways to test apps.
2.2.2
App development options in the industry
When choosing the development framework, three main approaches are looked at. Native
apps, hybrid apps and cross-platform apps. Each has it’s advantages and disadvantages
that I will explain in this section.
Android and iOS have a combined 99,66 percent share in the Danish market. The
technical analysis will therefore focus on these two operating systems.
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.10: Market share by mobile operating systems in Denmark (December 2021)
[gen21]
2.2.3
Native App Development
A native iOS app is built using Objective-C (older apps) or Swift(newer apps). While
Kotlin and Java are used to build Android apps. Native development have some ad-
vantages over the other two options.
Better performance and security are the main
advantages of using a native development approach. [MW15] [Sin]
2.2.4
Hybrid App Development
Hybrid apps are built using web technologies such as HTML5, CSS and JavaScript.
The app is wrapped inside a container that can run the app as if it was running in a
browser. The user would not be aware that it is a website wrapped inside a browser, as
the app would be possible to download form the application stores. Cordova and Ionic
are the two most used hybrid apps development frameworks [Vai]. The main advantage
of using hybrid apps, compared to the native approach, is the development time and
cost. Since web technology is supported by both Android and iOS, hybrid apps can run
on both platforms with no need to write code in a di↵erent language than JavaScript.
The main disadvantage comes with the performance and the user experience. While
the hybrid approach would work ﬁne for simple applications, it will most likely not
19
==PAGE:26==
provide the same performance level as the native approach. Hence it would a↵ect the
user experience negatively [tec].
Because hybrid apps run in a browser-like JavaScript environment, they can lack
support for some native features like running o✏ine and communicating with the device
hardware.
2.2.5
Cross-platform App Development
Cross-platform is an approach that has similarities to both the prior two approaches.
Here we also use one development framework and the majority of the code is written
in one language. The code is then partly compiled to native code that can run on the
respective device. Cross-platforms typically perform better than hybrid apps as they run
as native code. However, comparisons have shown that Native apps still has a better
performance that Cross-platform apps.
React Native
React Native is a cross-platform development framework developed by Meta8.
The
framework was built with inspiration of the web framework from the same company,
ReactJS9. Hence the naming. React Native apps are developed using JavaScript and
it contains many similar principles form the web. When built, a React Native app is
partially compiled to native code. All the UI elements and hardware related software
such as GPS, camera and microphone access are converted to native code. While some
of the business logic run on the JavaScript engines in iOS and Android devices10. All the
JavaScript code runs on a thread while all the native code runs on a separate thread.
Between these two threads there is a JSON communication mechanism called ”The
Bridge”. Data is sent back and forth between the two threads through the bridge. Most
of the times this runs smoothly. Although, when there is a lot of data that needs to be
transported through the bridge simultaneously, a ”jam” happens on the bridge which will
cause the app to run slowly. Eventually this will a↵ect the user experience negatively.
This is considered the main drawback of using React Native.
React Natives new Architecture
The team behind React Native is aware of the above mentioned performance problem.
The team has been working on redesigning React Natives architecture to try to solve
the problem. The new architecture will include four main changes that aim to improve
the performance of React Native apps [tec22a].
JavaScript Interface
The JavaScript Interface, JSI, will perform some of the tasks done by the bridge in the
8Previously, Facebook.
9https://reactjs.org/
10Both iOS and Android have standard JavaScript engines that run the JS code from the browser
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.11: React Native current architecture [tec21]
previous architecture. JSI will allow the JavaScript code to hold references to native
functions that could be called from the JavaScript thread without needing to send a
serialized object over the bridge.
Fabric
Fabric is a new UI rendering system implemented in the new architecture. Fabric will
improve the performance, speed up the startup time by lazy initializing some components
and reduce the serialization of data sent between JavaScript and the native platform by
using the JavaScript interface described in the section above [tec22e].
Turbo Modules
In the old architecture, all the native modules of the React Native application used by
JavaScript11 are initialized before the app starts. This is considered a pitfall in React
Native as all the native modules, even those not used by the application, are initialized
before the app starts. In the new architecture JavaScript will be able to hold references
to each of these native modules and only load the ones that are used in the app. This
will signiﬁcantly speed up the load up time of the app.
CodeGen
CodeGen is a static type checker. CodeGen will increase the amount of generated native
code at build time compared to the current architecture.
Expo.io
Expo is a framework and a set of tools used to build React Native application. Expo’s
main objective is to eliminate the need of using any native code and providing tools that
can improve the developer experience.
11e.g. File storage, Camera, Bluetooth etc.
21
==PAGE:28==
No native code
React Native is not intended to be a fully JavaScript frameworks.
When using na-
tive Modules like Bluetooth, FileStorage etc., native code needs to be used. The Expo
framework includes components that work as an abstraction level to the native code by
providing JavaScript components that can access the native modules.
Expo Application Services
Expo application service, EAS, is a tool provided by Expo.io. With EAS, it is possible
to build and submit applications to the App store and Google Play with ease compared
traditional deployment. When using EAS, it is possible to ship all the code from the
command line to the expo servers where it later will be available through a web-interface
to download and later submit to the application stores. This means that even developers
with no macOS computers would be able to build iOS apps. It is also possible to submit
the built application to the application stores through the command line using the EAS.
Expo Client
Expo provides a client app for testing and collaboration between the stakeholders. The
Expo Client app can be downloaded from the App Store and Google Play and can run
the project before it gets built or published for test. In agile teams this feature provides
a boost in the productivity and speed of getting instant feedback by internal testers or
other stakeholders [tec22c].
Developer Experience
All the above mentioned Expo features, provide a much improved developer experience
and easier learning curve than the bare React Native ﬂow. Expo has achieved that by
eliminating the necessity to use native code and native editors such as Android Studio
and Xcode [tec22f].
Pitfalls of Expo.io
Integrating native libraries is not possible when using the Expo managed ﬂow. Not all
native API’s are available in Expo and using third party native libraries is not possible
in Expo [tec22d]. Although, Expo provides the option of ejecting from the managed
ﬂow so the code base can be converted to a ”normal” React Native project. The second
major issue with Expo is the app size. When building an app using expo12 the whole
Expo SDK is included in the ﬁnal build. Even functions that are not used in the app
are included in the ﬁnal build. This has some limitations as a relatively simple app
can end up taking much more space than necessary. Nevertheless, this problem is not
present when using Expo Application Services. Apps built with EAS only include the
used libraries in the app and hence has a much smaller app size. [tec22b]
12Using expo-cli. Expo build:ios or expo build:android
22
==PAGE:29==
Flutter
Flutter is a cross-platform app development framework released in 2015 by Google.
Flutter can be used to develop apps for iOS, Android, web, mac and windows. The
framework uses an object-oriented, class-based programming language called Dart.
By using an object-oriented programming language, Dart provides type-safety in the
project.
Flutter apps are converted to native machine code.
The whole Flutter structure relies on widgets. A widget is a UI component shown on
the App screen. A Flutter application starts by a one root widget, which expands into
a tree of widgets. Broadly there are two types of widget classes; Stateless and Stateful
widgets. All deﬁned widgets should extend one of these classes.
Flutter has very good reputation of having a very complete documentation that
contains videos, code examples and explanations. Flutter is also known to provide a
generally good developer experience including a rich library of native UI-widgets and
hot-reload.
The Impact of Technology on UX
The following are some of the factors associated with the technology choice that could
e↵ect the user experience.
Performance
Using the native approach has the advantage of providing better app performance. Both
hybrid and cross-platform development has come a long way in performance. But native
apps still perform better. The performance of the app is an essential factor in a good
user experience.
Native libraries
One other major impact on the user experience is the native libraries for both iOS and
Android. When Apple or Google release updates to their respective SDK, it is not imme-
diately available in the cross-platform and hybrid options. Furthermore, because hybrid
runs in a browser like environment, there is some limitations to usage of native libraries.
Platform dependency
Both iOS and Android has standard UI-elements that are included in their respective
SDK. These UI-elements are commonly used in other apps on those platforms. When us-
ing a cross-platform framework, the developer has to imitate those UI-elements if needed
in the design. Doing so there is a risk of not being able to implement those UI-elements
with the same aesthetic and functionality quality as the native elements which also can
a↵ect the UX of the app.
23
==PAGE:30==
All these factor can limit some options in the cross-platform and hybrid development,
which can eventually a↵ect the user experience negatively.
2.2.6
Test in Apps
Mobile apps can be tested in various ways. The following are some software testing
methods that are relevant to app testing.
Performance Testing
This type of test focuses on the general performance of the app. The performance of
an app generally relies on three external factors; the hardware of the device, the speed
of the internet and backend performance. Some of the factors observed in performance
testing are app start-up time, battery consumption, memory and other hardware usage.
General app response time and performance on lower internet speeds are looked at too.
Security Testing
Security is an important factor especially from the users perspective. Security testing
can be done internally or be an external specialized company that can identify security
risks in the app.
Compatibility Testing
Mobile devices come in various screen sizes, software versions and hardware speciﬁca-
tions. It is hence important to ensure that the app and any major update can run on
the supported devices.
24
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Use Case: Børnebi↵en
In this chapter, I will explain how worked on Børnebi↵en.dk as a use case for this project.
I will analyze, design, implement and evaluate Børnebi↵en as an app.
3.1
Analysis
In this section, I will analyze the company needs, the target group and present the
deﬁned requirements.
3.1.1
Understanding the Current Project
The current project, Børnebii↵en.dk, is built as a web application using ReactJS and
NodeJS. The web UI uses the standard authentication service Adgangsplatformen. That
authentication system is used in several other bibliographic products such as bibliotek.dk,
læsekompas.dk and ﬁlmstriben.dk.
DBC digital has it’s own AI team that is providing a backend services for the UI.
These services provides metadata for each video, recommendations for videos that are
similar along with a title search API. All this data is provided through a REST-api. The
video streaming is provided by DBC’s partner Norges Film 1
1https://norgesﬁlm.no/about-2/
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.1: Current architecture of Børnebi↵en.dk
3.1.2
The Company Needs
After the initial analysis was done, the company concluded that an app would be the
optimal choice for the product interface.
That conclusion was reached by two main
arguments. First, the main users of the app are children between 3 and 7 years. The
general conception of the company is that parents of minor children prefer not to give
their kids free access to the internet. Hence a web application would not be the optimal
choice. An app will enclose the access to the internet and reduce the accessibility to the
open web. That assumption was supported by a survey done by Medieraadet.dk as a
part of a general research done by EU. [JL16]
The same research concluded that the majority of children that participated, pre-
ferred using apps on tablets. Hence, the company came to the conclusion, that an App
is a more suitable solution than a website.
The company, DBC Digital, has decades worth of experience in web development and
building data infrastructure. Although, the company does not have recent experience
in App development. The company previously had several attempts to start building
apps, but the company not been able yet to fully excel in that area. Previous experi-
ences include using the framework PhoneGap(Cordova) which is a hybrid development
framework where a website is wrapped in a browser that can be downloaded from the
phone app store.
The Filmstriben app is also provided by DBC. Although, it is developed by an ex-
ternal company called InLead.
This project beneﬁts the company in two ways. Firstly providing a comprehensive
and up to date analysis of the current app development approaches as well as coding an
26
==PAGE:33==
app that the company realized it needed it in its analysis of the target group. An app
that would ﬁt the target group more than a website as the company concluded in it’s
initial analysis.
In conclusion, the company needs an App but there is no suﬃcient experience in
building apps. The company needs an analysis of the current app development frame-
works in order to make an informed decision on which to go with. And as a bonus, the
company will see an example of an app built for their needs.
3.1.3
Target Group Analysis
Before the design phase, I did user research to try to understand the target group of the
project. I looked at various statistics and user research done on the target group.
The target group for Børnebi↵en is deﬁned by DBC Digital as children aged 3-7
years and their parents. The company conducted user research early in the project and
concluded that children in the lower end of the age range use digital media with a parent
or another grown up.
As part of a wide European study on digital media use of children2, the ministry of
culture in Denmark has published the results and conclusions of the study that they did
on Danish children aged 0 to 8 years.3
The study states that children in that age group prefer using apps for gaming, stream-
ing and internet use. The iPad is the preferable device for that age group. Parents of
children aged 6-7 were practical in the way they were handling the children’s use. They
often encouraged their children to use an iPad for streaming and entertainment.
Children in that age group are less interested in social media and mostly use the internet
for entertainment.
Platforms
DBC collects anonymous data about the visitors of Børnebi↵en.dk since its launch in
November 2021. Looking at types of devices used to access the site, it is evident that
the majority of users come from touch screen devices.
From the chart below, we can see that 57,6% of the visits come from either a smart-
phone, a tablet or a phablet4. In other words, more than half of the current users of
Børnebi↵en.dk, access the website from a mobile touch screen devices.
2https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/
3https://www.medieraadet.dk/ﬁles/docs/2017-12/Digitale%20medier%20i%20smaabornshojde.pdf
4Phablet is a term used for smartphones that have a bigger screen than 5.5 inces. E.g. iPhone 6 Plus.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2: Børnebi↵en visits by device type between november 2021 and july 2022(Col-
lected from DBC’s internal statistics system)
Personas
Based on the user research done, I created the following two personas of the users of
Børnebi↵en [Mar18]. Personas were explained in section (2.1.1).
Attribute
Persona 1
Persona 2
Name
Joakim
Anders
Age
5 y
39 y
Role
kindergarten, child
parent
Residence
Denmark
Denmark
Can read and type
very limited
yes
Preferred device
iPad
iPad(When using Børnebi↵en with a child)
Experience with technology
limited
experienced
Table 3.1: Personas of Børnebi↵en
The ﬁrst person is child using the app by it’s own. By the user research done, It is
assumed that a 5 years old ability to read or write is very limited. The earlier mentioned
study done by Mediestyrelsen, indicates that the iPad is the preferred devices for this
age group.
The second persona is a parent of a child.
Mediestyrelsen’s research indicated that
children also use technology, mostly using an iPad, with their parents.
28
==PAGE:35==
3.1.4
Requirements
The requirements and the scope of this project was agreed with my two supervisors from
DTU and the product owner of Børnebi↵en in DBC Digital.
The requirements are divided in two main groups. The ﬁrst part is to redesign and
implement the current features of Børnebi↵en.dk as an app. The second part is to design
new features that can improve the general user experience in Børnebi↵en.
The following are the functional requirements at the projects beginning
• The user should be able to login and logout
• The user should be able to see a main screen with recommendations.
• The user shold be able to search for content by title
• The user should be able to watch content
• The name of the users library should be shown in the app
While the technical requirements are the following
• DBC standard login system, Adgangsplatformen, should be used for the login ﬂow
• Recommendations should be fetched from DBC’s backed
• Content should be streamed form NorgesFilm
29
==PAGE:36==
3.2
Design
During the App design phase of Børnebi↵en, I tried to use some of the knowledge
presented in the prior section ( 2.1.2) and combine it with the current web design of
Børnebi↵en. Taking elements from the current design of Børnebi↵en would make the
product more consistent across platform. And using the research output would improve
the design and make it more compatible with the smaller screen adaptation (2.1.2).
The app design was done in two main steps. Firstly, I made a design that included all
the current features of Børnebi↵en.dk. During this step, I adapted the design more to
mobile and tablet users. Secondly, I made the design for two extra features that do not
currently exist at Børnebi↵en.dk. In the following two section I will show and describe
the two steps of design.
3.2.1
Phase one: from Web to App Design
Web interfaces and apps have di↵erences that must be considered in the design phase. In
the conversion phase, I had multiple factors such as screen size, device control and hand
placement in consideration (2.1.2). Compared to the existing website design I modiﬁed
the following.
Navigation
The navigation in the website is placed in the top of the screen. While it is common for a
website to have the navigation bar in the header, it is more common for apps to place the
navigation bar in the bottom of the screen. The navigation was placed in the bottom for
two reasons. First, to match the pattern of the other apps that the user is familiar with.
And second, for the usability. The bottom of the screen is ussually closer the ﬁnger of
the user and hence placing it there will provide easier ﬂow of navigating between screens.5
5https://uxplanet.org/perfect-bottom-navigation-for-mobile-app-e↵abbb98c0f
30
==PAGE:37==
(a) Web navigation is on the top
(b) The navigation is moved to the
bottom in the App design
Figure 3.3: Navigation design
Login
The login ﬂow was redesigned too. In the current web version the login ﬂow consist of a
button in the top menu that shows a login modal when clicked. When the login button
in the modal is clicked, the user is redirected to Adgangsplatform login page and later
redirected back after successful login. Once the user is logged in, a welcome message in
the top of the page is shown to highlight the name of the library that the user is from.
The product owner of Børnebi↵en in DBC requested showing the users library name in
the app. The libraries are the customers of Børnebi↵en, and showing their name in the
app is a business choice rather than a UX choice. Showing the library name after login
will arguably not have any positive e↵ect on the UX. I choose to create an extra screen
to show the information of the library as well as the login and logout functionalities.
31
==PAGE:38==
(a) Web login design
(b) New App login design
Figure 3.4: Login functionality
32
==PAGE:39==
(a) Web after login design
(b) New App after login design
Figure 3.5: Logout functionality
Besides the login button, the login ﬂow can also be started when the user tries to
play a video without already logging in. In the web version, an identical modal to the
previous design is shown. In the mobile app design, I created a similar design. Although
with a more minimalist design (2.1.3).
33
==PAGE:40==
(a) Web modal shown when the
user is not logged in
(b) Modal shown when the user is
not logged in
Figure 3.6: Starting a video without sign in
As mentioned earlier, the standard national library login system, Adgangsplatformen,
is used in the app. The mentioned login system is implemented only in a web version
(3.1.1). When the user wants to login through the app, a pop up view is shown where
the user can type the login info. I choose to show an in screen pop up instead of using
a redirection to the native browser. By keeping the user inside the app, the login ﬂow is
not interrupted by the changing between the app and the browser app.
34
==PAGE:41==
(a) Redirection in the web
(b) Pop-up webviewer for the login
page
Figure 3.7: Login ﬂow
Movie screen
The movie screen in the app is implemented with some modiﬁcations compared to the
web version. By reducing the height of the header, there is more space to show more
information in the movie screen. In contrast to the web version, the movie description
is by default shown in the app.
35
==PAGE:42==
(a) Movie screen in the web
(b) Movie screen in the app.
Figure 3.8: New movie screen design in the app
Footer
In the web version, there is a footer with information about the website and the address
of the company. While it is a very common practice to have a footer in website, it is less
common to have that information in the bottom of the app. The navigation is ﬁlling the
bottom of the screen and putting more navigation options in that area would not result
in good UX. The information in the footer of the web version can be added in the info
screen of the web.
Header
By removing the navigation in the header of the main screen, the space on the right side
of the logo makes it appear asymmetrical. I moved the Børnebi↵en logo horizontally to
the center.
36
==PAGE:43==
Search Screen
The search screen is similar to the web version. The search bar height is reduced and
the relocation of the navigation bar has given space to show two default suggestions in
the app compared to the current one suggestion in the web. This change has reduced
the wasted blank space in the app.
(a) Web search page design
(b) New App search screen design
Figure 3.9: Search functionality
3.2.2
Phase two: Designing new Features
After redesigning the features that already exist in the web version into the app, I decided
to design new features to the app. The focus of the new features is content discovery.
I tried to ﬁnd ways to present content in a new way and design features that could
improve the general content discovery in the app.
Focus movie in the main screen
Many similar video streaming application has a movie in the top of the main feed.
Streaming services like Netﬂix, Disney+, HBO and many other has this feature. Having
37
==PAGE:44==
a focused movie in the top, gives various advantages. One is providing a tool for the
content provider to specialize the experience for the user[And17]. The top movie sug-
gestion could be a special recommendation found by an AI suggester or a season based
suggestion.6
(a) Main screen of the web
(b) A movie in focus is added in the
app design
Figure 3.10: Main screen design
Discovery Screen
The discovery screen is a new designed feature.
The main concept of the feature
is to provide content without any search parameter. The content is suggested and now
requested. The idea is inspired by other video based apps like TikTok, Instagram(Reels),
Snapchat(Spotlight) and YouTube(shorts). All these examples use a ﬁxed feed where
each suggestion ﬁlls the whole vertical size of the screen.
The initial display of the
discover screen is an animation of a popcorn bucket and a popcorn that falls down from
the top of the screen. When the user either taps on the bucket or scrolls down the
6E.g. Christmas content during the Christmas period.
38
==PAGE:45==
discovery feed starts. Every time the user swipes down, a new suggestion is shown. The
suggestion shows the movie poster, movie duration and movie description.
Using AI to improve suggestions
This is designed with intention to implement a more personalized suggestion. This can
be achieved by recording, if the user watches the suggested movies or if the user skips
immediately. This data can be given to the AI team of DBC who then can use it to
suggest a more personalized content.
(a) Discover page
(b) Discover page content
Figure 3.11: Discover functionality
Animations
In the current web version there are no animations implemented. In the app version, I
designed and implemented two animations. The ﬁrst one is the loading screen animation.
The second is the discovery screen animation. While the app is loading, the popcorn
face is ”sleeping”. Once the loading is complete, the popcorn opens the eyes and ﬂies up
out of the screen before starting the application. As mention in section (2.1.5), children
39
==PAGE:46==
aged 2 to 7 is characterize by animism. Meaning they typically believe that objects, like
the sleeping cloud, have life and consciousness. This loading screen is intended to make
the app loading time feel less for the user (2.1.7).
(a) App is loading
(b) App loading is complete
Figure 3.12: New loading screen
3.2.3
Prototypes
Initially, I designed the prototypes using Figma. Figma is a design tool already used
by the UX designers at DBC.7 The ﬁrst iterations of the design were made entirely in
Figma. However, once I implemented that design and started improving it, I discovered
it is more time saving to implement the design directly.
With my background as a
software developer, it was faster for me to do the design by directly implementing it
with e.g. mock data.
Furthermore, I was advised by my supervisors to implement the animations directly
by coding to get a more smooth and close to real product animations. It is possible
7https://www.uxdesigninstitute.com/blog/user-interface-ui-design-tools/
40
==PAGE:47==
to do animations in Figma but the possibilities are limited compared with coding them
directly.
Figure 3.13: Early state design in Figma (www.ﬁgma.com)
The above, is the early prototypes made with Figma.
41
==PAGE:48==
3.3
Implementation
In this section I will explain how the Børnebi↵en app was developed.
3.3.1
Choosing App development framework for DBC Digital
As mentioned previously8, native apps perform better compared to cross-platform apps.
Having a video-streaming app that contains animations, long lists and other performance
heavy operations, going native is a an good choice when considering optimizing the user
experience.
However, there is other factors that play a role when choosing an app
development framework.
Chosen option
I found React Native to be the most ﬁt option for developing Børnebi↵en as an App.
The analysis considered the following factors and the decision was based on research and
interviews.
Team
The majority of the company’s frontend products are developed using ReactJS which is
a web development framework that has a lot of similarities to React Native (2.2.5). In
an interview with Nikolaj Bech Andersen9, he mentioned ”The option for a new layer
makes it possible to do almost everything a native app would be able to. We can have a
web developers switching to making apps without changing mindset.”.10
Because React Native has many similar concepts to web and especially ReactJS, it is
easier for a web developer to switch to React Native than native development or Flutter.
Currently, DBC has no iOS or Android developers. By choosing React Native, the
teams already working on ReactJS can with ease switch between ReactJS and React
Native.
Cost
One of the main reasons to choose a cross-platform option is the cost. Having to build
the same app with di↵erent project teams for each platform is costly. Especially, when
the company does not have any native platform developers and have to hire two whole
development teams to build the app.
Development Time
Using React Native will arguably reduce the development time. Having to develop one
app instead of two will eventually reduce the amount of time spent, debugging and
testing. Another factor is the current Børnebi↵en project is developed using ReactJS.
8in section 2.2.2
9I made an interview with Nikolaj Bech Andersen who is a Tech Lead at Kvaliﬁk consulting with
several years of React Native experience.
10Full interview script can be found in the appendix.
42
==PAGE:49==
Meaning some of the business logic code from the web project can be reused in the app.
Performance
As previously mentioned, performance is the main advantage of using a native devel-
opment over cross-platform. Especially in a project where user experience is valued.
Complicated user interfaces can have an impact on the performance of cross-platform
applications and hence e↵ect the UX.
Conclusion
Native development having a better performance does not mean that cross-platform
apps perform poorly. In the majority of cases, cross-platform performs just as good as
native development. With the new architecture of React Native, it is a rational bet to
use React Native given the coming performance improvements, current technologies and
teams at DBC and the other above mentioned advantages.
Given the mentioned aspects of the analysis, I choose to use Expo.io(2.2.5) to build the
app. As it provides an easier learning curve for JavaScript developers as well as the
beneﬁts of deploying with EAS(2.2.5).
3.3.2
From ReactJS to React Native
React Native is being branded as easy to learn for web developers. From my experience
with this project, I can conﬁrm that this is partly true. A lot of syntax and principles
are very similar. Both frameworks use JavaScript and many popular libraries11 can be
used on both frameworks with no extra conﬁguration needed. Nevertheless, there is
some major di↵erences that I encountered developing this project.
Lists
One of the main di↵erences between the two, is the display of lists.12 In HTML, lists are
normally showed in a div-element. While in React Native it is more complicated. There
are several types of List components that can be used depending on the use case. For
very large lists, it is recommended to use the FlatList13 e.g. a feed of data. For ﬁxed
scrollable UI-elements, the ScrollView14 component is suﬃcient.
This is very important subject to know as the choice of type of List in React Native can
have a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the app//
SVGs are Di↵erent
It is not possible to use SVG-ﬁles direclty in an Image component, like an img-tag in the
web. A community package called react-native-svg is widely used to display svg-ﬁles in
React Native.15
11E.g. ReduX, React Query and React’s hooks
12E.g. elements in a feed or a list of buttons
13https://reactnative.dev/docs/ﬂatlist
14https://reactnative.dev/docs/ScrollView
15https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-native-svg
43
==PAGE:50==
Navigation
Navigating in React is based on the webs already existing principles like URL path and
parameter. Mobile apps do not follow the same web navigating system and hence the
navigation in React Native is di↵erent. The most common approach of implementing
navigation in a React Native app is using the React Navigation. This is the approach
recommended in the oﬃcial React Native documentation. 16
Storing Data
It is common practice to use cookies to store keys and other data in web applications.
Cookies are only available in web browsers. To store data in the local device in React
Native community libraries are often used. AsyncStorage17 and SecureStore18 are two
libraries provided by Expo.io.
Environment variables
As previously mentioned, the environment variables in React Native, and app develop-
ment in general, should be handled in a di↵erent way than a traditional service-side web
application. Any variables stored in the app directly can be visible if the app ﬁles would
be decoded.
3.3.3
Integration with Existing Architecture
As explained in the analysis section (3.1), the current web version of Børnebi↵en com-
municates with 3 external API: Adgangsplatformen for authentication, Norges Film for
video streaming and DBC’s backend for fetching content data and recommendations.
The architecture of the app will be very similar to the web. Although with one signiﬁ-
cant change. There should be a server that works as a layer between the app client and
the other three services.
16https://reactnative.dev/docs/navigation
17https://docs.expo.dev/versions/latest/sdk/async-storage/
18https://docs.expo.dev/versions/latest/sdk/securestore/
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.14: New back-end architecture
The main reason for having his layer is to increase the security of the system. To
access Norges Film and Adgangsplatformen an API-key is required. In the web version
of Børnebi↵en, these keys are stored securely in the server where it is impossible for the
client to access them. Meanwhile all app bundles can be decomplied and secret keys
can be viewed if stored in the app. The common solution to this problem is to use a
web server to store these keys and retrieve information from other services and have a
REST-endpoint that the app client can access. This way no keys will be stored in the
client.
3.3.4
Deployment
The app is not published on the App Sore or Google Play at the current time as further
testing and ﬁnal approval by the company is required. The App was successfully built
for both iOS and Android and uploaded to Apples App Connect system where it can be
downloaded to iOS devices and tested.
I built the app using the Expo Application Services, where it is possible to build sign
and upload the app from the terminal without using Xcode. The build is then sent to
the expo servers and are available in the expo web interface to be downloaded and then
uploaded to the App Store through Apple Transporter.19
19https://apps.apple.com/us/app/transporter/id1450874784?mt=12
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.15: Expo.io interface where the builds can be downloaded(expo.dev)
46
==PAGE:53==
3.4
Evaluation
In this section, I will explain which methods were used to evaluate the design.
3.4.1
Usability Test of the Design
After implementing the MVP, I conducted a usability test of the App. Initially, I planned
to do the test online with children of some DBC employees that o↵ered to help. Eventu-
ally, I decided to go to a library and conduct a hallway test20 in person. I assumed that
communicating with children would require pedagogical methods. Hence I decided to do
the test in-person. I went to The Main Library of Copenhagen21 where there is a ﬂoor
dedicated for children. Mainly in the age range of the target group of the Børnebi↵en.
The test was conducted with assistance of a UX design graduate from IT University
of Copenhagen(2.1.3).
We asked parents of children in the library for permission to
conduct the tests with their children and rewarded the participant children with bags of
popcorn22.
Generally, user tests are expensive and time consuming to plan and conduct.Using
the hallway testing method of going to a library and spontaneously ﬁnding participants
that ﬁt into the target, it was very straight forward and inexpensive to conduct. The
parents were very helpful too. All the parents we asked accepted that we can conduct
the test with their children.
Test in the Library
As mentioned above, I conducted a usability test in the Main Library of Copenhagen.
The test had two main objectives.
Firstly, to test the usability of the features that
already exist in the web version of Børnebi↵en. These features include the sliders in
the main page, the search page as well as the modiﬁed and small-screen-adapted movie
screen and login ﬂow. These features do already exist in the original website product.
The usability test of them will give insights to the company about the usability problems,
if any, in these features.
The second objective of the test is to validate the two new added features that did not
already exist in the web version of the Børnebi↵en. These features are the focused movie
in the top of the main page and the discovery feed.
The test was planned in three sub-tests. Testing the main page and observing ini-
tial reaction of the design, testing the search page and ﬁnally testing the new movie
discovering feature.
Furthermore some basic questions were asked to each participant about their proﬁle,
use of devices and streaming habits. Speciﬁcally, the question asked before the actual
test were;
20Hallway test was introduced in section 2.1.3
21Danish: Københavns Hovedbibliotek
22Full test results in appendix A
47
==PAGE:54==
What is your name?
How old are you? (The gender was recorded as well.)
Do you have prior knowledge to the website version of Børnebi↵en ?
Do yo use other streaming services?
Do you prefer using an iPad23 or phone ?
These question were asked in the beginning of the test to create an information pro-
ﬁle of the user that hopefully can lead us to discover patterns that could be associated
to the collected information about the user. E.g. if age or gender e↵ects the choice of
content.
Test 1
The objective of the ﬁrst test is to observe two main aspects: the initial reaction of
the user and the test of the main page of the app. The main page included a new fea-
ture that does not appear in the original website version of Børnebi↵en.dk. Hence this
general usability test included multiple sub-tests that can be concluded in the following
questions:
See reaction on the loading animation.
How long does it take before the user reacts to the app ?
Which movie does the user choose ﬁrst?
Does the user scroll through the main feed?
How long does the user use in the main page?
Does the user press on the highlighted movie in the top ?
These question are not asked directly to the user during the test. These question are
meant as a ”guidelines” for the person conducting the test during the test.
Test 2
The second test focuses on the search page. If, the user didn’t already use the search
function, they should be directed or advised to do so. The main questions to have in
mind are the following;
How long does the user spend on the search screen?
Does the user understand the objective of the search screen?
Before conducting the test, I assumed that children between 3-7 were not able to
read and type like adults. And therefore, I focused on understanding if it is the children
or their parents that prefers using this screen.
Test 3
The third and ﬁnal part of the test focuses on another new feature added to Børnebi↵en:
the discovery screen. This screen does not appear in the web version of Børnebi↵en and
is one of the new features that I wanted to test. The screen contains an animation in the
23We used the term ”iPad” instead of ”tablet” based on argument presented in [JL16]
48
==PAGE:55==
top of the screen and suggestions of movies to watch presented as a ﬁxed feed similar to
the one used in TikTok.
What is the users initial reaction on the ﬁrst animation?
How many swipes before the child chooses a movie?
Results
I managed to conduct the usability test with four di↵erent participants at the library.
The table below shows the result of the introductory questions. I installed the app on an
iPad and an iPhone and gave the participants the choice between the two devices. Three
of the participants choose the iPad. Participant 2, Mille, chose the iPad initially, but
then switched to the phone. She told us that she has her own phone that she sometimes
streams videos on.
#
name
Age
gender
Prior knowledge to Børnebi↵en.dk?
Tablet or phone?
1
Joakim
8 y
male
no
tablet
2
Mille
11 y
Female
no
phone
3
August
7 y
male
yes
tablet
4
Mali
5 y
male
no
tablet
Table 3.2: The four participants in the usability test
The complete notes generated from each test can be found in the appendix A. The
analysis and conclusions from the test result will be presented in the discussion section
(4).
3.4.2
Expert review
As mentioned in the UX design section(2.1.3), a UX design can be evaluated by an
expert review. Peter Weibrecht is a UX and product designer with a master degree in
Digital design and more than 7 years of experience in UX-design. Weibrecht, did an
expert assessment of the UX design that I did for the Børnebi↵en app. The assessment
was divided into two sections: information architecture and interaction design. The fol-
lowing is a summary of the expert assessment. The full assessment can be found in the
appendix B.
All found issues, but one, were given category number 1. Which is the less critical
category24. No issues were found to be critical to be solved immediately.
24As explained in section 2.1.3
49
==PAGE:56==
Information Architecture
In the information architecture ﬁve screens were reviewed; Home, movie screen, search
screen, discover screen and info screen.
Home screen
Three issues were found in the home screen. Last played movies is not shown to the
user. If the user exit a movie half way through. It is not possible to ﬁnd it again in an
easy way.
The font size of the length label of the hero movie is too small and does not comply with
accessibility standards.
The content of the home screen can be confused with the discovery screen as they both
provide similar functionality. The solution to this could be renaming the discovery screen
to ”recommended” or something similar.
Movie screen In the movies screen, three issues were found too.
The play icon in the movie screen starts the movies. In all other screens it opens the
movie screen. The UX-expert suggests having consistency and standards when using
icons or buttons.
In the movie previews the duration of the movie is shown. While that information is not
shown in the movie screen. There should be consistency in showing of information.
Third and ﬁnal recommendation is showing more information about the movie in the
movie screen. That information could be helpful for the parents to decide what to choose.
Search screen
Five main problems were identiﬁed in the search screen.
Previous search queries are not shown.
When the search query is to long, it will go out of the search ﬁeld.
When scrolling down the search page, it could be confusing where the duration label
belongs.
When there is no results for the search input, there is feedback, but it could be more
constructive. There should be a suggestion to a solution to the problem.
It is not possible to clear the search input with one action. When the user regrets an
action, it should be possible to undo it with ease.
Discover screen
Two issues were identiﬁed in the discover screen.
The popcorn animation shown in the top of the screen is not consistent with the rest
of the screens. A solution to this could be auto scrolling to the ﬁrst element in the
discovery list after one second.
It is arguable what the icon for the discovery screen means. A rocket does not always
mean ”discovery” in the real world.
Info screen
50
==PAGE:57==
One issue were found in the info screen. The screen should be more informative when the
name of it is ”info”. Alternatively, it should be called ”proﬁle” where the information
shown is more about the user proﬁle.
Interaction design
In the interaction design three comments were made.
For returning users, is it relevant to show more direct ﬂow to what they actually want
to see. Returning users, should avoid seeing the same content every time they start the
app.
The second issue in the interaction design, is the system status after watching a movie.
There is no indication that a movie has been watched previously or not.
The ﬁnal issue is the ﬂow after watching a movie. When ﬁnishing watching a movie, the
user has to go back to previous screen to ﬁnd another movie.25
Conclusion on the Expert Review
Generally the feedback from Peter Weibrecht was positive. All the identiﬁed issues, but
one, were cosmetical problems and will not have an impact on the way the system is
used. It is though recommended to ﬁx them to improve the general user experience.
The majority of the issues are also present in the original web version of the app which
also means that extra technical implementation is needed to solve them.
25This is not actual in the discovery page as the user can scroll down after watching movie to continue
the ﬂow
51
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4
Discussion
In this chapter I will discuss the the research and test result and their relation to the
theory framework.
4.1
User test
After reading the notes from the test through I tried to ﬁnd patterns of usability prob-
lems that appeared across the four tests. I then tried to convert these problems into
suggestions for how these problems can be solved. The problems discovered can be di-
vided into three main categories. New features that could be implemented in the future.
Improvements to current design. And general behavior of the users that could be in
mind in future design iterations.
4.1.1
New Features
The following are the new features that could be implemented in the future based on
the conducted tests.
Filter by themes
Two of the participants, Mille and Mali, were very eager in ﬁnding content based on
their interests. Mille was were interested in the universe and the space, but couldn’t
easily ﬁnd something in that category. I noticed that she tapped on the search screen
within seconds of the start of the test and search for space.
In the current version of Børnebi↵en, it is only possible to search for movie titles
and not themes or categories. Adding the possibility to search for themes would provide
the user with a better usability in ﬁnding content that matches their interest. A bar
containing suggestions for themes in form of tags, could be implemented. Icons or emojis
could be added next to text to give better usability to the youngest part of the target
group.
52
==PAGE:59==
Filter by Age
Joakim and Mille were in the upper part of the target group. And they both commented
on the content suggested for them in the main screen and in the discovery screen were
for ”smaller” children. They could recognize some of the content suggested and they
commented that they used to watch them when they were younger but not anymore.
Mille speciﬁcally commented that it could be nice if it was possible to ﬁlter by content
for older children.
This problem could be solved by adding an age ﬁlter to the search page. This ﬁlter
can be a tag similar to the suggested theme tags earlier. With an age range in the tag
e.g. 3-5 years. Alternatively, the user could be asked about the age when they open the
app the very ﬁrst time. The latter version is useful for suggesting content in the main
and discovery screen based on age.
Group by content type
Joakim told us that he prefers watching series over movies. In the current version of
Børnebi↵en.dk there is no way of grouping series or ﬁltering by content type.
A solution to this problem could be adding a ﬁlter in the search screen. Alternatively,
series could be grouped and displayed in a comprehensive way in either a separate screen
or in the main page. Currently, di↵erent episodes of the same serie can be showed in the
same lists in the main page. This can trigger some confusions by the end user.
4.1.2
Improvements
The following are improvements that could be done on the current design.
Scroll in movie screen
Joakim tried multiple times scrolling in the screen that shows info about the movie. This
screen is shown when a movie is chosen form the main screen or from the search screen.
This usability problem can be solved by either making the movie screen scrollable or
redesigning it so it is more obvious that it is not possible to scroll down. Choosing to
make the screen scrollable will add the opportunity to give suggestion in the movies
screen and hence improving the UX by solving a problem and adding a new feature at
the same time. For episodes of a serie, the feed could contain the rest of the episodes in
that serie.
Scroll in Main Feed
Mali, the youngest participant, did not realize that the main screen was scrollable ver-
tically. We had to tell him that this option is possible after he spent a long time only
scrolling horizontally in the ﬁrst suggestion belt in the main screen. It should be more
obvious that the main feed is scrollable vertically. This can be done by e.g. showing the
top of the second suggestion belt in the initial screen. This way the user would see that
there is more than one belt.
Prevent duplication of suggestion
Joakim commented that he recognized some of the movies in the discovery page from
53
==PAGE:60==
the main page. Giving the same suggestion in di↵erent places could give the impression
that there is a smaller number of movies from the actual amount. The system should
not duplicate suggestions in di↵erent screens.
4.1.3
General Behavior & Feedback
The following are general conclusions that were derived from the tests. The following
should be considered in future design iterations.
Reads the description of the text
We discovered that all the participants except Mali, were taking their time reading the
descriptions of the content. Joakim spent over 6 minutes in the main screen. Mostly
reading the descriptions of the movies. He did not play any of the movies he read the de-
scription of. This was a surprise for me, as I assumed and mentioned in section(personas)
that children at that age would not like to read a lot. Mali, the youngest of the partici-
pants, did not spend much time reading the description. This should be taking in mind
in the future. The movie could be explained in clear text with appropriate font size, as
well as emojis or icons. So both ends of the age range of the target group could get a
better UX.
Animations were liked
In the end of the test, we asked the participants about what they think about the tests.
All four participants gave good feedback about those.
They described the popcorn
animation in the discovery feed as ”cute” and ”adorable”. Animations should be taken
into account in future design iterations as they make the design appear more fun and
interactive.
Content is important
All participants showed an obvious interest in the type of content presented to them.
We found that the participants were mostly interested in the content. Other than the
mentioned above problems, we did not observe any major design problems. The main
problem from the users was ﬁnding good content. As UX is not a design only problem,
the suggestion of content should also be more precise.
4.1.4
Error factors
I identiﬁed two main error factors when conducting the tests. The environment and
some of the participants age. As mentioned earlier, the test was conducted in a public
library. We went to the ﬂoor dedicated for the children to play. There were many games
and books and children played with each other. But we didn’t observe any child with
an electronic device. The public library is not the place where children usually use their
tablets or phone to stream videos. Hence it was not the natural environment that the
product is used in. This can be an error factor that could have a↵ected the test. One of
the participants, August, showed signs of shyness and being nervous when his parent left
54
==PAGE:61==
for a few minutes. A child talking with a stranger without the presence of their parent
could also a↵ect the results.
The second factor, is the age of the participants. Mille was 11 years and Joakim was
8. While Joakim was very close to the original target group, it is arguable if Mille di↵ers
from the target group. She could have developed more advanced cognitive skills that a
7 year old does not have.
4.1.5
New persona
The test result showed that the children user groups can further be divided into two
subgroups (2.1.1). Children in the upper end of the target group can usually read and
they use the description of the content to determine if it is interested or not. While
Children in the lower end of target group showed less interest in reading text and judged
the content by the visual representation like the poster image.
This information should be added to the user research to deﬁned the new personas of
Børnebi↵en (3.1.3). The table below describes the personas of Børnebi↵en with addition
of the results of the conducted tests.
Attribute
Persona 1
Persona 2
Persona 3
Name
Joakim
Mads
Anders
Age
3 y
7 y
39 y
Role
kindergarten, child
1. grade, child
parent
Residence
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Can read and type
no
limited
yes
Preferred device
iPad
iPad
iPad(When using Børnebi↵en with a child)
Experience with technology
no
limited
experienced
Table 4.1: Personas of Børnebi↵en
4.2
Children’s role in the development
As mentioned in the theory framework section 2.1.4, children can have various roles in
the development of new technology. In this project I collaborated with children to test
an app-adapted redisegn of the current functionality of Børnebi↵en.
Furthermore, tested prototypes of new features that could improve Børnebi↵en as a
product. These features are not implemented in the web version of Børnebi↵en, but
were designed by me and assessed by the children.The evaluation of the prototype test
will help me decide if the features are useful or not. In this scenario, the child is acting
as a tester for prototypes that are not implemented yet.
4.3
Development
During the development of the App, I encountered several obstacles that I want to reﬂect
over.
55
==PAGE:62==
Video streaming obstacles
Norges Film, who delivers API for the content, only o↵ers the videos as an iFrame.
iFrames are a way of displaying embedded HTML snippets in a website.
After the
authentication process, Norges Film provides a link to the iFrame that includes a video
player implemented by VideoJS. 1
I insisted ﬁnding an alternative to send only the video through the API and not an iFrame
with HTML-content.
But unfortunately, after several correspondences and meetings
with the developers from Norges Film, it was concluded that changing their API would
require a bigger refactoring which will be costly and will not be ready within the scope
of this thesis.
I ended up building a React Native component that simulates the playing of a video.
Initially the iFrame is hidden and only shown when the user presses the play button.
This solution seemed to work. But in an ideally user expedience optimized application,
a direct link should be used instead of the iFrame solution.
4.4
Future work
Some aspects of the project were not withing the scope. The following improvements
can be worked on in the future.
Video streaming
As mentioned in the previous section, video streaming was only available as an iFrame
implementation. Norges Film should be asked to provide an API that delivers the video
content in an isolated form from the iFrame implementation. Providing such an API,
would improve the user experience and give more possibilities to expand the design.
Discovery screen
The current implementation include a ﬁxed list of content to be shown in the discovery
feed (3.2.2). The discovery feed is meant to be optimized after the users preferences. It
is therefore important that the AI-team in the company develops a suggester based on
the users previous history. This suggester should also be used in the new focused movie
in the main page (3.2.2).
Movie screen
The current movie screen shows the video and it’s details. In the future, it is recom-
mended to implement a feed inside the movies screen. In that way, when the movie ends,
the screen automatically scrolls to the movie below. The content in the feed should be
based on suggestions or other episodes from the same series if the video is part of a
series.
1https://videojs.com/
56
==PAGE:63==
This will furthermore also provide more consistency across the app as the discovery
screen has a similar feed.
More tests
The conducted tests in this project showed that usability tests are not necessarily ex-
pensive or complicated to arrange. More tests should be done on Børnebi↵en, and other
DBC Digital products in general, to understand the user needs and identify usability
problems in an early stage.
57
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
During this project I managed to research information about modern app development
frameworks and map their advantages and disadvantages. I managed to use that re-
search to make an informed suggestion about what framework is the most suitable for
Børnebi↵en speciﬁcally and for DBC Digital in general.
I managed to research literature and related research on User experience, which I
used to suggest improvements to the design of Børnebi↵en if it was redesigned as an
app.
The following is some of the conclusions of this project.
User experience
From the UX literature research, user tests and expert review the following was con-
cluded.
Designing for apps
When redesigning an website as an app several facts had to be considered.
Smaller
screens means smaller space for the design. It is therefore important to use the space
purposefully. Navigation in the web is di↵erent from the typical bottom navigation in
apps. It is important to consider what the user is used to from other applications and
not di↵er too much from that. Breaking a pattern that the user is used to can e↵ect the
UX negatively.
Designing for kids
Kids is a very wide term. Based on Piaget’s theory of cognitive development(2.1.5) and
the results of the conducted user tests, it is evident that the cognitive skills of children
vary a lot depending on the age. E.g. the test showed that children in the upper range
of the target group read the description of the content to determined if it is interested
or not. Meanwhile youngest children, used movie posters and general visual appearance
to determine their interest.
Content is important
58
==PAGE:65==
The usability test conducted showed that the content in the app is just as important as
the design. The participants in the test showed a clear indication that they care mostly
about the content presented in the app. User experience is not only the design. It is
everything associated with the experience of the user. This was evident in the above
mentioned point. Most users did not identify critical issues in the design. Their main
concern was the content.
App development choice
The following are the conclusions from the app development research, interviews and
experience gained from implementing a cross-platform app.
Cross-platform development has come a long way
Native development has had the reputation of being the best performing compared to
the alternative frameworks. This is true today. Although, cross-platform development
has come a long way. Writing good React Native or Flutter applications can be a very
close competitor to native application. For a simple application that does not have many
advanced features, it might be hard to distinguish between the native and the cross plat-
form app.
Native has still the advantaged in being the better performing in most cases.
Even though the implemented app had more advanced features such as streaming videos
and scrolling through multiple vertical and horizontal lists, the performed tests showed
no performance deﬁcit.
Factors to consider when choosing a framework
Factors considered when choosing an app development framework are relative to the
company. E.g. companies with bigger resources, can a↵ord implementing native apps,
while smaller companies consider development costs as a major factor for choosing a
framework.
The common factors that I identiﬁed in the conducted interviews with DBC Digital and
other companies are cost of development, integration with existing technology stack,
development speed, user experience and skills within the company.
Choosing a technology for DBC Digital
Based on the conducted research and analysis, I suggest using React Native as the
development framework in DBC Digital. The vast majority of the company’s frontend
product is developed using ReactJS and hence the frontend teams in the company has
experience in JavaScript and ReactJS. These facts combined with the introduction of a
new React Native Architecture that will improve the performance a, it will make sense
for DBC Digital to use React Native as a framework. As proven by the conducted tests,
the user experience didn’t seem to be a↵ected by the performance of React Native.
59
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[All22]
Rosie
Allabarton.
What
is
the
ux
design
process?
a
com-
plete,
actionable
guide.
Careerfoundry,
2022.
Available
at
https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ux-design/the-ux-design-process-an-
actionable-guide-to-your-ﬁrst-job-in-ux/, accessed 2. August 2022.
[And17]
Maja Andersson. Enhancing content discovery in video on demand services
for children. Ume˚a University, 2017.
[B16]
Devran B.
Bottom navigation issue on ios, android and ux.
Medium,
2016. Available at https://medium.com/uxcope/bottom-navigation-issue-on-
ios-android-and-ux-8851↵e7260 , accessed 1. August 2022.
[Dru02]
Allison Druin. The role of children in the design of new technology, 2002.
[gen21]
Market
share
held
by
the
leading
mobile
operating
systems
in
denmark
as
of
december
2021.
Statista,
2021.
Available
at
https://www.statista.com/statistics/621147/most-popular-mobile-operating-
systems-in-denmark/ , accessed 8. August 2022.
[GO16]
Herbert P. Ginsburg and Sylvia Opper. Piaget theory of intellectual develop-
ment. International Psychotherapy Institute E-Books, 3 edition, 2016.
[Hal22]
Robert Half.
6 e↵ective sdlc models:
Which one is best?,
2022.
Available
at
https://www.roberthalf.com.au/blog/employers/6-basic-sdlc-
methodologies-which-one-besttoc3 , accessed 6. August 2022.
[JL16]
STINE LIV JOHANSEN and MALENE CHARLOTTE LARSEN. Digitale
medier i sm˚abørnshøjde. Medieraadet.dk, 2016.
[Lac18]
Matt Lacey. Usability Matters, Mobile-ﬁrst UX for developers and other ac-
cidental designers. Manning Publications Co., 2018.
[Mar18]
Stephanie Marsh. User Research. Kogan Page, 2018.
[MK95]
Kaori Kashimura Masaaki Kurosu. Apparent usability vs. inherent usability
experimental analysis on the determinants of the apparent usability, 1995.
60
==PAGE:67==
[Mor19]
Kate Moran.
Usability testing 101.
NN group, 2019.
Available at
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-testing-101/ , accessed 2. Au-
gust 2022.
[MSA22]
Francisco Rebelo Marcelo Soares and Tareq Ahram. Handbook of Usability
and User Expiernce. CRC Press, 2022.
[MW15]
Vincent Naessens Michiel Willocx, Jan Vossaert. A quantitative assessment
of performance in mobile app development tools, 2015.
[NB13]
Jakob Nielsen and Raluca Budiu. Mobile Usability. New Riders, 2013.
[NL93]
Jakob Nielsen and Thomas K. Landauer. A mathematical model of the ﬁnding
of usability problems, 1993.
[NN22]
Don Norman and Jakob Nielsen.
The deﬁnition of user experience (ux).
NNgroup, 2022. Available at https://www.nngroup.com/articles/deﬁnition-
user-experience, accessed 2. August 2022.
[Nor88]
Don Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books, 1988.
[Nor03]
Don Norman. The three ways that good design makes you happy. Ted, 2003.
Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RlQEoJaLQRA , accessed
2. August 2022.
[Pre21]
Mark Preston.
System development life cycle guide, 2021.
Available at
https://www.clouddefense.ai/blog/system-development-life-cycle , accessed
5. August 2022.
[Sim21]
J Simpson.
Rest vs. graphql:
A side-by-side comparison.
Nordicapis,
2021.
Available at https://nordicapis.com/rest-vs-graphql-a-side-by-side-
comparison/ , accessed 2. August 2022.
[Sin]
Satinder Singh.
Native vs hybrid vs cross platform – what to choose in
2022? Available at https://www.netsolutions.com/insights/native-vs-hybrid-
vs-cross-platform/ , accessed 2. August 2022.
[tec]
Native vs hybrid mobile apps - here’s how to choose. YML. Available at
https://yml.co/native-vs-hybrid-mobile-apps-heres-how-to-choose , accessed
2. August 2022.
[tec21]
The good and the bad of react native app development. altexsoft, 2021. Avail-
able at https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/react-native-pros-and-cons/.
[tec22a]
Deep
dive
into
react
native’s
new
architecture.
Medium,
2022.
Available
at
https://medium.com/coox-tech/deep-dive-into-react-natives-
new-architecture-fb67ae615ccd , accessed 2. August 2022.
61
==PAGE:68==
[tec22b]
Expo application services. expo, 2022. Available at https://expo.dev/eas ,
accessed 2. August 2022.
[tec22c]
Expo go. expo, 2022. Available at https://expo.dev/client , accessed 2. August
2022.
[tec22d]
Expo limitations, 2022. Available at https://docs.expo.dev/introduction/why-
not-expo/ , accessed 2. August 2022.
[tec22e]
Fabric.
ReactNative,
2022.
Available
at
https://reactnative.dev/architecture/fabric-renderer,
accessed
2.
August
2022.
[tec22f]
Here’s why we use expo
react native.
Bothrs,
2022.
Available
at https://www.bothrs.com/story/heres-why-we-use-expo-react-native , ac-
cessed 2. August 2022.
[UXo]
Available
at
https://ux.stackexchange.com/questions/112298/which-is-
better-side-menu-or-ﬁxed-bottom-menu , accessed 9. August 2022.
[UXo94]
Guerrilla
hci:
Using
discount
usability
engineering
to
pene-
trate
the
intimidation
barrier.
NN
group,
1994.
Available
at
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/guerrilla-hci/,
accessed
2.
August
2022.
[UXo00]
Why you only need to test with 5 users.
NN group, 2000.
Avail-
able at https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-
5-users/ , accessed 2. August 2022.
[UXo17]
Hallway
usability
testing.
Techopedia,
2017.
Available
at
https://www.techopedia.com/deﬁnition/30678/hallway-usability-testing,
accessed 2. August 2022.
[UXo20]
Role of animation and motion in ux.
NN group, 2020.
Available at
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/animation-purpose-ux/ , accessed 2. Au-
gust 2022.
[UXo21a] Design thinking vs. user-centered design:
What’s the di↵erence?
Ca-
reerFoundry, 2021.
Available at ”https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ux-
design/design-thinking-vs-user-centered/ , accessed 2. August 2022.
[UXo21b] Mobile navigation: patterns and examples. justinmind, 2021. Available at
https://www.justinmind.com/blog/mobile-navigation/ , accessed 1. August
2022.
[UXo22a] Design
thinking.
Interaction
Design,
2022.
Available
at
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/design-thinking,
ac-
cessed 2. August 2022.
62
==PAGE:69==
[UXo22b] User
centered
design.
Interaction
Design,
2022.
Available
at
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/user-centered-design
,
accessed 2. August 2022.
[Vai]
Lionel Sujay Vailshery. Cross-platform mobile frameworks used by software
developers.
[Vem20]
Durgaprasad Vemula. Ux benchmarking: Content discovery on video stream-
ing apps. Medium, 2020. Available at https://medium.com/peepaldesign/ux-
benchmarking-ott-platforms-c33bee54faeb , accessed 2. August 2022.
[WP17]
Ole Gregersen Ian Wisler-Poulsen. Usability: Testmetoder til mere brugbare
websites. Forlaget Graﬁsk Litteratur, 2017.
63
==PAGE:70==
Appendix A
Usability test results
64
==PAGE:71==
User #1 - Joakim - 8 år
Age
8 år, Joakim
Gender
Dreng
Kender du børnebiffen.dk?
Nej
bruger i andre tjenester?
Netflix, en halv time når han kommer hjem
efter skole. I weekenden må han gerne
spille
tablet eller mobil? egen?
Ipad
Ser mest film på TV
Noter:
Han scroller længe igennem film, først på den ene så på den anden.
Prøver at finde en film han syntes ser interessant ud.
Han holder ikke øje med noget bestemt men noterer sig at der er mange film.
Er der nogen du kender? Ja nogen af dem.
Han forsøger at scrolle ned når han har clicket ind på en film fra hovedsiden af.
Han læser teksten til filmen, hele teksten for at finde ud af om det er noget for ham.
Han tager sig god tid men går så tilbage. Han scroller på hovedsiden og clicker ind på
forskellige film hvor han igen læser teksten.
Hvorfor læser du teksten? For så ved jeg hvad filmen handler om.
Han bruger lang tid, over 6 minutter på at clicke ind på forskellige film på hovedsiden i sin
søgen efter den rigtige film.
Vi guider ham til at benytte de andre funktioner,
Han bruger udforsk, og ved med det samme at han skal scrolle ned, han scroller videre før
animationen er “færdig” og noterer at det er de samme film der går igen, men at der også er
nogle nye. og siger at det ikke er lange film, men at det mest er korte film eller afsnit.
Han siger han bedst kan lide afsnit.
Når han skal se noget på ipadden så finder han et afsnit på 20 minutter og så vælger han
noget kort bagefter.
Hvordan får du forslag på film? Nogen gange fra vennerne, og ellers sidder jeg og kigger på
film apps eller noget og kigger efter noget der interesserer mig. Og over på fritten der bliver
der nogengange sat film på om onsdagen eller når det er dårligt vejr.
Er der noget ved appen der er fedt eller dårligt?
Der er ikke så mange film for størrer børn men der er mange gode film som jeg har set da
jeg var yngre. Nu ser jeg mest tegnefilm på en time og en lille smule mere, så derfor var han
ikke interesseret i at se dem igen.
Man kan også søge efter noget derinde? Ja.
==PAGE:72==
Test #1 Hovedside test
Mål: Usability test
1) Hvor lang tid før barnet reagerer på appen?(første touch) Med det samme.
2) Scroller barnet i main feed? Ja
3)
Hvor lang tid bruger barnet på hovedsiden? lang tid.(6 min)
4) Klikker barnet på filmen i toppen? (Det lille lam?) ikke umiddelbart
==PAGE:73==
User #2 - Mille - 11 år
Age
11 år, Mille
Gender
Pige
Kender du børnebiffen.dk?
Nej
bruger i andre tjenester?
tablet eller mobil? egen?
Telefon, har sin egen telefonen.
Hun vælger at bruge appen.
Noter:
Hun går videre fra hovedsiden indenfor få sekunder til søgefunktionen og spørger om man
kan søge på et emne. Her clicker hun så på en film og læser beskrivelsen og trykker derefter
hurtigt play. Hun lukker selv filmen ned efter at have set den kort da den ikke virker.
Hun prøver nu på telefonen og går ind på den samme film igen, Hun søgte på emnet
“Rummet” for at finde filmen. Hun begynder nu at se filmen.
Hun siger hun ikke har nogle streaming tjenester på sin telefon,
Hun ser film på DR.DK men har den ikke som app.
Hun går tilbage til søgefunktionen og søger på universet.
Hun vælger film nogengange fordi nogen har fortalt hende det.
Hun kan godt lide at søge efter noget specifikt nogen gange, vi beder hende bruge de andre
funktioner, her går hun tilbage til hovedsiden og scroller lidt rundt og clicker ind på en film.
Hun går tilbage fra telefonen til ipadden, hun siger begge dele er godt og ipadden er god
fordi skærmen er størrer og telefonen er også god fordi man kan have den med.
Er der noget du syntes er fedt eller noget der ikke virker godt?
Der er jo stort udvalg, men det er mest for mindre børn.
Hun ville gerne have hvis der var temaer,
Eller hvis man kunne vælge en aldersgruppe, fx til de yngste, midterste, eller de ældste.
Hun syntes de små animationer er nuttede, især popcornene.
Hun syntes det er nemt at finde ud af hvordan man gør.
Test #1 Hovedside test
Mål: Usability test
Observer og besvar følgende spørgsmål:
5) Hvor lang tid før barnet reagerer på appen?(første touch) Med det samme, og direkte
ind på søg
6) Hvilken film vælger barnet først? (hvilket bånd?) Mops og Ollie
==PAGE:74==
7) Scroller barnet i main feed? Ja efter vi guider hende
8)
Hvor lang tid bruger barnet på hovedsiden? ikke så lang tid.
9) Klikker barnet på filmen i toppen? (Det lille lam?) Nej
==PAGE:75==
User #3 August - 7 år
Age
August, 7 år.
Gender
Dreng
Kender du børnebiffen.dk?
Sagde nej i starten, men kunne genkende
designet. Og sagde at han har brugt det før
(Ja)
bruger i andre tjenester?
Kan godt lide at se youtube, Bruger både tv
og ipad til at se det.
tablet eller mobil? egen?
Ipad, Nogen gange ser han film
Noter:
Han scroller langsomt på hovedsiden og siger den kender han godt den har hans far.
Han har brugt den før derhjemme,
Han ville bare gå ind på hjemmesiden og kigge efter en film, han kan ikke læse og skrive
endnu så han ville bare kigge efter billederne.
Han er lidt nervøs og meget stille,
Vi sender ham ind på udforsk hvor han godt ved hvordan han kommer videre fra
animationen men han scroller ikke automatisk videre og vil ikke prøve og teste det.
Var ikke meget glad for testen.
Vi spurgte flere gange om han vil prøve ting. Det gad han ikke.
Han kendte børnebiffen. (måske derfor?)
==PAGE:76==
User #4 Mali 5 år
Age
Mali, 5 år.
Gender
Dreng.
Kender du børnebiffen.dk?
bruger i andre tjenester?
Nogen gange ser han tv nogen gange ipad
nogen gange telefon og nogen gange
spiller han også.
tablet eller mobil? egen?
Ipad.
Undre sig nogen gange over hvorfor hans
mor siger han ikke må se ipad.
Noter:
Han scroller hurtigt på forsiden og vælger, en film (den lille grå ulv)og trykker play på.
Han scroller videre rundt på forsiden og clicker lidt rundt på de forskellige film
Han scroller til at starte med i 2-3 minutter kun i det første stykke af hovedsiden, derefter
siger vi han også kan scrolle ned, det gør han så. og virker lidt overrasket over hvor mange
muligheder der er.
Vi beder ham om at kigge på de andre features
vi får ham til at prøve udforsk han syntes popcorn animationen er sjov,
og scroller nemt frem og tilbage efter vi har forslået det.
Han ser primært noget med ninjaer eller dinosaur,
Hvordan finder du dem? Han kan selv finde dem ved skrive ninjago. Men det er der allerede
på tv’et.
Nogen gange høre han musik, kun nogen gange.
Vi spørger til hvad der mangler, han siger netflix!
Han siger det er sjovt og det er sjovt fordi man kan se noget man kan lide.
Hvis der havde været et billede af en ninja så ville han clicke på den, altså nemmere at
vælge ud fra interesse.
Prøvede at scrolle ned i discover feed efter at have nået bunden. Det var ikke tydeligt for
ham at man er nået bunden af det skærm.
==PAGE:77==
Conclusion:
-New features
-Discovery by interest/themes(space, universe, ninja, etc.)
-wants movies for older children (J8, Mi11) -> sort by age groups
--prefers episodes than movies -> good to show a series screen (J8)
-Improvements:
-tried to scroll in the movie screen -> make it scrollable (J8)
-Make it more obvious that the main feed can be scrollable (Ma5)
-recognizes some movies from main page in discover page ->show other movies (J8)
-General behavior & feedback
-Reads the description of the movies he find ->(make text bigger (J8)
-Animations are “nuttede”, (Mi11)
-content was important for all the participants. Finding good content was the main
thing for them
Did click on the main movie at the top?
Choose a movie from discover?
J8
Read movies texts?
J8, Mi11
Wants a specific interest ?
Mi11, Ma5
==PAGE:78==
Appendix B
Interview with UX-expert
72
==PAGE:79==
Ekspertvurdering - Foretaget af Peter Weibrecht
Omfang - sikring af en helhedsorienteret og systetmatisk gennemgang (s.80)
Ift. informationsarkitektur (s.66), så skal der gennemgåes siderne:
-
Hjem
-
Filmside
-
Søg
-
Udforsk
-
Info
Ift. interaktionsdesign (s. 67), så skal der gennemgåes flows’ne:
-
Afspilning af film
-
Udforsk-flow
Hvis der ikke nævnes noget i skemaet for det enkelte punkt, så er der ingen problemer
Gennemgang af Børnebiffen
Generelt til heuristik 2 - sammenhæng mellem website og den virkelige verden: Flere
funktioner består udelukkende af ikoner, så det er ikke nødvendigvis tydeligt, hvad de
indebærer, da de ikke findes i den virkelige verden Fx. play-ikoner på film i bånd
repræsenterer noget andet en play-ikonet på en filmside. Tilbage-knappen har ikke nogen
ledsagende tekst, så man må basere sig på rumlig forståelse. Ur-ikonet repræsenterer
længde, men det er ikke eksplicit.
Generelt til heuristik 10 - hjælp og dokumentation: Så findes der ingen hjælp og
dokumentation, det kunne evt. blive relevant, at man kunne gå et sted hen hvis afspilningen
fejler eller man ikke kan logge ind, men typisk ligger de ting ikke inde i apps mere, men
snarere på et website, som man kan komme over på.
A. Informationsarkitektur → Hjem
==PAGE:80==
Heuristik
Navn/nr.
Hvor
Problem
Beskrivelse
Kategori
1-4 points
Løsning
Forslag til
forbedring
6. Hellere
genkendelse
end brug af
hukommelse
Hjem-siden
Senest
afspillede film
vises ikke, fx.
hvis man har
været i gang
med at se en
film, er gået
væk fra app’en,
så mangler der
genvej til at
finde den igen.
2
8. Æstetisk og
minimalistisk
design
Minut-tal på
hero-filmen
Minut-tal for
hero-filmen
lader ikke til at
overholde
tilgængeligheds
standarderne,
fordi teksten er
for lille
1
3.
Bruger-kontrol
og frihed
Menu-baren
Hvad
indeholder en
hjem-side?
Hjem-siden er
på Børnebiffen
en form for
“Udforsk”-side,
så hvordan ved
brugeren hvad
de hver især
indebærer og
fungerer. Kan
brugeren
udforske sine
egne veje
1
Omdøb evt.
“udforsk” til
“anbefalet”, så
bliver
menupunktet
rammesat som
bibliotekernes
anbefalinger.
B. Informationsarkitektur → Filmside
Heuristik
Navn/nr.
Hvor
Problem
Beskrivelse
Kategori
1-4 points
Løsning
Forslag til
forbedring
4. Konsistens
og standarder
Filmsiden
Play-ikonet
igangsætter
filmen, men det
1
==PAGE:81==
gør play-ikonet
ikke på alle
andre sider
4. Konsistens
og standarder
Filmsiden
Der er ikke
nogen
angivelse af
længde/minutter
på filmsiden,
men det er der
på filmene på
udforsk-siden
1
8. Æstetisk og
minimalistisk
Filmsiden
Måske for
minimalistisk.
Kunne det være
relevant med
flere
informationer
såsom
aldersanbefalin
g, sprog,
undertekster,
instruktør,
priser, osv.
Nogen gange
hjælper
forældrene
også med at
finde film til
børnene.
1
C. Søgesiden
Heuristik
Navn/nr.
Hvor
Problem
Beskrivelse
Kategori
1-4 points
Løsning
Forslag til
forbedring
6. Hellere
genkendelse
end brug af
hukommelse
Søgefeltet
Tidligere
søgninger vises
ikke
1
8. Æstetisk og
minimalistisk
design
Søgefeltet
Indtastes en
meget lang
søgestreng, så
går bogstaverne
ud og
søgefeltets
ramme
1
==PAGE:82==
8. Æstetisk og
minimalistisk
design
Nede ad
søgesiden
Scroller man lidt
ned ad
søgesiden, så
er det svært at
vide om
angivelsen af
længde tilhører
filmen ovenfor
eller
nedenunder
teksten. Teksten
er mest nær
filmen
nedenunder,
men hører til
filmen ovenfor
1
9. Hjælp
brugeren med
at opdage og
komme tilbage
efter fejl
Ingen
søgeresultater
Når en
søgestreng ikke
giver resultater,
så får man
feedback men
ikke en
konstruktiv
besked, der
foreslår en
løsning.
1
3.
Bruger-kontrol
og -frihed
Søgefeltet
Det er ikke
muligt at slette
alle tegn i en
søgestreng på
en gang, så
brugere kan
fortryde
handlinger og
starte forfra
1
D. Udforsksiden
Heuristik
Navn/nr.
Hvor
Problem
Beskrivelse
Kategori
1-4 points
Løsning
Forslag til
forbedring
1. Systemstatus
Popcorn-animat
ion
Man trykker på
“udforsk”-menu
punktet, og så
står der
“Udforsk” i
starten. Det gør
1
==PAGE:83==
der ikke på
Hjem-  eller
Søgesiden.
Måske det
skulle have
været en
splash-screen,
som selv
animerede ned
til første film
efter 1 sekund,
da det ellers er
en lidt
overflødig
interaktion
2.
Sammenhæng
mellem website
og den virkelige
verden
Raket-ikonet
Raketten
betyder ikke
nødvendigvis
udforsk i den
virkelige
verden, der
betyder det nok
bare raket
E. Infosiden
Heuristik
Navn/nr.
Hvor
Problem
Beskrivelse
Kategori
1-4 points
Løsning
Forslag til
forbedring
1. Systemstatus
Infosiden
Der er en
velkomst, som
er en hilsen og
ikke så
informativt samt
en “log
ud”-knap, som
er en funktion
og heller ikke så
informativt.
1
Lav et
(hardcoded-)ud
kast, hvor der
står
profil-oplysning
er som fx. navn,
bibliotek, og
kald
menu-punktet
“Profil”
—-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
==PAGE:84==
Interaktionsdesign → Afspilning af film
Heuristik
Navn/nr.
Hvor
Problem
Beskrivelse
Kategori
1-4 points
Løsning
Forslag til
forbedring
7. Fleksibilitet
og effektivitet i
brugen
Hjem, Søg,
Udforsk
Erfarne brugere
kan ikke
skræddersy
app’en, så de
ser relevant
indhold eller
kommer direkte
hen til det
indhold, som de
gerne vil se, og
derfor bliver de
præsenteret for
det samme
indhold igen og
igen
2
1. Systemstatus
Efter afspilning
af film
Efter afspilning
vises det ikke,
at man har set
filmen
1
7. Fleksibilitet
og effektivtet i
brugen
Efter afspilning
af film
Efter afspilning
af filmen, så
skal brugeren
gå tilbage i
stedet for at
blive sendt
videre til en
lignende film
eller få forslag
om andre film,
så brugeren kan
komme direkte
videre til at se
noget nyt
1
==PAGE:85==
Appendix C
Interview with React Native
developer
79
==PAGE:86==
1) Are you using React Native in one of your products?(if yes which app?)
Yes, we're using it in two projects at the moment in Kvaliﬁk:
https://apps.apple.com/gb/app/student-life-at-cbs/id1507958327
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/easymove-micro-actions/id1447645538
These two are using Expo. The company I worked in before used the "native" React
Native:
https://apps.apple.com/dk/app/paralenz/id1464496086
For another client I also used Expo:
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/wavecare/id1483619701
2) Are you using Expo.io along with it?
Yes, for smaller projects it make sense to use Expo. Expo ﬁts perfectly for those
apps that just as well could be a website. For more complex functionality Expo is a
bit limited.
3) Are you satisﬁed with React Native ? Do you have any experiences that you want
to share?
When having a lot of develops coming and going, it very beneﬁcial to have one
framework across web and mobile. It's fast to make features and cross platform
which make it ideal for start-ups. The option for a new layer makes it possible to do
almost everything a native app would be able to. We can have web developers
switching to making apps without changing mindset.
4) If you got the choice to rebuild the app that you already have built with React
Native. Would you choose another framework? (if yes. Which and why?)
It's the only mobile framework I have experience in, so I would not choose another,
but I would consider to make a web app instead of a native app. Web apps can do
almost everything a mobile app can.
5) Any other thoughts on your app development technologies?
There's a lot of steps in making an app and deploying it.. Google and Apple have all
the power to control your app. There's a lot of freedom in making a web app instead.
So investigating in progressive web apps would be interesting.
