==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Machine-learning Methods
for Microﬂuidic Sorting
of Unicellular Algae
Aslak Rønnow Franzen
s163047
Supervisor: Assoc.prof. Massimiliano Rossi
Co-supervisor: Prof. Henrik Bruus
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
16 July 2022
==PAGE:2==
ii
Front page ﬁgure illustrates where the machine learning network is activated when
correctly classifying a microalgae cell.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Microalgae are a promising candidate for use in biofuel production. Their oil yield per
farmed volume is high and they have a short cultivation time. To maximize the energy
gain from biofuel production the microalgae cells should have traits that facilitate cell
disruption. Induced Darwinian evolution has been proposed as a method where this can
be achieved. Darwinian-induced evolution is where the microalgae cells with the desired
traits are retained and further cultivated while the remaining cells are discarded. This is
repeated until a new strain of microalgae is created. But the practical implementation
of this method can be quite challenging and an automatic system for selection would be
needed.
I will in this thesis describe how I have solved some of the challenges that an automatic
sorting system would have to overcome before being viable. The ﬁrst challenge is to be
able to observe the cells. This is, in this project, done through the use of optics. To ma-
nipulate and capture images of the cells I have constructed an experimental set-up which
consists of a microﬂuidic set-up and an optic set-up. The next challenge is for an algorithm
to be able to recognize the cells and their traits so that they can be sorted. This is done
through the use of an object detection algorithm. In the object detection algorithm, I have
used a combination of background subtraction, contour detection and centroid tracking
to be able to ﬁnd and track the cells and a machine learning algorithm to be able to
classify the category the tracked cells belong to. Both the object detection algorithm and
the experimental set-up were ﬁrst tested and calibrated on in-organic polystyrene tracer
particles. At last, the whole system was tested on living microalgae cells of the Chlorella
vulgaris species. The results veriﬁed that the system could be used to track and classify
microalgae cells in real-time, and the system, therefore, has the potential to be extended
to automatic sorting of microalgae.
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
ABSTRACT
==PAGE:5==
Resum´e
Mikroalger er en lovende kandidat til brug i biobrændstofproduktion. Deres olieudbytte
pr. opdrættet volumen er høj, og de har en kort dyrkningstid. For at maksimere energiud-
byttet fra produktion af biobrændstof bør mikroalgecellerne have egenskaber, der facilitere
cellenedbrydelse.
Induceret darwinistisk evolution er blevet foresl˚aet som en metode,
hvor dette kan opn˚as. Darwinistisk-induceret evolution er, hvor mikroalgecellerne med
de ønskede egenskaber bevares og dyrkes yderligere, mens de resterende celler kasseres.
Dette gentages, indtil der dannes en ny stamme af mikroalger. Men den praktiske im-
plementering af denne metode kan være ret udfordrende, og et automatisk system til
udvælgelse vil være nødvendigt.
Jeg vil i dette speciale beskrive, hvordan jeg har løst nogle af de udfordringer, som et
automatisk sorteringssystem skal overkomme, før det er levedygtigt. Den første udfordring
er at kunne observere cellerne. Det er i dette projekt gjort ved brug af optik. For at ma-
nipulere og fange billeder af cellerne har jeg konstrueret en eksperimentel opstilling, som
best˚ar af en mikroﬂuidisk opstilling og en optisk opstilling. Den næste udfordring er, at en
algoritme skal kunne genkende cellerne og deres egenskaber, s˚a de kan sorteres. Dette gøres
ved brug af en objektdetektionsalgoritme. I objektdetektionsalgoritmen har jeg brugt en
kombination af baggrundssubtraktion, konturdetektion og midtpunktssporing for at kunne
ﬁnde og spore cellerne og en maskinlæringsalgoritme for at kunne klassiﬁcere den kategori,
de sporede celler tilhører. B˚ade objektdetektionsalgoritmen og den eksperimentelle opsæt-
ning blev først testet og kalibreret p˚a uorganiske polystyrensporpartikler. Til sidst blev
hele systemet testet p˚a levende mikroalgeceller af Chlorella vulgaris -arten. Resultaterne
bekræftede, at systemet kunne bruges til at spore og klassiﬁcere mikroalgeceller i realtid,
og systemet har derfor potentiale til at blive udvidet til automatisk sortering af mikroalger.
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
RESUME
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master’s thesis is submitted as fulﬁlment of the prerequisites of obtaining the degree
of Master of Science and Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical
University of Denmark. The work was carried out from February 2022 till July 2022 at
the Department of Physics in the group of Theoretical Microﬂudics (TMF) headed by
Professor Henrik Bruus. The thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
I would like to thank my supervisor Assoc.prof. Massimiliano Rossi for introducing me
to such an interesting project and for all the help and guidance he has provided through-
out my project. I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Prof. Henrik Bruus for guiding
me and making available his vast experience and expertise in supervising master projects.
Furthermore I would like to thank the members of the TMF group for creating an en-
vironment that are both enjoyable and facilitates learning. I would especially like to thank
Gustav Modler and Søren Anton Kuhberg which presence in our shared oﬃce helped with
keeping both the spirits and work ethic high in the last weeks of the project.
Aslak Rønnow Franzen
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
16 July 2022
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
PREFACE
==PAGE:9==
Contents
List of ﬁgures
xi
List of tables
xiii
List of symbols
xv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology of Tracking and Machine Learning
5
2.1
Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Machine Learning Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Full Object Detection Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Experiments
19
3.1
Particle Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Experimental Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Running an Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results on Polystyrene Tracer Particles
31
4.1
The Polystyrene Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Training of the Polystyrene Particle Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Network Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results on Living Microalgae
43
5.1
The Microalgae Data Set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Training of the Microalgae Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Network Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion and Outlook
55
6.1
Extension of the Set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
60
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Running Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Median Background Image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
K-Nearest Neighbors Background Subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Finding Moving Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Centroid Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
CNN Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Image Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1
The Experimental Set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Pressure-based Flow Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Microﬂuidic Chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Optic Set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Polystyrene Particle Channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Particle Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Assessment of Polystyrene Particle Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Accuracy for the Polystyrene Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
10-micron Particle Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
5-micron Particle Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1
Microalgae Channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Microalgae Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Tuning of Microalgae Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Accuracy for the Microalgae Network with Oversampling
. . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Accuracy for the Microalgae Network without Oversampling . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
Microalgae Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1
Hydrodynamic Focusing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Inlet and Outlet of an Extended Microﬂuidic Chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Acoustic Deformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
LIST OF FIGURES
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
3.1
Polystyrene Particles Speciﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Polystyrene Particles Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Microalgae Cell Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Polystyrene Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Polystyrene Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Polystyrene Class Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1
Microalgae Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Microalgae Hyperparameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Microalgae Class Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
xiii
==PAGE:14==
xiv
LIST OF TABLES
==PAGE:15==
List of symbols
Symbol
Description
Unit
ρ
Mass density
kg m−3
¯v
Velocity vector
m s−1
v
Velocity
m s−1
¯g
Gravity vector
N kg−1
p
Pressure
N m−2
µ
Dynamic viscosity
kg m−1 s−1
Q
Volume ﬂow rate
m3 s−1
n
Concentration of particles
m−3
V
Volume
m3
f
Volume ratio between ready-made
and mixture solutions
N
Number of particles
KNN
K-nearest neighbour
GMM
Gaussian mixture model
EM
Expectation-maximization
NN
Neural network
CNN
Convolution neural network
E
Error function
I
Total amount of inputs and corre-
sponding outputs
y
Correct output
a
Predicted output
fps
frame rate per second
xv
==PAGE:16==
xvi
LIST OF SYMBOLS
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Bio-fuels are a renewable and sustainable source of energy that can help to reduce our
reliance on fossil fuels. They can be used in a variety of ways, including powering vehicles,
generating electricity, and heating homes. Microalgae-based biofuels oﬀer several beneﬁts
over other biofuel feedstocks. Microalgae has a high oil yield per farmed volume and a
shorter cultivation time, making it an excellent feedstock for biofuel production [1].
But there are challenges that have to be overcome before microalgae-based biofuels are
viable for large scale production[2]. One of these challenges are the optimization of bio-
oil production and especially the extraction process. The optimization of the extraction
process is crucial to the viability of microalgae based biofuel. This is due to the extraction
process requiring resources in one form or another, either for precise extraction or for
the destruction of the microalgae cells[3]. The eﬃciency of the extraction process will
therefore end up impacting the energy surplus of the ﬁnal biofuel product. This means
that the less energy intensive it is to extract the bio-oil from the microalgae cells the more
energy eﬃcient the overall process will become. One approach is to focus on optimizing
the extraction method itself, but the focus of this thesis is the more novel approach of
optimizing the cells instead. Creating a strain of cells, which are healthy but susceptible
to cell disruption would reduce the overall energy needed for extraction[4].
A recently proposed approach achieve optimized cells is through the use of Darwinian
evolution. The concept would be to select the microalgae cells that have traits enabling
easy cell disruption for bio-oil extraction. The selected cells would then be further culti-
vated. Repeating this selection process from the cultivated microalgae would then result
in the desired traits becoming more prominent. In this way, the production of bio-fuel
from microalgae cells could be optimized through the use of Darwinian-induced evolution
of the microalgae strains.
The sorting of microalgae cells could be done in a variety of ways. But for the induced
Darwinian evolution approach to be viable it would have to be done by an automatic
system. Automating the sorting process would, of course, speed up the process of selection,
but it could also enable more ﬂexibility in the selection of traits.
The creation of an
automatic sorting system that could operate in real-time would therefore enable rapid
research of microalgae suitable for bio-fuel production and could potentially also be used
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
for other commercial applications.
1.1
Scope of the Project
Multiple problems have to be solved before an automatic sorting system would be viable.
Some of these problems are an eﬀective way to manipulate the microalgae, being able to
track the microalgae, being able to classify the tracked microalgae, being able to sort the
classiﬁed microalgae and an eﬀective way to cultivate the algae. Not all of these problems
can be solved during the time frame of this project. But I will in this thesis describe how
I have solved the challenges of the manipulation of microalgae, the tracking of microalgae
and the classiﬁcation of microalgae.
The manipulation of the microalgae are done by
suspending them in a solution and then use a microﬂuidic set-up to pass them in front of a
optic set-up where images of the microalgae are captured. An object detection algorithm
will then enable automatic tracking and classiﬁcation of the microalgae. The tracking
algorithm consist of a background subtraction method, a contour detection algorithm and
centriod tracking.
The classiﬁcation algorithm consist of a machine learning network.
The whole system were developed and calibrated through the use of polystyrene tracer
particles.
1.2
Outline of the Thesis
Chapter 2: Methodology of Tracking and Machine Learning
In this chapter, I describe the methods used to create the object detection algorithm. This
is done by following the diﬀerent steps that the algorithm takes to track and classify a
moving particle. These steps are divided between a tracking algorithm to identify and
track moving particles and a machine learning network to classify the moving particles.
Chapter 3: Experiments
In this chapter, I describe how the particles of interest are handled and how images of them
are captured. This includes the diﬀerent particles and the solutions they are suspended
in, the microﬂuidic part of the experimental set-up, and at last how the proper images of
the particles are captured by the optic set-up.
Chapter 4: Results on Polystyrene Tracer Particles
The polystyrene tracer particles are used to develop and calibrate the object detetion al-
gorithm and the experimental set-up. I will in this chapter present the result obtained
from the polystyrene tracer particles and how they are analyzed and used. This includes
the data-set created from images of the polystyrene particles, the tuning of the hyperpa-
rameters used in the machine learning network that classify them, the training and testing
of the polystyrene machine learning network and at last how the complete tracking set-up
perform on polystyrene particles.
Chapter 5: Results on Living Microalgae
I will in this chapter present the results obtained from the living microalgae and how they
are analyzed and used. This includes the data-set created from images of the microal-
gae, the tuning of the hyperparameters used in the machine learning network that classify
==PAGE:19==
1.2. OUTLINE OF THE THESIS
3
them, the training and testing of the microalgae machine learning network and at last how
the complete tracking set-up perform on the living microalgae.
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Outlook In this chapter, I will present the conclusions
that can be drawn from this project. The conclusions will then be coupled to the further
development that can be done to achieve the goal of automatically sorting microalgae in
real-time.
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Methodology of Tracking and
Machine Learning
I will in this chapter describe the image processing that I utilize in my project and the
relevant concepts underpinning it. This is done by ﬁrst explaining how moving objects in
the image are tracked by the tracking algorithm. The ﬁrst part of the tracking algorithm
consists of an algorithm that ﬁnds the foreground image of moving objects by the use of
earlier images and background subtraction. The foreground image is then run through
a contour detection algorithm and the positions of the moving objects are found. After
the tracking algorithm has detected all moving objects in an image it identiﬁes them
and compares them to earlier identiﬁed objects and updates them through the use of
a centroid tracking algorithm.
The result is that all moving objects in the image are
uniquely identiﬁed and their position tracked. In the second part of the image processing,
I will explain how a machine learning network can classify objects. This is done by ﬁrst
describing the concepts and structure of the machine learning network and afterwards the
concepts and details of its training. At last, I will give an overview of the complete object
detection algorithm.
2.1
Tracking
The tracking algorithm starts with receiving an image from the camera. In my set-up this
image will be of a microchannel where the moving objects would be the particles of interest.
A depiction of a running experiment can be seen in Fig. 2.1, more detailed explanation
of the image capture is done in Chapter 3. The ﬁrst step of the tracking algorithm is to
identify the moving objects in the image. I have done this by using background subtraction.
This is where the background of the image, or image sequence, is identiﬁed and subtracted
from the image creating a binary image displaying the foreground of the image. In my
tracking algorithm, the background will be the stationary channel and the foreground is
the moving objects in the image. I have used 2 diﬀerent background subtraction methods
in this project. The ﬁrst method is median background subtraction which is conceptual
simple, but not very eﬃcient or robust. The second method is a K-nearest neighbours
5
==PAGE:22==
6
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
background subtraction which is more advanced, but also more eﬃcient and robust.
Figure 2.1: A depiction of a running experiment. The solution of interest travels through
the microchannel in the microﬂuidic chip. The microchannel is back-lit by the light source
so the particles suspended in the traveling solution are clear and distinct in the image. The
optical system captures the image from and chosen area of the microchannel highlighted
by the red box (not to scale). The image is then sent and displayed for further processing.
Shown here is an example of such an image from a 10-micron polystyrene experiment.
2.1.1
Median Background Subtraction
The median background subtraction method is a technique where the median of multiple
images is used to subtract the background from an image. This technique works by taking
multiple images of the same stationary scene and ﬁnding the median of each pixel for
each of the 3 colour channels. As the stationary parts of the images are present in all of
the images and are only temporarily obscured by moving objects, the median pixel values
will create a background image with only the stationary elements.
Such a generated
background image can be seen in Fig. 2.2. This background image is then subtracted from
the input image. This will cause the background pixels to have values close to zero while
the foreground objects will remain. The result is an image where the background has been
eﬀectively removed. The resulting foreground image can then be run through a contour
detection algorithm.
==PAGE:23==
2.1. TRACKING
7
Figure 2.2:
The background image produced by the median background method. It is
constructed by using multiple images that have already been recorded. The median values
for every pixel in each of the 3 colour channels are then used to construct a background
image which is the image pointed at in the ﬁgure. The background image can then be
subtracted from the current image to ﬁnd the moving objects in that image.
When using the median background subtraction method for real-time tracking the
number of previous images used to calculate the median background has to be set. The
number will be a trade-oﬀbetween precision and processing time, for this project it was
found that 10 images were a reasonable number. But a weakness of the median background
subtraction method is that sudden global eﬀects, such as light ﬂickering, is registered as
moving objects. This results in the method not being very robust and not very well suited
for real-time tracking. But it is suﬃcient if collecting data from recordings.
2.1.2
K-Nearest Neighbor Background Subtraction
As the median background subtraction method was subpar for real-time tracking, I used
a second background subtraction during real-time tracking.
The second background
subtraction method used in this project is a K-nearest neighbours (KNN) background
subtraction[5]. The speciﬁc KNN method I used can be found in the OpenCV python
package. The KNN algorithm works by classifying each pixel in an image into one of two
categories: background or foreground. To do this, the algorithm looks at the k-nearest
neighbours of each pixel and assigns the pixel to the category that most of its neigh-
bours belong. The KNN algorithm I have used makes use of a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) for eﬃcient adaptive density estimation per image pixel for the task of background
subtraction.
A GMM is a probabilistic model that assumes all the data points are generated from
a mixture of a ﬁnite number of Gaussian distributions with unknown parameters[6]. The
GMM is used to model the background pixels in an image and the foreground pixels are
then detected by subtracting the background from the image. The GMM is trained on a
data set of images and the parameters of the model are then estimated.
The GMM algorithm uses an expectation-maximization[7] (EM) approach to estimate
the parameters of the mixture network. The EM approach is a general method for ﬁnding
==PAGE:24==
8
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
maximum likelihood or maximum a posteriori estimates of parameters in statistical models,
where the model depends on unobserved latent variables. In the case of GMM, the latent
variables are the cluster assignments for each data point.
The GMM algorithm starts by initializing the parameters of the mixture network
(means and covariances of the Gaussian distributions). It then alternates between two
steps:
E-step: Compute the posterior probabilities of the latent variables given the current pa-
rameter values.
M-step: Update the parameter values given the current posterior probabilities.
The algorithm converges when the parameter values stop changing and the GMM
is then used to segment the image into foreground and background regions. When an
images is segmented into foreground and background it is also used to update the GMM
of the KNN background subtraction method[5]. The result of this is that slowly changing
parameters are ﬁltered out and do not impact the segmentation.
In Fig. 2.3 multiple
results of the KNN background subtraction is displayed.
Figure 2.3: The results of K-nearest neighbours background subtraction. The parameters
for multiply Gaussian distributions have been found from previous images and are used to
predict which pixels belong in the background category. These pixels are then subtracted
from the image leaving only the foreground image. The foreground image is in this case
the moving objects in the image. The moving objects detected can here be seen moving
towards the top of the images.
One advantage of using the KNN algorithm for background/foreground segmentation
is that it is relatively easy to implement and requires only a minimum of training. It takes
a certain amount of images before the predictions of the KNN algorithm becomes staple.
From experiments it was observed that after approximately 3 images the KNN algorithm
was consistent in its predictions. The KNN algorithm is also much less sensitive to light
ﬂickering as the predictive network is much better at identifying and discarding global
eﬀects in the image. Additionally, the KNN algorithm can be easily parallelized, which
makes it eﬃcient to run on large images[5].
==PAGE:25==
2.1. TRACKING
9
2.1.3
Contour detection
When the background has been subtracted, the binary image of only moving objects is
further processed by running it through a contour algorithm. In the contour algorithm, a
border following technique[8] is used to ﬁnd the position and extent of the contours. This
means that the moving objects in the image have now been identiﬁed and they have been
assigned a position and an area. In Fig. 2.4 the combined process of detecting moving
objects can be seen.
a)
b)
c)
Figure 2.4:
The process of object detection. In a) can be seen a sketch of a new image
as captured by the camera. This image is put into the background subtraction algorithm
which creates a binary image with only the moving objects. A sketch of this can be seen
in b). The binary image is then put into a contour detection algorithm which ﬁnds the
position of the moving particles in the image and gives the objects a bounding box. In c)
the found bounding boxes have been added to their respective particle.
2.1.4
Centroid Tracking
The next step in the tracking algorithm is to be able to identify moving objects between
images. I have done this by using a centroid tracking algorithm. The centroid tracking
algorithm works by calculating the distances between each object already tracked to every
moving object found in the new image. All the unidentiﬁed objects are then paired with
the identiﬁed object they are closest to, and if the distance between them is the shortest
distance to the respective identiﬁed object out of all the unidentiﬁed objects they are
accepted as the same object. If an unidentiﬁed object is not the closest object to any
identiﬁed object they are stored as a newly identiﬁed object. This process can be seen in
Fig. 2.5. But there is a risk that an already identiﬁed object does not show up as a moving
object in the next image, due to moving out of focus, light ﬂickering or being obstructed.
So to create a more robust tracking system I have included the feature that identiﬁed
objects are retained for 3 images before being removed as identiﬁed objects. This ensures
that identiﬁed objects are only removed when they have actually left the image.
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
ID: 0
ID: 1
ID: 2
ID: 0
ID: 1
Figure 2.5:
The process with which the moving objects in the image are tracked. In a)
is the previous image where two objects have been identiﬁed and tracked. In b) can be
seen the next image which has been run through the object detection process as shown in
Fig. 2.4. The distances between every object from a) to every object found in b) are then
calculated. This is represented in c) by yellow and red arrows going from identiﬁed objects
in the previous image to unidentiﬁed objects in the next image. The nearest object to an
identiﬁed object is then classiﬁed as the identiﬁed object if no other identiﬁed objects are
closer. This is shown in c) by the red arrows. If an unidentiﬁed object is not the closest
object to any identiﬁed object the unidentiﬁed object is stored as a newly identiﬁed object.
The ﬁnal product of this process can be seen in d) where the objects ID:0 and ID:1 has been
updated as they were the closest identiﬁed object to their respective unidentiﬁed object.
In the meantime, the object now identiﬁed as ID:2 had no already identiﬁed object to
which it was closest and was therefore stored as a newly identiﬁed object.
The algorithm is designed to work with objects that are moving in a straight line,
and so it does not work well with objects that are moving in a complex or erratic way.
However, it can be used to track objects that are moving in a simple, linear fashion. Which
is why the algorithm is a good ﬁt for the experimental set-up introduced in Chapter 3 and
one of the reasons that laminar ﬂow is desired when real-time tracking has to be done.
It furthermore also struggles with tracking objects if they obstruct each other as this can
result in an ID swap of the objects.
2.2
Machine Learning Network
The machine learning ﬁeld is extremely wide and there are a lot of diﬀerent mathematics,
parameters and architecture that make a machine learning network functional. Explaining
how and why every component of my machine learning network operates is outside the
scope of this thesis. I will therefore focus only on the terms and components that are
directly relevant to my machine learning network and the work done with it, and more
basic components will only be mentioned in passing.
==PAGE:27==
2.2. MACHINE LEARNING NETWORK
11
2.2.1
Machine Learning Architecture
In the previous section, I explained how the tracking algorithm that I have designed is
now able to identify moving objects in images, ﬁnd their position, ﬁnd the area they span
and track them between images. The next step is to classify the objects so it is possible
to sort them. To achieve this I have created a machine learning algorithm. I have chosen
to use machine learning for this due to its ﬂexibility. The classiﬁcation of a new trait
can, for example, easily be incorporated into the algorithm as it only requires a data set
with the new trait. Machine learning algorithms can be divided into two broad categories:
supervised and unsupervised. Supervised learning algorithms learn from labelled data,
where the label is the desired output of the algorithm. Unsupervised learning algorithms
learn from unlabeled data. As the tracking algorithm and experimental set-up enable the
creation of labelled data, I have in this project chosen to do supervised machine learning.
As one of the aims of this project is to be able to classify particles from images, a
machine learning method that is well suited for visual analysis would be ideal. I have
therefore chosen to use neural network architecture as a basis for a machine learning net-
work. Neural networks (NN) are a type of machine learning algorithm that is composed of
a large number of interconnected processing nodes, or neurons, that can learn to recognize
patterns of input data. Each node have a weight and a bias which are the parameters that
controls their reaction the an input. They learn by making connections and sending input
and output signals between nodes[9].
The convolution neural network (CNN) is a type of neural network that is especially
eﬀective in processing data with spatial or temporal structure. It is therefore ideal for
image analysis. CNNs are similar to traditional neural networks, but they are composed
of a series of convolutional layers that extract features from the data[10].
Convolution layers are made up of a set of weights that are applied to the input data
to produce a feature map. The weights are typically learned through training, and the
feature map is then run through an activation function, such as Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU), that enables non-linearity in the NN. The result is then fed into a pooling layer.
Pooling layers downsample the data, reducing the dimensionality and making the features
more robust[10]. The ﬁnal layer of the CNN is often a fully-connected layer where the
output is the probabilities that the network gives to each class being the correct class of
the input image. A depiction of the structure of convolution neural networks can be seen
in Fig. 2.6.
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
Figure 2.6:
A diagram of a convolution neural network architecture. The input image
is fed into the ﬁrst convolution layer which creates multiply feature maps. These feature
maps are then run through the ReLU activation function which enables non-linearity in the
network. The results of the activation function are then downsampled through the use of a
max-pooling layer where the maximum value in a set area of the feature maps is the value
fed further into the network. The results are then again fed into the a convolution layer,
through an activation function and a max-pooling layer. The results of the max-pooling
are then fed into a fully-connected layer where the output is the network’s prediction of
the input image. In this case, if the input was an image of a cat. Image is taken from[11].
The speciﬁc structure of a CNN used for machine learning can vary greatly depending
on what the aims of the machine learning task are, and under what constraints it has to
work. As the overarching aim of my project is to be able to automatically, through visual
cues and in real-time, classify and sort algae cells, a CNN with a compact architecture
orientated towards the classiﬁcation of images is preferred.
The machine learning architecture that I have chosen to use as a basis for my machine
learning network is the MobileNetV3 architecture [12]. MobileNetV3 is a machine learning
architecture for computer vision that is tuned for use by a mobile phone CPU. It achieves
this with the use of multiple novel machine learning methods such as depth-wise sepa-
rable convolutions and inverted residuals [12]. In depth-wise separable convolutions, the
convolution operations are done depth-and point-wise. Compared to convolution opera-
tions in standard CNN where the convolution is done on all the feature maps, depth-wise
separable convolutions are much more eﬃcient and almost as eﬀective. This means that
depth-wise separable convolutions achieve approximately the same results using a fraction
of the computational power[13]. Inverted residuals are structures designed to address the
problem of vanishing gradients in deep neural networks. The term ”vanishing gradient”
refers to the phenomenon whereby the error signal used to update the weights of a deep
neural network becomes progressively smaller as it moves through the layers of the net-
work, making it diﬃcult for the network to learn from data. The shortcut connections
created by inverted residuals allow the information to ﬂow more directly from the input
to the output, without going through all of the layers in between. This makes it easier for
the network to learn from data and results in better performance on tasks such as image
classiﬁcation[14]. The results of these machine learning methods are networks that are
==PAGE:29==
2.2. MACHINE LEARNING NETWORK
13
much smaller than traditional CNNs but achieve close to the same performance. They are
furthermore faster to train and the more compact architecture means that the computa-
tional power needed to classify images is much smaller. The MobileNetV3 is therefore an
ideal candidate for creating a machine learning network that can be used to classify and
sort algae cells automatically and in real-time.
The MobileNetV3 comes in two variants: Large and Small. The Large variant is tar-
geted for use with ImageNet classiﬁcation while the Small variant is targeted for use with
CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation[12]. As the computational power available for the ﬁnal product
should be on the order of a small laptop instead of a mobile phone, I choose to use the
large variant of the network. Both variants of MobileNetV3 are available as pre-trained
networks in the python package PyTorch.
Pre-trained networks are those that have been previously trained on a large data set.
This is usually done with CNNs as many features in an image can be transferred to other
images, such as the presents of shapes (lines, circles, etc.) in the image. By pre-training a
network on a large data set, the network can learn features that are generalizable to other
data sets. This makes training a network on a new data set faster. To utilize a pre-trained
network the weights of the pre-trained network are transferred to a new network, which
can then ne trained on a new data set.
The data set that the large MobileNetV3 has been trained on is the ImageNet data set.
The ImageNet is a large-scale visual database designed for use in visual object recognition
software research.
It contains over 1000 categories, such as animals, plants, vehicles,
furniture, and people[15]. A network pre-trained on the ImageNet data-set would therefore
have learned a wide variety of features that can be generalized to a new image data-set.
I have therefore chosen to initialise the MobileNetV3 with weights pre-trained on the
ImageNet cutting down on training time.
2.2.2
To Train the Network
The training of the machine learning network is a very important part of designing a
successful network and many factors impact how eﬀective the training of the network is.
The parameters that are not directly learned by the network, but impact the eﬃciency and
performance of the machine learning training are called hyperparameters. In the following,
I will describe the most important hyperparameters for my machine learning network.
Error Function
One of the most important hyperparameters in training the machine learning network is
the error function. The error function, also known as the loss or cost function, measures
how well the algorithm is doing at ﬁnding patterns in data. A good error function is
minimized when the algorithm is correctly identifying the desired data pattern, such as
correct classiﬁcation of the image input[16].
The error function, I have chosen for my machine learning network is the cross-entropy
error function. The function is used to quantify the diﬀerence between two probability
distributions, typically between the probabilities predicted by the neural network and the
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
actual class labels. The cross-entropy error function is deﬁned as[9]:
E = −1
I
I
∑
i=1
yi ln(ai) + (1 −yi) ln(1 −ai)
(2.1)
where y is the desired outcomes, a is the outputs of the network, the subscript i is a speciﬁc
input and corresponding output and I is the total amount of input data and corresponding
outputs. The cross-entropy error will be small when a and y are similar (i.e., the predicted
probabilities match the actual class labels), and will be large when they are dissimilar.
One advantage of using the cross-entropy error function is that it is always non-
negative, so we can be sure that any decrease in the error during training indicates that
the network is learning. Additionally, the cross-entropy error function can be used as a
loss function for both classiﬁcation and regression problems.
Overﬁtting
When a network too closely ﬁts a particular set of data, it is said to be overﬁt. This
means that the network has learned the noise in the data, rather than the true underlying
relationships. Overﬁtting can lead to poor generalization performance, meaning that the
network does not perform well on new, unseen data. It can also cause the network to be
unstable and diﬃcult to interpret[16].
Learning rate
A hyperparameter that is often very important to tune to the speciﬁc machine learning
network is the learning rate of the network.
The learning rate is a parameter in ma-
chine learning that controls how much the network adjusts its weights after each training
instance. A low learning rate means that the network only makes small changes to its
weights after each instance, which can lead to slow learning. A high learning rate means
that the network makes large changes to its weights after each instance, which can lead to
overﬁtting on the training data or overshooting the optima[16]. The learning rate is one
of the hyperparameters that will be tuned for my machine learning network. The results
of this will be shown in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5.
Optimizer
Another very important hyperparameter is the optimizer. Optimizers are the algorithms
that are used to adjust the weights and biases of a machine learning network while the net-
work is training. Some of the parameters that the optimizer itself makes use of can also be
overall hyperparameters for the network. There are a variety of optimizers available, each
with its advantages and disadvantages and the choice of optimizer can have a signiﬁcant
impact on the performance of a machine learning network. The optimizer I have chosen is
the ADAM optimizer. The ADAM optimizer is an extension of the traditional stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) algorithm and it is similar to the SGD algorithm in that it up-
dates the weights of the network in an iterative fashion. However, the ADAM Optimizer
==PAGE:31==
2.2. MACHINE LEARNING NETWORK
15
has a few key diﬀerences that makes it more eﬃcient than the SGD algorithm. First, the
ADAM Optimizer uses an adaptive learning rate. This means that the learning rate is
not constant, but rather it is updated after each iteration. The ADAM Optimizer uses a
technique called ”momentum” which helps the network converge to the global minimum
more quickly and minimizes overshooting of the optima. Second, the ADAM Optimizer
uses a diﬀerent update rule for the bias which helps to reduce the training time. The
traditional stochastic gradient descent algorithm uses the same update rule for both the
weights and the bias. Third, the ADAM Optimizer uses a ”weight decay” which helps to
prevent overﬁtting. Fourth, the ADAM Optimizer uses a ”momentum correction” which
helps improve the convergence of the algorithm. Overall, the ADAM Optimizer is a more
eﬃcient algorithm than the traditional stochastic gradient descent algorithm and mul-
tiple of its extra functions also ensures that no overshooting the optima happens. The
ADAM Optimizer has been shown to converge more quickly and to achieve a lower training
error[17]. As my machine learning network is pre-trained some of the features necessary
for the correct classiﬁcation is already learned where as others have to be calibrated in
varying degrees. A optimizer that can update its learning rate and have measures in place
to prevent overshooting of the optima for features that are already calibrated or have to
only be calibrated slightly is therefore ideal. The ADAM fulﬁlls these conditions while
also reducing general training time which is why it was chosen for my machine learning
network.
Batch Input
Batches are used in machine learning to group data points for processing. This can be done
for several reasons, such as making the training process more eﬃcient or making the results
more consistent. Batching data points together can also help to improve the accuracy of
the machine learning networks by reducing the amount of noise in the data. The batch
size is also a parameter of the optimizer that controls the number of training samples to
work through before the network’s weights and biases are updated[16]. The batch size
is one of the hyperparameters that will be tuned for my machine learning network. The
results of this will be shown in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5.
Oversampling
Oversampling is the process of increasing the number of samples in a data set. This is done
by either duplicating existing samples or by generating new samples through interpolation.
Oversampling is often used when working with data sets that are imbalanced, meaning
that there are more samples from one class than another[18].
This can be a problem
when training machine learning networks, as the network may learn to simply predict the
majority class over the minority class, or that the smaller amount of samples run through
the network prevents it from learning the features of the class in a reasonable amount of
time. Oversampling can help to mitigate this issue by increasing the number of minority
class samples, thereby giving the network more data to learn from. This is especially
eﬀective if combined with transforms of the input data. As one of the data-sets used in
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
my project shows a class imbalance, oversampled data sets will be created. Using the
oversampled data set to train on will be one of the hyperparameters tuned for my machine
learning network. The results of this will be shown in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5.
Image Transforms
Image transforms are when the parameters and values of the input iamge is changed.
There are many types of image transforms that can be used in machine learning. But the
ones used in my project are resizing, normalization and augmentation. Resizing changes
the size of the image to match the desired input for the machine learning algorithm.
Normalization adjusts the image so that the pixel values are within a certain range, such
as matching the mean and standard deviation of the data set itself or another data set.
This is especially eﬀective if the network has been pre-trained on another data set. Data
augmentation is when additional images are created from already existing images. This is
done by performing operations on the already existing images such as ﬂipping, rotation,
contrast, etc. The transforms done to the images in my project depend on the data set
they come from. Both the training set and validation set will be resized and normalized
to the ImageNet data set. But the training set will further be augmented by transforming
half the images in a batch with a random change in brightness, contrast, saturation, and
hue. These changes will augment the training set and minimize that the network learns
speciﬁcs of the individual recordings instead of learning in general to recognize the classes.
Hyperparameter Tuning
As the hyperparameters are so important for creating a successful machine learning net-
work it is extremely beneﬁcial to tune the hyperparameters to the speciﬁc machine learning
network[9]. In this project, I have done this by making a hyperparameter sweep. A hy-
perparameter sweep is an algorithm that uses a search method to go through a space of
possible hyperparameter values. The search method that I have used is random search.
This is a method that involves randomly selecting the hyperparameters from a range or
set of values and then training the network. Each of these training runs are then evaluated
to see how well they perform. Some of the advantages of random search are that it is less
likely to be trapped in local optima than other search patterns, is more eﬃcient than ex-
haustive search in high-dimensional space and it can be easily parallelized[10]. The results
of the test runs can then be analyzed and the optimal hyperparameters can be found.
To ensure that a hyperparameter sweep does not stagnate I use early stopping. Early
stopping is a technique that allows one to stop the training of a network if the network’s
performance on a validation set begins to decrease. This can be used to prevent overﬁtting
and to ﬁnd the optimal set of hyperparameters. This saves both time and resources as the
search algorithm does not continue training a network with decreasing performance. A
parameter that is needed for early stopping is the grace period[10]. In a hyperparameter
sweep, a grace period is used to allow a network to continue training for a set amount
of time after it has stopped improving on the validation set.
The reason for using a
grace period is that, in many cases, a network will not reach its peak performance on
==PAGE:33==
2.3. FULL OBJECT DETECTION IMPLEMENTATION
17
the validation set immediately. It may take some time for the network to learn all of the
features of the data and learn how to best generalize to the validation set. By allowing
the network to keep training for a set amount of time after it has stopped improving on
the validation set, it is given a chance to reach its full potential. The grace period is in
my project set to 1 which means that the training run stops if it stops improving on 2
validation sets in a row.
2.3
Full Object Detection Implementation
I now have all the components needed to create the object detection algorithm that can be
used to track the microalgae. The ﬁnal object detection algorithm takes an image of the
microchannel and runs it through a background subtraction algorithm. The background
algorithm output an image where only moving objects are present which is then run
through a contour detection algorithm. The output of the contour detection algorithm is
the position and the area at which the moving particles can be found. A centroid tracking
algorithm then compares these positions to previously known positions of particles in
earlier images, and all the particles in the image are then identiﬁed. The particle that is
closest to the end of the microchannel, and therefore the next particles that need to be
sorted, are run through the machine learning network to classify it. The machine learning
network outputs the probability that particles belong to a class.
The particle is then
classiﬁed as the class with the highest probability. The tracked particles are then updated
with the class it has been assigned. The whole object detection and tracking process can
be seen in Fig. 2.7.
ID: 0
ID: 1
ID: 0
Figure 2.7: Full processing of an input image. A sketch of the input as it goes through the
full object detection algorithm. In the ﬁrst process, shown in a), background subtraction
and contour detection happens. In the next step of the algorithm, shown in b), the centroid
tracking algorithm is run and every moving particle are identiﬁed and tracked. In c) the
particle furthest along in the channel is found and cropped out. The cropped image is
then run through the neural network and is classiﬁed, shown in d). The last step of the
full algorithm is to in the full image tag the furthest particle with its found class. The full
image is then send as output for viewing.
The versatility of the object detection ensures that it can easily be implemented in
a wider sorting algorithm. Furthermore, the ﬂexibility aﬀorded by the machine learning
algorithm enables addition or removal of which traits to sort for. This is the case as it
only needs a data set of the desired trait to be able to classify it.
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY OF TRACKING AND MACHINE LEARNING
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Experiments
In this chapter, I will go through the deliberations, decisions and ﬁnal implementations
that facilitate the experiments carried out in my project. I start by explaining that laminar
ﬂow is needed to control for tracking and sorting of particles and with the use of Reynolds
Number I show that laminar ﬂow is achieved. Afterwards, I describe the solutions that the
particles are suspended in both their composition and the deliberations gone into making
them. The polystyrene particle solutions are described ﬁrst with the microalgae solutions
following after. I will then explain how the solutions are handled and observed. This will
be done by describing the experimental set-up which is composed of a pressure-based ﬂow
controller, tubing, a microﬂuidic chip, actuators to control the position of the chip, an
optic set-up, a camera and a processing unit for processing and recording images. At last,
I will summarize how an experiment is conducted.
3.1
Particle Solutions
To examine the diﬀerent particles used in the experiments a method to manipulate the
particles is essential. I have in this project made use of microﬂuidics to manipulate the
particles. But to be able to use microﬂuidics in the experiments several considerations
have to be made.
The ﬁrst is to consider the ﬂow which facilitates the travel of the
particles. As the end goal of the project is to be able to track and sort the particles, the
ﬂow has to have well-deﬁned streamlines that the particles can travel along. The ﬂow
that achieves this is the laminar ﬂow. The second consideration is the make-up of the
solution that the particles are suspended in. These considerations are slightly diﬀerent
depending on the particle suspended in the solution. The considerations and process of
creating the solutions for the polystyrene tracer particles and the algae cells will each be
treated separately later in this section.
3.1.1
Laminar Flow
So to be able to track and sort the particles in the solution they have to run along well-
deﬁned streamlines.
To gain insight into this, I will introduce the governing equation
for the ﬂow. As the solutions used in these experiments are composed of incompressible
19
==PAGE:36==
20
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
Newtonian ﬂuids the Navier-Stokes equation can be used to describe the ﬂow. But as the
experiments will all be assumed steady-state and without an electrical ﬁeld the Navier-
Stokes equation is this case given by[19]:
ρ
[
(¯v · ¯∇)¯v −¯g
]
= −∇p + η∇2¯v
(3.1)
Here ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, ¯v is the velocity ﬁeld, (¯v · ¯∇)¯v is a inertia term, ¯g is the
gravity ﬁeld, ∇p is a pressure term and η∇2¯v is a viscosity term.
From Eq. (3.1) the dimensionless Reynolds Number can be found by expressing all
physical variables in terms of characteristic scales. When this is done the Reynolds number
is given by[19]:
Re = ρV0L0
η
(3.2)
Where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, V0 is a characteristic velocity, L0 is a characteristic
length and η is the viscosity of the ﬂuid. If the Reynolds number is small Re << 1 the
ﬂow is dominated by the viscous forces and if the Reynolds number is big Re >> 1 the
ﬂow is dominated by the inertia forces. If the viscous forces dominate the ﬂow becomes
a laminar ﬂow. It is therefore possible to achieve laminar ﬂow for the microﬂuidic set-up
by changing the parameters given in Eq. (3.2). This is done and the ﬁnal characteristic
scales for the experiments can be shown to give a low Reynolds number:
ρ = 997 kg
m3 ,
L0 = 2 × 10−4m,
V0 = Q0
L2
0
= 2.08 × 10−4 m
s ,
η = 8.9 × 10−4Pa s (3.3)
These characteristic scales give a low Reynolds number of 0.0467 and laminar ﬂow is
achieved which I also observe in the experiments.
3.1.2
Polystyrene Particles
To develop and calibrate the microﬂuidic set-up, settings of the camera, tracking algorithm
and the machine learning model, test solutions with in-organic particles are made. I do
this by creating polystyrene particle solutions. Two diﬀerent polystyrene particles are
used, 10-micron diameter particles and 5-micron diameter particles to mimic the size and
shape of unicellular microalgae. The particles are also red-ﬂuorescent but this property is
not used in these experiments. The relevant speciﬁcations of the particles can be seen in
Table 3.1.
==PAGE:37==
3.1. PARTICLE SOLUTIONS
21
Mean
Diameter
[µm]
Standard-
Deviation
[µm]
w/v
concentration
[kg/m3]
Density [kg/m3]
Particle
concentration
[1/m3]
10 micron
10
0.11
25
1050
4.75×1011
5 micron
4.99
0.16
25
1050
3.80×1014
Table 3.1:
The speciﬁcation of the 2 polystyrene particles used in the experiments [20].
The particles used in this experiment comes in a ready-made aqueous solution with a
weight/volume (w/v) concentration of 2.5%=25 kg/m3. Which gives a particle concen-
tration of 4.75×1011 m−3 for 10-micron particles and 3.80×1014 m−3 for the 5-micron
particle.
To be able to track and analyse the particles a reasonable average number of particles
have to be present in the frame recorded by the camera. An approximation of the av-
erage amount of particles present in the channel view can be calculated by the following
equations:
N = nps × Vc × f,
f = Vps
Vms
(3.4)
In Eq. (3.4) nps is the concentration of particles in the ready-made particle solution,
Vc = 3.2 × 10−11m−3 is the volume of the channel viewed by the camera, f is the ratio
of ready-made tracer particle solution volume to mixture solution volume and N is the
average amount of particles in the channel view.
The ideal amount of particles that should be in view in the ﬁnal sorting procedure
depends on multiply factors some of which themselves depend on the speciﬁcation of the
components in the ﬁnal product. But as the polystyrene solutions will be used to collect
data and develop the whole set-up, a reasonable lower and upper bound have to be chosen.
A consideration that has to be taken into account when choosing the lower bound is that
it still has to be high enough that suﬃcient data for training the machine learning model
can be collected. Furthermore due to the speciﬁcations of the handling system, described
later in Section 3.2.1, the ﬁnal volume should be on the order of 10 mL . Using a mixture
volume of 10 mL , a ready-made particle volume of 50 µL and the ready-made particle
concentrations found in Table 3.1 the approximate average amount of particles in the
camera view for the 10 and 5-micron particle solutions is found to be:
N10 = 4.75 × 1011m−3 × 3.2 × 10−11m3 × 50000mL
10mL
≈8
(3.5)
N5 = 3.80 × 1014m−3 × 3.2 × 10−11m3 × 50000mL
10mL
≈61
(3.6)
With the values stated above, the approximate average number of particles in the camera
view therefore becomes 8 for the 10 micron particle solution and 61 for the 5 micron
particle solution. Both of these are reasonable numbers for an lower and upper bound
respectively.
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
Buoyancy
A problem that I encountered early on in the experiments with the polystyrene particles
was sedimentation.
This was due to multiple factors.
One was using pure water as
the mixture solution when creating the particle solutions, as seen in the Table 3.1 the
polystyrene particles have a slightly larger density than water, 997kg m−3. This coupled
with the low ﬂow rates needed to properly observe the particles with the camera, resulted
in a much lower amount of particles being present in the camera view at any given moment
than expected. This impeded the data collection and had to be ﬁxed before proper data
sets could be collected. So to ensure that the tracer particles did not sediment while the
experiment is running they have to be close to neutral buoyancy.
I did this by using
a density gradient medium when producing the mixture solution. The medium used in
these experiments is called OptiPrep and has a density of 1320 kg m−3 and is sterile[21].
Assuming the density of the tracer particles solution is close to water density, mixing
8.2 mL water, 50 µL tracer particles solution and 1.8 mL OptiPrep provides a mixture
density that is close enough to neutral buoyancy for our purposes:
ρps = Vwρw + Voρo
VF
(3.7)
= 8.25mL997kg m−3 + 1.8mL1320kg m−3
10.05mL
(3.8)
≈1054.85kg m−3
(3.9)
Where ρps ≈1054.85kg m−3 is the density of the ﬁnal particle solution, ρo = 1320kg m−3
and Vo = 1.8 is respectively the density and volume of the OptiPrep, ρw = 997kg m−3
and Vw = 8.25mL is respectively the density and volume of water and VT = 10.05mL is
the volume of the ﬁnal particle solution. The solutions are kept in a 12 mL vial and the
speciﬁcations of the ﬁnal polystyrene particle solutions can be seen in Table 3.2. It is these
solutions that have been used in the experiments for data collection and tracking.
Solution
Water
[mL]
OptiPrep
[mL]
Ready-made
Particle Solution
[µL]
Calculated
Particles
in channel
Observed
Particles
in channel
10 micron
8.2
1.8
50
8
4
5 micron
8.2
1.8
50
61
20
Table 3.2: The two diﬀerent solutions of the polystyrene particles used in the experiments.
The solutions are identical regarding the ratio of volumes. But as the 5 micron particles
are smaller than the 10 micron particles, and they have the same w/v concentration
diﬀerent amount of particles can be found in each solution. The next to last column,
Calculated particles in channel, is the amount of particles that should on average be
observed in the part of the channel that the camera records.
This is calculated from
Eq. (3.4) where Vps = 50 µL, Vms = 10 mL, Vc = 3.2 × 10−11m3 and nps is the respective
particle concentrations found in Table 3.1. The last column is the approximate amount of
particles actual observed in the channel.
==PAGE:39==
3.1. PARTICLE SOLUTIONS
23
3.1.3
Microalgae Solutions
After the whole tracking system has been developed and calibrated by the use of the
polystyrene particles solutions, it should be tested on microalgae solutions, to conﬁrm its
viability to sort microalgae cells. I, therefore, created multiply diﬀerent algae solutions
that were run through the tracking system.
The algae species used in the microalgae
solutions are Chlorella vulgaris which are unicellular green freshwater microalgae which
are easy to cultivate and non-pathogenic (Hazard class 1)[22]. The Chlorella vulgaris was
chosen, in part, for its ease of cultivation and handling (non-pathogenic), but it was also
chosen due to its promise in biofuel production [4]. In addition to microalgae cells, a
sterile growth medium that the cells can be cultivating in has to be acquired. Both the
Chlorella vulgaris and the sterile growth medium, 3N-BBM+V premade, are acquired from
Culture Collection of Algae and Protozoa (CCAP). After the initial culture of Chlorella
vulgaris has been received it has to be subcultured into a fresh sterile medium to ensure
the viability of the microalgae cells.
The procedure for subculturing a preexisting microalgae culture is started by sterilizing
the containers that the subcultures will be put in. I do this by using a mix of 70% ethanol
and 30% water. The microalgae culture is then poured or pipetted into the containers
and the sterile growth medium is added in no more than a 1:10 ratio e.g. 5 mL into no
more than 50mL of the medium. This is all done with sterile equipment and inside a fume
cabinet. As the microalgae slowly sediment it is important to gently stir the algae culture
before any transfer is made.
In the ﬁrst subculturing of the microalgae, 5 mL of microalgae culture is mixed together
with 50 mL of growth medium. I do this 4 times and the 4 new subcultures are closed with
a lid, to ensure that no contaminants enter the mixture, and labelled by cup number. The
lid is kept slightly loose to facilitate gas exchange such that there is no pressure build-up
and the growth conditions do not become anaerobic. Three of the four new microalgae
cultures are again subcultured a couple of weeks later. I split each of the 3 cultures into 3
new subcultures. The ratio of the subcultures is around 17 mL of algae culture to 40 mL
of growth medium. The subcultures are then closed and labelled with the number of the
original culture and the new cup number (e.g. Cup 2.1).
The last step before the microalgae can be used for experiments is to transfer an algae
culture and growth medium into a vial, so that it can be run through the experimental
set-up. This is done in the fume cabinet. I do this by using a sterile syringe to transfer 2
mL of algae culture and 8 mL into the sterile vial. The newly made microalgae solution is
then run through the experimental set-up and the number of cells in view of the camera
can be observed. If the number of cells in the channel view is too high the solution is split,
in the fume cabinet, till the desired number of particles is reached. In Table 3.3 can be
seen the microalgae solution used in the experiments. It is these solutions that have been
used for data-collection and tracking.
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
Solution
Growth Medium [mL]
Algae culture [mL]
Cells in channel
Cup 1
8
2
20
Cup 2.1
8
2
10
Cup 2.1
9
1
5
Table 3.3:
The two diﬀerent solutions of the microalgae cells used in the experiments.
The ﬁrst solution has the algae culture taken from Cup 1 in the ﬁrst batch of subcultures.
In this solution 2 mL algae culture is mixed with 8 mL of growth medium. This results
in approximately 20 cells at a time being present in the part of the channel recorded by
the camera. The second solution has the algae culture taken from Cup 2.1, the ﬁrst Cup
subcultured from Cup 2. In this solution 2 mL algae culture is mixed with 8 mL of growth
medium. This results in approximately 10 cells at a time being present in the part of the
channel recorded by the camera. The third solution has the algae culture taken from Cup
2.1, the ﬁrst Cup subcultured from Cup 2. In this solution 1 mL algae culture is mixed
with 9 mL of growth medium. This results in approximately 5 cells at a time being present
in the part of the channel recorded by the camera.
3.2
Experimental Set-up
The solutions that have been described in the previous sections now have to pass by
a camera in an orderly and conﬁned manner such that the particles of interest can be
observed. To do this, I have assembled an experimental setup. The set-up consists of a
pressure-based ﬂow controller, tubing, a microﬂuidic chip, actuators to control the position
of the chip, an optic set-up, a camera and a processing unit for processing and recording
images. The full set-up can be seen in Fig. 3.1.
==PAGE:41==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
25
Figure 3.1:
The experimental set-up that has been used to observe and track the
polystyrene particles and microalgae cells. The input vial has a pressure cap attached to
its opening. The pressure cap keeps the vial pressurized and is connected to the pressure-
based ﬂow controller. The solution then runs through a ﬂow sensor which measures the
actual pressure and ﬂow rate in the system. The solution then enters into the microﬂuidic
chip which guides the solution through a microchannel. The microﬂuidic chip is aﬃxed
to 3 actuators which can move the chip in 3 directions which are perpendicular to each
other. The microﬂuidic chip and its microchannel are backlit by the light source. An optic
set-up with a magnifying lens and a camera is connected to a processing unit such that
the solution in the microchannel can be observed and images of it captured. After the
solution exits the microﬂuidic chip it is deposited in an output vial.
3.2.1
Loading of the Particle Solutions
An experiment is run by ﬁrst connecting the input vial, with the solution of interest, to the
pressure-based ﬂow controller. The pressure-based ﬂow controller has three components:
the pressure cap, a ﬂow sensor and the main controller unit which can be seen in Fig. 3.2.
When the pressure cap is locked on top of the input vial the experiment can begin.
==PAGE:42==
26
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
a)
b)
c)
Figure 3.2:
The component of the pressure-based ﬂow controller. In a) can be seen the
pressure cap.
The pressure keeps the input vial sealed and pressurized.
A tube goes
through the pressure cap and to the bottom of the of the vial.
The solution is send
through this tube by the pressure supplied by the pressure-based ﬂow controller. Before
the solution is let into the microﬂuidic chip it s passed through a ﬂow sensor. In b) the
ﬂow sensor can be seen. The ﬂow sensor measures the actual pressure and ﬂow rate in
the system and sends this to the main controller unit so that the pressure can be adjusted
to achieve the desired system ﬂow rate or pressure. In c) can be seen the main controller
of the pressure-based ﬂow controller. A tube of pressurized air is connected to the main
controller unit which the main controller unit then use to achieve the desired ﬂow-rate
or pressure in the experimental system. The connected pressure have to be 1000 mBar
. In c) there is two controller units which enables the experimental system to have two
diﬀerent ﬂow-rates if necessary. The ﬂow rate and pressure in the system can be adjusted
either manual by using the button or automatically if connected to a computer. On the
screen can be seen the target value that have been set, and the values measured by the
ﬂow sensor.
The pressure-based ﬂow controller can be used to adjust the ﬂow rate of the system
such that the particles of interest have a speed that ensures they can be observed in
suﬃcient quality. The ﬂow rate that gave the best results was found to be 0.1 to 0.5
µL /min. But at this ﬂow rate, the pressure-based ﬂow controller could not keep the
ﬂow rate completely stable and it ﬂuctuated between 0 to 1 µL /min. I found that these
ﬂuctuations were the smallest when the input vial was close to full. As the vials used
in the experiments have a volume of 14 mL , I found that a solution of 10 mL kept the
ﬂuctuations to a minimum while not running the risk of spillage.
==PAGE:43==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
27
3.2.2
The Microﬂuidic Chip
The experiment then continues when the solution of interest enters the microﬂuidic chip.
The microﬂuidic chip consists of a 3D printed main body, a glass capillary and a glass
slide. The microchip is constructed by ﬁrst 3D printing the main body. The main body
has holes in its sides for tubing at its inlet and outlet. These holes end up in a small
reservoir. From the reservoirs, there is a square opening where a glass capillary can be
ﬁtted. There is between these openings a gap such that clear images of the microchannels
and the solution of interest can be captured. When the main body has been printed a
200×200 microchannel µm glass capillary is carefully inserted. UV glue is then applied
such that a complete seal around all openings is made. Care is also taken such that the
glue does not block any of the channels. A glass slide is then delicately pressed on top of
the main body and the glass capillary. The glue is then cured by a UV lamp. At last,
tubing is connected to the microﬂuidic chip and UV glue is applied around the points of
insertion and cured. The ﬁnished microﬂuidic chip can be seen in Fig. 3.3.
Figure 3.3: The microﬂuidic chip where the particles or algae cells are observed. It consists
of a 3D printed chip with holes for tubing connected to reservoirs where the medium
holding the particles will ﬂow through. There are also openings for a square 200×200
µm glass capillary to be inserted, connecting the two reservoirs. The gap between the
openings ensures that clear images of the solution of interest can be captured. After the
glass capillary has been inserted a glass slide is glued on top of the microﬂuidic chip,
sealing the microﬂuidic chip such that ﬂuid can’t escape. This is done with UV-activated
glue and care is taken that no glue runs into the channels.
3.2.3
Optical Recording System
When the solution of interest has entered the microﬂuidic chip images if it can start being
captured. This is done by the use of an optic system that includes a magnifying lens and
camera. These are aﬃxed to a framework that makes it easy to take out the camera and
lens for cleaning or to change out the lens for one with a diﬀerent magniﬁcation. The
camera is then connected to a processing unit so that images can be shown, saved and
processed. When the optic set-up has started showing images the actuators can then be
used to get the microchannel centred, get the focal plane position adjusted and suﬃciently
==PAGE:44==
28
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
clear patch of the microchannel found such that good quality images can be captured. The
optic set-up and the actuators can be seen in Fig. 3.4
Figure 3.4: The optic set-up that will enable tracking of polystyrene particles and microal-
gae. The set-up consists of three motors, a microﬂuidic chip, an optic set-up, a camera,
and a processing unit. The motors facilitate the movement of the attached microﬂuid chip
in 3 to each other perpendicular directions. This ensures that the focal plane and channel
position can easily be adjusted even when the chip or optic set-up is swapped. The optic
setup has a magnifying lens in between the camera and a microﬂuidic chip. This lens
can be swapped out so that diﬀerent magniﬁcations of the microalgae can be captured.
At last, there is the camera, a PiCamera, which is connected to the processing unit, a
Raspberry Pi, for collecting images of the solution of interest. The Raspberry Pi enables
limited image processing and can furthermore send the images captured by the PiCamera
onwards for further image processing.
The actuators in these experiments are manually adjusted to ﬁnd the focal plane,
channel position and also speciﬁc points along the microchannel. But they can also be
controlled remotely or automatically if connected to a computer. The optic setup is made
up of a framework where lenses can be inserted at diﬀerent points along the frame. In this
project, a magnifying lens is inserted at the end of the framework. Diﬀerent magnitudes
of magniﬁcation can be used as needed. In the ﬁnal experiments used for this thesis, a
magniﬁcation of 10x has been used.
The camera used in the set-up is a PiCamera. This camera is easy to set up and use
in combination with a Raspberry Pi. In the setup, a Raspberry Pi 3 with the Bullseye
operative system installed is used. When capturing the images threading of the capture
process is used. Threading is a powerful tool for parallelizing image processing tasks. By
using multiple threads, a single image processing task can be split up into multiple subtasks
that can be processed in parallel. This can dramatically reduce the overall processing time
for the task. In this case process of capturing the images is done in parallel with the image
processing. This means that the camera does not have to wait for image processing to be
done before capturing the next image. Instead, it ﬁlls up a queue with images that the
==PAGE:45==
3.3. RUNNING AN EXPERIMENT
29
image processing algorithm can grab when the next image is needed.
The Raspberry Pi can do limited image processing, and optimization of the tracking
algorithm would enable simple tracking to be done on the Pi. But due to the high amount
of image processing needed for tracking and classiﬁcation of both the polystyrene particles
and the microalgae, the images captured by the PiCamera are sent to another computer
when tracking and classiﬁcation are needed.
The streaming protocol used for this is
ImageZMQ. ImageZMQ sends images between computers using PyZMQ messaging[23].
The Raspberry Pi perform image capture and can be made to do simple image processing
if necessary. The images are then sent via the imageZMQ protocol to the central computer
for more complex image processing like object detection, tracking, feature recognition, etc.
In this case, only a single Raspberry Pi is used, but ImageZMQ has the functionality to
send images from multiply Rasberry Pis to a central computer, so it is possible to run
multiply experiments in parallel.
3.3
Running an Experiment
To summarize, an experiment in my project starts with creating a solution, as explained
in Section 3.1, containing the particle of interest. The solution is then loaded into the
microﬂuidic set-up, as described in Section 3.2.1, where a pressure-based ﬂow controller
sends the solution into the 200×200 µm microchannel contained in a microﬂuidic chip.
To obtain images which are appropriate for further processing a ﬂow rate of 0.1 to 0.5
µL/min is desired. The optic set-up, described in Section 3.2.3, then ensures that images
of the microchannel and the particles of interest can be captured. The captured images
are then sent onward to a central computer where they can be recorded for later use or
used to track and classify the particles in the solution. It is these images that go into the
algorithms described in Chapter 2.
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTS
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Results on Polystyrene Tracer
Particles
I will in this chapter go through the results acquired from the polystyrene tracer particles.
In the ﬁrst section, I will describe the creation of polystyrene data sets. This includes the
generation of the raw images, the processing done to obtain the input images and how
they have been labelled. The data set has over 35,000 labelled images for training and
validating a machine learning network. The images are divided into 3 diﬀerent classes:
5-micron polystyrene particles, 10-micron polystyrene particles and empty background. In
the second section, I will delve into how the hyperparameters for the polystyrene network
have been chosen and also evaluate the training and validation of the network. This will
encompass an impact assessment of 4 diﬀerent hyperparameters on the network. From
this assessment, the ﬁnal values for the network’s hyperparameters are chosen and the
training results are shown and explained. In the last section, I will show the performance
of the polystyrene particle network in both classifying the size of polystyrene particles and
in its implementation in the wider tracking algorithm. The classiﬁcation performance is
evaluated by using an independent test set on which the polystyrene particle network has
not been trained. For the wider implementation, I will show images of tracking together
with diﬀerent performance parameters. At last, I will discuss what insights can be gained
from the results of the polystyrene tracer particle solutions.
4.1
The Polystyrene Data Set
The goal of the polystyrene machine learning network is to be able to distinguish between
two sizes of polystyrene particles when tracking particles in a microchannel. These two
sizes are polystyrene particles with a 5-micron diameter and a 10-micron diameter. To
achieve this goal, I created a data set consisting of over 35,000 images. The individual
images of the data set were produced by taking the full frame of the microchannel iden-
tifying all moving particles in the frame and creating a cropped image for each particle.
These cropped images are centred and zoomed in on an individual particle. It is these
cropped images that the data-set consists of and are used to train the machine learning
31
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS ON POLYSTYRENE TRACER PARTICLES
network. The speciﬁcs of the production and the details of the data set will be explained
in this section.
The data-set collection starts with a captured frame of the microchannel. The method
I have used to do this is described in Chapter 3. Such a captured frame can be seen
in Fig. 4.1.
After the frame has been captured the individual particles in the frame
have to be found.
I do this by using the tracking method introduced in Section 2.1
producing multiply cropped images of particles. The cropped images are set to have the
same dimension depending on the resolution of their recording. This is done to retain
more information on the spatial dimensions of the particle in question. In this project,
I decided to record at two diﬀerent resolutions. This choice is made to ensure that the
results from the machine learning network are not dependent on the image resolution and
so can be easily adapted when implementing the ﬁnal algorithm. The resolutions chosen
are 640×480 and 1280×720 pixels which give a cropped image size of 32×32 and 48×48
pixels respectively. These cropped images are then ready to be labelled, so they can be
used for training and validating the machine learning network.
Figure 4.1:
An image of the microchannel as recorded by the camera. Flowing through
the microchannel are a 5 micron polystyrene particle solution. The ﬂow moves from the
bottom up. The small distinct black dots in the channel are the 5-micron polystyrene
particles close to the focal plane while the blurred black dots are 5-micron polystyrene
particles further away from the focal plane.
For the polystyrene particles, the cropped images can be automatically labelled in
quite an eﬃcient way. This is done by making a monodispersed particle solution. The
==PAGE:49==
4.1. THE POLYSTYRENE DATA SET
33
monodispersed particle solution is then run through the experimental set-up and recordings
of the particles are made. When the cropping algorithm is run every found moving object
is then labelled as the corresponding particle size. This method is used to produce the 5
and 10-micron classes for the polystyrene data set.
As the machine learning network will work in conjunction with a tracking algorithm
and will run in real-time in the ﬁnal implementation, there is a risk of images getting
passed to the machine learning model that is neither of the two polystyrene particles. To
anticipate this event a third category is added, an empty background of the microchannel.
This ensures that if the tracking algorithm loses track of the particle and sent an empty
patch to the machine learning network, this can be labelled as background and discarded.
To supplement the data set, I have therefore collected additional cropped images of empty
backgrounds in the microchannel. The cropped images of the background have the same
dimensions as the cropped images of the polystyrene particles.
An example of these 3 classes can be seen in Fig. 4.2. It is these images that are
run through the machine learning network both when training the network and when
predicting the label of unknown cropped images.
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4.2: The cropped image used for the polystyrene data-set. The images shown here
are from a 640×480 resolution recording and therefore have a dimension of 32×32 pixels.
In a) the 5 micron class can be seen. The 5 micron polystyrene particle in this image has
been cropped from the image shown in Fig. 4.1. In b) the 10 micron class can be seen. In
c) the background class can be seen. It can also be seen that the light intensity diﬀers for
each image which is one of the parameters that are changed between recordings.
To ensure that the machine learning network can become as general as possible multiply
diﬀerent recordings for each polystyrene particle size are made. In these recordings light
incident angle, light intensity, ﬂow speed and focal plane position have been varied such
that the machine learning network will be able to sort out these factors when recognizing
particles. The composition of the data-set as explained so far can be seen in the Simple
data-set column of Table 4.1.
As under-representation of a class in a data-set can be a risk in later data sets, I chose
to create another data-set where the imbalance of the classes had been mitigated by the
use of oversampling (see Section 2.2.2).
I do this by simply adding copies of existing
cropped images to their respective class. This is done until the class imbalance in the
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS ON POLYSTYRENE TRACER PARTICLES
data set is much less pronounced. The use of transformations on the data set (described
later in this section), further enhances the eﬀect of oversampling. The composition of the
oversampled data-set can be seen in the Oversampled data set column of Table 4.1
Class type
Simple data-set
Oversampled data-set
5 micron
15,175 images
15,175 images
10 micron
9,832 images
14,120 images
Background
11,814 images
13,805 images
Total
36,821 images
43,100 images
Table 4.1:
In this table can be seen the composition of the two polystyrene data-set
used to train the network.
In the simple data-set column can be seen the amount of
images corresponding to each class and the total amount of images in the data-set. In the
oversampled data-set column the 10 micron and background classes have been oversampled
to try and enhance the performance of the network.
When the data-set has been generated the images are transformed (see Section 2.2.2)
to achieve multiply diﬀerent aims. The ﬁrst aim is to conform to the initialized parameters
of the machine learning model. This means that the images are resized to 224×224 pixels
to correspond with the input neurons of the model. The second aim is to transform them
so that the weights pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset (see Section 2.2.1) can be utilized.
This is done by normalizing them with the mean and standard deviation of the ImageNet
data set. This normalization is given by the mean and standard deviation of the 3 color
channels which are [0.485, 0.456, 0.406] and [0.229, 0.224, 0.225] respectively.
One of the last modiﬁcations to the data set before it can be used for training the
network is to split it up into a training set and a validation set. This split is set to 0.1
so that 10% of the data is put into the validation set. To further enhance the training
of the network model, the training-set has a further transformation of its images (see
Section 2.2.2).
Here half of the images are given random changes in their brightness,
contrast, saturation and hue respectively. These changes will augment the training set
and minimize that the network learns speciﬁcs of the individual recordings instead of
learning in general to recognize the classes.
4.2
Training of the Polystyrene Particle Network
The created data set now enables the training of the polystyrene machine learning net-
work. But to ensure optimal performance of the ﬁnal network, the hyperparameters of
the network have to be optimized for the data set and network structure. I have done this
by performing a random search pattern on 4 diﬀerent hyperparameters. The ﬁrst hyper-
parameter is to either use the oversampled data set or the data set with only a unique
image. The second hyperparameter is whether to update all the weights in the network
when training or only update the weights in the last layer of the network, the classiﬁcation
layer. The third hyperparameter is the learning rate of the network (see Section 2.2.2).
The fourth and last hyperparameter is the batch size of the input when training (see
==PAGE:51==
4.2. TRAINING OF THE POLYSTYRENE PARTICLE NETWORK
35
Section 2.2.2).
The metric used for managing when the test network stagnates is the
cross entropy loss function and the grace period for the hyperparameter sweep is set to 1
(see Section 2.2.2). As a hyperparameter sweep is very time-consuming a max number of
epochs that each network is allowed to train for has to be set. The max number of epochs,
that a test network is allowed to train for, is set to 5. The results of the hyperparameter
sweep for the polystyrene network can be seen in Fig. 4.3.
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS ON POLYSTYRENE TRACER PARTICLES
Figure 4.3:
The results of the hyperparameters assessment for the polystyrene particle
network. The 4 hyperparameters tested are from the right: the batch size (Batch), the
learning rate (L-rate), if all weights of the network are trained or only a subset (All
weights), if the data-set has been oversampled (Oversampled). Here Oversampled and
All weights are binary hyperparameters. For Oversampled 1 is an oversampled data-set
while if 0 it has not. For All weights 1 means that all weights have been trained while 0
means only the weights in the classiﬁcation layer have been trained. The two last axes
are how the test runes are evaluated. They are from the right: the number of epochs
that have been trained (Epochs) and how accurate the test network is when validating
after the last training run (Accuracy). Each line on the plot represents one test run. The
hyperparameters of the individual test runs are given by where the line crosses the diﬀerent
axes. The lines are colour-coded after how high their accuracy is. In a) 20 test runs have
been done for the polystyrene data-set. It can be seen that most of the hyperparameters
achieve above 98% accuracy. In b) a close-up of the test runs above 98% accuracy can be
seen. It can be observed that the runs with the highest accuracy have low learning rates.
In Fig. 4.3 a hyperparameter sweep has been done, and the results of 20 test runs
can be seen. When looking at the results multiply diﬀerent conclusions can be drawn.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. TRAINING OF THE POLYSTYRENE PARTICLE NETWORK
37
The two worst of the 20 test runs can be seen in Fig. 4.3 a). The two worst test runs,
purple and turquoise lines, have an accuracy of 89.4% and 92.2% respectively. Many of
their hyperparameters are similar. They have low batch sizes (16 and 8), have a high
learning rate (0.00098 and 0.00102) and are both trained on the data-set that has not
been oversampled. But the purple has all its weights trained while the turquoise only has
the classiﬁcation weights trained. When looking at the rest of the test runs with low batch
size, 16 and below, perform signiﬁcantly better. As the rest of the low batch size runs
have a low learning rate, below 0.0004, it would seem that a low learning rate enhances
the performance of the polystyrene network. This is further conﬁrmed when looking at
Fig. 4.3 b). Here can be seen that the runs with high accuracy, above 99.65%, all have
a low learning rate, below 0.0002. It can also be seen that a higher batch size, above 32,
makes the run much less sensitive to a high learning rate, as runs with a learning rate
higher than 0.0004 still achieve accuracies above 99.7%. But the runs with the highest
accuracy are to be found in the 8 and 16 batch size runs. Here there are multiply runs with
accuracy very close to 100%. They are found in both categories for the oversampled and
the trained weights hyperparameter. The evaluating parameter, epochs trained, therefore
becomes the deciding factor when choosing the ﬁnal hyperparameters for the polystyrene
network. As the ﬁnal training of the polystyrene network is not as time and resource
constrained as the test runs, more epochs can be trained for. It is therefore an advan-
tage if the ﬁnal hyperparameters chosen did not end up in a run getting stopped early
because of stagnation in learning (see Section 2.2.2). The hyperparameters that achieved
the highest accuracy while also running for the full 5 epochs are therefore chosen, these
hyperparameters can be seen in Table 4.2. But even though these are the values of the
best test run in the hyperparameter sweep it is only batch size and learning rate where a
deﬁnite trend can be seen. That smaller batch size (16 and below) with smaller learning
rates (0.0001 and below) performs best and that small learning rates in general (0.0002
and below) perform better.
Oversampled
Fully
trained
Learning
rate
Batch size
Polystyrene network
Yes
Yes
3.735×10−5
16
Table 4.2: Final hyperparameters of the polystyrene trained machine learning network
Network Training
With the hyperparameters given in Table 4.2, the polystyrene network is trained for 20
epochs. The training performance of the polystyrene network can be seen in Fig. 4.4. The
network accuracy converges quickly and after only 1 training epoch the validation accuracy
is already above 99.5%. There is no noteworthy over-ﬁtting happening and the training
accuracy converges toward the validation accuracy. The ﬁnal accuracies for training and
validation are 99.964% and 99.954% respectively. The small dip in the accuracies that
can be observed after the 9th epoch seems like it can be explained by looking at the class
accuracies in Fig. 4.4 b). Here the 10-micron class and the 5-micron class accuracies start
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS ON POLYSTYRENE TRACER PARTICLES
oscillating around each other for a few epochs after epoch 9. The learning from the ﬁrst
few epochs after epoch 9 seems to make the network biased towards either one or the other
class. But both class accuracies end up stabilizing and the 10-micron class are more stable
than before the dip.
a)
b)
Figure 4.4: The accuracy of the polystyrene network for the diﬀerent training epochs. In
a) can be seen the total training and validation accuracy for each epoch. Both the training
and validation accuracy converges on a 100% accuracy. It can be seen that convergence
happens rapidly and after only 1 epoch the validation accuracy is already above 99.5%.
There is no noteworthy over-ﬁtting happening and the training accuracy converges toward
the validation accuracy. A small dip in the accuracies can be seen after the 9th epoch,
but the accuracies recover. In b) can be seen the individual validation accuracies for the
network classes. It can be seen that all the classes have a high accuracy and no class is
completely neglected by the network. A reason for the dip after the 9th epoch can also be
seen here. It seems like the network have learned to recognize the 10 micron class at the
expense of the 5 micron class in epoch 10. This tendency is reversed in the epoch after,
and keep reversing until they again both stabilizes.
4.3
Network Performance
Before the network can be implemented in the wider tracking scheme, it will have to be
tested on recordings that are not part of its data set, as is the case when doing real-time
tracking. So to further test the performance of the polystyrene network its accuracy on an
independent test-set is found. The independent test set is composed of multiply diﬀerent
recordings that the polystyrene network has not been trained on. From these recordings,
the test set is created in the same way as the training set. To further analyse the network
both networks trained on the simple data-set and the oversampled data-set are tested on
the independent test-set. The results of these tests can be seen in Table 4.3.
==PAGE:55==
4.3. NETWORK PERFORMANCE
39
Test-set
Simple accuracy
Oversampled accuracy
5 micron
50.95%
96.49%
94.35%
10 micron
39.80%
91.97%
91.96%
Background
9.25%
100.00%
100.00%
Total
5871 images
94.99%
93.92%
Table 4.3:
Performance of two trained polystyrene networks.
One is trained on the
simple data-set with only unique samples and the other is trained on the oversampled
data-set. The test-set is composed of 5871 images with 50.95% in the 5 micron class,
39.80% in the 10 micron class and 9.25% in the background class. It can be seen the
that the network trained on the oversampled data-set performs slighlty worse, 1.07%,
than the network trained on the simple data-set. Almost all of this diﬀerence is due to
the oversampled network being worse at classifying the 5 micron class. Compared to the
validation accuracy found when training, 99.954%, the networks have a 5-6% decrease in
accuracy.
In Table 4.3 it can be seen that the polystyrene network trained on the unique data-set
has a better performance than the network trained on the oversampled data-set, a 1.07%
diﬀerence. The 5-micron class accuracy is much lower for the oversampled data-set, 2.14%,
while the 10-micron class is almost unchanged, 0.01% diﬀerence, and background accuracy
is completely unchanged. It can therefore be concluded that the size of the data-set is
large enough and the hyperparameters are chosen appropriately enough to counter the
class imbalances in the data-set, seen in Table 4.1. A possible upper bound on data-set
size and class balances for future data-sets is therefore given by the numbers found in the
Simple data-set column of Table 4.1.
Compared to the validation accuracy achieved when training the data-set, 99.954%,
there is a 6% decrease in accuracy for the oversampled network when run on the indepen-
dent test-set. So the network will have around 1 in 20 erroneous classiﬁcations when doing
real-time tracking. This is more than enough for rudimentary tracking. Furthermore, the
training and real-time tracking are done on a system where multiply factors vary both
between and during recordings. Some of these are lighting, ﬂow rate, particle speed, par-
ticle position with respect to the focal plane and number of particles. All these factors
can be more rigidly controlled in later systems which will help improve the accuracy of
the network further.
Tracking
As the polystyrene network trained on the simple data-set has shown an accuracy of
94.99% when classifying polystyrene particles in a test approximating real-time, I will
now combine it with the tracking algorithm (see Section 2.1). The resulting algorithm is
then ready to track and classify polystyrene particles in real-time. Images taken of this
can be seen in Fig. 4.5.
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS ON POLYSTYRENE TRACER PARTICLES
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4.5:
Real-time tracking, identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of polystyrene particles.
The tracking is here done on recordings. The processing speed is therefore not constrained
by network speed or capture speed. The frame rates given here (31, 26, 21 fps) is therefore
only an representation of how fast the algorithm can process an image. The red box is the
cropped area run through the tracking algorithm to ﬁnd moving particles. The resolution
of these tracking images are 640×480. In image a) 3 moving objects have been identiﬁed
and tracked. The moving object furthest along the channel, ID: 2, has been cropped and
run through the polystyrene network which correctly labels it as a 10 micron particle. In
the upper left corner can be seen that the processing speed lies around 31 fps. In b) an
amount frames have passed and on this frame particle 2 has moved out of the frame and a
new particle has moved into the frame and has being identiﬁed and tracked. Particle 3 is
now the particle furthest along the channel and is run through the polystyrene network.
The particle is again correctly identiﬁed as a 10 micron particles. The last image c) particle
3 has moved further through the channel and multiply new particles has moved into the
frame and has been identiﬁed and tracked. Particle 3 is still the furthest in the frame and
the polystyrene network is still correctly identifying it as a 10 micron particles. In all of
the frames the particles are moving from the bottom to the top.
==PAGE:57==
4.3. NETWORK PERFORMANCE
41
a)
Figure 4.6:
Real-time tracking, identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of polystyrene particles.
The tracking is here done on recordings. The processing speed is therefore not constrained
by network speed or capture speed. The frame rate given here (31 fps) is therefore only
a representation of how fast the algorithm can process an image.
The red box is the
cropped area run through the tracking algorithm to ﬁnd moving particles. The resolution
of this tracking image is 1280×720. Multiply particles are ﬂowing from the bottom to
the top and all of them are being tracked. In the middle of the channel at the bottom of
the image, there can be seen an ID without a bounding box. This is due to the tracking
algorithm identifying a moving object where no particle is present. It will disappear in a
couple of frames when the centroid tracking algorithm (see Section 2.1.4) can not pair it
with a moving particle in the frames. The particle furthest along the channel is correctly
classiﬁed as a 5-micron particle.
As seen in Fig. 4.5 and Fig. 4.6 the combined network and tracking algorithm can
successfully track and classify particles moving in the microchannel. This is the case for
both resolutions used in this project and for both particle sizes. Due to ﬂickering in the
light source, there will sometime be tracked objects where there are non. One such case
can be seen in Fig. 4.6 in the middle bottom of the channel. But as this is minimized
due to the background subtraction method used (see Section 2.1.2), the centroid tracking
(see Section 2.1.4) will quickly discard it as no corresponding object show up in the next
couple of frames.
The end goal of the whole system is to be able to sort particles. The system’s perfor-
mance is therefore dependent on its ability to track and classify particles before they reach
the sorting outlet. In the case shown here that would correspond to the top of the frame.
The performance of the whole tracking system, therefore, depends on two factors which
are intertwined: the image processing speed and the speed of the particles. The image pro-
cessing speed is also dependent on multiple factors but the most prominent in the current
system is the resolution. This is mostly due to constraints in the connection speed between
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS ON POLYSTYRENE TRACER PARTICLES
the camera and the computer (see Section 3.2.3). Here the size of the image reduces the
performance time of the whole system. For 1280×720 resolution images, the frame rate
is around 15-17 fps both when tracking and when not. This is compared to 30-35 fps for
640×480 resolution images when tracking and 35-40 fps when not. That connection speed
is the bottleneck in the current system is further shown when looking at the frame rate
of the oﬄine tracking. The oﬄine tracking is done on recorded images where the same
conditions as online tracking apply. These conditions are ﬂuctuating ﬂow-rate, variable
lighting and that images are displayed as part of the tracking process. When tracking
oﬄine the tracking frame rate between the two resolutions is almost indistinguishable due
to the automatic resource allocation that is done by the computer used for processing. For
both resolutions, the average tracking frame rate lies on the order of 30 fps.
A processing speed of 30 fps is more than adequate to track particles in real-time,
and even 15 fps could be adequate if the particle speeds are low enough. I have in the
lab observed that a ﬂow rate of 0.1 µL/min gives acceptable tracking performances for all
processing speeds. But as the ﬂow rate in the current system can ﬂuctuate with almost
0.5 µL/min a higher frame rate is preferable.
In conclusion, the polystyrene network can be trained to recognize the size of particles
with a suﬃciently labelled data set. It is shown that the tracking algorithm can identify
and track particles of diﬀerent sizes and that the polystyrene network can classify them
with around 95% accuracy in real-time. Furthermore, the network can be combined with
the tracking algorithm (see Section 2.1) to track and classify particles moving in the
microchannel before they move out of the frame, and it will therefore be able to sort
them if necessary. The tracking and machine learning algorithm are therefore viable to be
extended for tracking and classiﬁcation of algae cells if a data-set is provided.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Results on Living Microalgae
I will in this chapter go through the results acquired from the microalgae cells. In the ﬁrst
section, I will describe the creation of the microalgae data set. This includes the generation
of the raw images, the processing done to obtain the input images and how they have been
labelled. The data set has over 3,800 labelled images for training and validating a machine
learning network. The images are divided into 2 diﬀerent classes: microalgae cells and
debris.
In the second section, I will go deeper into how the hyperparameters for the
microalgae network have been chosen and also evaluate the training and validation of
the network. This will encompass an impact assessment of 4 diﬀerent hyperparameters
on the network. From this assessment, the ﬁnal values of the network hyperparameters
are chosen and the training results are shown and explained. In the last section, I will
show the performance of the microalgae network in both classifying moving objects and
its performance when implemented in the wider tracking algorithm. The classiﬁcation
performance is evaluated by using an independent test set on which the microalgae network
has not been trained. For the wider implementation, I will show images of tracking together
with diﬀerent performance parameters. At last, I will discuss what insights can be gained
from the results of the living microalgae solutions.
5.1
The Microalgae Data Set
The goal of the microalgae machine learning network is to be able to distinguish between
microalgae cells, to be retained, and debris, to be discarded when tracking moving objects
in a microchannel.
To achieve this goal, I created a data set consisting of over 3,800
images. The process of getting a cropped image to be labelled is the same as described in
Section 4.1. A single image of an microalgae solution can be seen in Fig. 5.1. Where the
microalgae data-set diverges from the polystyrene data set is that there is no automatic
way to label the cropped images. Instead, each cropped image is labelled manually. The
classes labelled in the microalgae data set are cells and debris. As can be seen in Table 4.3
the network can easily predict the background class when including the class in the data-
set when training.
It has therefore already been shown that the network can predict
the background class and to cut down on training time the background class is therefore
43
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ON LIVING MICROALGAE
excluded from the microalgae data set.
But even though the background class is not
included in the present microalgae data set, it should be present when designing the ﬁnal
sorting algorithm.
Figure 5.1:
An image of the microchannel as recorded by the camera. Flowing through
the microchannel is an microalgae solution. The ﬂow moves from the bottom up. The
small distinct black dots in the channel are the microalgae cells close to the focal plane
while the blurred black dots are microalgae cells further away from the focal plane. For
some of the microalgae cells the cell wall are somewhat clear and a white dot can be
spotted in the middle of the cell. The shapes that are not single circles are debris.
An example of the 2 classes in the microalgae data set can be seen in Fig. 4.2. It is
these images that are run through the machine learning network both when training the
microalgae network and when predicting the label of unknown cropped images.
==PAGE:61==
5.1. THE MICROALGAE DATA SET
45
a)
b)
Figure 5.2: There can here be seen examples of the cropped image used for the polystyrene
data-set. The images shown here are from a 1280x720 resolution recording and therefore
have a dimension of 48x48 pixels. In a) the microalgae cell class can be seen. In b) the
debris class can be seen. The debris class is very diverse and is basically everything that
does not conform to the single circle shaped form of the microalgae cell. Here can also be
seen that the light intensity diﬀers for each image which is one of the parameters that are
changed between recordings.
To ensure that the machine learning network can become as general as possible multiple
diﬀerent recordings are made of the living microalgae solutions. As was the case for the
polystyrene recordings and for the same reasons the microalgae recordings also have a
varied light incident angle, a varied light intensity, a varied ﬂow speed and a varied focal
plane. The composition of the data-set as explained so far can be seen in the Simple
data-set column of Table 5.1.
For the microalgae data set, it can now be seen that the under-representation of a class
is a real risk, as debris is a factor 10 smaller than the microalgae cell class. I, therefore,
chose to create another data set where the imbalance of the classes had been mitigated by
the use of oversampling (see Section 2.2.2). I do this by simply adding copies of existing
cropped images to the debris class. This is done until the class imbalance between debris
and microalgae cells is much less pronounced. As was the case for the polystyrene data-
set the use of transformations on the data-set further enhances the eﬀect of oversampling.
The composition of the oversampled data-set can be seen in the Oversampled data-set
column of Table 5.1
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ON LIVING MICROALGAE
Living microal-
gae
Simple data-set
Oversampled
data-
set
Cell
3.542 images
3.542 images
Debris
267 images
2.136 images
Total
3.809 images
5.678 images
Table 5.1:
The composition of the two microalgae data-sets used to train the network.
In the Simple data-set column can be seen the amount of images corresponding to each
class and the total amount of images in the data-set. In the Oversampled data-set
column the debris class has been oversampled to try and enhance the performance of the
network.
As was the case for the polystyrene data-set the microalgae data set is also trans-
formed by resizing the images to 224x224 pixels to correspond with the input neurons
of the network. They are also normalized with the mean and standard deviation of the
ImageNet data-set that the network’s weight has been pre-trained on. This normaliza-
tion is again given by the mean and standard deviation of the 3 color channels which are
[0.485, 0.456, 0.406] and [0.229, 0.224, 0.225] respectively. The microalgae data-set is also
split up in a training-set and validation-set with a 0.1 split so that 10% of the data is put
into the validation-set.
As was the case for the polystyrene data set the images in the microalgae data set
are transformed (see Section 2.2.2) to achieve multiply diﬀerent aims. The ﬁrst aim is to
conform to the initialized parameters of the machine learning model. This means that the
images are resized to 224×224 pixels to correspond with the input neurons of the model.
The second aim is to transform them so that the weights pre-trained on the ImageNet
data set (see Section 2.2.1) can be utilized. This is done by normalizing them with the
mean and standard deviation of the ImageNet data set. This normalization is given by
the mean and standard deviation of the 3 color channels which are [0.485, 0.456, 0.406]
and [0.229, 0.224, 0.225] respectively.
One of the last modiﬁcations to the data set before it can be used for training the model
is to split it up into a training set and a validation set. This split is set to 0.1 so that 10%
of the data is put into the validation set. To further enhance the training of the network
model, the training-set has a further transformation of its images (see Section 2.2.2).
Here half of the images are given random changes in their brightness, contrast, saturation
and hue respectively.
These changes will augment the training set and minimize that
the network learns speciﬁcs of the individual recordings instead of learning in general to
recognize the classes.
5.2
Training of the Microalgae Network
The created data-set now enables the training of the microalgae machine learning net-
work. But to ensure optimal performance of the ﬁnal network, the hyperparameters of the
network have to be optimized for the data set and network structure. I have done this by
==PAGE:63==
5.2. TRAINING OF THE MICROALGAE NETWORK
47
performing a random search pattern on 4 diﬀerent hyperparameters. The ﬁrst hyperpa-
rameter is to either use the oversampled data set or the data set with unique images. The
second hyperparameter is whether to update all the weights in the network when training
or only update the weights in the last layer of the network, the classiﬁcation layer. The
third hyperparameter is the learning rate of the network (see Section 2.2.2). The fourth
and last hyperparameter is the batch size of the input when training (see Section 2.2.2).
The metric used for managing when the test network stagnates is the cross entropy loss
function and the grace period for the hyperparameter sweep is set to 1 (see Section 2.2.2).
As a hyperparameter sweep is very time-consuming a max number of epochs that each
network is allowed to train for has to be set. The max number of epochs, that a test
network is allowed to train for, is set to 5. The results of the hyperparameter sweep for
the microalgae network can be seen in Fig. 5.3.
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ON LIVING MICROALGAE
Figure 5.3:
The results of the hyperparameters assessment for the microalgae network.
The 4 hyperparameters tested are from the right: the batch size (Batch), the learning
rate (L-rate), if all weights of the network are trained or only a subset (All weights), if
the data-set has been oversampled (Oversampled). Here Oversampled and All weights
are binary hyperparameters. For Oversampled 1 means an oversampled data set has been
used for training while if 0 the unique data set has been used. For All weights 1 means
that all weights have been trained while 0 means only the weights in the classiﬁcation layer
have been trained. The two last axes are how the test runes are evaluated. They are from
the right: the number of epochs that have been trained (Epochs) and how accurate the
test network is when validating after the last training run (Accuracy). Each line on the
plot represents one test run. The hyperparameters of the individual test runs are given by
where the line crosses the diﬀerent axes. The lines are colour-coded after how high their
accuracy is. In a) 20 test runs have been done for the microalgae data set. It can be seen
that most of the hyperparameters achieve above 90% accuracy. It can be observed that
the runs with the lowest accuracy (below 55%) have high learning rates (above 0.006%).
In b) a close-up of the 13 test runs above 90% accuracy can be seen. It can be observed
that the runs with the highest accuracy (above 98.5%) have low learning rates (below
0.0005).
==PAGE:65==
5.2. TRAINING OF THE MICROALGAE NETWORK
49
In Fig. 5.3 a hyperparameter sweep has been done, and the results of 20 test runs can
be seen. When looking at the results multiply diﬀerent conclusions can be drawn. The
three worst of the 20 test runs can be seen in Fig. 5.3 a). The three worst test runs, all
purple, have an accuracy of below 55%. They have some of the same hyperparameters in
pairs. Two of them have high learning rates (above 0.006) and two of them have high batch
sizes (32 and 40). The two with high learning rates also have all their weights trained
which would suggest that the weights are already close to optimal and the high learning
rates make the training overshoot (see Section 2.2.2). The 13 test runs with an accuracy
above 90% is shown in Fig. 5.3 b). Here can be seen that all the runs with high accuracy,
above 98.5%, all have a low learning rate, below 0.00005. It can also be seen that almost
all these runs have a batch size of 16 only one of the runs has a diﬀerent batch size (32).
While the runs are split between having all their weights trained or only the weights in
the last layer. All of the highest accuracy runs are run on the oversampled data set. As
was the case for the polystyrene network, the ﬁnal training is not as time and resource
constrained as the test runs, and more epochs can be trained for. It is therefore again an
advantage if the ﬁnal hyperparameters chosen did not end up in a run getting stopped
early because of stagnation in learning (see Section 2.2.2). As this is the case for all the
highest accuracy runs the hyperparameters chosen are simply the ones from the run with
the highest accuracy. These hyperparameters can be seen in Table 5.2. The results of the
hyperparameter sweep for the microalgae network are very similar to the results of the
polystyrene network hyperparameter sweep. They both suggest that a low learning rate
and batch size are ideal. But a diﬀerence is that for the microalgae hyperparameter sweep
a clear factor giving a high accuracy is for the network to be trained on the oversampled
data set. This would imply that the class imbalance of the microalgae data set is big
enough to have a severe impact on the training of the microalgae network.
Oversampled
Fully trained
Learning rate
Batch size
Microalgae network
Yes
Yes
1.715×10−4
16
Table 5.2:
Final hyperparameters of the machine learning network trained on the mi-
croalgae data set.
Network Training
With the hyperparameters given in Table 5.2, the microalgae network is trained for 40
epochs.
The training performance of the microalgae network can be seen in Fig. 5.4.
As expected with the smaller data set the microalgae network does not converge quite
as quickly as the polystyrene network.
But the convergence is still rather quick and
only 3 training epochs see the validation accuracy above 98%.
Both the training and
validation accuracy are convergent, the training towards 100% accuracy and the validation
toward approximately 98.5%. There is a slight over-ﬁtting happening, but the diﬀerence
is minimal, around 1%.
Furthermore from what can be observed from Fig. 4.4, this
overﬁtting can be eliminated if the data set is larger. Small dips in the accuracies can be
seen during the training. But the magnitude of the dips decreases throughout the training
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ON LIVING MICROALGAE
and the accuracies stabilize. When looking at the individual validation accuracies for the
network classes, it can be seen that all the classes have fairly high accuracy and no class is
completely neglected by the network. The debris class converges quickly at around 100%
while the cell class converges and stabilizes throughout the training. It can be seen that
it is mostly the cell class that contributes to the dips seen in the total accuracies.
a)
b)
Figure 5.4: The accuracy of the microalgae network for the diﬀerent training epochs when
trained with an oversampled data-set. In a) can be seen the total training and validation
accuracy for each epoch. Both the training and validation accuracy are convergent, the
training towards 100% accuracy and the validation toward approximately 98.5%. It can be
seen that convergence happens rapidly and after only 3 epochs the validation accuracy is
already above 98%. There is a slight over-ﬁtting happening, but the diﬀerence is minimal,
around 1%. Small dips in the accuracies can be seen throughout the training. But the
magnitude of the dips decreases throughout the training and the accuracies stabilize. In
b) can be seen the individual validation accuracies for the network classes. It can be seen
that all the classes have fairly high accuracy and no class is completely neglected by the
network. The debris class converges quickly at around 100% while the cell class converges
and stabilizes throughout the training. It can be seen that it is mostly the cell class that
contributes to the dips seen in a).
The hyperparameter analysis done from Fig. 5.3 suggests that the imbalance of the
classes in the data set has an impact on the performance of the network.
To further
investigate this the training is also done on the unique data set.
The results of this
training can be seen in Fig. 5.5.
==PAGE:67==
5.2. TRAINING OF THE MICROALGAE NETWORK
51
a)
b)
Figure 5.5:
The accuracy of the microalgae network for the diﬀerent training epochs
when trained without an oversampled data-set.
In a) can be seen the total training
and validation accuracy for each epoch. Both the training and validation accuracy are
convergent, the training towards 100% accuracy and the validation toward approximately
96.5%. It can be seen that after only 1 epoch the validation accuracy is above 93% which
is only 3% from the ﬁnal accuracy, even though it dips a couple of epochs later. There
is over-ﬁtting happening, with a diﬀerence of around 3%. Large dips in the accuracies
can be seen throughout the training. It can not be said with certainty if the accuracies
have stabilized, as the dips look like a repeating pattern. To conclude anything with more
certainty more training epochs are needed. The validation accuracy is much lower than
the validation accuracy found in Fig. 5.4 (around 2%). In b) can be seen the individual
validation accuracies for the network classes. It can be seen that the cell class have a
fairly high accuracy compared to the one found din Fig. 5.4. But the debris class has a
severely lower accuracy which lies around 65%. As this is not the case in Fig. 5.4 the class
imbalance in the data-set, shown in Table 5.1, impedes the network’s ability to classify
the debris class.
In Fig. 5.5 a clear impact from the class imbalance in the simple data-set can be
seen. The validation accuracy is much lower, 2% than the validation accuracy found in
Fig. 5.4. There is furthermore much larger overﬁtting happening, 3% compared to 1%.
Another diﬀerence is that with the same amount of training epochs it is not certain if the
validation accuracy is stabilizing and converging around a ﬁnal value. When looking at
the individual class accuracies it is apparent that the low amount of debris images in the
data set causes the microalgae network to only very poorly classify the debris class, as the
debris class accuracy ﬂuctuates around 60%. As this is not the case in Fig. 5.4, where a
100% accuracy for the debris class is reached, the class imbalance in the data set impedes
the network’s ability to classify the debris class. To use the microalgae network to track
and classify microalgae cells and debris in the microalgae solution a network trained on
the oversampled data set is used.
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ON LIVING MICROALGAE
5.3
Network Performance
Before the network can be implemented in the wider tracking scheme, it will have to be
tested on recordings that are not part of its data set, as is the case when doing real-time
tracking. So to further test the performance of the microalgae network, I ﬁnd its accuracy
on an independent test-set. The independent test set is composed of multiply diﬀerent
recordings that the microalgae network has not been trained on. From these recordings,
the test set is created in the same way as the training set. To further analyse the network
both networks trained on the simple data-set and the oversampled data-set are tested on
the independent test-set. The results of these tests can be seen in Table 4.3.
Test-set
Simple accuracy
Oversampled accuracy
Cell
99.59%
96.28%
96.28%
Debris
0.41%
100.00%
100.00%
Total
487 images
96.30%
96.30%
Table 5.3: Performance of two trained microalgae networks. One is trained on the simple
data-set with only unique samples and the other is trained on the oversampled data-set.
The test-set is composed of 487 images with 99.59% in the microalgae cell class and 0.41%
in the debris class. Even though earlier analysis suggest that the network trained on the
oversampled data-set should out-perform the network trained on the simple data-set no
diﬀerence can be seen here. But this is highly likely due to the small size of the test-set
and its very small representation of the class that would cause the diﬀerence, the debris
class.
In Table 5.3 no diﬀerence can be seen between the networks trained on the oversampled
data set and the simple data set. As earlier analysis heavily suggests that the network
trained on the oversampled data set should out-perform the other, likely, the small size and
underrepresentation of the problematic debris class is the cause of the similarity. Creating
a bigger test set with more diversity could prove or disprove this theory. But due to the
earlier analysis, the network trained on the oversampled data set will be the one used for
tracking.
Compared to the validation accuracy achieved when training the data-set, 98.5%, there
is a 2.2% decrease in accuracy for the oversampled network when run on the independent
test-set. This results in the microalgae network having a higher accuracy when classifying
in real-time than the polystyrene network. But even though the accuracy is a bit higher
the network will still have around 1 in 20 erroneous classiﬁcations when doing real-time
tracking. This is again more than enough for rudimentary tracking. As was the case for
the polystyrene network the training and real-time tracking are done on a system where
multiple factors vary both between and during recordings. Some of these are lighting,
ﬂow rate, particle speed, particle position to the focal plane and number of particles. All
these factors can be more rigidly controlled in later systems which will help improve the
accuracy of the network further.
==PAGE:69==
5.3. NETWORK PERFORMANCE
53
Tracking
As the microalgae network trained on the oversampled data-set has shown an accuracy of
96.30% when classifying microalgae particles in a test approximating real-time, I will now
combine it with the tracking algorithm (see Section 2.1). The resulting algorithm is then
ready to track and classify microalgae in real-time. Images taken of this can be seen in
Fig. 5.6.
a)
b)
Figure 5.6: Real-time tracking, identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of the microalgae solution.
The tracking is here done on recordings. The processing speed is therefore not constrained
by network speed or capture speed. The images shown are not the full tracking images
but have been cropped on the area of interest. In image a) 2 moving objects have been
identiﬁed and tracked. The moving object furthest along the channel, ID: 9, has been
cropped and run through the microalgae network which correctly labels it as a cell particle.
In b) an amount frames have passed and on this frame particle 9 has moved out of the
frame and a new particle has moved into the frame and has been identiﬁed and tracked.
Particle 32 is now the particle furthest along the channel and is run through the microalgae
network. The particle is correctly identiﬁed as a debris particle. It can also be observed
that the identiﬁed particles furthest along the channel are not necessarily the earliest
identiﬁed particles.
Particle 1, one of the ﬁrst identiﬁed particles, can be seen at the
bottom of the channel. This is due to the varying velocity ﬁeld in the channel. In all of
the frames, the particles are moving from the bottom to the top.
As seen in Fig. 5.6 the combined network and tracking algorithm can successfully
track and classify microalgae and debris in the microchannel. This is the case for both
resolutions used in this project. The end goal of the whole system is to be able to sort
microalgae cells. The system’s performance is therefore dependent on its ability to track
and classify the cells before they reach the sorting outlet. In the case shown here that
would correspond to the top of the frame. As was the case for the polystyrene particles the
performance of the whole tracking system depends on the two intertwined factors image
processing speed and the speed of the cells. The image processing speed is also dependent
on multiple factors but the most prominent in the current system is the resolution. As
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ON LIVING MICROALGAE
the system is identical to the one used in polystyrene particle case this is again mostly
due to constraints in the connection speed between the camera and the computer (see
Section 3.2.3). Here the size of the image again reduces the performance time of the whole
system. For 1280×720 resolution images, the frame rate is around 15-17 fps both when
tracking and when not. This is compared to 30-35 fps for 640×480 resolution images when
tracking and 35-40 fps when not. That connection speed is the bottleneck in the current
system is further shown when looking at the frame rate of the oﬄine tracking. The oﬄine
tracking is done on recorded images where the same conditions as online tracking apply.
These conditions are ﬂuctuating ﬂow-rate, variable lighting and that images are displayed
as part of the tracking process. When tracking oﬄine the tracking frame rate between the
two resolutions is almost indistinguishable due to the automatic resource allocation that
is done by the computer used for processing. For both resolutions, the average tracking
frame rate lies on the order of 30 fps.
A processing speed of 30 fps is more than adequate to track cells in real-time, and even
15 fps could be adequate if the cell speeds are low enough. I have in the lab observed that
the ﬂow rate of 0.1 µL/min also gives acceptable tracking performances for tracking the
microalgae cells at all processing speeds. But as the ﬂow rate in the current system can
ﬂuctuate with almost 0.5 µL/min a higher frame rate is preferable.
In conclusion, the microalgae network can be trained to recognize if the tracked particle
is a microalgae cell or debris to be discarded. This can even be done with a subpar data
set where a class imbalance is present.
This is done by using image transforms (see
Section 2.2.2) in combination with oversampling the data set till the class imbalance is
less pronounced. I have shown that the microalgae network can classify them with around
96% accuracy in real-time conditions. Furthermore, the network can be combined with
the tracking algorithm (see Section 2.1) to track and classify particles moving in the
microchannel before they move out of the frame, and it will therefore be able to sort them
if necessary. The tracking and machine learning algorithm can therefore be used in an
extended system that would sort microalgae cells.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Outlook
I have in this thesis described how a system that can manipulate, track and classify
microalgae cells in real-time has been designed and built.
The system consists of an
experimental setup and an object detection algorithm.
The object detection algorithm consists of a tracking part and a machine learning
part. The tracking algorithm makes use of background subtraction, contour detection
and centroid tracking to identify and track moving objects in the frame. The background
subtraction method is computationally eﬃcient and is robust against global eﬀects in the
image, such as ﬂickering light.
The centroid tracking method is simple and eﬀective,
but to gain optimal performance it needs to be used on particles that travel in straight
lines and do not obstruct each other.
To partially achieve this the parameters in the
experimental set-up ensures that the ﬂow moving the particles are a laminar ﬂow, and
therefore have well-deﬁned streamlines that the particles travel along. A machine learning
network were chosen for the classiﬁcation part of the object detection algorithm. The
general architecture for the machine learning network is that of a convolution neural
network which excels in image analysis. The speciﬁc structure of the machine learning
network were that of the MobileNetV3. This network structure is compact and is optimized
for minimized computational power usage. The hyperparameters of the network has been
tuned and optimized for the network structure and goal of classifying particles.
The
tuning results in the polystyrene particle network had all its weights being trained on the
oversampled data set with a learning rate of 3.735×10−5 and a batch size of 16. For the
microalgae network the hyperparameters were that all of its weights have been trained
on the oversampled data set with a learning rate of 1.715×10−4 and a batch size of 16.
This results in an object detection algorithm that have a high accuracy while being able
to be trained and run on a laptop. One of the strengths of using machine learning as
the classiﬁcation part of the object detection algorithm is its adaptability if changing the
traits that have to be sorted for. This have been shown by having the polystyrene data
set where the sorting parameter were the size of the particle, and the microalgae data set
were the sorting parameter were the shape of the particle. The object detection algorithm
is therefore versatile enough that it can easily be adapted when the ﬁnal traits to be sorted
for has been determined.
55
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Multiple experiments have been done and diﬀerent particle solutions for data collection
and testing have been made. An experimental setup to facilitate the experiments has been
designed and tested. The experimental set-up consists of a pressure-based ﬂow controller,
tubing, a microﬂuidic chip, actuators to control the position of the chip, an optic set-up,
a camera and a processing unit for processing and recording images. For my set-up a ﬂow
rate 0.1 to 0.5 µL/min is desired. The set-up had some problems with ﬂuctuating ﬂow
rates which was partially solved by having suﬃcient solution in the input vial. But there
were still enough ﬂuctuations in the speed of the particles that some improvements have
to be made before the ﬁnal sorting set-up can be viable.
To test both the experimental set-up and the object detection algorithm, solutions with
polystyrene tracer particles were created. Polystyrene particle data sets were collected and
used to train the machine learning network. The polystyrene machine learning network
was then shown to be able to classify the polystyrene particles by size with a 94.99%
accuracy. The whole system was then tested and it was shown that it could track and
classify the polystyrene particles in real-time with around 15 fps when using images with a
resolution of 1280×720 and around 30 fps when using images with a resolution of 640×480.
The system was therefore shown to be able to track and classify microparticles in real-time
and the system can therefore be used for further development with the microalgae cells.
As the system was shown capable of tracking and classifying microparticles, solutions
with the microalgae Chlorella vulgaris were made. Data sets of Chlorella vulgaris were then
collected and used to train the machine learning network. The microalgae machine learning
network was then shown to be able to classify if the tracked particle were microalgae or
debris with a 96.30% accuracy. It was also shown that an imbalance in classes of the data
set could impact the network negatively.
But that the performance of the microalgae
network could be improved through the use of oversampling.
It would therefore not
be a problem if the ﬁnal desired traits of the microalgae to be sorted after was a rare
occurrence in the microalgae cells. When whole system was tested with the microalgae
it showed almost the same performances as with the polystyrene particles. It could track
and classify the microalgae particles in real-time with around 15 fps when using images
with a resolution of 1280×720 and around 30 fps when using images with a resolution
of 640×480. The system is therefore viable for further use in sorting the tracked and
classiﬁed microalgae in real-time.
6.1
Extension of the Set-up
As the system has been shown capable of tracking and classifying microalgae in real-time
it has the potential for also sorting microalgae cells. But the system has to be further
developed and extended before it can be used to sort microalgae cells for induced Darwinian
evolution of microalgae strains. Three main improvements have to be made before this
is feasible. A focusing method has to be used so that the microalgae are contained in
the middle of the microchannel to ensure that the speed of the microalgae is more tightly
controlled and so they can be more precisely sorted. Furthermore, a sorting method that
can split the microalgae into the group that should be discarded and the one that should
==PAGE:73==
6.1. EXTENSION OF THE SET-UP
57
be cultivated further. The last is a method to deform the cells such that the rigidity and
integrity of their cell membranes can be determined.
6.1.1
Hydrodynamic Focusing
As the ﬂow is already laminar, the focusing of the microalgae can be achieved through the
use of hydrodynamic focusing[24]. Here an outer ﬂow will focus on the ﬂow containing
the microalgae in the middle of the channel, and due to the laminar ﬂow, no mixing of
the ﬂows will happen. A diagram of the concept can be seen in Fig. 6.1. But to be able
to use hydrodynamic focusing, adjustments to the experimental set-up have to be done.
The pressure-based ﬂow controller should drive two diﬀerent ﬂows and the inlet of the
microﬂuidic chip should be designed such that the second ﬂow focuses on the microalgae
ﬂow. The design for such an inlet can be seen in Fig. 6.2a. The ﬁrst steps of implementation
was started at the end of the project and if more time had been available it would have
implemented in the full system.
Focused stream
Figure 6.1: The focusing of the ﬂow of the microalgae solution through the use of hydro-
dynamic focusing set-up.
6.1.2
Microalgae Sorting
To be able to cultivate the microalgae with the desired traits further, they have to be
able to be sorted. The method that was designed to sort the microalgae was to have two
outlets from the microﬂuidic chip controlled by a valve each. One valve would then be
closed and the other open depending on what the microalgae cell to be sorted is classiﬁed
as. The design for the outlet of the microﬂuidic chip used in a expanded system can be
seen in Fig. 6.2b. If there had been more time the design would have been tested in the
experimental set-up together with the object detection algorithm.
==PAGE:74==
58
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2:
The inlet and outlet of the microﬂuidic chip when the system have been
extended to include sorting of the microalgae. In a) can be seen the inlet of the microﬂuidic
chip that would enable hydrodynamic focusing of the microalgae ﬂow. In b) can be seen
the outlet of the microﬂuidic chip that would enable the microalgae to be sorted. Both
outlets would each be controlled by a valve. The valves would then alternately be open
and closed depending on what the microalgae cell to be sorted has been classiﬁed as.
6.1.3
Acoustic Deformation
The last extension of the setup is a method to deform the cells such that the rigidity of their
cell membranes can be tested. It would be their rigidity together with their size that would
determine if they are cultivated further or discarded by the automatic sorting system.
If more time had been available the method of choice would have been acoustoﬂuidics.
A piezo actuator would have been added to the side of the microchannel which would
enable the creation of an acoustic radiation force. A sketch of the piezo actuator on the
current microﬂuidic chip can be seen in Fig. 6.3. The acoustic radiation force would then
compress the cell and the rigidity of the cell membranes could be determined. The choice
of acoustoﬂuidics is due to its ease of implementation in the current set-up and its high
biocompatibility when used on biological cells [25].
==PAGE:75==
6.1. EXTENSION OF THE SET-UP
59
Piezo actuator
Figure 6.3:
A sketch of how a piezo actuator could be placed on the current microﬂu-
idic chip to enable the use of acoustic radiation force to compress microalgae cells and
determine the rigidity of their cell membranes
With these additions to the experimental set-up the collection of data on the speciﬁc
microalgae traits can begin. The traits which enable a more eﬃcient microalgae biofuel
production would then be identiﬁed and a corresponding data set could be created. The
versatility of my object detection algorithm and the collected data would then enable
the system to be able to start sorting microalgae automatically and in real-time. The
challenges of a Darwinian-induced evolution approach has then been overcome and an
optimization of the microalgae-based biofuel production could begin. It is my hope that
this would improve the viability of biofuels as a green alternative and help in the green
transition.
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1] K. W. Chew, J. Y. Yap, P. L. Show, N. H. Suan, J. C. Juan, T. C. Ling, D.-J. Lee,
and J.-S. Chang, Microalgae bioreﬁnery: High value products perspectives. Bioresource
Technology 229, 53–62 (2017).
[2] Y. Chisti, Constraints to commercialization of algal fuels. Journal of Biotechnology
167(3), 201–214 (2013).
[3] E. Gunerken, E. D’Hondt, M. Eppink, L. Garcia-Gonzalez, K. Elst, and R. Wijﬀels,
Cell disruption for microalgae bioreﬁneries. Biotechnology Advances 33(2), 243–260
(2015).
[4] O. M. Adeniyi, U. Azimov, and A. Burluka, Algae biofuel: Current status and future
applications. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 90, 316–335 (2018).
[5] Z. Zivkovic and F. van der Heijden, Eﬃcient adaptive density estimation per image
pixel for the task of background subtraction. Pattern Recognition Letters 27(7), 773–
780 (2006).
[6] N. Friedman and S. Russell, Image segmentation in video sequences: A probabilistic
approach (2013).
[7] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin, Maximum likelihood from incom-
plete data via the em algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological) 39(1), 1–38 (1977).
[8] S. Suzuki and K. be, Topological structural analysis of digitized binary images by
border following. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing 30(1), 32–46
(1985).
[9] M. Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning (Determination Press) (2015).
[10] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning (MIT Press) (2016),
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[11] Cnn architecture (2022), image created and shared by Google.
[12] A. Howard, M. Sandler, G. Chu, L. Chen, B. Chen, M. Tan, W. Wang, Y. Zhu,
R. Pang, V. Vasudevan, Q. V. Le, and H. Adam, Searching for mobilenetv3. CoRR
abs/1905.02244 (2019).
61
==PAGE:78==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang, T. Weyand, M. An-
dreetto, and H. Adam, Mobilenets: Eﬃcient convolutional neural networks for mobile
vision applications (2017).
[14] M. Sandler, A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L. Chen, Inverted residuals
and linear bottlenecks: Mobile networks for classiﬁcation, detection and segmentation.
CoRR abs/1801.04381 (2018).
[15] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 248–255 (Ieee) (2009).
[16] T. Herlau, M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup, Introduction to Machine Learning and Data
Mining (Technical University of Denmark) (2019), lecture notes, Fall 2019, version
1.4b.
[17] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization (2014).
[18] C. X. Ling and C. Li, Data mining for direct marketing: Problems and solutions
73–79 (1998).
[19] H. Bruus, Theoretical Microﬂuidics (Oxford University Press) (2008).
[20] microParticles GmbH, Polystyrene particles, Red-ﬂuorescent (2022).
[21] Sigma-Aldric, OptiPrep Density Gradien medium (2022).
[22] Culture Collection of algae & protozoa, CCAP211/11B Chlorella vulgaris (2022).
[23] J.
Bass,
imagezmq:
Transporting
opencv
images.
https://github.com/jeﬀbass/imagezmq (2020).
[24] P. Augustsson and T. Laurell, Acoustoﬂuidics 11: Aﬃnity speciﬁc extraction and
sample decomplexing using continuous ﬂow acoustophoresis. Lab Chip 12, 1742–1752
(2012).
[25] M. Wiklund, Acoustoﬂuidics 12: Biocompatibility and cell viability in microﬂuidic
acoustic resonators. Lab Chip 12, 2018–2028 (2012).
