==PAGE:1==
DTU - TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
CENTER FOR BIOSUSTAINABILITY
Saccharomyces cerevisiae betaxanthin cell factories
analyzed with CRI-SPA, a high throughput
CRISPR-Cas9 based screening method
Author:
Mads Liengaard Jensen
Supervisors:
Paul Cachera
Nikolaus Sonnenschein
Uffe H. Mortensen
June 26, 2022
==PAGE:2==
i
Acknowledgements
This thesis marks the end of masters program in biotechnology at DTU. It is a bittersweet
feeling to say goodbye to the comfort of student life, but knowing all the skills I have
obtained during my many years as student will help me in the future, I am ready to take
on a new adventure as a graduate.
I would like to thank my supervisors Niko, Uffe and Paul for the opportunity to be a
part of such an incredible project. A special thanks Paul who has spent countless hours
helping me with labwork and fruitful discussions of datasets.
==PAGE:3==
ii
Abstract
Supplying the growing demand for pharmaceuticals, food and chemicals, while simul-
taneously reducing our carbon footprint is at the utmost importance for society. A major
bottleneck in the development of biotechnological production platforms for these prod-
ucts, is the need for highly efficient microbial cell factories, often requiring thousandfold
increases in titer and yield.
In this study, the use of CRI-SPA, a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 based screening method,
showed novel optimization targets for a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell factory producing be-
taxanthin. Deletion of endoplasmatic reticulum-associated protein degradation mediated
by the ubiquitin ligase Ssm4 showed an increase in betaxanthin production. Deletions of
functions in central carbon metabolism showed to favor the production of betaxanthin.
Further it has been discovered that CRI-SPA can screen for double gene deletions, unlock-
ing the potential to screen for positive genetic interactions, which could show surprising
synergistic effects in cell factory optimization.
==PAGE:4==
iii
Resumé
At dække den stigende efterspørgsel efter lægemidler, fødevarer og kemikalier, sam-
tidig med at vi reducerer vores CO2-fodaftryk, er af stor betydning for fremtidens sam-
fund. En stor flaskehals i udviklingen af bioteknologiske produktionsplatforme for disse
produkter er behovet for højeffektive mikrobielle cellefabrikker, som ofte kræver tusind-
fold stigninger i produktkoncentration og udbytte. Dette specialeprojekt viste brugen
af CRI-SPA, en CRISPR-Cas9-baseret screeningsmetode, som fandt nye optimeringsmål
for en Saccharomyces cerevisiae cellefabrik, der producerer betaxanthin. Deletion af endo-
plasmatisk retikulum-associeret proteinnedbrydning medieret af ubiquitin-ligasen Ssm4
viste en stigning i betaxanthinproduktion. Deletioner af funktioner i den centrale kulstof-
metabolisme viste forbedringer i produktionen af betaxanthin. Yderligere er det blevet
opdaget, at CRI-SPA kan screene for dobbelte gendeletioner, hvilket åbner potentialet til
at screene for positive genetiske interaktioner, hvilket kunne vise overraskende synergi-
stiske effekter i cellefabriksoptimering.
==PAGE:5==
iv
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
The use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as host and the use of genetic libraries .
3
2.2
The shikimate pathway and aromatic amino acid metabolism
. . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
An efficient biosensor for L-DOPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Genetic interactions, theory and techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Examples of genetic interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Modelling of genetic interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.3
Synthetic genetic arrays for fitness estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
CRI-SPA a novel high throughput screening method . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.1
Selective ploidy ablation (SPA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.2
CRISPR-cas9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.3
CRI-SPA protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methods
10
3.1
Strains and media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Cloning procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Construction of gRNA plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Construction of CRI-SPA donor strain Sc_ML.002
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
High throughput automatic pinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Data extraction pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6
Gene Ontology enrichment analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
==PAGE:6==
v
4
Results
16
4.1
Betaxanthin production and fitness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Effect of tyrosine feedback inhibition on betaxanthin producing cells . . .
20
4.2.1
Enrichment of endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degrada-
tion associated with Ssm4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
The GET complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Analysis of markerless pathway insertion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Genetic interactions in betaxanthin production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.1
CRI-SPA screen with YER084W∆background . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.2
Comparing intensity and fitness measurements across different screens 29
4.4.3
Quantitative analysis of interactions in YER084W∆strain
. . . . .
29
4.4.4
Non-linear batch effect correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
34
5.1
Betaxanthin is a bouqet of compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Limitations of the multiplicative model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Endoplasmatic reticulum expansion in cytochrome p450 optimization
. .
35
5.4
Other genome-wide screening platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.1
The use of CRI-SPA in combination with rational strategies
. . . .
36
5.5
Future prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
38
A Appendix A: Primers
44
B
Supplementary figures
45
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
A more sustainable and environmentally friendly chemical industry is at the utmost im-
portance for society, in the move away from petrol and plant derived products to sus-
tainable production platforms. This is combined with a gradually higher demand for
pharmaceuticals and nutritional products to secure a better access to medicine and es-
sential foods. Metabolic engineering of microbial cell factories can be key in fulfilling
these objectives, as microbial biochemical pathways are extremely versatile, giving rise
to a wealth of diverse organic compounds.
The shikimate pathway which exists in plants and microbes is responsible for the pro-
duction of a wealth of aromatic organic compounds, many of which could replace crop or
petrol derived products. For example opioids which are a drug in high demand that can
be synthesized in yeast, but are currently produced mainly by agriculture [1]. The pro-
duction of opioids in cell factories would need an approximate 100.000 fold improvement
in titer to be economically viable [2].
The major hurdle in transforming the pharmaceutical and food industry into purely
cell factory based production platforms, is therefore the need for effective strains deliv-
ering high yield and titer (product concentration), to compete with existing agriculture
based extraction or chemical synthesis. Effective techniques to optimize the product yield
and titer from strains containing a biochemical pathway of industrial interest, are there-
fore crucial in the development of future effective cell factories.
In this study a newly developed screening technique CRI-SPA is utilized to analyze
the production of betaxanthins, which are a group of compounds derived from the aro-
matic amino acid L-DOPA. CRI-SPA takes advantage of CRISPR-Cas9, yeast mating and
high-throughput genetic arrays, and can be used to insert a biosynthetic pathway into a
genetic library, for example the yeast deletion library.
The aim of the study is to demonstrate the potential of CRI-SPA to analyze the ef-
fect of previously implemented optimization strategies for L-tyrosine production, and
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
2
the downstream effect on heterologous production of the derived compound L-DOPA. It
will be shown how CRI-SPA screening data can be used to get a systematic insight of the
mechanisms acting as bottlenecks for high production of L-DOPA. Further it is demon-
strated that CRI-SPA can be used to screen for combinations of gene deletions, potentially
finding surprisingly beneficial (synergistic) effects on production of L-DOPA.
==PAGE:9==
3
Theoretical background
2.1
The use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as host and the use of
genetic libraries
Bakers yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a workhorse organism in the biotechnological in-
dustry as one of the most widely used host organisms in the production of pharmaceu-
ticals, fuels and food products [3]. Furthermore it is one of the most studied organism
in genetic research as a model organism for eukaryotic cell understanding, since genetic
engineering techniques are well developed. An advantage of S. cerevisiae is the availabil-
ity of strain libraries like the yeast deletion collectiom where every open reading frame
is replaced by a KanMX marker [4] and the yeast overexpression library [5]. Studying
these genetic libraries has gained immense amount of systematic understanding of gene
function of the approx 6000 genes in S. cerevisiae [6]. The mating pathway in yeast allow
for simple and cost effective high throughput modifications of these libraries [7].
2.2
The shikimate pathway and aromatic amino acid metabolism
The shikimate pathway is starting point for a wealth of aromatic compunds and is re-
quired in formation of the aromatic amino acids; tryptophan’, tyrosine and phenylala-
nine. The shikimate pathway exclusively exist in plants and microorganisms [8]. The
pathway starts with the condensation of intermediates of glycolysis and pentosephosphate-
pathway, namely phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), and erythrose-4-phosphate (E4P) which
enter the pathway through a series of condensation and redox reactions. The enzyme 3-
deoxy-D-arabinoheptulosonate 7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase (isoenzymes Aro3/4) con-
densates PEP and E4P to initiate the biosynthesis of aromatic compounds. Following this
reaction, the pentafunctional Aro1 enzyme catalyzes five out of the six steps in the shiki-
mate pathway, from DAHP to 5-enolpyruvyl-3-shikimate phosphate (EPSP). The choris-
mate synthetase (ARO2) catalyzes EPSP into chorismate, the common precursor for the
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background
4
FIGURE 2.1: The biosynthesis of betaxanthins starts with the condensation of phospho-
enolpyruvate (PEP), and erythrose-4-phosphate (E4P) to 3-deoxy-D-arabinoheptulosonate 7-
phosphate (DAHP), by the isozymes ARO3/4. Aro1 enzyme catalyzes five steps in synthesis
of chorismate where Aro2 catalyzes the last step (not shown). First committed step of L-
tyrosine synthesis is catalyzed by chorismate mutase (Aro7). Tyrosine synthesis is negatively
feedback regulated at Aro4 and Aro7 at high tyrosine concentration. Tyrosine is converted
to L-DOPA by the cytochrome p450 CYP76AD1. L-DOPA is converted to Betalamic acid by
4,5-DOPA dioxygenase extradiol (DOD) and spontaneously reacts with an amino acid to pro-
duce a betaxanthin. Black arrows are native reactions, red are heterologous. Double arrows
indicate several enzymatic steps.
three aromatic amino acids [9]. In tyrosine biosynthesis chorismate is then converted to
prephenate by chorismate mutase encoded by the gene ARO7. Prephenate is a branch-
point as the precursor of tyrosine and phenylalanine. In tyrosine synthesis prephenate is
hydrolated and then aminated to yield the final amino acid.
The biosynthesis of tyrosine is regulated allosterically with negative feedback at two
key branchpoints, namely on chorismate mutase Aro7 and at the first committed step of
the shikimate pathway, the DAHP synthase Aro4. Aro7 and Aro4 has therefore been a
target for enzyme engineering, and successful feedback insensitive variants of Aro4 and
Aro7 has been constructed, which increased tyrosine flux by over 4-fold [10].
The shikimate pathway is interesting in biotechnology, as it produces a long list of
aromatic compounds, which are industrially relevant. For example aromatic acids like
muconic acid and para-hydroxybenzoic acid, which today is mainly produced by oil de-
rived products [11]. Also many natural products and secondary metabolites that are
valuable in food- and pharma-industry are formed outgoing from shikimate pathway.
For example benzylisoquinoline alkaloids (BIAs) which are derived from L-DOPA. An
example of BIA’s that has gained attention is the production of opioids in cell factories,
which are currently manufactured by agriculture [2, 12]. Agriculture source is prone to
disadvantages that causes supply to be lower than demand. For example low yield, fluc-
tuations in supply due to seasonal effects or disease [13]. Production from an optimized
microbial cell factory can also be more sustainable than crop based production.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background
5
2.2.1
An efficient biosensor for L-DOPA
Efficient monitoring of the production capabilitites of the cell factory, and the flux through
the shikimate pathway is crucial for high throughput screening with CRI-SPA. In this
study we take advantage of a biosensor developed by deloache et. al [12]. The biosen-
sor functions by converting L-tyrosine into betaxanthins, a highly flourescent group of
compounds which are yellow under white light.
Tyrosine is first oxidized to L-3,4-
dihydroxyphenylalanin (L-DOPA) by the enzyme Cytochrome P450 76AD1 encoded from
the CYP76AD1 gene found in the plant Beta vulgaris [14]. L-DOPA is then further ox-
idized by 4,5-DOPA dioxygenase extradiol encoded by the gene DOD from Mirabilis
jalapa, which opens the aromatic ring, producing an unstable seco-DOPA that rearranges
nonenzymatically to betalamic acid [15]. Betalamic acid spontaneously reacts with an
amino acid, to form a betaxanthin.
Introduction of this betaxanthin biosensor, by cloning the genes CYP76AD1 and DOD
into the genome of a S. cerevisiae host, provides a powerful platform for monitoring the
production of L-DOPA from the cell factory. The work of Deloache et al. [12] has shown
that Betaxanthin production is proportional to L-DOPA concentrations. With calorimetric
image analysis the yellow flourerscense from betaxanthins can be monitored, and thereby
quantify the performance of the cell factory to produce L-DOPA. The biosensor enables
high throughput analysis of L-DOPA concentration in a library of yeast mutants.
2.3
Genetic interactions, theory and techniques
The interaction of two or more genes is when deletion of all interacting genes, display an
unexpected phenotype. The most extreme case of negative genetic interaction is synthetic
lethality, where two or more mutations are viable on their own, but combined result in a
nonviable strain [16]. Less detrimental negative interactions are the synthetic sick, where
two mutations combined are more severe than the product of the fitness defect displayed
by the two deletions individually. Positive interactions also exist, where two mutations
are surprisingly less severe than expected. Observations of these artifacts in double gene
deletions of yeast, has been heavily studied to get a systems understanding of genetic
interactions. Results have provided significant insight into the general principles of ge-
netic network connectivity, as it elucidates how genes are related, and very closely related
genes typically relate to the same cellular function. Genes with related biological func-
tions are connected by genetic interactions more often than expected by chance [7]. In
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background
6
the around 23 million double deletions in S. cerevisiae around 550000 negative and 350000
positive genetic interactions has been estimated [17].
2.3.1
Examples of genetic interactions
An example of a synthetic lethal interaction, is when one gene can buffer another deleted
gene in a vital cellular function. In this case the cell has wild type or reduced fitness when
missing one of the genes, but missing both is lethal. It can also be a physical interaction of
the gene products, where both single deletions, the protein complex is still able to fulfill
it’s function to some extend, but two missing subunits result in a non-viable cell.
Positive genetic interactions can relate to regulation, for example if a cell has a deleted
activator for a vital cell function. Deletion of the repressor will result in a surprisingly
fit phenotype. A positive interaction in a metabolic pathway could be the deletion of
one gene leading to accumulation of a toxic compound. Deleting the upstream enzyme,
alleviates the toxicity, resulting in a positive interaction. In this way genetic interactions
give clues on how gene products cooperate on same cellular function or metabolism.
2.3.2
Modelling of genetic interactions
Genetic interaction between two mutations is often expressed in a simple mathematical
model, that states that the product of two mutants individual fitness, describe the fitness
of the double mutant. The deviation from this assumption indicates a genetic interaction
[18, 7].
fab = fa fb + ϵ f
ab
(2.1)
The genetic interaction score (ϵ f
ab) describes the interaction of the two genes, and is posi-
tive for a positive interaction and negative for negative interactions. fab is double mutant
fitness and fa fb are single mutant fitness. This model has been proven to be powerful
for determining genetic interactions and has been widely used in large scale interaction
studies [19, 20, 17, 21].
To reliably predict interaction scores with the model in equation 2.1, extremely pre-
cise measures of single and double mutant fitness, and a high-throughput technique to
analyse the millions of mutants are required.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background
7
2.3.3
Synthetic genetic arrays for fitness estimation
Synthetic genetic arrays (SGA) is a technology that utilizes the mating pathway in yeast
to introduce an allele from a donor strain to a query strain, for example the yeast deletion
library. The double deletion mutants can be generated with automated pinning to differ-
ent selection media on an ordered array of agar plates [22]. Fitness (size) of all arrayed
mutants are then computationally quantified by image analysis.
In brief SGA utilizes that mated diploid S. cerevisiae cells in certain conditions sporu-
late and undergo meiosis. In meiosis the cells haploidize, where homologous recombi-
nation and crossing over of chromosome regions scrambles the chromosomes. Random
events transfer the mutation from the donor strain to the library strain resulting in double
mutants, which can be selected for with two different antibiotic markers.
The drawbacks of SGA is that transfer of a mutation or competence is dependent on
meiosis and sporulation which takes about 20 days for the whole protocol. Furthermore
the crossing over of genes is dependent on random events, considering introducing mul-
tiple mutations or genes with this method becomes exponentially less likely, and only
limited number of dominant selection markers are available. It also requires the query
strain to have good sporulation efficiency. Finally, because of the dependency on meio-
sis, it is only meaningful to use the SGA method with recipient strains that are isogenic
to the query strain, as homologous chromosomes are thoroughly scrambled due to ex-
tensive and unavoidable homologous recombination during meiosis [7].
2.4
CRI-SPA a novel high throughput screening method
CRI-SPA is a method recently developed in this department (study in review), which is
a technology that builds upon the same core principle as SGA, namely utilizing yeast
mating and automated pinning to transfer cells to different selection media, ultimately
introducing a genetic construct into a genetic library. CRI-SPA combines the principles of
selective ploidy ablation (SPA), with CRISPR Cas-9 to effectively introduce a biosynthetic
pathway into the genome of a genetic library (detailed description later).
2.4.1
Selective ploidy ablation (SPA)
SPA is a method developed to avoid cells going through sporulation and meiosis as in
traditional SGA. SPA utilizes a trick, where the chromosomes from the donor strain, are
made conditionally stable by introducting an inducable galactose promoter close to the
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background
8
centromere of all 16 chromosomes in the donor strain. Growing the mated diploid cells
on media containing galactose will result in loss of heterozygocity, as the assembly of the
kinetochore will be disrupted by the RNA polymerase binding to the strong galactose
promoter pGAL. As a result the mitotic spindle will not be able to interact with donor
chromosomes and ultimately some mitosis events will result in a haploid cell containing
only chromosomes from the query strain and potentially a plasmid. The donor strain
also harbor at least one URA3 marker on each chromosome. Therefore the successful
haploid cells containing the plasmid can be selected for on 5-FOA containing medium.
This method was developed by reid et al. in 2011 and was used to transfer a plasmid
into the yeast deletion library [23]. In general SPA can introduce a plasmid into a genetic
library with a protocol taking 5 days instead of 20 for a traditional mating based screen.
2.4.2
CRISPR-cas9
Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) and CRISPR as-
sociated (Cas) proteins is an adaptive immune system found in many bacteria, and is
utilized in genetic engineering for its ability to efficiently make DNA double stranded
breaks (DSB) [24]. CRISPR-cas9 mediated gene modification has been utilized in S. cere-
visiae since it was demonstrated by Di Carlo et al. in 2013 [25], where a Cas-9 nuclease
from the organism S. pyogens was introduced via a plasmid coupled to a constitutive
promoter TEF1.
Cas-9 nuclease functions by employing a guide RNA (gRNA) as a template, to where
in the genome the DSB should be introduced. The bases in the gRNA that recognises the
cut site is a 20nt spacer sequence, and is coupled to a universal ca. 75nt gRNA scaffold.
The true power of this system is that the 20nt gRNA spacer can be designed freely, with
the only limitiation that the cut site in the target genome, has to be adjecent to a so called
’protospacer adjecent motive’ (PAM) sequence, which in the case for SpCas9 is a 3bp
sequence with the motif ’NGG’.
2.4.3
CRI-SPA protocol
Combining SPA and CRISPR-Cas9 allows for high throughput transfer of donor chromo-
somes and a gRNA plasmid to a genetic library, resulting in efficient transfer of a genetic
construct. In the case of this project, a betaxanthin biosynthetic pathway is inserted into
the yeast deletion library. The protocol is explained in more detail in figure 2.2.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background
9
FIGURE 2.2: A) CRI-SPA protocol using mating pathway in S. cerevisiae to transfer betax-
anthin pathway into the yeast deletion library. CRI-SPA universal donor strain containing
the betaxanthin construct, a gRNA plasmid and CAS9 gene in chromosome. The gRNa-Cas9
cut site is where the betaxanthin construct is inserted into the library chromosome. B) Step
1, The MATa deletion library strains are pinned on top of a MATα CRI-SPA donor strain
where the cells mate on YPD for 12-24 hours to form diploids with gRNA plasmid. Step
2, diploids are exhausted for glucose via growth on raffinose and selected for the KanMX
marker in the library strains and the hphNT1 marker on the CRI-SPA gRNA plasmid. At this
stage, the target site in the recipient strain is cleaved by Cas9-gRNA. Repair of the resulting
DNA DSB happens by employing the sister chromosome as repair template, which has the
betaxanthin construct at the cut site, resulting in transfer of the betaxanthin construct to the
library chromosome. Step 3, galactose induced SPA generates haploids. Step 4, counterse-
lection on 5-FOA containing media, selects cells containing only library chromosomes which
are URA3 deficient. Step 5, the KanMX marker of the library strain and the betaxanthin con-
struct NatMX marker (optional) are selected for, yielding the final yeast deletion library with
the betaxanthin pathway. Figure adapted from [26]
==PAGE:16==
10
Methods
3.1
Strains and media
Strains used in this study are presented in table 3.1. The three strains used for CRI-
SPA screens are Sc_HO.25, Sc_BTX.002¨ and Sc_ML.002, where only Sc_ML.002 were
constructed during the work of this project. Sc_HO.25 and Sc_BTX.002 were constructed
in previous projects in the group ([26] and a study in review). The SPA compatible base
strain, from which all CRI-SPA compatible donor strains are constructed, where donated
by the group of Rodney Rothstein (Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia
University, USA) [23]. The SPA base strain was chromosomally integrated with SpCas9
to be CRI-SPA compatible in the work of [26] to become Sc_HO.10. The YKO library was
acquired from Invitrogen. Escheria coli DH5α cells was used for plasmid construction and
grown in Luria broth media.
For selection when using antibiotic markers, plates were supplemented with G418
(200 mg/L), nourseothricin (NTC) (100 mg/L) and hygromycin (hyg) (200 mg/L). Half
concentration was used in liquid media. For synthetic complete (SC) media 5-fluoroorotic
acid (5-FOA) (1 g/L) and uracil (30 mg/L) was added. Yeast Extract–Peptone–Dextrose
(YPD) was made with 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone and 2% either glucose, raffinose or
galactose. For solid media 2% agar was added.
TABLE 3.1: Strains used during this project
Strain
Genotype
Source
Sc_HO.10
MATα CEN1−16::pGal1-KlURA3 can1-100 his3-11,15 leu2-3,112 LYS2 met17 trp1-1 ura3-1RAD5 X-3::pTEF1-SpCas9-tCYC1-loxP-
Kl.LEU2
[26]
Sc_HO.25
MATα CEN1−16::pGal1-KlURA3can1-100 his3-11,15 leu2-3,112 LYS2 met17 trp1-1 ura3-1RAD5 X-3::pTEF1-SpCas9-tCYC1-loxP-
KlLEU2 KlURA3(dw XII-5 IS) XII-5(inner)::tTDH3-BvCYP76AD1-pTPI1-pCCW12-MjDOD-tCYC1-loxP-NatMX-lox
[26]
Sc_BTX.002
MATα CEN1−16::pGal1-KlURA3 can1-100 his3-11,15 leu2-3,112 LYS2 met17 trp1-1 ura3-1 RAD5 X-3::pTEF1-SpCas9-tCYC1-loxP-
KlLEU2 (dw XII-5 IS) KlURA3 XII-5::TADH1-ARO7G141S-PTEF1-PPGK1-ARO4K229L-TTDH3-BvCYP76AD1-PTPI1-PCCW12-
MjDOD-Pgossypii:NatMX:tTEF1gossypii
in review
Sc_ML.001
MATα CEN1−16::pGal1-KlURA3can1-100 his3-11,15 leu2-3,112 LYS2 met17 trp1-1 ura3-1RAD5 X-3::pTEF1-SpCas9-tCYC1-loxP-
KlLEU2 KlURA3(dw chromosome V)
This study
Sc_ML.002
MATα CEN1-16::pGal1-KlURA3 can1-100 his3-11,15 leu2-3,112 LYS2 met17 trp1-1 ura3-1 RAD5 X-3::pTEF1-SpCas9-tCYC1-
loxP-KlLEU2 (chromosome V dw) KlURA3 (YER084W ORF)::TADH1-ARO7G141S-PTEF1-PPGK1-ARO4K229L-TTDH3-
BvCYP76AD1-PTPI1-PCCW12-MjDOD-Pgossypii:NatMX:tTEF1gossypii
This study
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3. Methods
11
3.2
Cloning procedures
PCR amplifications for cloning of fragments to be transformed into cells, were run using
Phusion Hot Start II High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase. In the case of colony PCR, Taq DNA
Polymerase was used. Purification of DNA fragments obtained by PCR or from agarose
gel bands was done using the illustra GFX PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification Kit (GE
Lifesciences). Primers used in this study are presented in Supplementary Table A, which
were all ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies. Primers were designed using the
commandline tool Primer3 [27], and primers to be used with genomic DNA was blasted
using NCBI to ensure no off target priming. All cloning was done using uracil-specific
excision reagent (USER) enzyme from New England Biolabs and a protocol according to
[28], was used for plasmid fusion.
3.2.1
Construction of gRNA plasmids
Construction of plasmids coding for gRNA molecules was constructed from a 2µ plas-
mid pHO29 with a CRISPR spacer and scaffold transcribed from the promoter pSNR52.
The whole plasmid except for the spacer was amplified by PCR with uracil containing
primers HOP60 and HOP61, which allowed for insertion of a new spacer by user cloning.
The spacer DNA element was made by an oligo with the 20bp target sequence plus a
USER overhang in the 3’ end, matching the overhang of HOP60. A second oligo com-
plimentary on the 20bp spacer with a USER overhang matching the overhang of HOP61,
was annealed with the first. The annealing was done by mixing equimolar amounts of
the two oligos in NEB buffer 3.1. The mix was incubated at 98°C for 5 minutes and then
cooled to room temperature gradually over two hours in a thermocycler. For the USER
mix a molar ratio between spacer DNA and backbone DNA of 3:1 was found most suc-
cesful.
The spacer sequences was designed by an algorithm made by Doench et al. [29],
which optimizes activity while reducing off target effects by using the S288C genome
as a reference. The algorithm was implemented in Benchling software (Benchling.com),
which was the software I used for all bioinformatic tasks in this project.
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3. Methods
12
FIGURE 3.1: Overview of how CRI-SPA donor strain Sc_ML.002 was constructed. Simulta-
neous insertion of betaxanthin pathway and deletion of YER084W. Construct will be flanked
by Kl.URA3 markers to prevent crossed over chromosomes being viable on 5-FOA medium.
In betaxanthin genetic construct, the genes ARO4K229L and ARO7G117S encode mutated feed-
back alleviated versions of native Aro4 and Aro7 enzymes, used in L-tyrosine synthesis.
CYP76AD1 encodes a cytochrome p450 catalyzing L-DOPA formation from L-tyrosine. DOD
encodes 4,5-DOPA dioxygenase extradiol which catalyzes betaxanthin formation from L-
DOPA. gRNA (in red) targeting YER084W open reading frame.
3.3
Construction of CRI-SPA donor strain Sc_ML.002
Firstly Sc_ML.001 where constructed from Sc_HO.10, where a second Kl.URA3 marker
was introduced on chromosome V downstream of YER084W open reading frame at posi-
tion 555,310. This was done to make cells with crossed over chromosome arms unviable.
The Kl.URA3 marker was PCR amplified from a genome purification sample of Sc_HO.10
with ca. 40bp overhangs homologous to each side of the Cas-9 cut site/insertion site,
with primers MLJ58 and MLJ59. The PCR product was sequenced and showed only
two silent mutations. The PCR product was then used as a repair template in a marker-
less CRISPR-Cas9 mediated transformation according to [30]. Only the gRNA plasmid
pCML.04 was needed to transform, as the CAS-9 gene is chromosomally integrated in
Sc_HO.10. pCML.04 was removed and strain Sc_ML.001 was confirmed by colony PCR.
Insertion of the betaxanthin biosynthetic pathway into Sc_ML.001, was done on top
of the YER084W coding sequence, ultimately knocking in YER084W with a genetic con-
struct. As seen in figure 3.1 the genetic construct inserted consist of four genes and
nourseothricin (NTC) resistance gene (NatMX) as dominant marker.
The four genes
are the feedback alleviated Aro4 and Aro7 enzyme variants encoded by ARO4K229L and
ARO7G117S. Further the heterologous genes for betaxanthin production from L-tyrosine
as explained in section 2.2.1, namely CYP76AD1 and DOD. Different promoters and ter-
minators are used to avoid homologous recombination.
The construct was cloned by amplifying the genetic construct from plasmid Ant_E113
with USER compatible primers MLJ36 and MLJ37. The 200bp overhangs YER084W-UP
and YER084W-DW was amplified with complimentary USER overhang primers MLJ34,
MLJ35 and MLJ38, MLJ39. The three parts where fused with USER cloning, into the
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3. Methods
13
TABLE 3.2: Plasmids used during this project
Plasmid name
Genetic elements
Yeast marker
Source
pMLJ1
(YER084W-up)ARO7G141S-pTEF1-pPGK1-ARO4K229L-tTDH3-BvCYP76AD1-pTPI1-pCCW12-MjDOD-
tCYC1(YER084-dw)
hphNT1
This study
pCML3
pSNR52-gRNA(YER084W)-tSUP4
hphNT1
This study
pCML4
pSNR52-gRNA(chrV telomer)-tSUP4
hphNT1
This study
Ant_E113
ARO7G141S-pTEF1-pPGK1-ARO4K229L-tTDH3-BvCYP76AD1-pTPI1-pCCW12-MjDOD-tCYC1
NatMX
[26]
pHO29
pSNR52-gRNA(XII-5)-tSUP4
hphNT1
[26]
backbone plasmid pCCM023, which were made cloning ready by digestion with AsiSl
and Nb.Bsml. After successful assembly, the plasmid was digested with NotI, the approx
10kbp construct was used as repair template in a CRISPR assisted transformation accord-
ing to [30]. Since the gRNA plasmid should be maintained in the strain to make it compat-
ible with CRI-SPA, i designed three gRNA plasmids (pCML.001, pCML.002 pCML.003)
and selected the most effective. To determine the effectiveness i transformed cells with
gRNA plasmid and repair template and cells with gRNA plasmid but no repair template.
The most effective plasmid will result in very few colonies in the transformation without
repair template, because constant nuclease activity from Cas-9 and gRNA will cause a
sick cell. Further there will be many (in this case yellow) colonies of cells transformed
with repair template. For the three gRNA plasmids pCML.003 was most effective (sup-
plementary figure B.1) as it has approx 100 times as many colonies with repair template
compared to only gRNA plasmid.
3.4
High throughput automatic pinning
Automatic pin replication was carried out using the high-throughput pinning robot RO-
TOR HDA from Singer Instruments, utilizing replica pinning pads (RePads) and rectan-
gular petri dishes (PlusPlates). For parallel mating of the CRI-SPA Donor Strain to the
strains of the yeast deletion library, a single colony of the donor strain was inoculated in
25 mL YPD supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic in order to maintain the gRNA
plasmid. The donor strain was grown overnight and washed by centrifugation and re-
suspended with 25 mL milliQ water to remove the antibiotic. 150uL of cell suspension
was dispensed in wells of a 96 well plate serving as a source plate for the screen. From
this source plate, the CRI-SPA donor strain was pinned in 1536 format on the YPD mating
plates. The arrayed colonies of the deletion collection were pinned on top of the arrayed
liquid donor strain. Plate shuffling was introduced at the mating step, where library
strains from 384 format is pinned on top of the arrayed donor strain. After a full CRI-SPA
experiment plates were photographed with a PhenoBooth from Singer Instruments.
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3. Methods
14
3.5
Data extraction pipeline
After a completed CRI-SPA experiment approx 20000 mutants are ordered on 13 agar
plates. To extract colour intensity and size of all colonies, images of all plates are pro-
cessed by an image analysis pipeline. The raw intensity and size measurements were
extracted using functions adapted from the python package Pyphe [31]. To quantify yel-
low intensity, the image was converted from RGB to HSV and yellow intensity is defined
as the geometric mean of saturation and value. This assumed that colonies has a fixed
hue, meaning colonies can only display variants of yellow. This approach was developed
in the group before the start of this project (paper in review).
The raw size and intensity measurements is then processed to correct for systematic
experimental artefacts that are influencing measurements. Statistical corrections for these
artefacts are implemented in the order described below.
Edge effects are caused by colonies on the outermost edge having access to more
nutrients without competing neighbor colonies, resulting in edge colonies growing con-
siderably larger. The five outermost edges, are normalized to have the same median as
the plate median.
Plate effects are caused by slight differences in growth conditions between different
plates within the same screen. The differences is likely caused by plates made from differ-
ent batches, undergo slightly different conditions and different agar thickness. Also the
brightness of the pictures can vary within one screen, due to camera light source. Plate
average intensity and size are normalized to have the same mean across all plates within
one batch.
Spatial effects caused by differences in growth conditions within a single plate, caused
by differences in media and temperature etc. For yellow intensity also the light source
can cause spatial effects if it is not completely uniform across the plate. The spatial ef-
fects were corrected by defining a matrix S by first using a median filter on a 4x4 grid
and hereafter an average filter on a 7x7 grid. S is then divided by plate mean and every
colony Cjk is divided by Sjk, which is the same approach as in [20].
Jacknife variance filter is imposed to filter outliers within the four replicates of each
deletion. This method has previously been used for large scale interaction screens. The
method compares the standard deviation between replicates of every gene. If leaving out
one of the replicates i reduces the standard deviation by more than 2/N, that replicate is
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Methods
15
discarded. In short, when σ −σi > (2/N)σ, where σ is the standard deviation of the four
replicates, σi is the standard deviation leaving i out, and N is the number of replicates.
[20].
3.6
Gene Ontology enrichment analysis
Gene ontology enrichment was done by The PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evo-
lutionary Relationships) classification system which was designed to classify proteins
(and their genes) in order to facilitate high-throughput analysis. [32] A Fischer’s exact
test is used to identify over-represented Gene Ontology (GO) terms with a cutoff p-value
of 0.01.
==PAGE:22==
16
Results
The results presented in this thesis encompass all the experiments done, which will be
shortly outlined. In total five genome wide CRI-SPA screens of the yeast deletion li-
brary has been performed. Three screens of the strain Sc_BTX.002, one screen of strain
Sc_HO.025, and one screen of a strain constructed in this project Sc_ML.002. The aim
is firstly to make a general analysis of how CRI-SPA data can be used to analyze single
gene deletions, and the effect deletions has on betaxanthin production capabilities in a
cell factory. Secondly two previously constructed betaxanthin producing cell factories,
Sc_BTX.002 and Sc_HO.025 are compared to analyze the differences in production capa-
bilities, when tyrosine feedback inhibition is alleviated. Lastly, an analysis of deletions
in the strain Sc_ML.002 which additionally has a deletion of the gene YER084W, with the
goal of finding synergistic deletions leading to enhanced betaxanthin production.
4.1
Betaxanthin production and fitness
The result of a CRI-SPA screen consist of all strains from the yeast deletion library, where
each strain has been transferred the betaxanthin genetic construct. All ca. 4800 strains
are ordered on 13 rectangular 1536 format agar plates, with each mutant having four
replicates randomized across the plates. The yellow intensity and size of each colony can
be quantified and normalized in an image analysis pipeline described in section 3.5. The
two metrics, yellow intensity and size as a measure of betaxanthin production capabilities
and a fitness measure respectively.
From the plate readings some general artifacts can be observed. First of all it is clear
that the majority of gene deletions do not have a significant effect on betaxanthin pro-
duction capabilities (yellow intensity) (see figure 4.1). This is expected as betaxanthin
production or flux through the shikimate pathway and aromatic amino acid production,
is a relatively niche metabolism compared to for example central carbon metabolism.
In comparison, fitness is a more general measure that can be the cause of disruption in
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4. Results
17
FIGURE 4.1: Yellow intensity and fitness measurements of colonies on an ordered array of
deletion mutants from a CRI-SPA screen of the yeast deletion library. Data is averaged across
replicates and sorted. Errorbars represent one standard deviation of 8 replicates across two
different batches.
hundreds of processes. The fitness measurements in figure 4.1 shows few mutants that
display higher fitness than wildtype, which is expected as the wildtype yeast evolves to-
ward biomass production. Though it can be said that most gene deletions does not show
a severe fitness defect, likely because the deleted genes are not important in the lab en-
vironment grown on YPD. The gene deletions ranking 3000-4000 indicates a slightly sick
phenotype, and genes in the lowest ranks 4000-4800 are very sick (notice different y-axis
in figure 4.1).
An exiting prospect of having two metrics, fitness and production, to evaluate each
mutant, is the possibility to have a two dimensional view of how high production often
relates to a fitness defect, especially when accumulation of a compound might be toxic, or
heterologous compound production compete for metabolites with primary metabolism.
This tradeoff is something that is important to consider when making cell factories, al-
though a defect in biomass cell growth is often expected. The important thing is that the
productivity (g/l h) and Yield of the compound of interest is high enough to make the
process economically viable [33].
From this two dimensional view, a clustering analysis can be made. On figure 4.2
high intensity genes are plottet in graph representing the entire S. cerevisiae genome. In
short highly related genes which show similar interaction profiles, often inferring with
the same function or physical protein complex, are placed close together. Data from CRI-
SPA screen is overlayed this graph. looking at from a qualitative view it can be seen
that deletion mutants with a high yellow intensity tend to cluster with genes relating to
the mitochondrial cellular function. To further analyse this observation, a gene ontology
(GO) enrichment analysis was made, using PANTHER 17.0 online tool [32]. The GO
consortium is continuously curating yeast gene research, to fit every gene into a GO term,
grouping gene function, cellular component and biological process on several levels [35].
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4. Results
18
FIGURE 4.2: Left: CRI-SPA data from strain Sc_BTX.002. Yellow intensity and colony size of
all viable gene deletions, where each point is averaged across three screens with four repli-
cates for each gene per screen. Deletion mutants are grouped on highest yellow intensity
(yellow) and low yellow intensity without a severe fitness defect (cyan). Right: CRI-SPA data
overlayed graph of genetic connectivity of every gene in S. cerevisiae, where genes placed
close to each other show similar genetic interaction profiles, and therefore often function
within same cellular function. [17]. Made with TheCellMap.org [34].
The GO enrichment analysis show that high intensity deletion mutants, marked with
yellow in figure 4.2, are highly enriched for genes relating to the mitocondrial matrix and
the CCAAT-binding complex (table 4.1. The CCAAT- binding complex, consisting of the
HAP2/3/4/5 gene products, is a key regulator in yeast metabolism transcriptionally acvti-
vating genes with CCAAT motif in the promoter [36]. In yeast the HAP complex is well
described as a master regulator of respiratory metabolism, as it activates the transcription
of cytochromes for the mitochondrial matrix, and all enzymes in the TCA cycle among
other genes. [37].
The finding that deletion of the HAP complex, and integral parts of the mitochondrial
matrix result in a more yellow phenotype, strongly suggests that limiting oxidative res-
piration favors the production of betaxanthin. The reason for this mechanism, might be
that the cytochromes performing redox reactions in the electron transport chain, for ex-
ample coenzyme Q, are synthesized from chorismate (aromatic precursor to tyrosine) and
tyrosine [38]. Therefore maintaining high activity in the respiratory chain is a compet-
ing pathway, utilizing the tyrosine that could instead be used to synthesize betaxanthin.
Furthermore flux through the shikimate pathway has previously been identified to be
inversely correlated with respiratory growth, as the precursors PEP and E4P is directed
towards the TCA cycle for maximal ATP yield [39].
To reach a deeper understanding of why some deletions cause a reduced betaxanthin
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4. Results
19
TABLE 4.1: Top five Gene Ontology enrichments of gene deletions relating to high yellow
intensity.
GO cellular component
GO term inentifier
fold over random
CCAAT-binding factor complex
GO:0016602
32.18
mitochondrial inner boundary membrane
GO:0097002
24.14
mitochondrial large ribosomal subunit
GO:0005762
20.54
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III
GO:0015008
19.31
matrix side of mitochondrial inner membrane
GO:0099617
19.31
production, the mutants showing a lower yellow intensity (cyan in figure 4.1), without
a severe growth defect was also analyzed for GO enrichments. It is hypothesized that
these deletions can give an insight into possible upregulation targets in cell factory op-
timization. The result in table 4.2 showed that proteins relating to cellular components
of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) are enriched. One of
the functions of the ESCRT complex is budding of ubiquinated and misfolded membrane
proteins from the ER into endosomal vesicles as a response to overflow of misfolded pro-
teins, ultimately leading to degradation in the lysosome [40]. Under normal conditions
most proteins are degraded in the proteasomes [41].
The explanation for this enrichment might be, that the cytochrome p450 CYP76AD1
in the betaxanthin pathway (section 2.2.1) is not native to yeast, and therefore the na-
tive folding mechanisms in yeast might not be adequate to fold the high amount of
this enzyme correctly. When the ESCRT complex and other proteins in the endosomal
pathway are deleted, misfolded CYP76AD1 will accumulate in the ER and golgi and
outcompete functional protein, ultimately leading to reduced p450 activity and lowered
betaxanthin production. Correct folding of high amounts of P450s to produce complex
plant secandory metabolites in yeast, has previously been described as a key challenge in
yeast metabolic engineering [42]. Though more research into this phenomena, should be
performed to validate this hypothesis.
TABLE 4.2: Top 3 Gene Ontology enrichments of low producing mutants without significant
fitness defect.
GO cellular component
GO term inentifier
Fold over random
ESCRT complex
GO:0036452
16.00
Multivesicular body
GO:0097487
11.63
Late endosome membrane
GO:0031902
8.46
In this example CRI-SPA data can give a top level systematic understanding of what
mechanisms is important for activity in an inserted pathway. The data provide gene can-
didates for deletions or upregulation targets, which could go into more in depth analysis
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4. Results
20
in liquid media, ultimately optimizing the titer and yield of a yeast cell factory.
4.2
Effect of tyrosine feedback inhibition on betaxanthin pro-
ducing cells
As outlined in section 2.2 the metabolic enzymes encoded by the genes ARO4 and ARO7
are feedback inhibited by high tyrosine concentration. This negative feedback has been
alleviated by point mutations in the work of Luttik et al. [10], resulting in the variants
ARO4K229L and ARO7G117S. In the strain Sc_HO.25 betaxanthin biosynthesis relies on
native levels and variants of Aro4 and Aro7 together with the gene products inserted
for biosynthesis of betaxanthin CYP76AD1 and DOD. In contrast the strain Sc_BTX.002,
has the mutated genes ARO4K229L and ARO7G117S, which are introduced together with
CYP76AD1 and DOD in the same genetic construct.
FIGURE 4.3: A. pictures of colonies corresponding to top 10 yellow intensity from CRI-SPA
screen of strain Sc_HO.25. B. Yellow intensity and fitness (size) measurements from CRI-SPA
screen of strain Sc_HO.25. Top 10 yellow intensity genes from Sc_HO.25 marked in red and
annotated. In yellow 100 mitochondrion related deletions showing high intensity in strain
Sc_BTX.002. Purple is the Get complex responsible for inserting tail-anchored proteins. C.
Pictures from CRI-SPA screen of strain Sc_BTX.002 of top 10 genes from Sc_HO.25. D. yellow
intensity and fitness measurements from CRI-SPA screen of Sc_BTX.002.
The result of CRI-SPA screens of the two strains, Sc_BTX.002 and Sc_HO.25 are out-
lined in figure 4.3. Even though colonies grown on different plates in different batches
are not easy to compare, looking at colonies from the two strains (A and C in figure 4.3),
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4. Results
21
show that the mutation of feedback inhibition significantly increases the yellow inten-
sity, and potentially betaxanthin production (reported to increase tyrosine levels at least
4-fold [10]). Higher production will also mean much higher demand for precursors, and
a bigger competition and impact on the cells other metabolisms, which is hypothesized
to be the reason for a vastly different phenotypic profile of the two strains (B and D in
figure 4.3).
Generally it can be seen that the profiles of the two screens has some substantial differ-
ences (B and D in figure 4.3). When only native Aro4 and Aro7 are available (Sc_HO.25),
the big cluster of deletion mutants showing increased yellow intensity but at the cost of
growth fitness (yellow in figure 4.3 B and D), is clearly not present as in Sc_BTX.002. This
cluster, as discussed in section 4.1, contains deletions related to the mitochondrion and
aerobic respiration. No enrichment of mitchondrion related genes were present for the
top 100 deletions for Sc_HO.25, indicating that aerobic respiration is not really a compet-
ing factor with native tyrosine biosynthesis in these conditions. The reason for this differ-
ence could be, that the amount of the two precursors PEP and E4P taken up by tyrosine
biosynthesis, is not enough to significantly deplete PEP and E4P for glycolysis and TCA
cycle in Sc_HO.25. Hence deletions of aerobic respiration metabolic genes and structural
parts of mitochondrion, does not provide as big an advantage as in Sc_BTX.002, since
tyrosine biosynthesis is not limited by precursor concentration, but likely by negative
feedback inhibition and other kinetic bottlenecks.
Although the clustering of deletion mutants are different between the two strains,
there are some gene deletions that are coherently in the top influential gene deletions,
marked in red in figure 4.3 (B and D), which are the top 10 yellow intensity deletions
from Sc_HO.25. The phenotype of these 10 deletion mutants has a higher yellow intensity
across the two strains, indicating that even though there is less ’hits’ in Sc_HO.25, the hits
are also present in a higher producing strain repeatedly across three separate screens.
Therefore we believe these genes to be interacting on betaxanthin production in some
central manner and are not random effects.
4.2.1
Enrichment of endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation
associated with Ssm4
SSM4 (also known as DOA10) together with CUE1 and UBC7 (figure 4.3) are an inter-
esting set of genes, as deletion of SSM4 and CUE1 does not show decreased growth fit-
ness, and only slight growth defect for UBC7 (0.85-0.96 95% CI, relative to WT), across
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4. Results
22
all five screens performed in this project. All three gene deletions are not reported to de-
crease growth rate on agar individually [17]. Liquid growth data in YPD, show wild type
growth rate for CUE1 and UBC7 single deletions, and a maximum growth rate reduction
of around 10% for SSM4 deletion [43]. These three genes are all part of the endoplasmic
reticulum-associated protein degradation of cytosolic substrates (ERAD-C), where pro-
teins are ubiquitinated, extracted from the membrane if needed, and degraded by the
proteasome in the cytosol [44].
Ssm4 is a membrane bound ubiquitin ligase (E3) and a retrotranslocase, fascilitating
ubiquitination and extracting of a broad range of substrates, including ER membrane
bound proteins with cytosolic domains, soluble cytosolic proteins and soluble proteins
in the nucleus. Ssm4 interacts with Ubc7 and Cue1, where Ubc7 is a soluble ubiquitin
conjugating enzyme (E2) residing in the cytoplasm, which interacts with the ER mem-
brane through the membrane anchored Cue1. The mechanism of these proteins are, that
Mss4 recruits Ubc6 (not in YKO library) and the protein destined for degradation, where
Ubc6 attaches the first ubiquitin moiety. Hereafter Ssm4 recruits Ubc7, which elongates
the ubiquitin chain, finally leading to Ssm4 translocating the membrane protein to the cy-
tosol where it is degraded [45] (3. and 4. in figure 4.4). Ssm4 mediated protein degrada-
tion is known to target several single pass ER anchored enzymes with misfolded cytosolic
domains, including Sbh2 which is involved in protein translocation into the endoplasmic
reticulum [46].
The fact that SSM4, Ubc6 and Cue1 are all hits across five different CRI-SPA screens
of three different strains, show that deletion of Ssm4 dependent ERAD cause a more yel-
low phenotype, strongly suggest that the mechanism is responsible for degrading some
protein or proteins that favor betaxanthin production. It has been identified that the
conversion of L-tyrosine to L-DOPA by the cytoplasmic ER tail anchored cytochrome
p450 76AD1, is often the key bottleneck in achieving high concentrations of L-DOPA
and downstream BIAs [12]. Cytochrome p450s are of type III membrane bound proteins,
meaning that the ’anchor’ is in the N-terminus, and the functional part of the enzyme is in
the C-terminus, which resides in the cytoplasm [14]. SSM4∆mutant has been shown to
increase concentration of several single pass membrane bound proteins, including Sps2,
Ubc6 and mitochondrion outer membrane bound Pgc1 [47].
A model that could explain the results of the CRI-SPA screens (figure 4.4), namely that
Ssm4 associated ERAD deletions being enriched, could be that CYP76AD1 is degraded in
this pathway and because CYP76AD1 is overexpressed and not native, yeast chaperones
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4. Results
23
might not be geared to facilitate this plant p450 in presumably high amounts, or it might
be a slow process. These factors result in accumulation of unfolded CYP76AD1 and the
cells safety mechanism is to ubiquinate the misfolded proteins and send them to degra-
dation in the proteasomes. An ER anchored p450 called CYP3A4, which play a large role
in degradation of various drugs in the human liver has been expressed in yeast. Analysis
showed that degradation required Ubc7 and Cue1, indicating proteasomal degradation
route, although it could not be confirmed that degradation was dependent on the Ssm4
system [48]. I have not been able to find an example of a p450 which has been directly
shown to be targeted by Ssm4, though it is assumed that most ER-anchored enzymes
with misfolded cytoplasmic regions are sent for degradation in this manner [41].
It should also be noted that the deletion of Ssm4 dependent ERAD does not lead
to a complete block of degradation, because substrates can use an “overflow” pathway
involving transport via the Golgi to the lysosome [41].
4.2.2
The GET complex
An interesting finding is that deletion of GET4 increases betaxanthin production. Get4
acts in the insertion another type of membrane proteins, namely the tail-anchored pro-
teins with the TM region in the C-terminal, and the functional part in N-terminal facing
the cytoplasm [49]. Since these proteins need to be translated in the cytoplasm before re-
vealing their hydrophobic charged anchor, chaperones need to cover the c-terminal and
direct it for insertion in the ER membrane [50]. These chaperones are Get4 and Get5
which are believed to interact with the ribosome during peptide synthesis, and together
with Sgt2, masking the nascent c-terminal anchor immediately after release [50]. The
protein is then mediated by Get3 and delivered to the membrane bound Get1/Get2 com-
plex, which inserts the c-terminal anchor in the membrane [51]. An interesting finding is,
that Ubc6 (part of the Ssm4 complex discussed in previous paragraph) mislocate to the
mitochondrial membrane in GET1/2∆and GET3∆mutants [47]. This indicate that the
reason for mutants with deletions in the Get complex showing a more yellow phenotype,
are a an effect of less Ubc6 available in the ER associated Ssm4 complex.
The model I propose (figure 4.4), links Get1/2/3/4/5, Ubc6/7, Cue1 and Ssm4 to
degradation of CYP76A1 which is assumed to be the rate limiting enzyme in betaxanthin
synthesis [52, 12]. To further validate this model, an experiment where CYP71AD1 is
fused with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and incorporated into Ssm4 deficient strain,
could elucidate if it is actually an increase in CYP71AD1 concentration is the reason for
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Results
24
FIGURE 4.4: Proposed model of how the heterologous cytochrome p450 CYP76AD1 is de-
graded and thereby decrease betaxanthin production. Model based on data from genome-
wide CRI-SPA screenings. 1. The nascent tail-anchored (anchor in C-terminal) protein Ubc6
is immediately after translation interacting with Get4 and Get5 which are interacting with
the ribosome. Get4/5 fascilitates the construction of complex consisting of Ubc6 and Get3
which masks the hydrophobic anchor. 2. The Get3-Ubc6 complex is able to freely diffuse in
the cytosol, where it interactis with Get1 and Get2 positioned in the ER membrane. Get1 and
Get2 fascilitates insertion of the C-terminal anchor of Ubc6 into the ER membrane. 3. In the
ER membrane Ubc6 acts in concert with the ubiquitin ligase and translocatase Ssm4, where
Ubc6 ligate the first ubiquitin moiety to CYP76AD1. Hereafter Ubc7, which is anchored to
the membrane through the mediator protein Cue1, elongates the ubiquitin chain. 4. after re-
peated ubiquination of CYP76AD1 the enzyme is translocated out of the ER membrane and
send for degradation in the proteasome.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Results
25
increased betaxanthin levels.
Rpn4 is a transcription factor activating transcription of most proteasome genes in
yeast. Rpn4 concentration is known to increase during folding stress, resulting in degra-
dation of the accumulated misfolded proteins [53]. Additionally folding stress induces
a wealth of mechanisms, including chaperone production and under prolonged stress
apoptosis [54]. Many genes, including RPN4, which responds to folding stress are ac-
tivated by a master stress transcription factor Hsr1 [53]. The fact that deletion of Rpn4
increases production of betaxanthin, indicates that our inserted heterologous proteins ac-
cumulate unfolded, and therefore the cell trancribes increasing amount of RPN4 which
then initiates ERAD to degrade the misfolded proteins. RPN4 might therefore be a ben-
eficial deletion, as it removes the option of degrading the heterologous enzymes under
folding stress, and instead increases chaperones and other folding stress relievers, which
leaves more time for achieving correct folding. This analysis is an example of how CRI-
SPA data can give a systematic understanding of cellular mechanisms affecting a heterol-
ogous pathway.
4.3
Analysis of markerless pathway insertion
Another intriguing question asked was, that since the transfer of the gene cassette is me-
diated by CRISPR-Cas9, it might not be necessary to have a genetic marker like NatMX
incorporated into the inserted cassette. The remarkable thing about CRISPR-Cas9 sys-
tems is it’s high efficiency in recruiting the HR machinery in yeast, and therefore is able
to do markerless transformations with over 95% efficiency [30]. To validate if markerless
CRI-SPA screens could be successful, I performed two CRI-SPA screens with the usual
protocol (section 2.4), but in step 4, where strains with remaining donor chromosomes
are counter selected, the gRNA plasmid is maintained. In the last step (step 5) cells are
normally grown with a marker selecting for the insert, for example YPD agar with G418
and NTC antibiotics. Instead of NTC antibiotic gRNA plasmid was maintained in this
last step, relying on Cas-9 to maintain the competence. Although the Cas-9 activity re-
quires donor chromosomes, which are counter-selected on ura3 medium in step 4, so it is
doubtful if the gRNA plasmid makes any difference on the last plate (step 5).
Comparing the colony size and intensity on the last step in the two parallel experi-
ments (figure 4.5, showed that there is a correlation coefficient between markerless and
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4. Results
26
FIGURE 4.5: Correlation plot of yellow intensity and size measurements of all viable gene
deletions between two CRI-SPA screening experiments. One experiment with antibiotic se-
lection for the inserted betaxanthin cassette, and one solely relying on markerless CRISPR-
Cas9 mediated insertion.
antibiotic selection of 0.85 for area and 0.87 for intensity. The pearson correlation coef-
ficient for colony area is as high as expected for two replicates of one plate within same
batch, where three copies of plates with different shuffles had an average correlation of
0.83 in previous experiments.
For yellow intensity previous experiment showed, that replicates on same media
within same batch had an average correlation of 0.93. With this in mind, even though
0.87 is considered highly linear correlated, it is a bit less than expected for two copies
within the same batch. Inspecting the correlation plot (figure 4.5 for yellow intensity, it
is seen that there is slightly less signal from cells grown without an antibiotic marker
than expected assuming linear correlation. Especially for the highly yellow phenotypes.
Less signal could be a result of the mix of cells on non-selective media slightly favors
cells that has not been transformed successfully, or has lost the competence as it is not
vital, resulting in a mix of genotypes, where some harbours the insert and some don’t.
Although this is considered not to change the overall conclusions of the experiments, and
it is therefore considered that CRI-SPA markerless is as powerful as the original protocol.
Though markerless insertion of two or more gene elements with CRI-SPA is not shown to
work as well. Insertion of three markerless cassettes with CRISPR-Cas9 has in traditional
yeast transformation shown to have an efficiency of 60-70% [30].
The fact that a genome wide CRI-SPA screen can be performed markerless, opens the
door to utilize higher order CRISPR multiplexing inserting multiple pathways, deletions,
over-expression and potentially point mutations, in a single screen.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Results
27
4.4
Genetic interactions in betaxanthin production
The next part of this project aims to uncover genetic interactions affecting betaxanthin
production and fitness in a double deletion CRI-SPA screen. The goal is to find unex-
pectedly yellow phenotypes which are not predicted from the strains’ individual yellow
intensities (synergistic effects) based on a multiplicative model. The multiplicative model
has been implemented for interactions affecting growth fitness (size) [16, 17, 21], which
is a very general measure that is affected by hundreds of cellular functions. I propose
to use the multiplicative model to predict yellow intensity, a more niche cellular process
presumably only involving a small subset of the cell metabolism. Recall the multiplicata-
tive model from equation 2.1, but here we use intensity the metric instead of fitness:
Iab = IaIb + ϵI
ab
(4.1)
Where ϵI
ab is the intensity based interaction score, Iab is the double deletion strains’
intensity and IaIb are single deletion intensities.
The multiplicative model requires really good estimates of single mutant intensities,
preferably from several repeated baseline screens (only single deletions) of the donor
strain. In this case the single mutant intensities are measured from three repeated CRI-
SPA screens of strain Sc_BTX.002. The double mutant fitness are measured from a single
screen, as several screens per knockout background would dramatically increase amount
of work, when increasing number of genes to test for synergistic effects. It is therefore
hoped that a single screen per knockout background screen provides enough statistical
power, to select a handful of candidates to further analyse for synergistic effects.
4.4.1
CRI-SPA screen with YER084W∆background
To show an example of how CRI-SPA can be used to study the interaction of several gene
deletions, I did a CRI-SPA screen that introduced the betaxanthin pathway into the yeast
deletion library. In addition to the pathway, deletion of the gene YER084W was intro-
duced with the aim of finding synergistic effects (positive interactions) for betaxanthin
production. YER084W was chosen as it has near wild type fitness (0.88 ± 0.11 relative
to WT) and an enriched yellow intensity (1.18 ± 0.043) based on three CRI-SPA screens.
Further, YER084W is a gene of unknown function, which is known to be present as both
mRNA and protein in the cell [55]. In a previous experiment a subset of gene hits were
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Results
28
FIGURE 4.6: A. agar plate with 384 deletion mutants. Each gene deletion in 4x4 formation.
Every second row has a second deletion of the gene YER084W (top row in 4x4). Whiskers
showing intensity measurements for every row. YER084W deletion mutant showing no be-
taxanthin intensity in the YER084W∆library strain, which is expected due to the insertion
site is sequestered by the KanMX marker. B. Straked colonies from single and double dele-
tion CRI-SPA screen.
manually knocked-out for confirmation of CRI-SPA. The deletion of YER084W showed
strong color intensity and was confirmed both by flow cytometry and growth experiment
in liquid medium (data not shown). Intrigued by why deletion of this 128 a.a. protein
with unknown function caused a significantly increased yellow phenotype, a CRI-SPA
screen with YER084W∆donor strain Sc_ML.002 was performed. Because colonies from
different screens are hard to compare (discussed in detail later), i first made two plates
with replicates placed next to each other in a 4x4 formation. Every second row was with
YER084W∆(from top) background and WT background.
The fact that the top row in 4 by 4 replicates consistently showed a higher yellow
intensity (figure 4.6 A) whiskers), indicated that the CRI-SPA screen with a YER084W∆
background worked as expected. Also the betaxanthin construct is not able to integrate
in the YER084W∆library strain, which has a KanMX marker in the ORF. These two fac-
tors give a strong indication that the experiment was successful. When strains from the
double deletion screen was streaked next to each other (B in figure 4.6). A purely quali-
tative inspection of the yellowness of single and double deletions indicate that we have
synergistic effects on yellow intensity, at least to some extend. A good quantitative mea-
sure for the yellow intensity of double deletions, compared to single deletions, require
comparison of different screens. A strategy to quantify the interaction of genes, which
result improved betaxanthin production is presented in next paragraph.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Results
29
4.4.2
Comparing intensity and fitness measurements across different screens
To compare intensity and fitness measurements from different screens, done on different
days with possibly weeks or months in between, has some challenges. Every batch will
have reached a different size and yellow intensity, even though cells are grown for exactly
24 hours in every batch. This batch signature can be caused by many factors. Size of
colonies on previous plates slightly affect the number of cells transferred resulting in a
higher starting biomass, slight differences in media made by different people, incubator
temperature control, humidity etc. For intensity measurements a big contributor to batch
effects is the camera setup (PhenoBooth, see methods), which can cause large differences
in intensity, even with the exact same settings between days. These batch effects mean
that we can essentially only compare raw colony size and intensity measurements with
other colonies within the same screen.
To solve the problem of batch effects i propose a batch correction system based on
two assumptions. Firstly, that growth fitness and yellow intensity are increasing linearly
within every batch, for example if colonies on average are 20% bigger in a replicated
screen, all colonies will be 20% bigger independent of fitness. The second assumption is
that the median fitness and intensity are good estimates of donor strain fitness and inten-
sity, as it is expected that over half of viable deletions, don’t significantly impact colony
size or betaxanthin production. With these assumptions every screen can be normalized,
so that metrics are relative to background, by dividing with the median of all colonies
in the screen. The background intensity or fitness can then be normalized according to
single mutant fitness estimate from baseline screens. In short, in double deletion screens
when normalizing to median we are able to measure Iab
Ia which we then multiply by Ia
(relative to WT) estimated from single deletion screens. Ultimately we have a measure
for double mutant intensity Iab relative to wild type.
After batch correction, we apply the multiplicative model in equation 4.1, and set
up a null hypothesis, that double mutant intensity minus the product of single deletion
intensities equals zero. H0 : Iab −IaIb = 0 or ϵI = 0. Deviations from this assumption is
according to the model a genetic interaction. A threshold of
4.4.3
Quantitative analysis of interactions in YER084W∆strain
To show an example of the approach outlined in previous paragraph the data from dou-
ble deletion screen of Sc_ML.002 with YER084W∆background, was used to estimate
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Results
30
FIGURE 4.7: Batch correction shown for four CRI-SPA screens. Three replicates of single dele-
tion screens (WT background) and one screen of double deletion (YER084W∆background).
Batch correction normalizing to screen median, and thereafter double deletion screen nor-
malized according to single mutant fitness of YER084W deletion.
positive and negatively interacting genes.
General inspection of Yellow intensity vs fitness of YER084W∆screen and WT back-
ground screen (A and B in figure 4.8). Overall the pattern of having a large cluster in the
middle, showing wildtype or ’background’ yellow intensity, and a cluster of significantly
more yellow and less fit phenotypes are present in both screens. Also the Ssm4 ubiqui-
tinating complex are showing a background fitness and high yellow intensity. Although
the group of highly yellow deletions (green in figure 4.8), is located closer to the main
group that show background intensity and fitness. This indicates that when introducing
two deletions that individually result in a very yellow phenotype, the product of the two
deletions seems to hit the same ’plateau’ as the most yellow single deletions. To further
analyse this effect of negatively interactions in highly yellow deletions, the interaction
score is calculated.
As described in previous paragraph, every gene was tested for interaction score ϵI
with YER084W, with the null hypothesis that ϵI equals zero. A students t-test was used
to compare the four replicate colonies, normalized to intensity and fitness relative to wild
type in the interaction screen, with the single mutant intensity of the 16 replicate colonies
from three single mutant screens. The genes that showed an ϵI significantly different
from zero, and a threshold value of |ϵI| that is larger than 0.08, where hypothesized to
be a significant interaction. The threshold value of 0.08 was chosen, as it is used in SGA
screens as a cutoff for genetic interactions measured from fitness [20]. After applying
these thresholds, hits that are over 10% more yellow than background in the YER084W∆
screen and are positive interactions, are candidates to screen for synergistic effects (black
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Results
31
FIGURE 4.8: A. Phenotypic profile from CRI-SPA screen with YER084W double deletion
background. Yellow intensity and size measurements are normalized relative to WT and
can be compared to B. Green points are negative interactions that show a significantly yel-
low phenotype in YER084W∆screen. Red are known negative interactions from large SGA
study [17]. Purple are the genes involved in Ssm4 mediated polyubiquination, SSM4, UBC7,
and CUE1 discussed in paragraph 4.2.1. Black are proposed positive genetic interactions
based on intensity, which additionally show a surprisingly high intensity in combination
with YER084W. B is yellow intensity and size from CRI-SPA screen with no deletions in
donor strain for comparison. C. Vulacano plot showing intensity based genetic interaction
score and the p-value of the null hypothesis that interaction is zero. Gene deletions with an
interaction score greater than 0.08 and a p-value less than 0.05 are considered hits. D. vulcano
plot of fitness based interaction scores.
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4. Results
32
in figure 4.8. In short, we are interested in gene deletions that in combination with dele-
tion of YER084W has a surprisingly yellow phenotype, while also being more yellow
than background. The three candidates found are RPS8A, LSM7, GRR1, which are a ribo-
some constituent, a cytoplasmic protein involved in mRNA decay, and a component of an
SCF ubiquitin-ligase complex respectively. Though one should be extremely careful with
putting a lot of emphasis on these three hits, as for example LSM7 and GRR1 are barely
within thresholds, and that we for a significance level of 0.05 are accepting that we on 5%
of occasions reject a true null hypothesis. Here we do ca. 4800 tests and therefore expect
around 240 false positives of which is assumes to be evenly distributed between positive
and negative interactions. For intensity we have 203 hits for positve interactions, and
we should therefore be really careful with assuming they are not false positives. These
interaction screens should be seen as a way of selecting candidates for further analysis.
For example small scale fermentations, to make a deeper analysis of synergistic effects.
Looking at hits that are negative interactions (green in figure 4.8), it is shown that
negative interactions are much more predominant than positive. It is clear when look-
ing at figure 4.8.A, that almost all genes in the cluster of high yellow intensity deletions,
negatively interacting, meaning they are less yellow that expected from a multiplicative
model. In other words, combination of two yellow genes are often surprisingly less yel-
low than the product of it’s single deletions. This is a very important result, and an
indication of how CRI-SPA data should be interpreted, and that multiplicative effects of
high betaxanthin producers should not be expected. After a certain yellow intensity of
approx 1.5 times WT intensity, we see a plateau where increase in titer might be restricted
by many cellular processes being bottlenecks. The observation of a maximum plateau is
also indicated from the two plates, where double and single deletions were grown to-
gether (see supplementary figure B.2.
Comparing gene deletions that are known to negatively interact with YER084W dele-
tion (red in figure 4.8 acts like a good positive control, that the majority of these known in-
teractions are showing a petite phonotype, and it seems that a large group of other genes
are in that cluster as well, indicating that in our conditions, more interactions might be
present. In figure 4.8.D we see that negative interactions from the reference dataset [17]
in red, where around half is confirmed to be fitness based negative interactions.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Results
33
4.4.4
Non-linear batch effect correction
Non-linear batch effects has been reported to be one of the biggest systematic effects, af-
fecting detection of true positives in large scale genetic interaction experiments [20]. In
the SGA screens by the Boone lab [17] batch corrections are done by singular value de-
composition (SVD) [56], a method similar to the more well known principal component
analysis (PCA). Successful implementation of SVD to SGA data requires large amount of
data across many screens [20], and i therefore did not try to implement it for CRI-SPA.
The batch effects seen across CRI-SPA screens has many similarities with microarray
transcriptomics data, where plates will also have plate effects, spatial effects and distinct
batch effects. A method that is often used to normalize batch effects in microarrays is
to ’force’ distributions into the same shape using quantile normalizaition, which fixes
the number of colonies in every 5% quantile [57]. Quantile normalization relies on the
assumption that observed changes in the empirical distribution of samples are due to
unwanted variability. One should be extremely careful of assuming this about CRI-SPA
data from different strains. I tried to implement a version of quantile smoothing called
qsmooth [58] which takes into account differences between different strains. Qsmooth
can also be paired with an empirical bayes correction named ComBat, which can handle
non-linear batch effects and requires few batches (<25) [59]. I attempted to implement
ComBat and qsmooth normalisations to CRI-SPA data for the three batches of Sc_BTX.002
together with one batch of Sc_ML.002, using the Bioconductor package in R. Although
the batch corrected data showed significant reduced linear correlation between all com-
binations of replicate screens, indicating that important biological insight was lost.
In general statistical methods for correcting batch effects will be a tradeoff, where a
lot of variability due to technical batch effects will be corrected, but will inevitably lead
to mistakenly remove biological important variation disguised as batch effects. I would
therefore not recommend implementing batch effect correction, for smaller amount of
screens, but if large scale interaction screens of intensity and fitness for hundreds of genes
with CRI-SPA, more work should be put in to solve it.
==PAGE:40==
34
Discussion
The aim of this study was to identify novel knockout targets for improved betaxanthin
production, which served as a sensor for the industrially relevant compound L-DOPA.
A high producing L-DOPA cell factory could provide a powerful platform for manu-
facturing of valuable downstream benzylisoquinoline alkaloids like opioids, and other
plant secondary metabolites [52]. The use of newly developed high throughput screening
method CRI-SPA showed bottlenecks in genes involved with degradation of ER bound
proteins, and competition with central carbon matabolism.
5.1
Betaxanthin is a bouqet of compounds
Working with betaxanthin as a sensor has some challenges, since betaxanthins are a
bouqet of compounds, with the possibility of many different amino acids bound to beta-
lamic acid (section 2.2.1). In this study gene deletions resulting in high yellow intensity,
are assumed to be a result of high betaxanthin concentration. What is not considered
and might be a significant factor, is that different amino acids could potentially produce
slightly different colours. It could be further analysed if differences in the availability
of different amino acids produce a higher signal, but without corresponding to a higher
L-DOPA concentration.
5.2
Limitations of the multiplicative model
A significant result of this project is, that the majority of gene deletions resulting in a
significantly higher yellow intensity, does not show direct multiplicative effect with a
second beneficial deletion, when analysed with CRI-SPA. The reason for this finding can
either be a result of the method only being able to measure a certain level, or a biologi-
cal explanation that bottlenecks in betaxanthin production is reached. The experimental
factors could be, that a maximum yellow intensity can is reached within the protocol of
CRI-SPA, resulting in double deletions of high intensity reaching the maximum faster,
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5. Discussion
35
and the increase in intensity of wild-type level of yellow intensity catch up quicker in
double deletion screen. Another possibility is that our intensity model is not linear with
concentration when reaching higher intensities. An experiment that could be made to
further elucidate this, would be to take pictures in short time intervals over the first 24
hours and measure yellow intensity development.
The second possibility for double deletions being less yellow than expected, could
be a biological artefact, when reaching high amount of betaxanthin and L-DOPA. When
concentrations rise to a certain level, other bottlenecks start to hinder flux, for example
toxicity of L-DOPA or its side products dopaquinone [60]. Bottlenecks in the availability
of ER membrane bound CYP76AD1 could also be a significant limitation, resulting in a
local maximum of betaxanthin production.
When designing cell factories it is therefore important to consider a mix of many
strategies, since multiplicative effects of many deletions should not naively be assumed.
5.3
Endoplasmatic reticulum expansion in cytochrome p450 op-
timization
Recent trends in optimization of p450 function in yeast has identified ER expansion as
an efficient strategy to increase flux [61]. Overexpression of genes related to the ER,
ICE2 and ICE2 and INO2 has shown positive result in increasing p450 activity [62, 63].
Interestingly ICE2 and INO2 deletions in CRI-SPA screens of Sc_BTX.002 across three
batches show reduced yellow intensity of 0.90 ± 0.07 and 0.79 ± 0.074 relative to WT
intensity respectively. The deletion of PAH1 has also been shown to increase the size of
ER membranes [64]. This demonstrates that the yeast cell has to be completely remodeled
to gain powerful yeast platforms with high p450 activity, which require unconventional
thinking of optimization targets.
5.4
Other genome-wide screening platforms
Another way to screen for beneficial deletions, is using a pooled version of the yeast dele-
tion library, and with classical transformation techniques transform a biosynthetic path-
way into the whole library. This approach has been used to optimize betaxanthin pro-
duction, where the most yellow fluorescent cells are picked with Fluorescence-activated
Cell Sorting (FACS) and identified with DNA sequencing. The study [65] identified the
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5. Discussion
36
genes HMX1 and YOR1 as beneficial deletions, both of which were not significant hits in
CRI-SPA screens of Sc_HO.002.
The work of Jiang et al [52] used a cDNA genetic library from the plant Arabidopsis
with the goal of introducing genes that could increase betaxanthin production. Top yel-
low intensety cells, where selected and analysed by sequencing and yellow intensity was
increased by 2.4 fold.
These screening methods compared to a CRI-SPA screen, don’t have the advantage
of having mutants on an ordered array, where systematic understanding of the whole
genome is possible. Also CRI-SPA has the advantage of giving a fitness measure. The fit-
ness measure from growth on solid agar, should not be considered a direct measure of liq-
uid growth rate in an industrial setting. A dataset of liquid growth rate of the yeast dele-
tion library [66] had a pearson correlation of 0.44 with CRI-SPA data from Sc_BTX.002.
Fitness measurements from CRI-SPA can therefore be an indication of liquid growth rate.
5.4.1
The use of CRI-SPA in combination with rational strategies
In general optimization of a yeast cell factory can include many gene targets. Knocking
out of competing pathways to redirect flux, regulating central carbon metabolism to bal-
ance precursor concentration, transporter engineering, compartmentalization etc. [33].
Although rationally designing these gene targets for deletion or regulation, can be a hit or
miss process, where direct genotype to phenotype predictions are hard to predict due to
complex regulation or genetic interactions. Genome-wide screenings is therefore a pow-
erful tool to find engineering targets, that would not be found by rational approaches.
A combination of rational approaches and screening techniques could be powerful in
designing future cell factories.
5.5
Future prospects
The missing link in this project, is that I don’t have a good measure for how yellow
intensity extracted from the calorimetric image analysis relate to true concentration of
betaxanthin and L-DOPA. Further work should be put in, to analyse the hits identified
in this project. For example deletion of genes related to Ssm4 mediated protein degra-
dation could be grown in liquid culture, and compared to wild type production to get a
quantitative measure of the increase in concentration of L-DOPA.
==PAGE:43==
37
Conclusion
The aim of this study was to identify novel knockout targets for improved betaxanthin
production, which served as a sensor for the industrial relevant compound L-DOPA. The
use of newly developed high throughput screening method CRI-SPA showed that be-
taxanthin production could be increased by deleting genes involved with degradation
of endoplasmatic reticulum bound proteins through the Ssm4 complex. Therefore Ssm4
mediated degradation is suspected to degrade CYP76A1 responsible for converting tyro-
sine to L-DOPA. Deletion of genes in central carbon metabolism showed increased flux
towards betaxanthin production, likely because it is competing for precursors.
CRI-SPA was demonstrated in analyzing double deletions. Results showed that direct
multiplicative effects of high producers should not be expected for betaxanthin produc-
tion, as local maximum production rates are reached.
This study demonstrated that genome-wide CRI-SPA screening can identify unknown
mechanisms, that give a systematic understanding of what is limiting flux in production
of plant secondary metabolites. CRI-SPA can be a valuable tool to find unconventional
engineering targets, that would not have been found by a rational approach.
==PAGE:44==
38
Bibliography
[1]
Huan He et al. “Concise total synthesis of opioids”. In: Organic Chemistry Frontiers
9.9 (2022), pp. 2322–2327.
[2]
Stephanie Galanie et al. “Complete biosynthesis of opioids in yeast”. In: Science
349.6252 (2015), pp. 1095–1100.
[3]
Martin Kavšˇcek et al. “Yeast as a cell factory: current state and perspectives”. In:
Microbial cell factories 14.1 (2015), pp. 1–10.
[4]
Elizabeth A Winzeler et al. “Functional characterization of the S. cerevisiae genome
by gene deletion and parallel analysis”. In: science 285.5429 (1999), pp. 901–906.
[5]
Grace Marie Jones et al. “A systematic library for comprehensive overexpression
screens in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Nature methods 5.3 (2008), pp. 239–241.
[6]
André Goffeau et al. “Life with 6000 genes”. In: Science 274.5287 (1996), pp. 546–
567.
[7]
Amy Hin Yan Tong et al. “Global mapping of the yeast genetic interaction net-
work”. In: science 303.5659 (2004), pp. 808–813.
[8]
Oliver Kayser and Nils Averesch. Technische Biochemie: Die Biochemie und industrielle
Nutzung von Naturstoffen. Springer-Verlag, 2015.
[9]
Gerhard H Braus. “Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: a model system for the regulation of a eukaryotic biosynthetic path-
way”. In: Microbiological reviews 55.3 (1991), pp. 349–370.
[10]
MAH Luttik et al. “Alleviation of feedback inhibition in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis: quantification of metabolic impact”. In: Metabolic
engineering 10.3-4 (2008), pp. 141–153.
[11]
Songwei Wang et al. “4-Hydroxybenzoic acid—a versatile platform intermediate
for value-added compounds”. In: Applied microbiology and biotechnology 102.8 (2018),
pp. 3561–3571.
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
39
[12]
William C DeLoache et al. “An enzyme-coupled biosensor enables (S)-reticuline
production in yeast from glucose”. In: Nature chemical biology 11.7 (2015), pp. 465–
471.
[13]
Lauren Narcross et al. “Microbial factories for the production of benzylisoquinoline
alkaloids”. In: Trends in biotechnology 34.3 (2016), pp. 228–241.
[14]
Gregory J Hatlestad et al. “The beet R locus encodes a new cytochrome P450 re-
quired for red betalain production”. In: Nature genetics 44.7 (2012), pp. 816–820.
[15]
Nobuhiro Sasaki et al. “Detection of DOPA 4, 5-dioxygenase (DOD) activity using
recombinant protein prepared from Escherichia coli cells harboring cDNA encod-
ing DOD from Mirabilis jalapa”. In: Plant and cell physiology 50.5 (2009), pp. 1012–
1016.
[16]
AHY Tong and C Boone. “Synthetic genetic array analysis in Saccharomyces cere-
visiae In: Xiao W, editor. Yeast Protocol”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology: Humana
Press (2006), pp. 171–91.
[17]
Michael Costanzo et al. “A global genetic interaction network maps a wiring dia-
gram of cellular function”. In: Science 353.6306 (2016), aaf1420.
[18]
Ramamurthy Mani et al. “Defining genetic interaction”. In: Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences 105.9 (2008), pp. 3461–3466.
[19]
Robert P St Onge et al. “Systematic pathway analysis using high-resolution fitness
profiling of combinatorial gene deletions”. In: Nature genetics 39.2 (2007), pp. 199–
206.
[20]
Anastasia Baryshnikova et al. “Quantitative analysis of fitness and genetic interac-
tions in yeast on a genome scale”. In: Nature methods 7.12 (2010), pp. 1017–1024.
[21]
Elena Kuzmin et al. “Systematic analysis of complex genetic interactions”. In: Sci-
ence 360.6386 (2018), eaao1729.
[22]
Amy Hin Yan Tong et al. “Systematic genetic analysis with ordered arrays of yeast
deletion mutants”. In: Science 294.5550 (2001), pp. 2364–2368.
[23]
Robert JD Reid et al. “Selective ploidy ablation, a high-throughput plasmid transfer
protocol, identifies new genes affecting topoisomerase I–induced DNA damage”.
In: Genome research 21.3 (2011), pp. 477–486.
[24]
Martin Jinek et al. “A programmable dual-RNA–guided DNA endonuclease in
adaptive bacterial immunity”. In: science 337.6096 (2012), pp. 816–821.
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
40
[25]
James E DiCarlo et al. “Genome engineering in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using
CRISPR-Cas systems”. In: Nucleic acids research 41.7 (2013), pp. 4336–4343.
[26]
Helén Olsson. “Development of CRI-SPA, amating-based, CRISPR-Cas9 assisted
method for high-throughput yeast strain construction, and its applications in yeast
cell factory research”. In: PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark (2020).
[27]
Andreas Untergasser et al. “Primer3—new capabilities and interfaces”. In: Nucleic
acids research 40.15 (2012), e115–e115.
[28]
Hussam H Nour-Eldin et al. “Advancing uracil-excision based cloning towards an
ideal technique for cloning PCR fragments”. In: Nucleic acids research 34.18 (2006),
e122–e122.
[29]
John G Doench et al. “Optimized sgRNA design to maximize activity and minimize
off-target effects of CRISPR-Cas9”. In: Nature biotechnology 34.2 (2016), pp. 184–191.
[30]
Mathew M Jessop-Fabre et al. “EasyClone-MarkerFree: A vector toolkit for marker-
less integration of genes into Saccharomyces cerevisiae via CRISPR-Cas9”. In: Biotech-
nology journal 11.8 (2016), pp. 1110–1117.
[31]
Stephan Kamrad et al. “Pyphe, a python toolbox for assessing microbial growth
and cell viability in high-throughput colony screens”. In: Elife 9 (2020), e55160.
[32]
Huaiyu Mi et al. “PANTHER version 16: a revised family classification, tree-based
classification tool, enhancer regions and extensive API”. In: Nucleic acids research
49.D1 (2021), pp. D394–D403.
[33]
Anne Mathilde Davy, Helene Faustrup Kildegaard, and Mikael Rørdam Andersen.
“Cell factory engineering”. In: Cell systems 4.3 (2017), pp. 262–275.
[34]
Matej Usaj et al. “TheCellMap. org: a web-accessible database for visualizing and
mining the global yeast genetic interaction network”. In: G3: Genes, genomes, genet-
ics 7.5 (2017), pp. 1539–1549.
[35]
Karen R Christie, Eurie L Hong, and J Michael Cherry. “Functional annotations for
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome: the knowns and the known unknowns”. In:
Trends in microbiology 17.7 (2009), pp. 286–294.
[36]
Yinhe Mao and Changbin Chen. “The hap complex in yeasts: structure, assembly
mode, and gene regulation”. In: Frontiers in microbiology 10 (2019), p. 1645.
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
41
[37]
S Buschlen et al. “The S. cerevisiae HAP complex, a key regulator of mitochondrial
function, coordinates nuclear and mitochondrial gene expression”. In: Comparative
and functional genomics 4.1 (2003), pp. 37–46.
[38]
Makoto Kawamukai. “Biosynthesis and bioproduction of coenzyme Q10 by yeasts
and other organisms”. In: Biotechnology and applied biochemistry 53.4 (2009), pp. 217–
226.
[39]
Else-Jasmijn Hassing et al. “Connecting central carbon and aromatic amino acid
metabolisms to improve de novo 2-phenylethanol production in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae”. In: Metabolic engineering 56 (2019), pp. 165–180.
[40]
Marina Vietri, Maja Radulovic, and Harald Stenmark. “The many functions of ES-
CRTs”. In: Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 21.1 (2020), pp. 25–42.
[41]
Pedro Carvalho, Veit Goder, and Tom A Rapoport. “Distinct ubiquitin-ligase com-
plexes define convergent pathways for the degradation of ER proteins”. In: Cell
126.2 (2006), pp. 361–373.
[42]
Lihong Jiang et al. “Improved Functional Expression of Cytochrome P450s in Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae Through Screening a cDNA Library From Arabidopsis thaliana”.
In: Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology (2021), p. 1286.
[43]
Agnieszka Marek and Ryszard Korona. “Restricted pleiotropy facilitates mutational
erosion of major life-history traits”. In: Evolution 67.11 (2013), pp. 3077–3086.
[44]
Claudia C Schmidt, Vedran Vasic, and Alexander Stein. “Doa10 is a membrane
protein retrotranslocase in ER-associated protein degradation”. In: Elife 9 (2020),
e56945.
[45]
Min Deng and Mark Hochstrasser. “Spatially regulated ubiquitin ligation by an
ER/nuclear membrane ligase”. In: Nature 443.7113 (2006), pp. 827–831.
[46]
Gregor Habeck et al. “The yeast ERAD-C ubiquitin ligase Doa10 recognizes an in-
tramembrane degron”. In: Journal of Cell Biology 209.2 (2015), pp. 261–273.
[47]
Verena Dederer et al. “Cooperation of mitochondrial and ER factors in quality con-
trol of tail-anchored proteins”. In: Elife 8 (2019).
[48]
Mingxiang Liao et al. “Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of cytochrome
P450 CYP3A4 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: further characterization of cellular par-
ticipants and structural determinants”. In: Molecular pharmacology 69.6 (2006), pp. 1897–
1904.
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
42
[49]
Nica Borgese and Elisa Fasana. “Targeting pathways of C-tail-anchored proteins”.
In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes 1808.3 (2011), pp. 937–946.
[50]
Ying Zhang et al. “Ribosome-bound Get4/5 facilitates the capture of tail-anchored
proteins by Sgt2 in yeast”. In: Nature communications 12.1 (2021), pp. 1–17.
[51]
Mashun Onishi et al. “The ER membrane insertase Get1/2 is required for efficient
mitophagy in yeast”. In: Biochemical and biophysical research communications 503.1
(2018), pp. 14–20.
[52]
Lihong Jiang et al. “Improved Functional Expression of Cytochrome P450s in Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae Through Screening a cDNA Library From Arabidopsis thaliana”.
In: Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology 9 (2021), p. 764851.
[53]
Jeremy J Work and Onn Brandman. “Adaptability of the ubiquitin-proteasome sys-
tem to proteolytic and folding stressors”. In: Journal of Cell Biology 220.3 (2021).
[54]
Haoxi Wu, Benjamin SH Ng, and Guillaume Thibault. “Endoplasmic reticulum
stress response in yeast and humans”. In: Bioscience reports 34.4 (2014).
[55]
Sina Ghaemmaghami et al. “Global analysis of protein expression in yeast”. In:
Nature 425.6959 (2003), pp. 737–741.
[56]
Orly Alter, Patrick O Brown, and David Botstein. “Singular value decomposition
for genome-wide expression data processing and modeling”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 97.18 (2000), pp. 10101–10106.
[57]
Yaxing Zhao, Limsoon Wong, and Wilson Wen Bin Goh. “How to do quantile nor-
malization correctly for gene expression data analyses”. In: Scientific reports 10.1
(2020), pp. 1–11.
[58]
Stephanie C Hicks et al. “Smooth quantile normalization”. In: Biostatistics 19.2 (2018),
pp. 185–198.
[59]
W Evan Johnson, Cheng Li, and Ariel Rabinovic. “Adjusting batch effects in mi-
croarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods”. In: Biostatistics 8.1 (2007),
pp. 118–127.
[60]
Takashi Nakatsuka et al. “Genetic engineering of yellow betalain pigments beyond
the species barrier”. In: Scientific reports 3.1 (2013), pp. 1–7.
[61]
Lihong Jiang et al. “Functional expression of eukaryotic cytochrome P450s in yeast”.
In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering 118.3 (2021), pp. 1050–1065.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
43
[62]
Anita Emmerstorfer et al. “Over-expression of ICE2 stabilizes cytochrome P450 re-
ductase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Pichia pastoris”. In: Biotechnology Journal
10.4 (2015), pp. 623–635.
[63]
Philipp Arendt et al. “An endoplasmic reticulum-engineered yeast platform for
overproduction of triterpenoids”. In: Metabolic engineering 40 (2017), pp. 165–175.
[64]
Jae-Eung Kim et al. “Tailoring the Saccharomyces cerevisiae endoplasmic reticulum
for functional assembly of terpene synthesis pathway”. In: Metabolic engineering 56
(2019), pp. 50–59.
[65]
Judy Savitskaya et al. “Iterative screening methodology enables isolation of strains
with improved properties for a FACS-based screen and increased L-DOPA produc-
tion”. In: Scientific reports 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–10.
[66]
Jonas Warringer et al. “High-resolution yeast phenomics resolves different phys-
iological features in the saline response”. In: Proceedings of the national academy of
sciences 100.26 (2003), pp. 15724–15729.
==PAGE:50==
44
Appendix A: Primers
TABLE A.1
Primer name
Sequence
target
gRNA oligos
MLJ09
AGATCCTGTGGGAAAATCCGGTTTTAGAGCT
pCML1
MLJ10
CGGATTTTCCCACAGGATCTGATCATTTAT
pCML1
MLJ11
GAGTGGTGGTGCCCACAACGTTTTAGAGCT
pCML2
MLJ12
CGTTGTGGGCACCACCACTCGATCATTTAT
pCML2
MLJ13
TCACACCCGCTGTATCAAAGGTTTTAGAGCT
pCML3
MLJ14
CTTTGATACAGCGGGTGTGAGATCATTTAT
pCML3
MLJ15
TAGGTGATAACATCAGAACCGTTTTAGAGCT
pCML_4
MLJ16
GGTTCTGATGTTATCACCTAGATCATTTAT
pCML_4
HOP60
GTTTTAGAGCUAGAAATAGCAAG
pHO29
HOP61
GATCATTTAUCTTTCACTGC
pHO29
Genetic inserts
MLJ58
CACTGCATTATCCTTCATTTTCGTTAGTGCGCATCCTCGATCCCAATACAACAGATCACG
Klura3
MLJ59
TTCAATAGAAAACATTTAGTAAAGCTGGTAACCGAAGCTCGTTTTATTTAGGTTCTATCG
Kl.ura3
MLJ34
CGTGCGAuGGTCTTTGCAGCGCTAG
YER084W up
MLJ35
AAGAGGGCuTGTTTGTAGCATCAGCAACG
YER084W up
MLJ36
AGCCCTCTuATTAAGTCCTCAGCGAGCT
betaxanthin construct
MLJ37
AGCCTGTGuCACTAGTGGATCTGATATCACC
betaxanthin construct
MLJ38
ACACAGGCuTAACTCAGATTTTCAAGAAACAGAATA
YER084W dw
MLJ39
CACGCGAuCTGATAAGAAAGAAGAAGACTATTAATTAA
YER084W dw
Checking primers
MLJ22
CAGCGCTAGGAGCGTCTAAA
Betaxanthin insertion
MLJ23
TGGAAAGAAGAGCACGACTG
Betaxanthin insertion
MLJ24
TGGGTACCACTCTTGACGAC
Betaxanthin insertion
MLJ20
TCCCCCTATCGAAACCCAAC
Checking Kl.URA3 insert
MLJ21
ACAAAGTGGAGAAGCATCCA
Checking Kl.URA3 insert
HOP76
GATGGCTGTGTAGAAGTACTCG
checking gRNA spacer insert
Sequencing primers
CCM.S002
CAGCTGACGCGATCTTCG
betaxanthin construct
CCM.S012
GAGTACGAGACGACCACG
betaxanthin construct
CCM.S022
ATATTTAAGGGCGCCTGTC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S001
CAGTATGGGAAGTCATCGACGT
betaxanthin construct
PC.S002
CGGGTAATTAACGACACCC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S003
TGGAGAAGCCAAGAACAACC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S004
TCGGTACCGTTCTTGAAACC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S005
CAGCATCCACAATGTATCAGG
betaxanthin construct
PC.S006
TAGAGGGAGACATTTCACC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S007
GTCAATTTGTGGTGGTCACC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S008
AAATTGTTACCTCCAGGTCC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S009
TACCCAGACCCATTGTACC
betaxanthin construct
PC.S010
GTTGTAGTGGTGGATACCG
betaxanthin construct
MLJ58
CACTGCATTATCCTTCATTTTCGTTAGTGCGCATCCTCGATCCCAATACAACAGATCACG
Kl.URA3 insert
MLJ59
TTCAATAGAAAACATTTAGTAAAGCTGGTAACCGAAGCTCGTTTTATTTAGGTTCTATCG
Kl.URA3 insert
==PAGE:51==
45
Supplementary figures
==PAGE:52==
Appendix B. Supplementary figures
46
FIGURE B.1: comparison of A) pCML.3 and B) pCML.2, pCML.1 had no colonies (not
shown). Left column is CRISPR assisted transformation where a repair template was added
to the reaction mix. Right column is with only gRNA plasmid which should result in a very
sick phenotype. Based on these results pCML.3 is concluded to be a very effective spacer
sequence, and is used for CRI-SPA screen of Sc_ML.002.
==PAGE:53==
Appendix B. Supplementary figures
47
FIGURE B.2: Yellow intensity data of approx 750 deletion mutants, from CRI-SPA generated
colonies plated on the same plate for comparison. Errorbars represent one standard deviation
based on only two colonies. Orange are colonies with a double deletion with YER084W. Blue
is single deletions.
