==PAGE:1==
Masters Thesis
Analyzing the Cation Effect with Ionomer
Modified Catalysts for CO2 Electrolysis
Author:
Bjørt ´Olad´ottir Joensen
Supervisors:
Brian Seger, Associate Professor
Thomas Jaramillo, Associate Professor
Dong (Daniel) Un Lee, Associate Staff Scientist
Technical University of Denmark And Stanford
University
A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Masters of Science in engineering (Physics and Nanotechnology)
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
To improve the performance of a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) two components
have been tuned in this work. First, the gasket thickness was varied to find the optimal
compressive load. The gasket thickness is essentially a measure of the pore sizes and
therefore the accessibility of CO2. However, for this particular configuration, the 0.01”
thick gasket around the anode and cathode was found to be optimal. To see the effects
of compression on the macroporous layer XCT has been used.
Second, the cation
effect is explored for mono- and multivalent cations. Three different approaches were
tested for adding Cs+ to the catalyst layer; Cs2CO3 and Nafion drop-casted as an
overlayer on Cu nanoparticles, Cs2CO3, Nafion and Cu nanoparticles mixed in the ink
before spray coating the substrate, and Cs2CO3 as an electrolyte. While the catalyst
performance is increased with a Cs+ and Nafion overlayer, the Mg cations have a higher
potential to improve performance from a theoretical standpoint. Nevertheless, there
are some practical challenges yet to be solved when probing the surface with Mg2+.
Under alkaline conditions the Mg2+ will start to form a salt that might block the pores
preventing CO2 to access while potentially insulating the cell causing the potential to
increase. For the study of cation effects, SEM and XPS have been used for electrode
characterization, GC and NMR have been used for product quantification, and ICP-MS
has been used for contamination tracing.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
The work of this thesis has been conducted throughout the period of January 2022 to
June 2022 in the Jaramillo Group at Stanford University - Department of Chemical
Engineering under the supervision of Associate Professor Thomas Jaramillo, Associate
Professor Brian Seger, Associate Staff Scientist Dong Un (Daniel) Lee, and PhD student
Kabir Abiose. First, I would like to thank Professor Thomas Jaramillo for granting me
the opportunity to do research at Stanford University. I would also like to express my
dearest gratitude to Professor Brian Seger for his continuous advice and support. I am
honored for the trust he has shown in me by providing me the opportunity to conduct
research at one of the collaborating universities, as well as other opportunities he has
given me throughout my entire education. I would also like to give a special thanks
Dr. Daniel Lee for his patience, daily supervision, and advice and for helping with
XPS and XCT, Kabir Abisoe for some interesting discussions regarding the project
and CO2 reduction in general and for helping with SEM imaging on some samples,
Daniela Marin for helping with some more SEM imaging, Gaurav Kamat and Ashton
Aleman for helping with the ICP, Junjie Chen for synthesising the Cu nanowires, and
Carlos Giron Rodriuez and Asger Barkolt Moss for taking their time to read my thesis
and provide feedback. Finally, I would like to thank the Jaramillo group, intramural
softball champions, for giving me a warm welcome and making this experience fun and
special.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgments
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Climate Crisis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prospects of Electrochemical CO2 Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Aim of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
6
2.1
Electrochemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Heterogeneous Catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Cation Effect and Ionomer Modification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
The Experimental Setup
17
3.1
Electrolysis Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Characterization methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Potentiostat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Gas Chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.3
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.4
Inductively Coupled Plasma - Mass Spectrometry . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.5
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.6
X-ray Computed Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.7
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Mass Transport and Pore Network for Fibrous Cathode
27
5
Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
32
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
5.1
Electrode Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Electrochemical Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.1
Temperature Dependence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
Various Cu Catalysts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.3
Changes in Double Layer Capacitance from Flooding . . . . . .
37
5.3
Tuning Hydrophobicity with PTFE in the Ink . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Ink Engineering with Ultrasonic Motion Controlled Spray Coater
42
6.1
Copper Nanoparticles and Nafion Mixed Ink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Copper Nanoparticles, Nafion, and Salt Mixed Inc . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Electrolyte Engineering with Magnesium
46
8
Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
48
8.1
Spray Coating an Ionomer Cation Overlayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2
Drop Casting Cesium Carbonate and Nafion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2.1
XPS Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9
Various Cation Trap Approaches
56
10 Conclusion
59
11 Future Prospects
61
Bibliography
63
Appendices
70
A Appendix
71
A.1 Sono-tek Spray Coating Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 NMR Calibrations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.3 PTFE Particles in Ink
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.4 Ag related data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.5 Impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.6 Sulfonic groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.7 Temperature Dependance on Water content in Air . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.8 Cu Overlayer and XPS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
The Climate Crisis
For the past 50 years, the Earth’s average surface temperature has increased remarkably
due to human activities causing a higher concentration of greenhouse gasses in the
atmosphere. Figure 1.1 from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
clearly states the severity of this issue, with an increase of over 1◦C since 1850. This
trend will continue without drastic action [1]. One of the initiatives from a political
Figure 1.1: The change in temperature on the sur-
face of the earth and the simulated causes to change
from 1850 to 2020 [1].
standpoint is the Paris Agree-
ment from the COP21 in 2015.
This agreement has some clear
goals to get the climate crisis
under control.
Two of the ac-
tion items are to keep the tem-
perature changes of 1.5◦C within
reach and secure global net-zero
emissions by 2050. However, as
Figure 1.1 indicates the time for
reaching this goal is running out
[2].
To reach the goal of stay-
ing within a change of 1.5◦C
fossil fuels must be phased out
and replaced by alternative net
zero-emitting energy sources. In
2020, 12% of the total energy supply of the United States consisted of renewable energy
sources, where biomass, wind, and hydroelectric power had the largest share (Figure
1.2). However, natural gas and petroleum still account for the largest share of the total
1
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.2: The distribution of the different energy sources in the for the total energy
supply of the United States of America in 2020 [3]
energy supply [3]. Three different strategies for reducing CO2 emission are [4]: Decar-
bonization by improving the performance of CO2 emitting sources, carbon recycling by
turning CO2 into hydrocarbons for new purposes, and carbon sequestration by captur-
ing and storing atmospheric CO2. For decarbonization, two promising zero emitting
energy sources are solar and wind power which currently consist of 4.4% of the total
energy supply. Nevertheless, these two energy sources have a major drawback; they are
dependent on the weather. The supply of solar and wind power energy will not always
meet the demand, and this is why energy storage starts to play an important role in
the transition from fossil fuels to sustainable energy sources. When there is a surplus
of energy from solar and wind power the energy can be stored in storage technologies,
such as pumped hydro, batteries, and compressed air. For the transport sector, which
accounted for 14% of the global CO2 emission, carbon recycling becomes particularly
interesting due to the advantages of having fuel in liquid form. An example of carbon
recycling is electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction using CO2 as feedstock by convert-
ing it to liquid fuels. In contrast to decarbonization, carbon sequestration allows a net
zero CO2 emission by a continued emission combined with carbon capture and storage
technologies that prevent CO2 releasing to the atmosphere.
2
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
1.2
Prospects of Electrochemical CO2 Reduction
In general CO2 reduction can proceed biologically, thermally, or electrochemically. The
electrochemical CO2 reduction has certain advantages such as the possibility to produce
Figure 1.3: A technoeconomic analysis of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, ethanol, and
ethylene.
The assumptions behind this figure are a pure CO2 price of $30/tonne,
Faradaic efficiency of 90%, current density of 500 mA/cm2, electrolyzer cost of
$300/kW, and plant lifetime of 30 years [5]. The green bars have been placed with val-
ues for MEA systems with similar operating conditions as used throughout this project
[6].
a wide variety of products while operating under mild conditions. The electrochem-
ical CO2 reduction can proceed through different pathways and the number of electron
transfers depends on the complexity of the reaction [4]. The products from electro-
chemical CO2 reduction vary in energy density. Some of the possible products and
3
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1. Introduction
their corresponding market prices are carbon monoxide (2 electron transfer, 0.6$/kg),
methanol (6 electron transfer, 0.6$/kg), methane (8 electron transfer, 0.18$/kg), ethy-
lene (12 electron transfer, 1.3$/kg), and ethanol (12 electron transfer, 1$/kg) [7]. The
greatest challenge in terms of economic viability for electrochemical CO2 reduction is
the energy efficiency. For electrochemical CO2 reduction to be competitive with other
storage technologies and chemical production methods, it is crucial to have a high
selectivity and a low overpotential.
Figure 1.3 shows a technoeconomic analysis of hydrogen, carbon monoxode, ethanol,
and ethylene and what standards in terms of energy efficiency a CO2 electrolyzer should
meet to be economically viable.
The green bar states the current state-of-the-art
CO2 electrolyzer systems with an Ag catalyst for carbon monoxide production and Cu
catalyst for ethanol and ethylene. According to this figure, the production of carbon
monoxide from electrochemical CO2 reduction can be feasible for electricity prices
below 6 cents/kWh (Figure 1.3). Cu catalysts for ethanol and ethylene production
need to improve in terms of selectivities and voltage efficiencies to become economically
viable.
1.3
Aim of Thesis
This thesis aims to improve the voltage efficiency, catalytic activity, and selectivity of
a Cu catalyst. This work will be carried out using ion-containing polymers (ionomers)
and different cations to improve the performance of Cu catalysts for membrane elec-
trode assembly (MEA) systems.
One of the big challenges of CO2 reduction with MEA devices is related to water
management due to catalyst flooding preventing CO2 access. The number of active
sites can be controlled through the hydrophobic nature of polymers. Polymers can
function as catalyst binders to a substrate, and their presence at the catalyst and
electrolyte interface can increase the mass transport of CO2[8]. Ionomers can also be
used to tune the hydrophobicity of the cathode, and previous work has shown that the
presence of an ionomer layer can extend the triple-phase boundary further into the bulk
of the cathode [9]. The CO2/H2O ratio varies with the hydrophobic and hydrophilic
functionalities of the ionomers [10]. Furthermore, research has shown that ionomers
can improve the selectivity of C2+ production by controlling the local pH via Donnan
exclusion [8]. Nevertheless, studies have shown inconsistent results, and the impact of
4
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1. Introduction
ionomers on a catalyst’s surface using a carbon gas diffusion electrode has yet to be
fully understood. The ionomer can also be used as a cationic trap essentially controlling
position and concentration near the catalyst surface. The concentration and type of
cation affect the CO2 reduction activity through interactions with the adsorbates in
the Helmholtz double-layer [11]. The effect of cations from the anolyte attracted by the
potential gradient is also studied for comparison. The Cu catalyst will be fabricated
using industrially relevant fabrication methods and tested electrochemically using an
MEA configuration under ambient conditions.
To improve mass transport of the gas diffusion electrodes the effect of compression
and different flow field types will be studied as well. These effects will be studied for
Ag catalysts using the same system but under slightly different operating conditions.
5
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Electrochemistry
The following section is based on theory from the textbook, ”Electrochemical Engi-
neering”, by Thomas F. Fuller and John N. Harb [12]. The theory aims to support the
understanding af an electrochemical CO2 reducing cell.
In electrochemistry, Faraday’s law states that the amount of substance produced at
each electrode is directly proportional to the number of charge transferred through the
cell:
mi = MiQ
nF ,
(2.1)
where mi is the mass, Mi is the molecular weight of the species i, n is the number
of electron transfer for a given reaction, and F is the Faraday constant. In an elec-
trochemical reaction electrons are transferred from the species being oxidized to that
being reduced. The oxidation takes place at the anode
O →O+ + e−
(2.2)
and the reduction at the cathode
R+ + e−→R
(2.3)
These two half-cell reactions have a corresponding half-cell potential, and these two
combined make the full cell potential. One commonly used reference is the standard
hydrogen electrode (SHE), where hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is 0 V vs. SHE.
An alternative reference is the pH-independent reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).
The difference can be expressed as
U [V vs. RHE] = U [V vs. SHE] −0.059 · pH.
(2.4)
From these half-cell reactions, the standard cell potential can be found as the difference
between the two reduction potentials
U θ
cell = U θ
cathode −U θ
anode.
(2.5)
When calculating the standard cell potential, also referred to as equilibrium potential,
6
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2. Theory
reactions are assumed to be in equilibrium. The potential of which the redox reaction
takes place when displaced from equilibrium can be written as the Nernst equation:
U = U θ
cell −RT
nF
 Y
ions
 ci
co
i
si Y
gas
 pi
po
si!
,
(2.6)
where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, c is the concentration of ion,
p is the pressure, and si is the stoichiometric coefficient.
The energy required to
drive a redox reaction at constant pressure and temperature can be expressed by the
equilibrium potential
∆G = −nFU,
(2.7)
where ∆G is the change in Gibbs Free energy. When ∆G is less than zero the reaction
proceeds spontaneously and energy can be obtained. Contrarily, when it is greater
than zero the reaction is non-spontaneous and requires energy to proceed.
Thermodynamics gives a great understanding of the redox reaction potential but does
not cover the full story. The measured potential is in reality higher due to resistance
from the diffusion of ions, electrical resistance, and limited reaction kinetics.
The
difference between measured cell potential, V , and the equilibrium potential, U, is
called an overpotential, η,
η = V −U
(2.8)
The overpotential implies that the measured voltage is higher than thermodynamically
determined. The Butler-Volmer equation describes the relationship between the total
current density, i, and the overpotential of the system, and is expressed as
i = io
 
exp
αaFη
RT

−exp
αcFη
RT
!
,
(2.9)
where io is the exchange current density, αa and αc are the anodic and cathodic
transfer coefficients, where αa + αc = n, where n is the number of electrons transferred
in the reaction. The exchange current density describes the intrinsic electron transfer
rates at zero overpotential. At large negative or positive overpotentials, the Butler-
Volmer equation can be approximated to the Tafel equation, written as
i ≈io exp
αFη
RT

.
(2.10)
Figure 2.1 shows the Tafel plot with the overpotential as a function of the logarithmic
current density purely from a kinetic standpoint.
7
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Theory
Figure 2.1: The tafel equation at large positive overpotentials, where io = 10−4 Am−2,
T = 25◦C, and α = 0.5.
For these electrochemical reactions, product formation can be directly related to the
measured current and is called faradaic efficiency. The faradaic efficiency, ηf, is defined
as
ηf = IA
I
(2.11)
where IA is the current used for producing species A, also referred to as partial current.
The faradaic efficiency is a measure commonly used to define the selectivity of a system.
The faradaic efficiency is dependent on product formation that is related to an electron
transfer.
2.1.1
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
One very useful method for characterizing electrochemical devices is electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Potentiostatic EIS (PEIS) measures the current re-
sponse to an oscillating potential. The potential can be expressed as a cosine or sine
function
V (t) = ∆V cos(ωt)
(2.12)
8
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Theory
where ∆V is the amplitude of the input voltage, and ω is the angular frequency. The
corresponding current has the same frequency, but may be shifted in time with a phase,
ϕ:
I(t) = ∆Icos(ωt −ϕ)
(2.13)
where ∆I is the amplitude of the corresponding current. Similarly, galvanostatic EIS
(GEIS) measures the potential response to an oscillating current. In EIS the potential
or current is oscillating from high to low frequencies, f = ω/2π. EIS can be a complex,
but rather useful tool providing information on many different mechanisms from their
reaction times, which is information reflected in the phase. The phase shift of each
mechanism is essential for telling different mechanisms apart, and some are shown in
Figure 2.2. The fastest responses are detected by electrons and carry information on
cell resistance and inductance up to the ns scale. In the ns to ms time scale diffusion
of ions is detected, and can be related to e.g. double-layer capacitance at solid-liquid
interfaces. From the ms scale and up larger effects like growth of solids and interface
reactions appear.
Figure 2.2: This figure shows the time scale of some reactions [13].
The different components of the impedance are modelled by electric circuit theory
Resistance: ZR = R , Capacitance: ZC =
1
jωC , Inductance: ZL = jωL
(2.14)
9
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Theory
A constant phase element (CPE) is used to describe imperfect capacitors as they in
most cases will appear in real life systems due to surface roughness [14], such as the
porous GDE. The mathematical expression of the CPE to the impedance is
Z =
1
CPE(jω)α
(2.15)
, where α is a number between 0 (pure resistance) and 1 (ideal capacitor). To find the
capacitance from resistance and CPE in parallel the following equation can be used:
R · CPE = (R · C)α ⇒C = (R · CPE)
1
α
R
(2.16)
The different components of the impedance can be connected in
Series: Z = Z1 + ... + Zn or in Parallel: 1
Z = 1
Z1
+ ... + 1
Zn
(2.17)
The impedance will generally be described as a complex number in Cartesian form:
Z = Re(Z) + Im(Z)j
(2.18)
The impedance can be illustrated in different ways such as Nyquist and Bode plots. The
Nyquist plot is used in this project and shows the imaginary part as a function of the
real part of the impedance. Impedance measurements can contain useful information
on the MEA configuration, as it is possible to distinguish cathodic and anodic reactions
by fitting an electrical circuit to the data. This will be demonstrated in Chapter 5.2.3.
10
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.2
Heterogeneous Catalysis
A catalyst can increase the rate of a chemical reaction by giving an alternative more
energetically favourable path of which the reaction may proceed (Figure 2.3). This
takes place when reactants bind to a catalyst surface lowering the activation energy of
the reaction. The catalyst changes the reaction kinetics but not the thermodynamics,
hence the overall change in free energy is the same regardless of the presence or absence
of a catalyst.
Figure 2.3: An energy diagram for a reaction with reaction coordinates on the first axis
with and without the presence of a catalyst [15]
In heterogeneous catalysis, the reaction of gas or liquid molecules takes place an
active site of a solid interface. The performance of these solid catalysts varies with the
nature of the metals used. There are numerous criterion for a good catalyst, and some
of these include high activity, and high selectivity towards a desired product, and a high
stability. The optimal activity of a catalyst can be explained using Sabatier’s principle
stating that the interaction between the catalyst and the absorbate should neither be
too strong nor too weak. When the interaction is too weak the reactant will not adsorb
to the surface, and when it is too strong it will not desorb [15]. This phenomena is
often illustrated as a volcano plot with the optimal catalysts closest to the top with e.g.
11
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Theory
heat of adsorption or intermediate binding energy as descriptor. Figure 2.4.a shows the
volcano plot for CO2 reduction reaction activity as function of CO binding strength.
From figure 2.4 it is clear that the most selective catalysts for CO2 reduction related
Figure 2.4: a) shows the volcano plot of CO2 reduction reaction activity vs. CO binding
strength. b) shows a selectivity map of the CO2 reduction activity with the binding
energy of COOH* and CO* as descriptors. Both figures are adapted from [16]
products are Cu, Au, and Ag. Y. Hori has been of the leading scientists within the
area of CO2 reduction, and has done extensive research on different metal catalysts
already back in the 1980’s [17]. Some of the results are shown in Table 2.1. The best
HCOO−catalysts are p-block metals. Metals with moderate H atom binding energy
have a tendency to be good H2 producers, while metals with weak H atom binding
energy are better for CO2 reduction [18]. Cu is the most selective catalyst towards
hydrocarbons, and is unique do to its low hydrogen binding energy [15].
An alternative way to represent the optimal catalyst is using two different descriptors
such as the binding energy of COOH* and CO* in a 3D volcano plot, as shown in Figure
2.4.b. This means that the binding energies of reaction intermediates to a catalyst scale
with each other.
This phenomenon complicates the catalyst optimization as more
variables have to considered.
Figure 2.5 gives an overview of the various intermediates of multi-carbon product
formation and emphasizes the complexity of the reaction pathway towards these C2+
12
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Theory
Table 2.1: The faradaic efficiency of the most common products from CO2 reduction
on various metals at 18.5◦C [17].
products. Some of the possible reactions and their corresponding reduction potentials
are shown in Table 2.2 at 1 atm and 25◦C[20]:
Half-cell reactions
Potentials (V vs. SHE)
Eq. number
CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 2e−→CO(g) + 2OH−
-0.934
(2.19)
CO2(g)+5H2O(l) +6e−→CH3OH(l)+6OH−
-0.812
(2.20)
CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) +8e−→CH4 + 8OH−
-0.659
(2.21)
2CO2(g)+8H2O(l) + 12e−→CH2CH2 + 12OH−
-0.764
(2.22)
2CO2(g) + 9H2O(l) + 12e−→CH3CH2OH(l) + 12OH−
-0.744
(2.23)
Table 2.2: Possible CO2 reduction reactions and corresponding electrode potentials.
One of the major challenges of electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction is the com-
peting hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
H2O + 2e−→H2 + 2OH−
−0.838V vs SHE
(2.24)
Any kind of hydrogenation to CO2 requires the CO2 to bind more easily to the catalyst
than H2. The low thermodynamic potential required for HER explains the inefficiencies
of CO2 reduction. Even though Cu is known to produce mostly CO2 reduced products
certain factors may enhance HER as we will see later. The anodic reaction is oxygen
evolution reaction (OER), and has the following half-cell potential:
4OH−→O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
−0.82V vs SHE
(2.25)
13
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Theory
Figure 2.5: Possible pathways for multi-carbon production formation [19].
2.3
Cation Effect and Ionomer Modification
While Cu is the most selective catalyst towards certain hydrocarbons, the selectivity
can be altered further via the cation effects using cations with different hydration
radii [21]. When intermediates are adsorbed on a surface they will form a molecule
dependent dipole at the surface.
The dipole will be oriented towards the negative
14
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Theory
surface. Cations in the electrolyte are attracted by the negative cathode, accumulate
in the outer Helmholtz layer, and create a larger electric field. The formation of *OCCO
is determined as the rate limiting step for C2+ products and can be stabilized by the
stronger electric field. Figure 2.6.a shows the cation effect for two different cations, Li+
and Cs+. This figure shows the role of hydration radii in the electric field effect due to
the distance between the surface and respective cations. The ionic and hydration radii
for Li+, Cs+, and Mg2+ are stated in Table 2.3.
Figure 2.6: a) illustrates the electric field effect of Li+ and Cs+ with two different
hydration radii. b) shows the CO partial current of CO2 reduction on Ag(111) using
different cations relative to Li+ [11].
Figure 2.6.b shows the change in CO partial current density using the cation effect
of different cations relative to Li+. The multivalent cations create the strongest effects
on the electric field. Despite Mg2+ having a higher hydrated radius than both Li+ and
Cs+, it has a 2+ charge, thus allowing for a higher charge density at the electrode
interface, and further stabilizing the *OCCO intermediate.
Ion
Ion radius
[nm]
Hydrated
radius [nm]
Hydration
number ± 1
Eq. constant
@ 50% coverage
Li+
0.068
0.38
5
0.54
Cs+
0.169
0.33
1
7.10
Mg2+
0.065
0.43
6
>Cs+
Table 2.3: The ion radius, hydrated radius, hydration number, and equilibrium constant
at 50% coverage of the sulfonic groups in Nafion for different cations[22]
15
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Theory
To make sure the cations will remain close to the catalyst surface the cation exchange
ionomer, Nafion, is used as a binder. The chemical structure of Nafion is shown in
Figure 2.7, and consists of sulfonate groups incorporated onto a tetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE) backbone. The proton, attached to the sulfonate group, SO−
3 , is exchanged
with another cation, A, by the following equilibrium reaction:
AClaq + H+
SO3 ↔HClaq + A+
SO3
with the equilibrium constant:
Keq =
[ACl]xH+
SO3
[HCl]xA+
SO3
where x is the fractional coverage of the sulfonic group with an exchanged proton.
The equilibrium constants of Li+, Cs+, and Mg2+ are stated in Table 2.3. Li+ is the
only cation that is less prone to exchange with the proton. Cs+, and Mg2+ can be
substituted for the proton by adding salts to the ink before spray coating the substrate
as shown in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: The chemical structure of Nafion[23].
Ionic conductivity is a measure of how weakly the sulfonate group binds to the
cations, so they can move freely. However, for this purpose it is beneficial to have
a strong binding to maintain the cations at the catalyst surface.
The equilibrium
constants in Table 2.3 state that the Cs+ and Mg2+ will bind strongly to the Nafion,
in agreement to their low conductivity in Nafion[22].
16
==PAGE:22==
3
The Experimental Setup
To perform electrode characterization, electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction experi-
ments, and product quantification various techniques and equipment will be required.
These will be described in this chapter.
The experimental setup used throughout this project had already been designed
and improved for CO2 electrolysis at the beginning of this project. An overview is
shown in Figure 3.1. As seen in Figure 3.1, the experimental setup can be divided
Figure 3.1: An overview of the experimental setup.
into two sections; the cathodic and the anodic compartments. On the left side, the
anode is being fed with a 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte of 99.99% purity from Sigma-
Aldrich GmbH that is circulated from a reservoir to the cell using an Ismatec® Reglo
peristaltic pump with a pump rate of 10 mL/min. On the cathodic side, a Swagelok®
needle valve is used for supplying a constant CO2 flow of 40 mL/min that is humidified
by a bubbler and fed to the cathodic side of the electrolyzer. The flow is controlled by
17
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
turning the needle valve. The gas continues to a liquid trap where residue water and
liquid products are collected before entering the gas Chromatograph (GC). The gas
outlet flow is continuously measured after the GC using an Agilent ADM volumetric
flow meter from Agilent Technologies, Inc. A volumetric flow meter is well suited for
measuring different gas compositions contrary to a mass flow meter calibrated for a
specific gas. The electrolyzer is connected in a two-electrode setup to a potentiostat
that controls the cell voltage and current.
3.1
Electrolysis Cell
For CO2 electrolysis a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) is used with an anion ex-
change membrane (AEM). The MEA configuration is a compact cell where a membrane
separates the anodic and cathodic compartments of the cell (Figure 3.2).
The advantages of using an MEA in comparison to alternative configurations include
a high performance at ambient pressure and temperature, the vapor-fed system is
ideal for the production of gaseous products, and the compact cell design minimizes
the electrical resistance by having a larger interface and no catholyte compartment
in contrast to the flow cell configuration [8].
Despite the numerous advantages of
Figure 3.2: a) shows the basic principle of the MEA device using an AEM. b) shows
the MEA running at the fuel cell test station. c) shows the channels of a serpentine
flow field.
the MEA device, there are some critical drawbacks of particular system components.
These include flooding of the cathode, CO2 and product crossover across the AEM,
salt precipitation, and high overpotentials particularly for Cu catalysts as the results
will show later.
18
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
The MEA used for this project was purchased from Fuel Cell Technologies Inc. and
is shown in Figure 3.2.b. It is equipped with a temperature controller that can be
connected to the fuel cell test station to set and measure the temperature.
The gaskets consisted of PTFE-Coated Fiberglass Fabric Sheets from McMaster-
Carr and had a thickness of 0.01” (254 µm) on each side as the schematics of Figure
3.2.a show. The gaskets ensure a proper compression and limit the fluids within the
cell. The flow fields allow reactants to enter the cell, reach the catalyst surface, react,
and exit the cell. A serpentine flow field was used for this project and is illustrated in
Figure 3.2.c.
3.1.1
Electrodes
For the MEA system, the catalyst is facing the membrane while the gas is supplied from
the back of the electrode. Gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) are used allowing the gas
to flow through the pores reaching the catalyst layer to form a triple phase boundary.
Triple phase boundaries are essential for CO2 reduction to take place as they are the
interface between a conducting solid catalyst for electron transfer, a gaseous path for
reactants, and a liquid electrolyte path. Porous conductive GDEs are beneficial due to
their high surface area allowing more active sites and higher mass transport. Sigracet®
39BB from Fuel Cell Store, Inc. is a 315 µm thick carbon paper and was used as a
substrate for the cathode. It consists of a macroporous gas diffusion layer (GDL) back-
ing paper and a micro porous layer (MPL) treated with 5 wt% polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE). A commercial 315 µm thick IrO2 GDE from Dioxide Materials Inc was used
as anode and serves as an OER catalyst.
The catalyst used for this project was 60-80 nm commercial Cu nanoparticles with
a ≥99.5% purity. For all experiments, the catalyst loading was 1 ± 0.2 mg/cm2.
The catalyst was spray coated on the GDL. To assure uniform distribution, the Cu
nanoparticles and ionomers were coated on the GDE using an automated programmable
coating system called ExactaCoat from Sono-tek Inc (Figure 3.3.a). A nozzle moves
across a specified area by motion control while spraying micron sized droplets, created
with high frequency sound waves, on the surface. The area of which the nozzle sweeps
through is in an arc pattern as shown in Figure 3.3.b, where the distance between
each line is 0.5 mm. All inks were prepared in a 4 mL H2O and 4 mL isopropanol
solution with 50 mg Cu nanoparticles potentially with salt and ionomers depending on
the purpose. The ink was sonicated for 20 minutes before being loaded into a syringe
19
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
Figure 3.3: a) shows the Sono-tek spray coater and b) shows the pattern of which the
spraycoater moves across the sample.
and spray coated on the substrate. Approximately 75% of the Cu is lost during this
process.
3.1.2
Membrane
A 50 µm thick Sustainion® X37-50 Grade 60 AEM from Dioxide Materials Inc is used
as the separator between the cathode and anode of the MEA. AEM’s conduct anions
through to their positively charged cationic functional groups (imidazolium). These
functional groups are covalently bound to a polymer backbone and conduct anions such
as OH−or carbonate species. Alternatively cation exchange membranes (CEM) can
be used for conducting H+ from the anode to the cathode. However, the major issue of
CEM is the difficulties of suppressing HER in the more acidic environment. An ideal
membrane has a high ionic conductivity and does not allow liquid to diffuse through
[22].
Prior to testing the Sustainion membranes were activated in 1M KOH for 2 hours
at 55◦C to exchange Cl−to OH−[24].
3.2
Experimental Procedure
Each experimental procedure has advantages and disadvantages, and the particular
choice of this design will be explained in this section.
Every experiment starts with an activation under mild conditions to for example
20
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
allow improvements in membrane conduction. These activation processes also provide
insights on potential issues such as misaligned gaskets, short circuits, and leaks. A
Figure 3.4: The timeline showing the procedure of the experiment.
preliminary procedure was designed for all experiments, and the timeline is shown in
Figure 3.4. The experiment is performed in galvanostatic mode with four current steps
of 100 mA/cm2, 200 mA/cm2, 300 mA/cm2, and 400 mA/cm2. When increasing the
current it can be difficult to decouple effects of time and current. To give a slight idea
of how each of these two parameters affect the system each current step had two GC
injections revealing any severe changes that would occur within this time frame. These
differences can be a function of changes in catalyst, membrane, GDL, and anode. A
1000 µL liquid sample was taken from the 14 mL electrolyte reservoir after each current
step. While changes in electrolyte volume easily can be taken into consideration for se-
lectivity calculations there are other drawbacks of this approach. One drawback is that
a smaller electrolyte volume also gives higher product concentrations and correspond-
ingly higher probability of product oxidation at the anode. However, the practicality
of changing the whole electrolyte, which would be a more precise approach, without
stopping the experiment, can be rather difficult.
The resistance was found using current interupt (CI) between each current step.
The current interrupt measures the difference in OCV and the measured potential at
the respective currents, 100, 200, 300, and 400 mA/cm2, and finds the resistance with
Ohm’s law. The CI takes 0.1 s where it is at OCV for 0.05s and at the respective
current for 0.05s. This immediate measurement allows a deconvolution of ohmic and
capacitative losses.
For some experiments EIS was performed before and after to obtain information
on charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance. This was unfortunately
implemented rather late, resulting in limited amount of data for fitting.
21
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
3.3
Characterization methods
3.3.1
Potentiostat
A VSP potentiostat from Bio-Logic Science Instruments Ltd with a booster unit was
used for the electrolyzer controlled by the EC-Lab® software. The potentiostat can
run in galvanostatic mode, called chronopotentiometry (CP), where the current is
fixed and the corresponding potential is measured. Alternatively, the potentiostat can
run in potentiostatic mode, called chronoamperometry (CA), where the potential is
fixed and the corresponding current is measured. For simplicity of having a constant
current to calculate the faradaic efficiency the poteniostat was running in CP mode.
The MEA was connected in a two-electrode configuration. The working electrode and
counter electrode were connected to the cathode and anode, respectively. It would
be beneficial to have a three-electrode setup, but the implementation can be rather
impractical with high uncertainties.
3.3.2
Gas Chromatography
The gas chromatograph used throughout this project is a 8610C from SRI Instruments
GmbH and is shown in Figure 3.5.a. Gas chromatography (GC) is used for product
quantification of the outlet gas flow from the MEA. The GC takes an injection from
the supplied gas (Figure 3.5.b 2 and 3) and is transported through the GC system
using a nitrogen carrier gas (Figure 3.5.b 1) as a mobile phase. Nitrogen is used due
to low reactivity to avoid interaction with the sample gas and its surroundings. The
gas is led through a long column (Figure 3.5.b 4) with a stationary phase. As the
mobile phase gas passes through the stationary phase different compounds will react
differently due to various sizes and affinities resulting in different retention times. The
column is heated during the analysis to decrease the retention time of the less volatile
gas species. The total detection time of this particular GC is around 10 minutes with
a 7 minutes cool down time. Furthermore, long column gives a better separation but
longer retention time, which can be unfavourable due to durability issues of the device.
When the sample has been separated in the column, it will reach the detector. The
GC has two types of detectors (Figure 3.5.b 5); flame ionization detector (FID) and
thermal conductivity detector (TCD). The FID is sensitive towards hydrocarbons, and
is decomposing the products using a flame. The FID is for the purpose of this project
22
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
Figure 3.5: a) shows the 8610C GC from SRI Instruments and b) shows a diagram
with the schematics of a gas chromatograph [25]
used to detect CH4 CO, C2H4, and C3H8. TCD is a non-invasive detection method
that measures the thermal conductivity of a gas and is most sensitive to gasses with
thermal conductivities different from a reference gas (carrier gas), and is used to detect
hydrogen in this project [25].
3.3.3
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) was used to quantify the liquid prod-
ucts. The NMR ised for this project is a 600 MHz Varian Inova. NMR is a technique
where a strong external magnetic field is applied to a sample while observing the in-
teraction of spin states. The transition of the different spin states are unique for the
different nuclei and their chemical environment. This enables characterization of their
molecular structure. The energy E of the magnetic dipole #»µ under in a magnetic field
B is written as:
E = −#»µ · B
(3.1)
B is usually chosen to align with the z-axis so the energy is
E = −µz · B = −γmℏB
(3.2)
where m is the spin state, γ is a positive number, and ℏis Planck’s constant divided
by 2π. The isotopes and have specific frequencies of which they will resonate. The
magnetic field around the nucleus will also change with electron density that is de-
termined by the chemical structure of the isotope. This phenomenon is referred to as
the chemical shift and enables NMR to differentiate between different molecules. The
23
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
chemical shift δ is defined as
δ = Href −Hsub
Hmachine
· 106
(3.3)
where Href is the resonance frequency of a reference, Hsub is the resonance frequency of
a substance, and Hmachine is the operating frequency of the spectrometer. The chemical
shift is found relative to a reference, that is added to the sample. The NMR technique
used in the project is 1H NMR where the magnetic resonance is found with respect to
hydrogen-1 nuclei. To avoid interference with the sample D2O is used as the solvent.
Upon preparation 35 µL of internal standard and 700 µL of sample is added to a NMR
tube. The internal standard consists of a fixed amount of phenol (C6H5OH.), used as
reference for HCOO−1, and DMSO ((CH3)2SO), used as reference for the remaining
products [26]. The calibrations and quantification calculations are found in Appendix
A.2
3.3.4
Inductively Coupled Plasma - Mass Spectrometry
The inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) from Thermo Fisher
Scientific Inc is used to quantify the amount of metal in a liquid to e.g.
quantify
potential contamination. The liquid is made into a aerosol and carried to the plasma
torch by a carrier gas. When the droplets reach the plasma torch, they desolvate and
ionize. Only a small amount of the ions reach the mass spectrometer after passing
elements such as a sample cone, a skimmer cone, and a ion lens. The ions continue
to the quadropole, where they are separated by their mass-to-charge ratio and to the
detector where the measured signal is proportional to the concentration. The ICP-MS
can detect traces down to parts per trillion levels [27].
3.3.5
Scanning Electron Microscopy
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) is an imaging technique used to characterize
the catalyst morphology and particle sizes. In SEM high energy electrons are focused
on the surface of a sample to gain a variety of information. The response from the
sample includes secondary electrons, backscattered electrons, and X-rays. For imaging
secondary and backscattered electrons are used. An electron source is placed above a
number of different condenser lenses and apertures that focus the electron beam in a
vacuum chamber. Secondary electrons with low energies are ejected from the specimen
atoms by inelastic scattering. The electron energy determines how far the electrons
24
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
can travel before losing its energy. Secondary electrons give topological information as
they originate a few nanometers from the surface due to their low energy. A detector
is positioned to one of the sides of the chamber and detects the secondary electrons
giving information on the topography of the sample surface.
3.3.6
X-ray Computed Tomography
With x-ray computed tomography (XCT) it is possible to construct 3D volumetric
images of 2D projections by rotating the sample, and it is used for imaging of the
GDEs in this project. The XCT is a Xradia 520 Versa x-ray microscope (XRM) from
Carl Zeiss Ag. The schematics of the imaging process is illustrated in figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Basic working pricinple of XCT [28]
A source is emitting an x-ray beam through a sample and the resulting attenuation
is measured by a detector that creates a 2D radiograph. The transmitted x-ray will
strongly depend on the atomic number, the density, and the volume of the sample.
When the sample has rotated 360◦a 3D structure of the sample can be reconstructed
in an imaging software [28]. The XCT is used to obtain 3D structures of the GDE
under different amounts of compression to calculated parameters such as porosity.
3.3.7
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
X-ray induced photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is an important technique used to
study catalysts as it maps elements, compositions, and chemical state of a surface [15].
Figure 3.7.a shows an incoming x-ray reaching the sample with an energy high enough
25
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. The Experimental Setup
to emit a photoelectron from different orbitals. The kinetic energy of the photoelectron
carries information on the element and orbital of which the photoelectron, that has not
been inelastically scattered, originated. The following relation describes the relation
between kinetic energy, Ekin, and binding energy, Ebin:
Ebin = hν −Ekin −Φ,
(3.4)
where hν is the photon energy of the incoming x-ray and Φ is the work function of the
energy analyzer. With a mean free path of a few manometers the photoelectron carries
information on the discrete and unique energy of the atomic orbitals at the surface.
Figure 3.7: a) shows a basic illustration of the working principle of XPS. b) shows the
setup of an XPS [29].
Figure 3.7.b shows the setup of the XPS with an electron gun emitting x-rays from
a crystal x-ray monochromator. The x-ray radiates the sample where photoelectrons
are released. Some electrons will enter the hemispherical energy analyser where the
kinetic energy of the photoelectron is measured. The setup must be in a UHV chamber
to increase the mean free path of the emitted photoelectron.
The XPS will be used to characterize the cathode to quantify the amount of ionomer,
cations, and catalyst at the surface.
26
==PAGE:32==
4
Mass Transport and Pore Network for
Fibrous Cathode
Previous studies have acknowledged the importance of CO2 mass transport for elec-
trochemical CO2 reduction reaction devices [30] [31]. In this study, the effect on mass
transport in a GDE is studied for different compressive loads by varying the gasket
thickness.
As part of another project the operating conditions of the following experiments were
slightly different from those explained in the previous section. The experiments of this
chapter have been executed by Daniel Lee and myself, and illustrated by Daniel Lee.
Other than using a physical vapor deposited (PVD) Ag catalyst these experiments were
performed at 40◦C, with a 1 M KHCO3 electrolyte, using an interdigitated flow field,
and gasket thicknesses as the variables of interest. Figure 4.1 shows the differences in
using a serpentine flow field in contrast to an interdigitated flow field (Figure 4.1.c).
Figure 4.1: a) shows the voltage as function of cell potential and b) shows the faradaic
efficiency as function of CO partial current density for the serpentine and interdigitated
flow field.
27
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Mass Transport and Pore Network for Fibrous Cathode
A serpentine flow field provides the gas a free path from inlet to outlet where some
of the gas will flow through the GDE and react at the catalyst surface. For an interdig-
itated flow field without any direct path from inlet to outlet the gas is forced through
the GDE to exit the cell. There are no notable changes in the cell voltage as function
of current density when comparing the serpentine and interdigitated flow fields (Figure
4.1.a). Figure 4.1.b shows the difference in selectivity for CO and H2 with a serpentine
and interdigitated flow field. It is beneficial to have an interdigitated flow field at all
current densities due to the improved mass transport. By forcing the gas through the
GDE water may be removed from the porous structures while CO2 access is improved
as the gas must pass the GDE to exit the cell.
Figure 4.2.a and 4.2.b show the faradaic efficiencies of CO and H2 for 0.01” (254
µm) and 0.008” (203.2 µm) gasket thicknesses, respectively. They are both showing
similarly high CO selectivities at voltages up to 3V where both start to decrease, but
for 0.008” gaskets it decreases more rapidly.
Comparing the gasket thicknesses of 0.008” and 0.01” is essentially a comparison of
the compression. For PEM fuel cells the optimal gasket thicknesses have been found
using the ”pinch”, as a guideline for what gasket thicknesses give the best compressive
load on the electrochemically active area of the electrodes [32]:
Pinch = TGDL,anode + TGDL,cathode + TAEM −Tgasket
(4.1)
According to an MEA manual by Flordia Solar Energy Center [32] the pinch should
be 229-254 µm for the optimal compression. The pinch of the 0.008” and 0.01” gaskets
are 273.6 and 172 µm, respectively. Figure 4.2.c shows the partial current density of
CO for the 0.008” and 0.01” thick gaskets. Despite gasket thicknesses of 0.008” being
closer to the optimal pinch the 0.01” gasket thickness is performing better. In the
region of 2.6 V to 2.9 V the gasket thickness does not have any impact on the partial
current density of CO. At higher potentials the currents starts to be limited by the
mass transport of CO2, and with a high compressive load this effects becomes more
severe. As the GDE is compressed it might decrease the volume of which the gas can
flow through to reach the catalyst and react. Generally, a mass transport limitation
would appear as a plateau in the CO partial current density, but in Figure 4.2.c the
blue curve (0.008”) decreases at 3.2 V meaning that the catalyst is flooded.
28
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Mass Transport and Pore Network for Fibrous Cathode
Figure 4.2: a) shows the faradaic efficiency using 0.01” gasket thicknesses, b) shows
the faradaic efficiency using 0.008” gasket thicknesses, c) and shows the partial current
density of CO as function of cell voltage for gasket thicknesses of 0.008” and 0.01”,
and d) shows the energy efficiency of CO and H2 as function of cell voltage for 0.008”
and 0.01” gasket thicknesses.
The energy efficiency is shown in Figure 4.2.d, and is at a maximum for low cell
potentials and decreases as the potential increases. This effect is enhanced for the
0.008” thick gaskets. The energy efficiency is slightly higher than reported data for
similar systems [33] [6]. However, the energy used for heating the cell to 40◦C has not
been taken into considerations for the energy efficiency calculations.
29
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Mass Transport and Pore Network for Fibrous Cathode
Figure 4.3: This figure shows the suggested path for a gas in the interdigitated flow field
with for a lower and higher compression.
Figure 4.3 shows how the compression is expected to affect the flow when using an
interdigitated flow field. XCT imaging is used for a better understanding of what the
macro porous layer looks like in 3D.
Figure 4.4 shows the 3D structure of the pristine GDE, post-mortem GDL com-
pressed with 0.01” thick gaskets, and post-mortem GDL compressed with 0.008” thick
gaskets. The micro porous layer is not visible on the XCT scan. For the pristine and
GDL compressed with 0.008” thick gaskets the back side is detaching from the macro
porous layer. This is a general trend for the highly compressed electrodes. The back
side is also falling off the pristine sample from the handling before the imaging. In the
middle carbon fibers are stacked with a substance in between.
Figure 4.4: The XCT images for untested, tested with 0.01” gaskets, and tested with
0.008” gaskets.
30
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Mass Transport and Pore Network for Fibrous Cathode
According to the manufacturer, the GDL has been treated with 5 wt% PTFE, and
might be causing some of the unknown substance in between the tubes. From these
images it is difficult to quantify pores sizes, but the macro porous layer thickness from
the 0.008” gasket looks slightly more compressed than that of the 0.01” gasket.
Figure 4.5 shows the 2D projection from a top view of the XCT images, and shows
an intensity of the first 60 slices from the top and down. Here it is easier to see the
difference in porosity, how the compression affects the pores, and why mass transport
limitations become more severe for highly compressed GDEs.
The Python module
Porespy is used to calculate porosity. The segments shown in Figure 4.5 have porosities
of 0.6 and 0.36 for 0.01” and 0.008”, respectively. The porosity for the total macro
porous layer was 0.77 for the GDL with 0.008” gasket thickness, and 0.8 for the GDL
with 0.01” gasket. Nevertheless, due to the distribution of pores it becomes difficult to
quantify pore structures and sizes from one XCT scan, and ideally this would be done
for multiple samples.
Figure 4.5: This picture shows an average projection of a few microns from a top view
and down. The left figure shows the GDE after using 0.01” gaskets and has a porosity
of 0.6. The right figure shows the GDE after using 0.008” gaskets and has a porosity
of 0.36.
In conclusion, the gasket plays an important role for the MEA, as it limits the fluids
within the cell. There is an optimal compression of which the electrode-membrane
interface proves sufficient contact while the high porosity is maintained. This chapter
has only dealt with the issues of too high compression. Appendix A.4 shows the results
of too low compression for a 0.011” gasket thickness.
31
==PAGE:37==
5
Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
5.1
Electrode Characterization
To see what effect cations have on the performance it is important to have a reference
with pure Cu. As a benchmark three different approaches were used: 50 nm PVD
Cu with 1 mg/cm2 loading from Daniel Lee, spray coated 60-80 nm commercial Cu
nanoparticles with 1 mg/cm2 loading, and spray coated Cu nanowires synthesized by
Junjie Chen with 1.8 mg/cm2 loading. Figure 5.1 shows the SEM images of all three
catalysts.
Figure 5.1: a) shows physical vapor deposition Cu on a GDL, b) shows commercial Cu
nanoparticles spray coated on a GDL, and c) shows the Cu nanowires spray coated on
a GDL.
Figure 5.1.a shows the PVD Cu with a catalyst thickness of 50 nm catalyst with
the advantage of having a similar shape to the substrate it covers. In terms of op-
timal thickness literature has shown inconsistent results, possibly due to variations
in substrate. According to Gabardo et al. the optimal thickness is 250 nm with a
PFTE substrate [19], while according to Jeng et al. 400 nm is the optimal thickness
for Sigracet 39 BC maximizing the catalyst surface area while maintaining the porous
structure of the substrate [34]. With Sigracet 39BB a 50 nm catalyst layer might be
in the lower range. Literature has also shown that the CO2 reduction activity scales
with morphology, crystal facets, and size, ie. surface energy and area [35]. In Figure
32
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
5.1.b, judging from the feature sizes, the red and yellow area supposedly show the Cu
nanoparticles and substrate, respectively. This hypothesis could be supported by an
energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) for characterizing materials at the surface. Due
to the size difference between the Cu nanoparticles and the substrate features, which
essentially is the size of the PVD Cu particles, the PVD Cu is expected to outperform
the Cu nanoparticles. The Cu nanoparticles also tend to form agglomerates. Figure
5.1.c shows the Cu nanowires. The synthesis of the Cu nanowires was adapted from
Kumar et al. [36]. The Cu nanowires were stabilized using a Pluronic® F-127 block
copolymer, and grown by the coordinated framework structure of a zeolitic imidazolate
framework to obtain uniform core-shell structures.
5.2
Electrochemical Testing
5.2.1
Temperature Dependence
Before testing the different Cu catalysts this section aims to give an understanding of
why it is beneficial to operate at 20◦C in contrast to Chapter 4 where the operating
temperature was 40◦C.
Figure 5.2 shows the faradaic efficiency and partial current density as function of
current density for the Cu nanoparticles operating at 20◦C and 40◦C.
Figure 5.2: A comparison between Cu nanoparticles spray coated on a GDL operating
at 20◦C and 40◦C. a) shows the faradaic efficiency as function of current density. b)
and c) show the partial current density as function of current density for CO and H2,
respectively.
33
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
In general all catalysts are primarily making CO at low current densities and H2
at high current densities. CO is a more favourable product at low current densities
due to the availability of CO2 and the lower catalytic barrier of CO in contrast to H2.
When going to higher currents the overpotential increases logarithmically in agreement
to the Tafel slope, Equation 2.1, and linearly in agreement to Ohm’s law due to mem-
brane losses. At higher overpotentials the C-C coupling of two adsorbed CO molecules
becomes more likely due to its catalytic barrier [37]. Hence, the faradaic efficiency
of ethylene increases at 200 mA/cm2. As the current increases the catalyst reaches
a point where the CO2 mass transport becomes the limiting factor [38] [39]. Despite
the production of H2 being less catalytically favorable than CO2 in alkaline conditions,
HER will start to dominate at high voltages. HER is a result of a flooded electrode
where water is filling the pores and catalyst surface preventing CO2 to access.
The Cu nanoparticles operating at 20◦C and 40◦C have very similar performances in
terms of selectivity. However, at 200 mA/cm2 CO production dominates at 40◦C while
C2H4 dominates at 20◦C. The desorption energy of CO decreases with an increasing
temperature [40]. This means that before the C-C coupling takes place, which is one
of the essential steps for C2+ products, the CO has already desorbed.
The 40◦C
experiment produces slightly more H2 at low current densities. This can be explained
by the higher water content of the 40◦C experiment due to the relationship between
temperature and water content in CO2 at the same relative humidity, shown in Figure
A.12, Appendix A.7. Another notable difference between 20◦C and 40◦C are the error
bars, that are larger at high temperature. This means that the cell is more unstable
within the 30 minutes of each current step.
The partial current density in Figure 5.2.b and 5.2.c indicates how the CO2 reduction
related products slows down as HER starts to dominate.
Figure 5.3 shows the cell voltage (blue) and cell resistance (green) for the operat-
ing temperatures of 20◦C and 40◦C. The 40◦C experiment has the best performance
with the lowest overpotential, as expected from the relation between temperature and
overpotential in the Tafel equation, Equation 2.1.
34
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
Figure 5.3: The left axis shows the cell voltage and the right axis shows the cell resis-
tance for Cu nanoparticles operating at 20◦C and 40◦C.
However, it starts to fluctuate at high current densities. This is a general tendency
for MEA systems after reaching mass transport limitations. These fluctuations have
been studied by researchers in our group at DTU (results have yet to be published), and
is believed to be attributed to a build-up of crystals from the KHCO3 near the catalyst
surface. As crystals form they start to block the pores causing CO2 mass transport
limitations causing HER to dominate. OH−becomes the main charge carrier due to
the limitations of CO2. Since the conductivity of OH−is higher than the conductivity
of CO2−
3
the potential drops. However, as water builds up at the cathode the crystals
start to dissolve, which results in periodic oscillations as this process repeats itself.
In conclusion the ethylene production is optimized when the cell is operating at room
temperature, therefore future experiments will continue at 20◦C.
5.2.2
Various Cu Catalysts
In this section the catalysts characterized in Section 5.1 will be tested to have a bench-
mark at 20◦C. Figure 5.4 shows the selectivity and partial current density of CO and
H2 for all three catalysts.
35
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
Figure 5.4: Comparison of a Cu catalyst fabricated using physical vapor depostion,
spray coated Cu nanoparticles, and spray coated Cu nanowires. a) shows the faradaic
efficiency and b) shows the cell potential and resistance for the three catalysts. The
NMR data for the Cu nanowire is missing.
With a faradaic efficiency of approximately 58% CO at 100 mA/cm2 and 37% C2H4
at 200mA/cm2 PVD Cu has the best performance up to 300 mA/cm2, as expected.
The Cu nanoparticles with a faradaic efficiency of 27% C2H4 at 200 mA/cm2 have
the best performance when comparing the spray coated electrodes. At higher current
densities the spray coated electrodes have a slightly higher ethylene production than
the PVD Cu. A hypothesis is that the morphology of the catalyst can change the hy-
drophobicity of a catalyst preventing the electrode from flooding allowing more CO2 to
reach the catalytically active sites and react. This hypothesis is supported by previous
studies saying that hydrophobicity increases with surface roughness [41] [42]. From the
partial current density of CO in Figure 5.4.b, the PVD Cu is reaching mass transport
limitations already after 200 mA/cm2. The thin structures of the PVD Cu might be
the reason for this, as a smaller volume will flood quicker than a large volume [43]. The
partial current densities of H2 are constantly increasing for all three catalysts. Mor-
phology can also help tuning the C-C coupling by controlling the amount and shape of
nanocavities by concentrating desired intermediates to steer selectivity towards higher
carbon products [44]. This effect may also be one of the reasons for a higher ethylene
production for PVD Cu.
The Cu nanowires started off with the highest ethylene production, but are seemingly
flooded quite easily from the high HER production. The fast flooding can also be
observed from the large error bars from the difference in the two GC injections taken
36
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
for each current step. When the electrode degrades this is reflected as an increase of
HER as the CO2 is prevented to reach the active sites. Proof of flooding is shown using
potentiostatic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (PEIS) in the next section.
Figure 5.5: The left axis shows the cell voltage and the right axis shows the cell resis-
tance for PVD Cu, Cu nanoparticles and Cu nanowires done by CI.
Figure 5.5 shows the cell potential and resistance for all three catalysts. The Cu
nanowires also have a relatively low overpotential supposedly due to its porous structure
and high surface area. The PVD Cu and Cu nanoparticles have similar cell voltages.
The Cu nanoparticles operating at 20◦C are chosen as the benchmark due to the
possibility of using the ultrasonic spray coater for electrode preparation. The ultrasonic
spray coater is industrially relevant with straightforward upscaling, and gives flexibility
in ink engineering to mix additional components such as ionomers, binders, and salts.
5.2.3
Changes in Double Layer Capacitance from Flooding
To show evidence of flooding PEIS is performed during reaction at a cell potential
of 3 V where the cathode is known to primarily do CO2 reduction with a current
density of around 100 mA/cm2. At these potentials it is possible to gain knowledge on
charge transfer resistance, double layer capacitance etc. Figure 5.6.a and 5.6.b show
the Nyquist plot from the PEIS measurements before and after the standard 2.5 hour
long electrochemical testing. The frequency range was 1 MHz to 1 Hz. The fitting
(orange line) only took -Z” > 0 into account. At high frequencies where -Z” < 0 the
impedance response will be dominated by inductance in the wires due to the high
mobility of electrons [45].
37
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
Figure 5.6: a) shows a Nyquist plot before electrochemical testing, b) shows a Nyquist
plot after electrochemical testing with the negative imaginary part of Z as function of
the real part of Z. The blue dots show the measured data, and the orange line is the fit
from the Python Impedance module. c) shows a table with the fitted parameters for the
suggested circuit, and d) shows the suggested circuit.
The fitting was executed in Python using the Impedance module. The equivalent
electrical circuit, shown in Figure 5.6.d., is based on the already known mechanisms
that are expected to take place at 3 V and the shape of the Nyquist plot. These mech-
anisms include: OER taking place at the anode, leading to a charge transfer resistance,
Ra. In parallel to the charge transfer resistance is the double layer capacitance from
charging at the solid-liquid interface described as a CPE. The same parallel circuit is
used to model the cathode where CO2 and HER reduction represent a charge transfer
resistance, and the double layer capacitance occurs due to undesired flooding. In ad-
didtion to the two parallel circuits there will be a resistance from the membrane and
GDE. The table in Figure 5.6.c shows the fitted parameters are their corresponding
uncertainties as well as the calculated double layer capacitance. The charge transfer
resistance at the anode, Ra, decreases from 16 Ωto 6.93 Ωafter the electrochemical
test concurrently to an increase in the double layer capacitance, C, from 21.64 mF to
51.69 mF. There is supposedly a correlation between the OER active area, the double
38
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
layer capacitance, and hence the charge transfer resistance. In contrast to the cathode,
it is desirable to have a wetted surface increasing the electrochemically active surface
area at the anode since OH−is the reactant.
The membrane resistance is initially 1.67 Ωand 1.88 Ωafter the experiment, in
contradiction to an expected increase in conductivity as function of time. This can
be explained by a decrease in membrane conductivity when going to OCV between
the CP and PEIS, a membrane degradation, the type of ions that are conducting, and
delamination between the catalyst and membrane.
At the cathode side there is a significant increase in charge transfer resistance, Rc
from 0.62 Ωto 8.11 Ω, with a concurrent increase in C from 0.143 mF to 0.62 mF. At the
cathode the electrochemically active surface towards CO2 reduction products should
not be too wet to increase triple phase boundaries. An increase in C can be explained
by flooding at the surface as it allows charge to build up. This limits the reactants to
H2O, which requires a higher potential to reduce causing the charge transfer resistance
to increase. The potential of HER will also depend on the presence of CO2 as HCO−
3
will act as proton donor and is a more favourable reaction than HER from H2O [46].
5.3
Tuning Hydrophobicity with PTFE in the Ink
The issue of flooding has already been addressed in this work and by a number of
different research groups working with MEA configurations for electrochemical CO2
reduction. Gabardo et al. showed that integrating flooding resistant PTFE reduces
the HER at higher current densities [19] [47]. But rather than having a pure PTFE
layer acting as a hydrophobic GDL, PTFE is mixed in the ink. Xing et al. showed
successful results with a 20% increase of CO2R products by adding 70wt% 30-40 nm
PTFE nanoparticles to Cu nanoparticles before spray coating the carbon-based GDL
[48]. The particle sizes used for this project are 1 µm PTFE particles from Sigma-
Aldrich.
To show the impact on hydrophobicity 5 µV water droplets were applied to the
electrodes, and the contact angle was measured (Figure 5.7). The contact angle, which
is a measure for hydrophobicity, shows no obvious trends as function of PTFE loading.
A high contact angle is desired, and pure Cu shows has the highest angle of 146◦
followed by 50wt% PTFE with 142◦.
However, there is some uncertainty in these
number.
39
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
Figure 5.7: The contact angles of different PTFE loadings
The addition of PTFE had a negative effect on the voltage for all loadings. With
50wt% and 100wt% PTFE the experiment failed due to conductivity issues (Figure
A.6). With 1wt% PTFE the potential in Figure 5.9 was fairly stable at 100 mA/cm2,
but fluctuates significantly at higher current densities.
Figure 5.8: The voltage profile of a Cu nanoparticles mixed with 1wt% PTFE.
The selectivity did not show any major changes, and is rather consistent to the
previous results. There is a high CO production at 100 mA/cm2, and as the current
increases the HER and ethylene production increase too while CO production decreases.
NMR was not performed for these experiments, and that is one of the reasons for a
low accounted faradaic efficiency.
It is unclear what effects the size differences of the Cu nanoparticles and PTFE
particles may be, and this is one parameter that would be interesting to tune.
40
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Benchmark of Copper for CO2 reduction
Figure 5.9: The voltage profile of a Cu nanoparticles mixed with 1wt% PTFE.
Regardless of the failed attempt to improve hydrophobicity, there is still sufficient
evidence for improved mass transport with the presence of PTFE. PTFE is a hydropho-
bic material, and can be one of the ways to prevent flooding if incorporated correctly
into the device. Despite the insulating nature of PTFE, it could certainly be beneficial
to put more efforts into water management by adding polymers to the catalyst layer
or into the bulk of the GDL, but this is beyond the scope of the thesis.
41
==PAGE:47==
6
Ink Engineering with Ultrasonic Motion
Controlled Spray Coater
6.1
Copper Nanoparticles and Nafion Mixed Ink
In this chapter the effect of adding Nafion® to the catalyst layer is studied. Later the
proton will be exchanged by another cation to improve the catalyst performance.
Studies have shown that Nafion can improve the mass transport of CO2 through a
balanced gas/liquid environment due to its hydrophobic backbone [8] [48]. Xing et al.
[48] showed that in addition to 30-40 nm PTFE nanoparticles in the spray coated ink,
Nafion provides a hydrophobic environment for CO2 electrolysis towards C2+ products
in a flow cell configuration with a Nafion membrane.
Figure 6.1: SEM images of pure Cu and three different Nafion loadings.
42
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6. Ink Engineering with Ultrasonic Motion Controlled Spray Coater
In this work three different Nafion loadings, 5wt%, 10wt%, and 20wt%, were added
to the ink that was spray coating onto the electrode. In Figure 6.1 the SEM images
show similar structures and distribution for all three loadings. With Nafion the surface
becomes more insulating, charge-up effects start to show, and the resolution worsens.
One measure of hydrophobicity is contact angle of a water droplet on the substrate
in Figure 6.2. The contact angle has been estimated from these three photos of pure Cu
(∼156◦), 5wt% Nafion (∼167◦), and 20wt% Nafion (∼130◦). There is no obvious cor-
relation in Nafion loading and hydrophobicity, and the contact angles might be within
the margin of error as there is some uncertainty to the contact angle. Nevertheless,
according to these figures 5wt% Nafion has the lowest wetting while 20wt% has the
highest wetting. It is known that the backbone of Nafion is hydrophobic and the sul-
fonic groups are hydrophilic[8]. The equivalent weight of Nafion was 1100 and defines
the number of grams of dry polymer per mole of SO3. To minimize the hydrophilicity
of Nafion a higher equivalent weight is desirable as it scales inversely proportionally
to the number of sulfonic groups. However, the number of sulfonic groups might limit
the number of cations at the catalyst, which will be relevant later in this thesis.
Studies have also shown that in a 1:1 water to isopropanol mixture Nafion tends
form ≥200nm large agglomorates [49] that might cause an unpredictable behaviour in
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity. This might also explain the lack of change in hydropho-
bicity when adding Nafion.
Figure 6.2: Contact angle of pure Cu nanoparticles, 5wt% Nafion, and 20wt% Nafion.
Images are taken with an Iphone 11.
Figure 6.3.a shows the selectivty using the three different Nafion loadings. There is
a clear increase in HER to over 40% for all three loadings as opposed to pure Cu from
the previous chapter. When Nafion is added to the catalyst layer it might provide a
more acidic microenvironment which is favourable for HER. From the SEM images it
43
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6. Ink Engineering with Ultrasonic Motion Controlled Spray Coater
is difficult to determine where the Nafion is located but it might also be blocking active
sites of the Cu causing the HER to increase.
Figure 6.3: Comparison of a different Nafion loadings in the ink for the ultrasonic spray
coater. a) shows the faradaic efficiency and b) shows the cell potential and resistance
from CI for the four Nafion loadings.
The voltage profile in Figure 6.3 is unstable in the presence of Nafion at the catalyst
layer. This can be justified from the general unstable cell potential that is usually cor-
related to HER as described in the previous chapter, as well as an increased potential
from the electrical insulating nature of Nafion. The voltage for 10wt% Nafion is suspi-
ciously high and unstable, and might have been affected by other system parameters.
6.2
Copper Nanoparticles, Nafion, and Salt Mixed
Inc
Despite the negative impacts on selectivity, it can be beneficial to add Nafion to the ink
if the protons are exchanged with other cations. The cations are expected to enhance
the catalyst performance via the cation effect from Section 2.3.
The cations used in this project are Mg2+ and Cs+, where Mg potentially could have
a higher impact according to Figure 2.6 [11]. The Mg2+ will presumably bind to two
sulfonic groups, whereas Cs+ binds to one, meaning that the concentration of Mg at
the catalyst surface will be twice as low. Therefore, the expected enhancement is the
same for Cs and Mg. The cations are expected to bind to the sulfonic groups in the
ink before spray coating, and when a negative potential is applied the cations might
detach from the sulfonic groups to the cathode. The idea behind using Nafion is to
44
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6. Ink Engineering with Ultrasonic Motion Controlled Spray Coater
let Mg bind to the sulfonate groups avoiding precipitation of e.g. MgCO3. MgCO3
has a low solubility of 0.0139 g/100 ml, and therefore MgCl2 with a solubility of 54.3
g/100 mL was added to the ink [50]. For consistency CsCl was used when studying
the cation effects of Cs. Concentrations of 0.01 M CsCl and MgCl2 are expected to
shift the equilibrium sufficiently far to exchange all protons to the respective cations.
Appendix A.6 shows the SEM images of adding too high concentrations of salt and the
calculations for the necessary amount of cations.
Figure 6.4.a shows the faradaic efficiency for the catalyst when adding salts and
Nafion to the ink. In general, HER is dominating for all three experiments. And from
these experiments the performance does not improve with the presence of cations.
Contrarily, the HER becomes more dominating. The salt might be blocking the pores.
Furthermore, it is unclear what effects the presence of Cl−has on the pH.
Figure 6.4.b shows the cell potential. When adding a salt the cell voltage improves,
which might be a sign of improved HER from the acidic environment.
Figure 6.4: a) shows the faradaic efficiency and b) shows the voltage and resistance
from CI when adding salts to the ink in addidtion to Nafion. NMR was not performed
for these experiments to analyze liquid products.
Despite the enhanced HER and suppressed CO2 reduction reaction demonstrated in
this section, it is still believed to be beneficial adding cations to the catalyst. In this
particular study other parameters had larger influence on selectivity.
45
==PAGE:51==
7
Electrolyte Engineering with Magnesium
Most studies on the cation effect are performed with pure metal catalysts where the
cations originate from the electrolyte [11] [51] [52]. Despite the AEM separating cath-
ode and anode, cations can migrate across the membrane and enhance the catalyst
performance. The next approach to improving the performance of the Cu catalyst
with Mg cations, MgSO4, with a solubility of 710 g/L [53], was used as an anolyte.
Figure 7.1.a shows the faradaic efficiency of 0.1 M KHCO3, 0.1 M KHCO3 + 0.01 M
MgSO4, and 0.1 M KHCO3 + 0.1 M MgSO4. By looking at the high HER the presence
of MgSO4 does not seem to improve the performance. Contrarily, an increase in the
MgSO4 concentration was causing the experiment to fail quicker. With 0.1 M KHCO3
+ 0.01 M MgSO4, the selectivities were similar to those of pure 0.1 KHCO3 with slightly
lower CO2R products. The total accounted faradaic efficiency is also lower for 0.1 M
KHCO3 + 0.01 M MgSO4 which is a general tendency for experiments with higher cell
potentials, as the liquid products have a higher chance of being oxidized. With 0.1 M
KHCO3 + 0.1 M MgSO4 there is a clear increase in HER, and since the experiment
failed after 1 hour there is only GC data for 100 mA/cm2 and 200 mA/cm2. The
presence of SO2−
4
might cause H2SO4 to form and provides a more acidic environment.
Figure 7.1.b shows the cell voltage for 0.1 M KHCO3, 0.1 M KHCO3 + 0.01 M MgSO4,
0.1 M KHCO3 + 0.1 M MgSO4, and 0.1 M MgSO4. There is a clear correlation between
the cell potential and concentration of MgSO4. The potential for pure 0.1 M KHCO3 is
fairly stable, and as more MgSO4 is added it starts to fluctuate and eventually reaches
the maximum limit for the potentiostat. When the KHCO3 is no longer present the
Mg is the only cation to cross over to the cathode causing the system to fail within 10
minutes. The hypothesis for the failure mechanism is precipitation of MgCO3 at the
cathode. This might cause a failure for many reasons.
46
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 7. Electrolyte Engineering with Magnesium
Figure 7.1: a) shows the faradaic efficiency and b) shows the voltage and resistance
from CI when adding salts to the ink in addition to Nafion. The errorbar of 0.01 M
MgSO4 is 0 because there is only one GC measurement. The labels with + x MgSO4
refer to 0.1 M KHCO3 + x M MgSO4.
If MgCO3 is blocking the pores it prevents CO2R to access the catalyst layer. It is
also insulating due to its low conductivity [54], which is why the potential is increasing
rapidly. Finally, the MgCO3 might cause the membrane to delaminate from the elec-
trode resulting in poor contact. These hypotheses were, however, not confirmed with
further studies.
47
==PAGE:53==
8
Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper
Nanoparticles
8.1
Spray Coating an Ionomer Cation Overlayer
To study the Mg cation effect two approaches have been used; adding MgCl2 and Nafion
to the ink as well as using MgSO4 as an anolyte. The final approach to apply cations
and Nafion to the catalyst layer was spray coating an overlayer with the ultrasonic
spray coater. When an overlayer is spray coated on a GDE there is a high loss as
mentioned earlier. To get the exact loading of MgCl2 and Nafion the electrode was
weighted before and after spray coating. Notably, the mass was 3 mg lower after spray
coating on overlayer on top of the Cu catalyst. This indicates that the physisorbed Cu
nanoparticles were physically removed by the air from the spray coating nozzle.
Figure 8.1: The left figure shows Cu before spraycoating an overlayer, and the right
figure shows the electrode after coating a MgCl2 and Nafion overlayer.
Figure 8.1 shows the Cu electrodes before (left) and after (right) spray coating an
overlayer of 5wt% MgCl2 and Nafion. It is clear to see how the color changes when
MgCl2 (transparent in solution) is added to the electrode. On the right hand figure
some black spots are visible indicating that material has been removed.
48
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
Figure 8.2: a) shows the faradaic efficiency and b) shows the voltage and resistance
from CI when adding salts to the in addition to Nafion.
Figure 8.2 shows the faradaic efficiency and cell potential of Cu with a MgCl2 over-
layer, and it does not improve the performance. HER is dominating at all current
densities, and the MEA fails after reaching 300 mA/cm2. As previous experiments
have demonstrated this might be due to MgCO3 precipitation, causing the pores to be
blocked limiting CO2 access and insulation.
The limited purity of the MgCl2 salt might also have caused the poor performance.
Figure 8.3 shows the metals detected in the anolyte using ICP. The contaminations at
the surface are likely higher than what is detected in the anolyte, as the electrostatic
forces will attract these metals, and the membrane is preventing crossover. There are
clear traces of Ni contamination for the experiment using MgCl2 as salt. As shown
in Figure 2.1 Ni is a great H2 catalyst. For the experiment using CsCl there was Cu
detected in the electrolyte, which was also seen visually by the color of the electrolyte.
The Cu has for unknown reasons crossed over to the anolyte. For the experiment with
different Nafion loadings there are fortunately no signs of contamination except for Ag,
which is not a major failure mechanism and might occur from using the same cell and
setup for Ag and Cu experiments. Cu contamination might however be an issue when
doing experiments with Ag as unexpected products will be detected.
49
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
Figure 8.3: ICP measurement detecting Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, and Ag for different
Nafion loadings and salts. The number infront of the element refers to the respective
isotope, and is in all cases the most abundant isotope.
Despite the potential improvements of adding multivalent cations to the catalyst,
this project has dealt with some of the impracticalities of adding Mg cations to the
catalyst. And these challenges unfortunately apply for most multivalent cations that
would be relevant to apply. Monovalent cations are more practical due to their higher
solubility in water when bound to a carbonate, bicarbonate or hydroxide. Monovalent
cations improve the performance, but to a lesser extent than the mulitvalent cations
potentially could. The next section describes how the performance can be enhanced
with Cs2CO3.
8.2
Drop Casting Cesium Carbonate and Nafion
The previous chapter described how the shaping air from the ultrasonic spray coater
could remove catalyst. To avoid loss of material another film-forming technique, called
drop-casting, is applied [55]. For drop-casting a solution with Cs2CO3 and Nafion is
casted on the heated GDL with a pure Cu catalyst. The heat plate was 85◦C, but
presumably the GDE temperature was lower due to heat losses. The heat will cause
the water to evaporate leaving only salts and Nafion on the GDE. This method is
50
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
more time consuming, and does not provide a uniform thickness and salt distribution.
However, it is simple and does not require any expensive equipment. An advantage of
drop-casting is that no ink is lost during the casting process, so the loading is easily
controlled.
The solvent targeted a 5wt%, 10wt%, and 100wt% Cs2CO3 and 1:1 ratio of Cs+:SO−
3 .
The calculations for the solvent compositions and amounts are shown in Appendix A.8.
Figure 8.4 shows a SEM image of pure Cu nanoparticles and Cu nanoparticles with
10wt% Cs2CO3. They show similar morphologies, but due to the charge-up effects
from the additional Nafion and Cs2CO3 the resolution is compromised.
Figure 8.4: A comparison between the pure Cu nanoparticles and the Cu nanoparticles
with 10wt% Cs2CO3 and Nafion.
8.2.1
XPS Analysis
Figure 8.5 shows XPS spectra for the pure Cu nanoparticles (blue) in comparison to
the Cu nanoparticles with a 10wt% Cs2CO3 and Nafion drop-casted overlayer (red
and green). The whole spectra are shown in Appendix A.8. For XPS analysis the
conductivity, thickness, and roughness of a sample may shift the peak positions due to
charging effects leading to higher binding energies. The validity of using C 1s, referred
to as advantageous carbon, as reference for the whole spectrum [56] has met some
criticism, due to the uncertainties of its chemical composition. In this sample carbon
can be found as contamination, in the substrate, in the carbonate form, and in Nafion.
However, since XPS is used as a quantification tool in this project, finding the oxidation
state of Cu is not essential. The red and green spectra of the drop-casted sample show
similar results and can indicate a uniform distribution of salt and Nafion. Figure 8.5.a
51
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
shows the binding energy around the Cu2p3/2 peak. This figure shows that there is
no change in the oxidation state of Cu when adding an overlayer. The Cu peak is at
933.5 eV and corresponds to the same peak as Cu(II) oxide peak [57] and is confirmed
by the presence of the two Cu2+ satellite peaks. Figure 8.5.b shows the Auger peak of
Cu LMM and confirms a similar oxidation state of Cu. These two spectra also show
that there is less Cu at the surface of the drop-casted sample. This can be explained
by the presence of Nafion and Cs2CO3 at the surface.
Figure 8.5: These XPS spectra show the photoelectron intensity as function of binding
energy. a) shows the XPS spectra around Cu2p3/2, b) shows the XPS spectra around the
Cu Auger peak, c) shows the XPS spectra around S2p4 peak, and d) shows the spectra
around Cs3d3 peak. The blue line represents the pure Cu nanoparticle sample. Red
and green shows two different areas of the same Cu nanoparticle sample with a 10wt%
CsCO3 overlayer.
Figure 8.5.c and 8.5.d show the S and Cs peaks, respectively. In these two figures
there are similar amounts of S and Cs at the surface. From these XPS spectra quantities
are found using the CasaXPS software. The quantities are shown in Table 8.1.
52
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
Pure Cu NP
Area 1: Cu + Cs
Area 2: Cu + Cs
Cu
16.26%
6.88%
6.8%
Cs
0%
5.47%
6.6%
S
0%
7.02%
5.1%
C
31.58%
36.43%
36.97%
O
52.17%
44.2%
44.47%
Table 8.1: Material quantification at the surface of the catalyst with pure Cu nanopar-
ticles and two different areas of the Cu nanoparticles catalyst with Cs and Nafion.
For pure Cu nanoparticles there is 16% Cu and 52.17% O, where some of the oxygen
is found due to the CuO formation at the surface.
The reason for the remaining
26% is unclear. As the amount of Cu at the surface decreases the oxygen decreases
correspondingly. When preparing the solvent for drop-casting the aim was a 1:1 ratio
of Cs+:SO−
3 . The quantified amount of Cs+:SO−
3 is close to a 1:1 ratio for both areas.
The aim was also to have a 10wt% of Cs2CO3 for the total amount of Cu. Even though
there seems to be a 1:1 ratio, it is important to remember that the Cu has a larger
thickness. The XPS is only representing the surface composition, and the total amount
of Cu is much higher if the whole catalyst layer is taken into consideration.
Figure 8.6.a shows the faradaic efficiency for four different Cs2CO3 with loadings of
0%, 5%, 10%, and 100% Nafion. In terms of selectivity there are no drastic changes at
100 mA/cm2 except for the 100% Cs2CO3 loading where the HER increases slightly.
This can be explained by a too high loading causing a lower CO2 accessibility at the
catalyst surface, as Cs and nafion might be blocking the catalyst. At 200 mA/cm2 there
is a lower HER for the 5% and 10% Cs2CO3 loadings. When an overlayer is added to
the surface multiple variables might change. The overlayer might block water from the
catalyst, but the 100% Cs2CO3 loading with the thickest overlayer shows contradictory
results. The cation effect is particularly interesting for a loading of 5% Cs2CO3 where
the largest ethylene production is seen at 300 mA/cm2. The C2H4 to CO ratio is large
for this particular loading which can be explained by the stabilization of *OCCO which
is the rate limiting step for C2 product formation. From the partial current density
in Figure 8.6.b it is also shown that with a loading of 5% Cs2CO3 the cathode never
reaches a mass transport limitation to the same extent as the catalysts with 0%, 10%,
and 100% Cs2CO3 loading do. In terms of HER these three catalysts have similar
53
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
scaling while 5% Cs2CO3 generally has a lower HER. This might be because some
Cs2CO3 loading is beneficial, but 10% is too much.
Figure 8.6: a) shows the faradaic efficiency and b) shows the partial current density of
CO2R related products, and c) shows the partial current density for H2 with 5%, 10%,
and 100% Cs2CO3 as well as for pure Cu nanoparticles.
The cell potential also improves by adding an overlayer (Figure 8.7). The 5% loading
did not have the exact same current steps and it there for not directly comparable to the
other curves. 5% and 10% Cs2CO3 loadings have lower and more stable cell potentials
at all current densities in comparison to 0% and 100% overlayer loadings. At higher
loadings the cell potential becomes more unstable presumably due to the higher HER
combined with an insulating effect from the thick overlayer. Figure 8.8.a shows a more
clear view of the loading effects on the cell potential. Now it is possible to see that at 100
mA/cm2 the cell potential is slightly lower for 10% Cs2CO3 compared to 5% Cs2CO3.
0% and 100% Cs2CO3 show higher cell potentials at 100 mA/cm2 and 200 mA/cm2.
This change in potential can be explained by easier kinetics due to the cation effect,
where at 100% Cs2CO3 the cathode starts to face other issues as mentioned above.
54
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 8. Cation Overlayer on Pure Copper Nanoparticles
Figure 8.7: The cell potential as function of time for four current steps on the left axis,
and the resistance from CI on the right axis. The 5% Cs2CO3 had shorter current steps
with only one GC injection.
Figure 8.8: a) shows the cell potential as function of loading and b) shows the energy
efficiency as function of loading.
The energy efficiency can give a good overview on the overall cell performance and
is the multiplication of faradaic efficiency and voltage efficiency. The energy efficiency
for 5% Cs2CO3 is the only one higher than that of pure Cu nanoparticles which is
comparable but slightly lower than the highest performance stated by Xu et al. [58]
for a similar system with cathode consisting of Cu nanoparticles, Nafion, and a PTFE
substrate, and a Sustainion membrane. With a PTFE film they demonstrate higher
faradaic efficiency towards ethylene but at higher cell potentials.
55
==PAGE:61==
9
Various Cation Trap Approaches
It has become clear that the effect of Cs cations at the catalyst surface enhances
the performance in terms of selectivity and voltage. In this chapter three different
approaches for adding Cs cations to the catalyst are examined. These include drop-
casting an overlayer with Cs2CO3 and Nafion, spray coating Cu nanoparticles with
Cs2CO3 and Nafion, and using a 0.1 M Cs2CO3 electrolyte (Figure 9.1).
Figure 9.1: The three approaches for adding cations to the catalyst surface. The first
shows the ionomer, Cs cations and catalyst mixed before spray coated onto the substrate.
The second shows the drop-casted ionomer and Cs cation overlayer onto a spray coated
Cu nanoparticle catalyst. The last shows how the cations can diffuse through the mem-
brane to a pure Cu catalyst.
The mixed salt and catalyst catalyst starts with the best performance in terms of
HER vs CO2 reduction products (Figure 9.2.a), but is the first to flood with high
faradaic efficiencies towards H2 and decreasing partial current density towards CO
(Figure 9.2.b). Having Nafion in the whole catalyst layer might advance the hydrophilic
properties of the bulk in agreement to the previous experiments. This will allow water
56
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 9. Various Cation Trap Approaches
to penetrate the bulk and block active sites from CO2, causing the H2 production to
dominate regardless of the expected impacts from the cations effects. In comparison
to the Cs2CO3 and Nafion overlayer the cation effect seems to improve the selectivity
to a lesser extent at 100 mA/cm2. However, the electrode is not flooding as severely
as the mixed ink electrode. This hypothesis is in contradiction to the earlier argument
stating that an overlayer prevents water to penetrate deeper to the bulk of the catalyst
layer.
The total accounted faradaic efficiency of 0.1 M Cs2CO3 is very low. NMR data could
account for some of the faradaic efficiency, but would doubtfully account for the re-
maining ∼60%. Nevertheless, assuming the quantities are reliable, the electrode is not
flooding as easily. In this configuration Cs cations are expected to migrate or diffuse to
the cathode. This is confirmed by the increasing ethylene production in comparison to
the last column showing the benchmark without Cs2CO3. This approach also demon-
strates the lowest HER at high current density, and emphasizes the enhancements of
the cation effects. This experiment also proves that Nafion not is a necessity.
Figure 9.2: a) shows the faradaic efficiency as function of current. b) and c) show
the partial current density for CO2 related products and H2 related products. NMR has
only been done for the experiment using an overlayer.
Figure 9.3 shows similar results for the cell potential of the mixed and Cs2CO3
electrolyte. In terms of stability the cathode with overlayer outperforms the remaining
two experiments. In contrast to all other experiments throughout this project the cell
resistance for the Cs2CO3 electrolyte experiment improves over time due to the time
it takes for Cs cations to reach the cathode.
57
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 9. Various Cation Trap Approaches
Figure 9.3: The left axis shows cell potential and the right axis shows the resistance for
the three different approaches of adding cations to the catalyst
In conclusion it might be beneficial to add Cs into the catalyst layer if it can be done
without changing the hydrophobic properties. The experiment with 0.1 M Cs2CO3
demonstrates that the electrostatic forces supposedly are sufficient to maintain the
cations at the cathode, so Nafion might not be necessary.
58
==PAGE:64==
10
Conclusion
First, this project aimed to improve the performance of an electrochemical CO2 re-
duction reaction device in an MEA configuration by optimizing the compression using
different gasket thicknesses and an Ag catalyst. Second, the aim was to understand
the mechanisms of adding cations to a Cu catalyst surface and test it in an MEA under
ambient conditions.
As crucial it is to fabricate a selective CO2 reducing catalyst with high activity,
the MEA performance must also meet certain standards from an engineering perspec-
tive. The performance is to a great extent dependent on the gasket thickness due to
the compressible GDL. The gasket thickness influenced the porosity of the GDL and
the membrane and electrode interface area. Inconveniently, despite literature stating
optimal ”pinches” for MEA devices, there is no general standard that fits every sys-
tem. The types and thicknesses of gaskets, GDEs, and membranes play a role when
determining the optimal gasket thickness. For this project the optimal gasket thick-
ness was 0.01” around each electrode, enabling a higher CO2 mass transport at high
current densities allowing cell voltages of up to 3.2 V without reaching mass transport
limitations.
The performance of a Cu catalyst was improved using cations. It is known that
multivalent cations potentially could increase the CO2 to ethylene production to a
greater extent than monovalent cations.
This theory was tested using Nafion as a
cation trap for Mg2+ in an attempt to prevent precipitation. However, the presence of
Mg2+ at the catalyst surface and in the electrolyte did not improve the performance.
Contrarily, the Mg cations were forming salts at the cathode blocking active sites and
causing the cell resistance to increase due to the insulating nature of the salts.
Nevertheless, the performance was improved using Cs cations at the catalyst surface
with three different approaches; Cs2CO3 as the electrolyte, Cs2CO3 and Nafion mixed
in the ink with Cu nanoparticles before spray coated on the substrate, and Cs2CO3 and
Nafion as an overlayer on pure Cu nanoparticles. All three approaches had individual
59
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 10. Conclusion
advantages and disadvantages, and the pure Cu nanoparticles with an overlayer had the
best performance in terms of selectivity and cell potential reaching energy efficiencies
of almost 15%.
60
==PAGE:66==
11
Future Prospects
Throughout this work some of the major challenges in CO2 reduction have been pre-
sented and have yet to be solved.
Even though it is essential to have a high catalyst activity, selectivity, and stability
the MEAs for CO2 reduction is facing some challenges that can not solely be solved
from a pure catalyst optimization standpoint. The cell engineering becomes important
to solve issues such as flooding, CO2 conversion rates, and energy efficiencies.
With Cu being the best catalyst for production of C2+ products like ethylene, there
is still room for improvement. In this work the ethylene energy efficiency increased
by 1.7% with a Cs+ and Nafion overlayer. However, the performance has yet to meet
certain standards to be economically viable. With Cs being the largest cation with
lowest hydration radius in the first group of the periodic table it is questionable to
what extent they further can improve the catalyst. As previous computational studies
have shown the multivalent cation could potentially improve the catalyst to an even
greater extent, but in an alkaline environment the solubility is particularly low for
most salts that include multivalent cations. This is not an issue in acidic media. One
potential path to continuing the study of cation effects would be to do CO2 reduction
in acid, but control the pH with ionomers to supress HER. This would enable a higher
solubility for the salts.
CO2 in acidic media also becomes particularly interesting for another major issue
the field of alkaline CO2 reduction currently is facing: CO2 crossover causing low CO2
conversion rates. In acidic media proton exchange membranes could be used to prevent
CO2 from crossing over to the anode.
The issue of flooding is currently limiting the current density, and is proof of how
important water management can be.
Some studies have shown excellent faradaic
efficiencies towards ethylene with a PTFE substrates, and to improve the cell voltage
simultaneously a thorough polymer study would be useful. This could either be done
by tuning the PTFE amount in the GDL or to try another type of polymer such
61
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 11. Future Prospects
as electronically conductive polymers. A hydrophobic and electronically conductive
polymer could be beneficial for this application.
62
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1] IPCC, 2021: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai,
A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. P´ean, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.
I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T.
Waterfield, O. Yelek¸ci, R. Yu and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In
Press.
[2] What is a cop:
A pivotal moment in the fight against climate change.
UN
Climate Change Conference UK 2021. https://ukcop26.org/uk-presidency/
what-is-a-cop/.
[3] EIA.
United states energy facts explained (2020).
https://www.eia.gov/
energyexplained/us-energy-facts/.
[4] Nitopi, S. et al. Progress and perspectives of electrochemical co2 reduction on
copper in aqueous electrolyte. Chemical Reviews 119, 7610–7672 (2019). URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00705. PMID: 31117420, https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00705.
[5] Luna, P. D. et al.
What would it take for renewably powered electrosyn-
thesis to displace petrochemical processes?
Science 364, eaav3506 (2019).
URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aav3506. https:
//www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aav3506.
[6] Wakerley, D. et al. Gas diffusion electrodes, reactor designs and key metrics of
low-temperature co2 electrolysers (2022). URL https://www.osti.gov/pages/
biblio/1860692.
[7] Jouny, M., Luc, W. & Jiao, F. General techno-economic analysis of co2 electrolysis
systems (journal article) — doe pages (2018).
URL https://www.osti.gov/
pages/biblio/1712664.
[8] Kim, C. et al. Tailored catalyst microenvironments for co2 electroreduction to
multicarbon products on copper using bilayer ionomer coatings (2021).
63
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[9] de Arquer, F. P. G. et al. Co2 electrolysis to multicarbon products at activities
greater than 1 a cm-2. Science 367, 661–666 (2020).
[10] Koshy, D. M. et al. Chemical modifications of ag catalyst surfaces with imida-
zolium ionomers modulate h2 evolution rates during electrochemical co2 reduction
(2021).
[11] Ringe, S. et al.
Understanding cation effects in electrochemical co2 reduction
(2021).
[12] Fuller, T. F. & Harb, J. N. Electrochemical engineering (Wiley, 2018).
[13] Lecture slides: ”introduction to electrochemical impedance spectroscopy” (2021).
Learn.dt.dk.
[14] Lacey,
M.
The constant phase element
(http://lacey.se/science/eis/
constant-phase-element/, 2018).
[15] Chorkendorff, I. & Niemantsverdriet, J. W. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics (Wiley, 2003).
[16] Jaramillo, T. F. et al.
The oxidation of water and the reduction of CO2 to
fuels (Stanford). https://gcep.stanford.edu/pdfs/TechReports2013/4.7.1_
Jaramillo_Public_Version_2013.pdf.
[17] Hori, Y. Electrochemical co2 reduction on metal electrodes. Faculty of Engineering
143 (2008).
[18] Frese, K. W. Calculation of surface binding energy for hydrogen, oxygen, and
carbon atoms on metallic surfaces.
Surface Science 182, 85–97 (1987).
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0039602887900902.
[19] Gabardo, C. M. et al.
Continuous carbon dioxide electroreduction to concen-
trated multi-carbon products using a membrane electrode assembly.
Joule 3,
2777–2791 (2019). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2542435119303654.
[20] Qiao, J., Liu, Y., Hong, F. & Zhang, J. A review of catalysts for the electroreduc-
tion of carbon dioxide to produce low-carbon fuels. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 631–675
(2014). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C3CS60323G.
64
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[21] Resasco, J. et al. Promoter effects of alkali metal cations on the electrochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide (2017). URL https://www.osti.gov/pages/biblio/
1390621.
[22] Catalytic conversion of sustainable energy into fuels and chemicals: Chapter 6 co2
electrolysis. Brian Seger.
[23] Nafion (2022). URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nafion.
[24] Kutz, R. B. et al.
Sustainion imidazolium-functionalized polymers for carbon
dioxide electrolysis. Energy Technology 5, 929–936 (2017).
[25] Gas
chromatography
–
how
a
gas
chromatography
machine
works,
how
to
read
a
chromatograph
and
gcxgc.
URL
https://www.technologynetworks.com/analysis/articles/
gas-chromatography-how-a-gas-chromatography-machine-works-how-to-read-a-chromatog
[26] Nmr
spectroscopy.
URL
https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/
Analytical_Chemistry/Physical_Methods_in_Chemistry_and_Nano_
Science_(Barron)/04%3A_Chemical_Speciation/4.07%3A_NMR_
Spectroscopy.
Chemistry Libra Text and Pavan M. V. Raja, Andrew R.
Barron.
[27] Icp-ms
as
a
technique.
URL
https://www.ohsu.edu/
elemental-analysis-core/icp-ms-technique. OHSU.
[28] Wilson, P. F. et al.
X-ray computed tomography (xct) and chemical analy-
sis (edx and xrf) used in conjunction for cultural conservation:
The case of
the earliest scientifically described dinosaur megalosaurus bucklandii - heritage
science (2018).
URL https://heritagesciencejournal.springeropen.com/
articles/10.1186/s40494-018-0223-0.
[29] Mogk, D.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (2022).
URL https://serc.
carleton.edu/msu_nanotech/methods/xps.html.
[30] Moore, T., Xia, X., Baker, S. E., Duoss, E. B. & Beck, V. A. Elucidating mass
transport regimes in gas diffusion electrodes for co2 electroreduction. ACS Energy
Letters 6, 3600–3606 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.
1c01513. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.1c01513.
65
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[31] Weng, L.-C., Bell, A. T. & Weber, A. Z. Modeling gas-diffusion electrodes for co2
reduction (2018). URL https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/
2018/CP/C8CP01319E.
[32] Center, F. S. E.
Procedure for performing pem single cell testing - en-
ergy (2009). URL https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/03/f10/
htmwg_may09_pem_single_cell_testing.pdf.
[33] Kutz,
R.
B.
et
al.
Sustainion
imidazolium-functionalized
poly-
mers
for
carbon
dioxide
electrolysis
(2017).
URL
https:
//www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Sustainion-Imidazolium%
E2%80%90Functionalized-Polymers-for-Kutz-Chen/
5b2f8ce4ee5e9c030f98220a5638ed6fe1ca2511.
[34] Jeng, E. et al.
Scalable gas diffusion electrode fabrication for electrochemical
co2 reduction using physical vapor deposition methods. ACS Applied Materials
& Interfaces 14, 7731–7740 (2022). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.
1c17860. PMID: 35128928, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c17860.
[35] Jing Jing Lv, W. L. W. Z. J. J. Z. F. J., Matthew Jouny.
A highly porous
copper electrocatalyst for carbon dioxide reduction.
WILEY-VCH
(2018).
URL https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201803111. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.201803111.
[36] Abhishek Kumar, Y. C. M. J. S. V. C. L. M. V. S. M. R. K. S. M. S., Anu Sharma.
A highly porous copper electrocatalyst for carbon dioxide reduction. WILEY-VCH
(2018). URL https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202008054. https://doi.org/
10.1002/adfm.202008054.
[37] Joseph H. Montoya, P. J. K. N., Prof. Andrew A. Peterson.
Insights into c-
c coupling in co2 electroreduction on copper electrodes. WILEY-VCH (2013).
URL https://doi.org/10.1002/cctc.201200564. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cctc.201200564.
[38] Leonard, M. et al. Flooded by success: On the role of electrode wettability in co2
electrolyzers that generate liquid products. ChemRxiv (2020).
[39] Yang, K., Kas, R., Smith, W. A. & Burdyny, T. Role of the carbon-based gas
diffusion layer on flooding in a gas diffusion electrode cell for electrochemical co2
66
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
reduction.
ACS Energy Letters 6, 33–40 (2021).
URL https://doi.org/10.
1021/acsenergylett.0c02184.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.
0c02184.
[40] ZHAO Ziyan, Y. Y. b. Z. Y. J. D. G., Dmitry DORONKIN. Light and temperature
effect on co desorption during photothermal co2 hydrogenation over pt/al2o3 .
[41] Xin, L. & Meixiang, W. Morphology and hydrophobicity of micro/nanoscaled
cuprous iodide crystal:
Article information:
J-global (1970).
URL https:
//jglobal.jst.go.jp/en/detail?JGLOBAL_ID=200902242181351263.
[42] van der Niet, M. J. T. C., den Dunnen, A., Koper, M. T. M. & Juurlink, L. B. F.
Tuning hydrophobicity of platinum by small changes in surface morphology. URL
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011PhRvL.107n6103V/abstract.
[43] Larraz´abal,
G.
O.,
Okatenko,
V.,
Chorkendorff,
I.,
Buonsanti,
R.
&
Seger,
B.
Investigation of ethylene and propylene production from co2
reduction
over
copper
nanocubes
in
an
mea-type
electrolyzer.:
Seman-
tic
scholar
(2022).
URL
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
Investigation-of-Ethylene-and-Propylene-Production-Larraz%C3%
A1bal-Okatenko/819fb88a7dc20456d9d218550f4f3df2996578f3.
[44] Zhuang, T.-T. et al. Copper nanocavities confine intermediates for efficient elec-
trosynthesis of c3 alcohol fuels from carbon monoxide (2018).
URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41929-018-0168-4#citeas.
[45] Inductance. URL http://www.consultrsr.net/resources/eis/induct1.htm.
[46] Koshy, D. M. et al.
Chemical modifications of ag catalyst surfaces with imi-
dazolium ionomers modulate h2 evolution rates during electrochemical co2 re-
duction. Journal of the American Chemical Society 143, 14712–14725 (2021).
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c06212.
PMID: 34472346, https://
doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c06212.
[47] Dinh, C.-T. et al.
Co¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ electroreduction to ethylene via hydroxide-
mediated copper catalysis at an abrupt interface. Science 360, 783–787 (2018).
URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aas9100. https:
//www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aas9100.
67
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[48] Xing, Z., Hu, L., Ripatti, D. S., Hu, X. & Feng, X. Enhancing carbon dioxide gas-
diffusion electrolysis by creating a hydrophobic catalyst microenvironment (2021).
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-20397-5.
[49] Welch, C. et al. Nafion in dilute solvent systems: Dispersion or solution? ACS
Macro Letters 1, 1403–1407 (2012). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/mz3005204.
PMID: 35607114, https://doi.org/10.1021/mz3005204.
[50] Properties of substance: magnesium carbonate.
URL http://chemister.ru/
Database/properties-en.php?dbid=1&amp;id=634.
[51] Liu, M. et al. Enhanced electrocatalytic co2 reduction via field-induced reagent
concentration (2016). URL https://www.nature.com/articles/nature19060#
citeas.
[52] Sandberg, R. B., Montoya, J. H., Chan, K. & Nørskov, J. K.
Co-co cou-
pling on cu facets:
Coverage, strain and field effects (2016).
URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0039602816300826.
[53] Magnesium sulfate.
URL https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Magnesium-sulfate#section=Melting-Point.
[54] Antony, D. What is magnesium carbonate used for? (2019). URL https://
sciencing.com/magnesium-carbonate-used-for-5616228.html.
[55] Archet, F., Esteoulle, D. & Ben Dkhil, S.
Thin film processing method:
from lab to industrialization of opv devices (1st part).
URL https://
dracula-technologies.com/thin-film-processing-method-1/.
[56] Greczynski, G. & Hultman, L.
Compromising science by ignorant instrument
calibration-need to revisit half a century of published xps data.
URL https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31975485/.
[57] Copper:
Periodic table:
Thermo fisher scientific - us.
URL https://www.
thermofisher.com/us/en/home/materials-science/learning-center/
periodic-table/transition-metal/copper.html.
[58] Xu, Y. et al.
Self-cleaning co2 reduction systems:
Unsteady electrochemical
forcing enables stability (2021).
URL https://acs.figshare.com/articles/
68
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
journal_contribution/Self-Cleaning_CO_sub_2_sub_Reduction_Systems_
Unsteady_Electrochemical_Forcing_Enables_Stability/13685584/1.
69
==PAGE:75==
Appendices
70
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix
A.1
Sono-tek Spray Coating Parameters
A.2
NMR Calibrations
These figures show the last NMR samples for all experiements.
ID
37
59
39
38
48
Note
10wt% Nafion
5wt% Cs2CO3
overlayer
5wt% Nafion
20wt% Nafion
Pure Cu NP
ID
47
55
53
58
56
Note
PVD Cu
1000wt% Cs2CO3
overlayer
0.01 MgSO4
electrolyte
10wt% Cs2CO3
overlayer
100wt% Cs2CO3
overlayer
The faradaic efficiency is calculated as:
A · d · V · nF
Aratio · i·
(A.1)
where A is peak area, d is the electrolyte dilution factor (1 for all experiments of this
project), V is electrolyte volume, nF is the charge that goes to each raction, i is the
current denisty, and t is the time of which the current was present before taking a
sample.
To Calculate the faradaic efficiency of the NMR the different peaks are calibrated as
reference to Phenol (formate) and DMSO (methanol, ethanol, n-propanol, acetic acid,
acetaldehyde, ethylene glycol, allyl alcohol, and acetone). The are ratios are shown in
the table below.
71
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A. Appendix
Molecule
HCOO-
MeOH
EtOH
nPrOH
acetic
acid
acetald.
gly
ald
eth
glyc
allyl
alc
Area ratio
/ mM
0.200
4.155
4.535
4.423
4.159
4.159
2.772
5.545
2.772
# e-
2
6
12
18
8
10
8
10
16
Ref peak
Phenol
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
#protons/peak
1
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
2
Peak type
s
s
t
t
s
d,d
d
s
dt
Location
8.32
3.23
1.06
0.77
1.79
2.12
3.4
3.545
3.99
Figure A.1
72
==PAGE:78==
Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.2
Figure A.3
73
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.4
Figure A.5
74
==PAGE:80==
Appendix A. Appendix
To Calculate the faradaic efficiency of the NMR the different peaks are calibrated as
reference to Phenol (formate) and DMSO (methanol, ethanol, n-propanol, acetic acid,
acetaldehyde, ethylene glycol, allyl alcohol, and acetone). The are ratios are shown in
the table below.
Molecule
HCOO-
MeOH
EtOH
nPrOH
acetic
acid
acetald.
gly
ald
eth
glyc
allyl
alc
Area ratio
/ mM
0.200
4.155
4.535
4.423
4.159
4.159
2.772
5.545
2.772
# e-
2
6
12
18
8
10
8
10
16
Ref peak
Phenol
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
DMSO
#protons/peak
1
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
2
Peak type
s
s
t
t
s
d,d
d
s
dt
Location
8.32
3.23
1.06
0.77
1.79
2.12
3.4
3.545
3.99
A.3
PTFE Particles in Ink
Figure A.6: The red shows 100wt% PTFE and the blue shows 50wt% PTFE
75
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.4
Ag related data
76
==PAGE:82==
Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.7: The 2D projection from top to bottom of the macro porous layer, before the
GDL has been compressed.The 2D projection from top to bottom of the macro porous
layer, after the GDL has been compressed with 0.008” thick gaskets.
Figure A.8: The 2D projection from top to bottom of the macro porous layer, after the
GDL has been compressed with 0.01” thick gaskets.
77
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.5
Impedance
Figure A.9: The impedance before and after the experiment
A.6
Sulfonic groups
For a solution of 50 mg Cu nanoparticles the 10wt% Nafion corresponds to 5 mg
Nafion. With Nafion 1100 there is 1 mol SO3 for 1100 g Nafion. This means that to
total number of sulfonic groups is:
5.3 · 10−3g
1100g/mol ≈4.8 · 10−6mol
(A.2)
A concentration of 0.01 M in a 8mL solution corresponds to 8 10−5 mol MgCl2, which
is much larger than the number of sulfonic groups.
It is difficult to find a balance for how much salt to add. Figure A.10 shows an
example where 1M MgCL2 was added, and it is blocking the whole surface.
78
==PAGE:84==
Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.10: 1M MgCL2 added to the inc
Figure A.11 shows the results of different MgCl concentrations.
Figure A.11: 1M MgCL2 added to the inc
79
==PAGE:85==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.7
Temperature Dependance on Water content in
Air
Figure A.12: https://angelicaisa.com/blog/understanding-dewpoint/
80
==PAGE:86==
Appendix A. Appendix
A.8
Cu Overlayer and XPS Data
This figure shows the full spectra of Cu and Cu with a dropcasted overlayer.
Figure A.13: XPS spectra with advantageous carbon as reference
81
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A. Appendix
This figure shows the spectra of Cu, Cu with a dropcasted overlayer, and mixed ink
Cu.
Figure A.14: XPS spectra of mixed ink recipe with advantageous carbon as reference
82
