==PAGE:1==
An investigation into the factors shaping
leadership of remotely distributed
startup teams
Stefan Plugaru
Kongens Lyngby 2022
Technical University of Denmark Department of Entrepreneurship, Diplomvej
Buildings 371 & 372, 2nd floor
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
Summary (English)
In the last four years, there has been an increase in the adoption of remote work and,
subsequently, remote leadership. This study looks at the factors that make an effective leader in
remotely distributed startup team.
There is a lack of data on what constitutes an effective leader in remotely distributed startup
teams. This paper is helping fill the knowledge gap.
The study focuses on startups that are pre-product-market-fit and are under 150 people.
Furthermore, the leaders considered in this research are typically team leaders of teams that
are smaller than ten people from various departments.
An interpretivism research philosophy was chosen for the basis of the research, together with
an inductive research approach. The data was collected through one-on-one interviews with
remote startup leaders across several companies in Europe and the USA.
Results show that there are some differences in the proficiency of specific leadership skills.
Discrepancies between the following skills were identified; communication, trust levels, team
composition, visibility, and accessibility of leaders.
==PAGE:3==
Summary (Danish)
I de sidste fire år er der sket en stigning i brugen af fjernarbejde og dermed også i ledelse på
afstand. I denne undersøgelse undersøges de faktorer, der gør en effektiv leder til en effektiv
leder i startup-teams, der arbejder på afstand.
Der er mangel på data om, hvad der udgør en effektiv leder i fjernt distribuerede startup-teams.
Denne artikel er med til at udfylde dette vidensgab.
Undersøgelsen fokuserer på nystartede virksomheder, der er præ-produkt-markedsegnet og er
under 150 personer. Desuden er de ledere, der tages i betragtning i denne undersøgelse, typisk
teamledere for teams, der er mindre end ti personer fra forskellige afdelinger.
Der er valgt en interpretivistisk forskningsfilosofi som grundlag for undersøgelsen sammen med
en induktiv forskningstilgang. Dataene blev indsamlet gennem enkeltinterviews med ledere af
startup-virksomheder på afstand på tværs af flere virksomheder i Europa og USA.
Resultaterne viser, at der er visse forskelle i færdighederne inden for specifikke
ledelsesfærdigheder. Der blev identificeret uoverensstemmelser mellem følgende færdigheder:
kommunikation, tillidsniveau, teamsammensætning, synlighed og ledernes tilgængelighed.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors, Carolyn Rutherford, Jason Li-Ying, and Robin van Oorschot, for
their help and guidance throughout the master thesis project. I would like to give special thanks
to Carolyn Rutherford for the day-to-day supervision, for helping me clarify any sort of questions
and for sharing with me interesting information within remote leadership that have helped me
broaden my understanding of this field.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary (English)
2
Summary (Danish)
3
Acknowledgements
4
1. Introduction
7
2. Research objectives
8
2.1 Problem statement
8
2.2 Research questions
9
3. Fundamentals and related work
10
3.1 What is a Startup?
10
3.2 Startup team dynamics
11
3.3 Levels of distance in remotely distributed teams
12
3.4 A brief history of the evolution of leadership styles
14
3.5 Leadership effectiveness in a traditional setting
18
3.6 The challenges and benefits of remote leadership.
21
4. Methodology
26
4.1 Chosen research methodology
27
4.1.1 Research philosophy
27
4.1.2 Research approach
28
4.1.3 Time horizon
28
4.2 Construction of the interview questions
28
4.3 Procedure and participants
29
4.3.1 Interview types
29
4.3.2 Participant Pool
30
4.3.3 Ethical Considerations
32
4.3.4 Bias
32
4.3.5 Reliability and Validity
32
5. Interview results
33
Question 1 – team size and common interactions
33
Question 2 – location and time zones
34
Question 3 – being an accessible leader
35
Question 4 – fun in a remote setting
36
Question 5 – teaching junior roles
36
Question 6 – motivation in a remote setting
37
Question 7 – overcoming distance
37
==PAGE:6==
Question 8 – effective remote leader
38
Questions 9 – remote technology
39
Question 10 – advantages as a remote leader
42
Question 11 – disadvantages as remote leader
43
6. Discussion
43
6.1 Effective remote leaders
43
6.2 In person events
46
6.4 The concept of leadership capital
47
6.5 Does different types of distance require a different set of leadership skills?
47
6.6 Practical applications
49
6.7 Limitations of the study
49
7. Conclusion
49
8. Future work
51
References
52
Appendix
55
Transcripts
55
==PAGE:7==
1. Introduction
Poor leadership can be one of the most costly problems experienced by any company. Bad
leadership can stir companies into disorder; which in turn can jeopardize all the stakeholders
involved, regardless of whether they have a personal or financial interest.
According to Hogan and Kaiser (2008), over 50% of leaders end up derailing their companies.
According to the writers, these unsuccessful leaders were picked for factors other than their
proven leadership abilities. In addition, they claim that between 30% - 50% of leaders are
incompetent in day-to-day business operations.
These are just some of the reasons why leadership has been the focus of published research
for many years, and it is generally acknowledged as one of the most highly sought-after
resources.
Mullins (1995) referred to leadership as an "Inspirational process," suggesting that leaders play
a significant role in influencing the adoption of change. Yukl (2013) elaborated on the various
variables at play in leadership change, both internal and external, and stressed that good
leaders need to be very adaptable if they want to keep up with the rapid growth of technology
and ongoing political upheaval. This is especially important for companies that do business
internationally.
Today leaders rely more and more on technology to stay connected and to be able to
communicate with their team. According to Duarte & Snyder (1999), leaders of organisations
who do not utilise virtual teams successfully experience difficulties in remaining competitive in a
fast changing international environment.
Covid pandemic accelerated the adoption of a relatively new type of leadership; virtual, remote,
e-, digital leadership. There are many definitions for this type of leadership. In essence it refers
to leading teams that are not in some location through the use of technology.
Most of the literature from pre-Covid times looked at remote leadership as traditional leadership
enhanced by technology. However, there are inherent limitations that come with remotely
distributed teams that at this time can’t be replaced by technology. Some of these limitations are
related to; communication, company culture, work ethics, relationship build up and rapport.
Remote leadership in established organisations is somewhat documented. Furthermore, the
research papers tend to look inside one big organisation. This can potentially create a biassed
environment. The bias can be due to industry norms, location or because the leadership
approach aligns with a handful of people at a higher level.
However, remote leadership in startups environments is less researched.
==PAGE:8==
There are many challenges for leaders in startups who do not have the same level of
face-to-face interaction as traditional leaders.
The aim of this thesis is to investigate what it means to be an effective leader in remotely
distributed startup teams. This paper is looking to find whether there are any discrepancies
between traditional leaders and remote leaders in a startup environment.
2. Research objectives
2.1 Problem statement
There is a lack of data on what constitutes an effective leader in a remotely distributed startup
team. Participating in the creation of a startup is already one of the most challenging
environments for any leader. Furthermore, according to Census, an official government
organization in the USA, the number of startups is constantly increasing from 3.5 million in 2019
to 5.3 million in 2021.
This is also supported by one of the most desired accelerator programs, YCombinator, which
mentions that they have seen a steady increase in the number of applications in the last five
years.
Even if the number of remote startups remains constant relative to the overall number of
startups created, this still represents a yearly increase in the number of remote startups and the
number of remote leaders.
This is a problem because as the number of remote startup leaders increases yearly, there is
still no clear and predictable way to know what factors influence an effective remote leader.
Thus more and more people will start experiencing the consequences of bad remote leadership.
The study wants to contribute to filling-in the knowledge gap and take some of the guesswork
out of this space. (see Figure 2)
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2 – Gap in the research diagram
2.2 Research questions
An Investigation into the factors that influence effective leadership in remotely distributed startup
teams.
This paper is built around answering the following questions:
1.
How is remote leadership different from traditional leadership?
2.
What challenges need to be addressed as a remote leader?
3.
What are some of the perceived benefits of being a remote leader?
4.
What are the factors that make startup remote leaders effective?
5.
How do different levels of distance influence the leadership effectiveness in remotely
distributed startup teams?
==PAGE:10==
3. Fundamentals and related work
3.1 What is a Startup?
There are many definitions in the literature for what constitutes a startup. One of the most
simple and clear ones comes from Steve Blank, a serial entrepreneur and professor at business
schools such as Stanford, Berkeley, and Imperial College.
The definition is as follows: a startup is “a temporary organization designed to look for a
business model that is repeatable and scalable.” In contrast, a company is “a permanent
organization designed to execute a business model that is repeatable and scalable.” (see Figure
3)
Therefore the difference is that startups look for an attractive business model, while established
companies already have such a business model and are focused on successfully executing it.
This distinction affects the nature and needs of both kinds of organizations.
Figure 3 – Startup phases diagram
In his book, Blanks (2012) mentions that in order to find a repeatable and scalable model, one
must apply the scientific method, which is based on testable hypotheses, the empirical
confirmation of such hypotheses through experiments, and the analysis of the results.
Startups are typically agile enough to be able to test this type of hypothesis in rapid succession.
The small size allows for a lean approach to testing the hypothesis without huge budget
commitments.
Additionally, no restructuring is needed to test hypotheses due to its “juvenile”/ flexible nature. In
contrast, an established organization typically needs to go through a lengthy process to allocate
resources to test hypotheses at a scale that would make sense for an established company.
==PAGE:11==
When it comes to the size of the company, Banks (2012) mentions that a company in the
execution phase of the business model is typically 150 individuals or higher.
In this paper, we will be focusing on the “The search for the business model” phase, startups
that have under 150 people.
3.2 Startup team dynamics
McGrath (1984) categorizes group tasks into four sections: generation, selection, negotiation,
and execution. All of these activity categories can be found in a startup context. Intra-team
negotiation may be less common than idea development, strategy selection, and plan
implementation.
Interdependence is another commonly utilized dimension in startup teams, which relates to how
much team members rely on one another to fulfill their jobs Gully (2002);
Bygrave and Minniti (2000) put it another way, in low-interdependence jobs, each team member
primarily works alone. In contrast, in highly interdependent tasks, each team member is
expected to discuss and provide their unique contribution to the collective result.
In general, the startup environment is thought to be highly interdependent because the team
works closely together, and each member is expected to provide some unique knowledge
Bygrave and Minniti (2000). However, the required amount of interdependence may vary
depending on where you are in the startup process.
The startup phase is characterized by frequent modifications to the business plan Bygrave and
Minniti (2000). Bygrave and Minniti (2000) discovered that the ability to absorb information and
learn from one's business environment is a key prerequisite for successful pivoting after
examining several new enterprises in the process of refining their strategies.
According to Hyytiäinen (2014), the ability to listen and learn is the most significant capability of
a startup team among Finnish angel investors and experienced entrepreneurs.
According to Hyytiäinen (2014), the startup process is an iterative or evolutive process in which
the team must regularly test their ideas against data gathered from customers and other
stakeholders. Entrepreneurs' ability to absorb information, re-evaluate their position, and
respond to changes fast are crucial in this process.
The entrepreneurial setting differs from general management or functional team contexts in four
ways, according to Ensley (2003):
1.
Resource scarcity
2.
Risk levels
3.
Time
==PAGE:12==
4.
Ambiguity
New venture teams have less access to material and social capital than larger enterprises in
terms of resources.
The personal and financial dangers associated with entrepreneurship are considerably higher
for entrepreneurs. Because new companies are frequently based on specific market
opportunities, there is a limited amount of time to capitalize on these opportunities.
Finally, emerging firms frequently have less information available for decision-making than
established corporations. All four of these variables place distinct strain on the new venture
team, making it a challenging environment in which to grow.
3.3 Levels of distance in remotely distributed teams
There are a number of studies that look at the idea of leadership distance and how it affects
performance. In this paragraph I will be looking at the different levels of distance in leading
remotely distributed teams.
Napier & Ferris (1993) speculated that the function of distance may moderate the relationships
between psychological and structural distance in determining subordinate performance and
satisfaction.
Napier & Ferris (1993) identified three dimensions of distance:
1.
Psychological distance — this type of distance refers to the difference between
supervisor and subordinate
A number of factors influence psychological distance
a.
Demographic distance — this refers to age, race, gender
b.
Power distance — which refers to the power differential between leader and
follower
c.
Perceived similarities — this refers to “the degree to which an individual believes
that s(he) is similar to a target individual’’
d.
Values similarity — refers to similarities in beliefs, value or attitude between
follower and their leaders
Psychological distance tends to be present in multi-level chain of command organizations. This
type of organization tends to be slow and resource intensive. In a startup context this type of
distance has little impact as the teams are relatively small. Startups tend to have relatively flat
structures with one level command chain.
==PAGE:13==
2.
Structural distance — this type of distance refers to physical distance as well as
organizational structure and supervision structure.
3.
Functional distance — this type of distance refers to the degree of closeness between
the leader and the subordinate
Napier & Ferris (1993) argue that functional distance is comprised of:
a.
Affect
b.
Perceptual congruence
c.
Latitude
Here Napier & Ferris draw upon the Leader–member exchange theory (LMX)
Later Antonakis & Atwater (2002) expanded on the study of leadership distance by adding high
or low levels to each of three dimensions of distance. By doing this they developed eight
typologies of leadership:
1.
Proximal leadership — which has Low - Psychological distance, Low - Structural
distance, and High - Functional distance. Antonakis & Atwater (2002) give the example
of Alexander the Great , a leader that maintained close contact with his soldiers and
treated them as equals, participated personally in battles with them.
2.
Hands-off leadership — Low - Psychological distance, Low - Structural distance, and
Low - Functional distance. An example is the type leader that is accessible to followers
and can speak intimately with followers, but does not interact frequently with followers as
a result of leader substitutes.
3.
Virtually close leadership — High - Psychological distance, Low - Structural distance,
and High - Functional distance. This type of leader is what Avolio, Kahai, and Dodge
(2000) referred to as an ‘‘e-leader’’.
4.
Socially distant leadership — Low - Psychological distance, High - Structural distance,
and High - Functional distance. The Duke of Wellington, for example, was described by
Kegan (1987) as keeping frequent contact with his soldiers and commanding from close
quarters. He was, however, cold, detached, loftily condescending, the voice of someone
speaking across an unbridgeable gap between him and the groundlings....
==PAGE:14==
5.
Virtually distant leadership — High - Psychological distance, High - Structural
distance, and High - Functional distance. A remote leader that is distant both socially
and physically to his followers but relies heavily on technology to get in contact with his
subordinates.
6.
Avuncular leadership — High - Psychological distance, Low - Structural distance, and
Low - Functional distance. F.D. Roosevelt exemplified the avuncular leader; he
championed the ordinary people's cause, paid attention to them, promoted social
equality, and appeared to be warm-hearted Willner (1984).
7.
Manor house leadership — Low - Psychological distance, High - Structural distance,
and Low - Functional distance. A good example here is the Waldman and Yammarino's
(1999) definition of a typical CEO, who, despite being physically close to followers, he
was socially distant from them and only communicates with them indirectly (and with
subordinate leaders directly).
8.
Distal leadership — High - Psychological distance, High - Structural distance, and Low
- Functional distance. A notable example of a distant leader is Adolf Hitler. Hitler was
depicted by Kegan (1987) as being physically and socially detached from his troops. His
soldiers' interactions with him were infrequent and choreographed. He was uninterested
in them, distant, and mostly dealt with his subordinate leaders.
The eight typologies encompass a number of leadership styles, most of them prominent
historical figures. While the researcher agrees with the overall structure of defining distance
leadership typologies, he finds it a bit too generic for the purpose of this paper. For an indepth
look see Chapter 6.5.
3.4 A brief history of the evolution of leadership styles
The subject of leadership is popular and there are many papers looking at the different aspects
within leadership.
There are several theories around leadership, the researcher will briefly describe some of them
to depict the evolution over the years and how we arrived at the current leadership theories.
Great man Theory
==PAGE:15==
The concept of leadership became widely popular in the nineteenth century, and early
philosophers studied military and political leaders. According to the great man theory, leaders
are born rather than created or taught to be leaders. "The history of the world is but the
biography of great men", Carlyle (1841).
Of course, this study took place during a time when the participants in the study were primarily
aristocratic, religious, or military men from the upper classes; as a result, the author's argument
denies the ability of persons from lower social rank to advance to positions of leadership.
Spencer (1895) criticized Carlyle's formulation of the Great Man idea, claiming that it was
primitive and unscientific to ascribe historical events to the actions of a few Great Men. Carlyle's
"great men," according to Spencer, were simply products of their social environment.
Trait Theory
The trait theory evolved from the great man theory, which switched the focus to researching the
characteristics of outstanding leaders. It was proposed that by defining these characteristics,
those with them may be identified as having the qualities of a good leader.
It was believed that having this information would make it easier to recruit for high-ranking
positions Stogdill (1974). Despite the fact that trait theory was beneficial in that it defined what
makes a strong leader, scholars agreed that the theory had reached its conclusion and that the
attention should now shift to leadership behavior. Trait theory has been criticized for its simplistic
approach.
Behavioural Theory
The focus of leadership thinking shifted away from trait theory and toward leaders' behavior and
interactions with their followers. During this time, many behavioral and social scientists who
studied management also researched leadership. McGregor (1960) was one of the more
renowned figures, and he had a significant influence on leadership academics as they shifted
their focus away from the leader's individual characteristics and onto their actions.
It was widely accepted that a leader's success was determined by what they did and how they
did it, rather than the "Person," as was previously assumed. For the first time, this meant that
exceptional leadership could be attained by anyone with the necessary talents. Both White &
Lippitt (1960) and Lewin (1997) conducted study on this topic that backed up McGregor's theory
and identified three distinct leadership styles that could be observed when making judgments.
1.
Autocratic — A leader who makes decisions without consulting his or her followers or
even organization members.
2.
Democratic — When the leader seeks input from others and is considered of the input
they bring.
3.
Laissez-faire — A leader with a laissez-faire attitude encourages others to take charge
by removing themselves from the decision-making process. It's important to highlight
==PAGE:16==
that a leader's decision to take a laissez-faire approach to decision-making is a
conscious choice, not an excuse from a leader who is lazy or preoccupied.
Situational Leadership Theory
According to Yukl (2013), in the 1950s, Fiedler proposed that a leader's efficacy was largely
influenced by the leader's characteristics and traits, but was also influenced by the situation.
Hersey & Blanchard (1977) conducted additional research and focused on the characteristics of
the followers in the situation.
They recommended that leaders adapt their approach to a situation based on the follower.
Situational leadership is another name for this concept. Mullins (1995) agreed, stating that
leaders must adapt their leadership style to the development (or "maturity") of their followers.
See
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4 – Situational leadership diagram
Depending on the follower's growth level, the four styles (S1, S2, S3, or S4) imply that leaders
should focus more or less on the work at hand and/or the relationship between the leader and
the follower.
The Full-Range Leadership Theory
Bass and Avolio’s (1994) Full Range Leadership Model (FRLM) contends that there are three
types of leaders who express unique sets of traits that are tied specifically to their leadership
styles. The first leadership style, transformational leadership, is the most beneficial style and
most desirable form of leadership.
1.
Transformational leaders — are known for instilling intrinsic drive in their followers,
fostering growth and development in their subordinates, creating a great working
atmosphere, pushing for a common vision, and providing mentoring and advice to
followers.
2.
Transactional leadership — the most frequent leadership style found in many firms.
Transactional leaders focus on monitoring, organization, and performance, and employ
both rewards and punishments, sometimes known as "carrots and sticks," to instill
conformity inside the organization. Transactional leaders frequently choose this
approach because they want to maintain the status quo.
3.
Laissez-faire leadership — is widely regarded as the most ineffective type of leadership.
Laissez-faire leaders are known for their lack of leadership, enabling followers to set
their own rules and have a greater role in selecting which policies are best for the
company. As a result, laissez-faire executives are more likely to intervene when things in
organizations go wrong.
Despite the fact that the FRLT is the standard-bearer for the neocharismatic leadership
movement, it ignores key leader characteristics that Antonakis and House (in press) refer to as
instrumental leadership. Instrumental leadership accounts for leader actions that are (a)
strategic in character (i.e., strategy creation and implementation) and effect the organizational
level of analysis and (b) follower work facilitation (path-goal facilitation and outcome monitoring).
Adaptive Structuration Theory
Avolio, Kahai & Dodge (2000) suggest an Adaptive Structuration Theory-based framework for
investigating how Advanced Information Technology influences and is influenced by leadership.
The consequences of Advanced Information Technology, according to this concept, arise from
their interaction with organizational structures, of which leadership is a part. It should be
emphasized that interactions with Advanced Information Technology may affect organizational
structures, including leadership. The authors use an Adaptive Structuration Theory-based
framework to compile relevant findings and proposals from a wide range of sources in order to
make recommendations for building an e-leadership research agenda.
==PAGE:18==
Distributed Leadership Theory
According to Bolden (2011), researchers and practitioners only started to accept the concept of
distributed leadership in the year 2000. Harris (2009) and Gronn (2000) are two of the primary
researchers who contributed to the development of DL Theory, according to their paper. Until
Spillane (2012) "defined 'distributed cognition' and 'activity theory' as the conceptual foundations
of their particular account of DL," the term "D" was not frequently used as a crucial concept.
Bennett, Wise, Woods, and Harvey (2003) conducted a study in which they reviewed all of the
literature on distributed leadership. Due to their similarities, the study also covered delegated
leadership, democratic leadership, devolved leadership, and distributed leadership. It is difficult
to find a clear definition for distributed leadership. However, Kayworth & Leidner (2002) defined
it as "leadership that is not in the same physical location as the team that he or she is
managing."
Because the teams were working from afar, they relied on technology to communicate (e-mail,
webbased etc).
Other scholars, such as MacBeath (2006), argue that DL is a practice and structure founded on
team members' acceptance of one another's leadership potential, and that formal leaders must
'let go' of control and enable others to take it on if it is in the team's best interests.
Spillane (2012) argues that many organizations must allow teams to become self-directed.
Self-managed teams are becoming increasingly frequent in all organizations, but their success
will be determined by how well people in varied leadership roles can communicate, unite, and
work toward a single goal. Cameron & Green (2015) also discuss this topic, claiming that
effective leadership does not always originate from the top down of an organization, implying
that leaders can emerge from any level of the organization depending on the situation and
culture.
3.5 Leadership effectiveness in a traditional setting
The essential challenge of leadership is the ability to enact change. Despite the fact that a great
deal of research has been done on what constitutes a good leader, there appears to be no
universal agreement. Outstanding leaders are essentially a fine combination of traits, abilities,
behaviors, sources of authority, and situational factors.
These become the deciding variables in one's ability to influence others and achieve group
goals. Given any degree of natural traits and the conditions surrounding the event, any member
of any organization can assume leadership at any time. Various leadership functions could be
carried out by different persons who can effectively influence what the group accomplishes, how
it is done, and how the group interacts with one another. The amount to which the group
==PAGE:19==
achieves its goals is the most effective measure of a leader's and his/her skill. Stephan Covey,
the author of The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, said it well, "Begin with the end in mind."
Effective leadership is frequently seen as one of the pillars of organizational success and
growth. Effective leadership is, in reality, a source of competitive advantage for businesses and
the cornerstone for their success and growth Kim (2007).
Organizations' ability to conduct and sustain strategic change projects has been severely
hampered by a lack of effective leadership. Establishing and reinforcing values and purpose,
developing a vision and the strategies required to achieve the vision, forming the community
required to implement the strategies, and initiating and managing the changes required to
ensure growth and survival are all essential roles of effective organizational leaders Bodinson,
(2005).
According to McCauley (2004) and Kim (2007) individual leadership characteristics that may
influence leadership effectiveness include:
1.
Intelligence — Intelligent leaders have the ability to grow, learn and master new
approaches to lead people. There are three main concepts to consider when boosting it:
self-awareness, executive brain function, and response agility.
2.
Dominance — Dominant leaders achieve their objectives by exerting their authority as
the boss, rewarding employees with bonuses and promotions, and threatening others
with penalties.
3.
Leadership styles are constantly evolving, and the 'dominant' style is becoming less
popular in recent years. This is because authoritarian leaders in professional settings are
not tolerated as much as they used to be. Instead, more flexible and collaborative
leadership styles are being favored.
4.
Generalized self-efficacy — Leaders with a generalized self-efficacy cope better when
challenges arise and when they encounter pushback. They stay calm and exercise
self-control even when in very stressful situations. In addition, they also are more willing
to put in the effort needed to lead well and take care of their group's needs.
5.
Self-monitoring — Mark Snyde (1979) coined the term "self-monitoring" to characterize
how closely people/leaders watch their self-presentations, expressive behavior, and
effective nonverbal displays.
6.
Emotional intelligence — Leaders that are emotionally intelligent are cognitively and
emotionally sensitive. These leaders are acutely aware of others' feelings and recognize
that empathy entails both a cognitive and an emotional component (knowing what others
are going through) (feeling what others feel).
==PAGE:20==
7.
Conscientiousness — Conscientious leaders behave ethically and expect others to do
so as well. There are no compromises when it comes to ethical, legal, or safety norms.
One significant contribution is to hold the team and the company accountable for
maintaining high standards in these areas.
8.
Emotional stability — Emotionally stable leaders use anger and disappointment
strategically to jog people out of complacency. Emotional stable leaders see the
advantage of using occasional and well-timed expressions of strong emotion have a
galvanizing effect on performance.
9.
Extraversion — Extraverted leadership involves being extroverted, outspoken, brave,
chatty, and dominant in order to command attention. This has the benefit of establishing
a clear authority structure and providing direction.
Furthermore, leader effectiveness can also be measured in terms of follower attitudes, conduct,
satisfaction, and acceptance. According to Svensson and Wood (2005), organizational
successes can be explained by the notion that organizational leadership effectiveness has a
direct relationship and association. The contingency leadership paradigm views leadership
effectiveness as dynamic and continual. This dynamic and consistency are determined by two
contextual variables: contextual precision and timely precision. Contextual precision refers to a
leader's contextual awareness in a global framework, whereas timely precision refers to a
leader's timely observation in corporate and societal contexts at a specific point in time. The
contingency model can be used to study and evaluate the effectiveness of leadership over time.
It can also be utilized to pinpoint specific events that resulted in successful or poor
organizational outcomes.
Chen and Silverthorne (2005) suggest a situational approach to leadership effectiveness, which
allows managers to choose the leadership style that best suits their subordinates' preparedness,
ability, and willingness. According to the situational approach, a good fit between leadership
style and subordinate readiness leads to increased subordinate satisfaction and performance.
Effective leader behavior will include less structure (task focus) and less socio-emotional
support as the level of follower readiness rises (relationship orientation). The leader must
provide direction at the lower stages of readiness. With increasing levels of readiness, however,
followers are in charge of task direction Hersey (1996).
Something to keep in mind is that these traits are collected from a sample size that goes across
many industries and time periods, some of these traits are not relevant anymore in present
times. Furthermore, some of these traits could be considered good in military leadership
positions, but at the same time, they might be considered bad in a startup context.
==PAGE:21==
3.6 The challenges and benefits of remote leadership.
In this chapter, the researcher describes the main challenges remote startup leaders face.
Furthermore, the author will look at the benefits that remote leadership brings.
The success pillars of all-remote leaders are similar to traditional leaders, but there are certain
areas where all-remote leaders need to pay particular attention.
Being a leader in an all-remote startup is much like being a leader in any other startup. It comes
down to trust, communication, and company-wide support of shared goals, all of which aid in
avoiding dysfunction.
Remote forces you to do the things you should be doing way earlier and better. It forces
discipline that sustains culture and efficiency at scale, particularly in areas that are easily
deprioritized in on-site startups.
For a remote leader, it is essential not to assume that team members understand good remote
work practices. Remote leaders are expected to coach their team members to utilize
asynchronous communication, design an optimal workspace, and understand the importance of
self-learning/self-service.
What are the challenges of being a remote leader?
Although leading remote teams is difficult, it is not more difficult than leading on-site teams. It is
just different and requires different skill sets in order to succeed. However, a remote leader must
be aware of the problems posed by distance, the restrictions it imposes, and the constant
reliance on technological intermediates channels.
This awareness can help remote leaders prepare better to lead accordingly.
Zander (2013) identifies three broad critical challenges that leaders have in virtual teams.
Goal alignment is the first challenge.
Multinational companies will have three main goals: short term, medium term, and long term.
Different teams prioritize different goals depending on where you look in the companies across
the globe.
I.E. the global leaders may prioritize short to medium-term goals while local leaders may
prioritize long-term goals. Zander (2013) mentions that this expectation might be culturally
routed and brought through another way in the local environment. Interactions with various
stakeholder groups on a local level might reinforce these goals. Fundamental assumptions can
be rooted in culture or may be passed down through tradition.
Zander (2013) goes further to separate two levels of team goals. Operational, which are usually
explicit, and those that are not well defined but are assumed to be mutual. Assuming shared
==PAGE:22==
objectives in multicultural teams can be problematic as these may divert from one cultural
context to the next.
In the startup setting, the goal-setting structure is similar to large organizations. There are also
short, mid, and long-term goals. In a startup setting, there is a bigger enthesis on short-term
goals, and the lifeline of a startup is, in many cases, only a few months.
Another point that might make goal setting more complicated for large global organizations is
that the information gets diluted as it follows down the hierarchical structure. By the time it
reaches the other end of the line, it becomes so lean and stripped of the context that the local
team does not have a choice but to rely on assumptions.
However, in a startup environment, the information goals often come directly from the origin,
making it easier to ask clarifying questions to get a clearer goal and even the reasoning behind
it. All this makes it easier to follow through.
Furthermore, Eric Johnson, VP of Engineering at GitLab mentions another part of the
goal-setting challenge for remote leaders. "People need to be able to work independently on
things, and so you have to focus on work breakdown. Take a large project, break it up into
chunks. Something that someone can take offline for half a day, a day, a week, and come back
with a result, and then integrate that result with the pieces that their teammates had been
working on, so that you complete the project together. Work breakdown, or work shaping, is that
much more important in remote organization". This is probably a bit on the practical side but
nevertheless still relevant.
The second challenge is communication and trust.
Communication remains the biggest challenge for an effective leader. This also remains an
obstacle for leaders leading remotely distributed startup teams.
In her paper Zander (2013) mentions that team members have to overcome the practical
challenges of different time zones constraints for real-time interactions, making communication
harder than in person.
In contrast, collocation leaders can observe teammates' behaviors outside meetings and can
create a better picture.
If we look at startup teams, this is even more prominent, the company size is relatively small,
and in many cases, most of the startup is the leader's immediate team.
In the early stages of a startup, communication resembles more the way friends communicate.
Formalities are skipped, and conversations are raw and unfiltered. This type of communication
allows for deeper relationships. In turn, this helps leaders understand each of their team
members to a deep level. This deep understanding creates a level of trust that is hard to
achieve in an online setting.
Why do we need trust in a remote team?
==PAGE:23==
The development of trust can vary from team to team and from culture to culture. Zander (2013)
says that, ultimately, trust is needed so that your team behaves in a predictable manner and will
consistently deliver on their promises.
This is even more true for a startup environment as many times there is less stability and fewer
incentives to harbor trust.
Zander (2013) tells us that "Trust develops most effectively as a result of shared experiences
and a rich interaction context that allows deeper interface and interdependence." In a remote
startup setting, this can be hard to achieve as there is not much previous context and next
experiences are always dependent on intermediary technology like Zoom and Slack.
For early-stage startups, communicating and building relationships is extra hard. Casual
conversations that are normally held during lunch/coffee machines are no longer possible.
Without planning and allocating time for it, this takes away from the whole experience. As CTO
of Gorgias puts it," you can't make a startup work without working long hours, without smelling
each other's sweat. You just can't get ahead. You can't make it without being close to each other
when celebrating the small wins and being sad over losses. This creates a special bond that
gets you through the toughest periods...".
While this makes complete sense in an early stage, remote startup relocation can be risky and
expensive. If leaders relocate to a more expensive country, leaders may have a way shorter
runway. Additionally, if you relocate, you might lose the ability to leverage your local network as
an advantage.
Another important aspect of communication for remote leaders is that it requires extra effort to
communicate clearly, and to be able to do this, leaders need to learn how to communicate
without too much context.
Additionally, there is a stronger enthesis on listening and asking better questions. It means that
leaders need to read between the lines and assess emotions as well and all in an online setting.
The usual over-the-shoulder chat now requires leaders to take time to write a clear Slack
message or email or taking time to set a proper video call.
Cultivating relationships in a remote setting can easily become a task that some team members
do not participate in as much. It is easier to feel close to colleagues who work in the same office.
However, as a leader, you would need to step outside your comfort zone by reaching out to
remote team members in a nice, kind, and professional manner.
The third challenge is to keep team members motivated
One of the main objectives of a leader is to help teams see the bigger picture and align them to
the organization's goals. In a startup, context motivation goes one step further and requires
==PAGE:24==
leaders to convince team members to believe in their reality against all odds. This sometimes
implies taking bigger risks than a mature company.
Zander (2013) says there are two main types of motivations, autonomous motivation
(willingness to engage) and controlled motivation (having to engage). In organizations, a team
that works in a virtual setting tends to demonstrate less willingness to engage in team-based
attempts to align goals. This disinterest can lead to less involvement in getting to know others
on the team. As a result, leaders need to put in more effort with this type of individuals / teams
to motivate them. Otherwise, motivation problems are sure to arise.
This is even more true in a remote startup setting where goals can sometimes be ambiguous. A
lack of incentives and clear goals will enhance demotivation and make team members drift apart
faster.
This does not mean that leaders with virtual teams willing to engage will not need to put in the
effort to maintain the involvement levels. Zander (2013) argues that virtual teams can quickly
disengage because of the team leader's leadership style. She says that leadership behaviors
and expectations are strongly related to national culture and may differ dramatically from culture
to culture.
This might impact big organizations, where people are allocated to a team within a company.
However, in small startup teams, this has less of an impact. Small team leaders are usually
personally involved in the hiring process. Clearly, they understand whether this particular
individual will be a good fit for the team or not before they even join the team.
Some leaders might be tempted to employ a "chameleon" leadership style, where the leader
employs different leadership styles depending on which team member they talk to and their
cultural background. This is found to have a negative impact on the overall team dynamics and
company cultures. The leader is seen as fake and dishonest.
Zanders (2013) research touches on some of the most relevant challenges. However, the
research was done in 2013, at a time remote work was in its infancy, and only big corporations
were able to adopt some form of remote work. Compared to today, where most organizations
undertake some form of remote work.
It is important to mention that this refers to leaders in established organizations who normally
lead bigger teams and do not necessarily apply to startups.
What are the benefits of being a remote leader?
There are many benefits of working remotely as a leader. The researcher describes below some
of them.
The first benefit is flexibility and freedom.
==PAGE:25==
It depends on the level of distance, but in essence, remote leaders can work from anywhere.
Remote leaders are normally assessed on their performance, meaning they can choose their
work time slots. This is also true for individual contributors. Truly remote startups do not care
much about the location as long as the milestones are met. Another part that is typically
important is the way one delivers and documents work.
The flexibility to work from anywhere means different things for each person. There are extreme
cases where leaders travel the world full time and are location independent. Many others just
like the ability to work while visiting family and friends in different locations.
Even for people who typically work from their home office, this type of flexibility allows them to
do things like go for a run, take care of children or spend more time with family.
Furthermore, a remote leader, when expanding the team, is no longer bound to one location.
They have the opportunity to create a team of top performers across multiple pools of talent.
This gives an incredible advantage in today's competitive talent environment. This is especially
true for startups with IT focus that normally have limited resources to compete with
well-established organizations.
A good level of diversity in a team is key, as pointed out Nederveen Pieterse (2015), here,
remote leaders have another advantage which comes with a larger pool of talent that becomes
available by being in a remote setting. Remote leaders get to pick not only the best performers
in a given pool of talent but also the most diverse ones.
Diversity has many advantages, including closing the bias gap, increasing innovation and
creativity, and many more.
However, leaders should be careful not to overdo it, in very diverse teams, goal setting can be
hard, as there are many different perspectives to consider. Another item to consider is that
decision-taking is slower, which can be crucial for a small agile startup.
The second major benefit is cost and time savings.
Going to work can be very expensive. Leaders have travel costs, parking, lunch, coffee and
snacks, work clothes, etc. Some USA-based employers even give refreshments or clothing
allowances as a benefit as part of the compensation package. By working remote, helps save all
these costs, which can be between $167 and $416 a month in USA depending on the location.
I.E. in Denmark, for a daily commuter that needs to get from Lyngby to Valby via public
transport, unlimited trips is $102 with a commuter card (cheapest available option).
This means more disposable income is available for other things, which is always good.
Childcare costs can also be reduced with remote working, as parents can spend more time at
home, although it can be a huge effort to work and take care of young children.
==PAGE:26==
Another big part is time savings. The avg. commuter time in the USA is 26 min one-way, this is
roughly an hour a day on commuting. This time can be spent on more relevant things like
spending time with family and other more desirable activities.
Another advantage remote leaders benefit from in the recruitment process is that they spend
less time filling job openings. They normally have access to a much bigger pool of talent and a
wide range of compensation packages. In some extreme cases, they have a bigger team with
more talented people and less money. This is primarily by leveraging the ability to hire in local
markets and outcompete the local employers on compensation packages.
The third benefit is comfort and balance.
Open space offices are common, considered cool and progressive, but often noisy and
distracting. People are talking, there are all kinds of motion happening that can be distracting,
and there is a general buzz.
While this is fantastic for socializing, working in this environment can be challenging. Most of us
need to work in a somewhat quiet environment to focus.
Working from home allows for more creative thinking and productivity.
Another advantage of remote work is that it allows you to set up your office or workspace as you
want.
If you are messy, you will not have to worry about your coworkers complaining. Moreover, if you
are the office's tidy person, you can concentrate on your own space.
Many people are more productive when they are in their own surroundings. You can choose
your workspace environment if you work from home as a telecommuter or freelancer.
Leadership roles are sometimes over-requested, it could be for tutoring purposes or for
guidance on project milestones. Normally this is not a problem, but leaders also need focus time
where they get things done. In a physical office, this can be complicated as the person would
just show up at your desk. In a remote setting, they have more space to choose these time slots
to fit with their schedule.
==PAGE:27==
4. Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodology for answering the research questions established in
Chapter 2.2.
4.1 Chosen research methodology
4.1.1 Research philosophy
Before deciding on the most successful strategy for conducting this study, the researcher
considered whether quantitative and qualitative research or a combination of the two should be
used.
Quantitative research relies primarily on data and numerical analysis, presenting the findings as
relationships between variables. As this is a relatively new type of leadership, there are no freely
available relevant databases to use in this thesis.
Furthermore, the researcher did not have direct access to a considered number of candidates to
create a significant amount of data through surveys.
Additionally, creating accurate surveys that pinpoint the real issues in space requires previous
deep knowledge in the field of remote leadership in a startup setting.
Lastly, the candidates are typically people with very crowded time schedules. The researcher
did not believe that answering a stranger's survey would be an essential task on any leader's
agenda.
Considering that the author did not have direct access to a database and did not have an easy
way to compile one, an interpretivism research philosophy was chosen.
At the core of an interpretivism research philosophy is qualitative data.
According to Žukauskas (2017) "Interpretivist research philosophy says that the social world can
be interpreted in a subjective manner." Here, knowing how people interact with the social world
is given the utmost importance. The foundation of interpretivism research methodology is the
idea that the researcher has a specific function in observing social reality. In this research
philosophy, the research is driven by the researcher's interests.
Qualitative research allows for a more iterative approach, meaning that the first interviews are
not necessarily for collecting empirical data. Instead, they help map the landscape and help the
interviewer get in-depth domain knowledge.
Furthermore, interviews allow for a feedback loop. The researcher gets to know if the questions
touch the essential aspects of remote leadership. The feedback loop can be the leader's body
language, voice intonation, or fidgeting. But it also allows for clarifying questions.
==PAGE:28==
Later interviews were more consistent as the researcher learned which questions were clear
and which were too generic.
4.1.2 Research approach
The researcher wanted to keep an open mind when exploring this field. An inductive research
type was chosen for the purpose of this thesis.
Inductive research allows the research to start with a detailed observation of the world. As he
progresses through the investigation moves toward more abstract generalizations and ideas.
Inductive reasoning is frequently referred to as a "bottom-up" technique for knowledge, as it is
shown in the Figure 4.1.2, where the researcher uses observations to create an abstraction or
to paint a picture of the topic under study.
Figure 4.1.2 – Inductive reasoning diagram
4.1.3 Time horizon
Due to limited resources and time, the researcher decided to opt against a longitudinal time
frame. A cross-sectional time frame was chosen as the researcher believes that this will provide
the most amount of value given the limited circumstances.
4.2 Construction of the interview questions
In his book, Fitzpatrick (2017) outlines what are good questions and what are bad questions to
ask during an interview. His hands-on approach to interviews helps him avoid leading questions.
Lending questions are bad because the data can be biased. This can lead the investigation in
an incorrect direction. As the author mentions many times in his book, avoid “fluff” at all costs.
The whole book is about how to formulate questions in such a way that even your loving, caring
mom would tell you the unbiased truth.
The researcher had two iterations on some of the questions as the interview went on. Because
the researcher realized there is a better way to get the interviewee to talk and open up more.
The researcher did validate that the candidate is the right person to talk to beforehand. He used
LinkedIn personal and company profile profiles to ensure this was a startup and that the
candidate was in a leadership position.
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Procedure and participants
4.3.1 Interview types
The researcher conducted three types of interviews
1.
Online interviews — One-on-one interviews in the form of Video calls using tools like
Zoom and GoogleMeets or Slack.
This approach fits into their workflow and can be easily integrated into their
calendars/schedules. It requires low effort, and it's familiar. It gave the researcher some
non-verbal communication cues, voice intonation, facial expressions, etc. This type of
interview represents the main block of collected data.
2.
Asynchronous interviews — These types of interviews are less traditional. This allows
for an asynchronous interview and allows for flexibility to fill in the questions on their own
time. This approach is different from a questionnaire because it has an iterative process.
The researcher can ask several clarifying/follow-up questions in the form of comments.
The researcher created a google docs document that he shared with the interviewee
online.
This approach is interesting, it makes the whole transcript part of the research much
easier. However, it can be hard to do at scale. It could be a nightmare to keep track of
10-20 interview docs at the same time.
3.
Ad-Hoc interviews — This type of interview is more of a conversation around the coffee
machine and the water cooler. These interviews normally lasted about 15-20 min. They
normally cover only 2-3 questions from the online interviews. They are normally not
scheduled and happen naturally, as the researcher was part of an accelerator space
while conducting his research.
The length of these interviews usually are about 15-20 min.
Furthermore, this type of interview helped the author get familiar much faster with the subject.
Additionally, it helped cut down on the number of iterations for the main interviews.
The problem with this type of interview is that they are not planned, and sometimes it's hard to
take notes. A good approach is to take notes right after the discussion as the conversation is
still fresh on the mind.
==PAGE:30==
The researcher is aware that his type of data points can be hard to replicate.
The researcher attempted to interview people through Slack. The idea was to create focus
groups and have an ongoing discussion in Slack channels. Eventually, the idea was dropped as
none of the participants wanted to really commit to it. Additionally, most of the interviewees have
many slack channels, including work, and most of the time, other messages tend to be muted,
thus being ignored a lot of the time.
This method could be interesting to explore in another paper and with a different focus group
than entrepreneurs. The researcher sees it as an intermediate between qualitative interviews
and qualitative interviews. It has a degree of flexibility that other data collection methods do not
have. I.E. you can make live polls, you can edit messages, you get instant access to the people
involved
4.3.2 Participant Pool
The online interviews were conducted virtually via Google meets. The intention was to interview
remote startup leaders from various industries with remotely distributed teams in common.
It was important that we looked at the department, as certain aspects of leadership may be
particular to that department. Furthermore, the researcher wanted to see if there are leadership
patterns that emerge across departments distributed remotely.
The researcher looked at industry. All the participants work with software to a certain degree,
either selling software or creating it.
As the main targeted group was early-stage startups, most of the leadership roles were C
levels, either with or without experience in previous companies.
No company secrets were discussed during the interviews. The focus was on the leadership
practices within startups. Participants agreed to share their names and contact details as part of
this study. There was no need for confidentiality, so no Non Disclosure Agreements were not
needed.
==PAGE:31==
Participant
Role
Department
Immediate
team size
(weekly
interaction
s)
Leader
timezo
ne
Team
timezone
Type of
remote
distance
Industry
Interview type
Simon
CTO
Engineering
4
UTC
(+1)
UTC (+1) |
UTC (+2)
Hybrid
Fintech
Ad-Hoc
Alex
CTO
Engineering
25-30
UTC
(-8)
|UTC
UTC (-8) |
UTC (-4) |
UTC | UTC
(+1) | UTC
(+2) | UTC
(+3)
Hybrid
SaaS
Ad-Hoc
Ivana
Team lead
Product
-
UTC
(+1)
UTC (+1) |
UTC (+2)
Full
remote
SaaS
Ad-Hoc
Romain
CEO
Sales
-
UTC
(-8)
|UTC
UTC (-8) |
UTC (-4) |
UTC | UTC
(+1) | UTC
(+2) | UTC
(+3)
Hybrid
SaaS
Ad-Hoc
Radu
Team lead
Engineering
6
UTC
(+2)
UTC (-8) |
UTC (-6) |
Full
remote
Entertain
ment
Ad-Hoc
Laurynas
Sales
team lead
Sales
5
UTC
(+2)
UTC (+2)
Remote
Finance
Online
Jeff
CSO
Sales
8
UTC
(-6)
UTC (-8) |
UTC (-6) |
UTC (-5) |
UTC (-4)
Asynchro
nous
Software
Developm
ent
Online
Miles
CEO
Sales /
Engineering
7-8
UTC
(-4)
UTC (-8) |
UTC (-6) |
UTC (-5) |
UTC (-4)
Asynchro
nous
Software
Developm
ent
Online
Maciej
Sale team
lead
Sales
9
UTC
(+2)
UTC (+2)
Remote
SaaS
Online
Cristian
CTO
Engineering
3
UTC
(+2)
UTC (+1)|
UTC (-8)
Full
remote
HR tech
Asynchronous
Nick
CEO
Sales
3
UTC
(+1)
UTC (+1) |
UTC (+2)
Remote
HR tech
Online
Platon
CEO
Sales
3
UTC
(+3)
UTC (+1) |
UTC | UTC
(+2) | UTC
(+3)
Full
remote
HR tech
Online
Table 1 – Participant pool
==PAGE:32==
The researcher considered the age of the participants, and there is a pattern that emerged
within the limited pool. All participants are under 37 years old, and grew up in the internet age.
4.3.3 Ethical Considerations
The researcher is well aware that ethics must be carefully considered before beginning any type
of research. Creswell (2006) and Berg (2009) both noted that an adequate research design
must include ethical considerations. Here are three main factors:
●
Informed consent of participants
All participants agree to share their insight with the readers of this paper in a verbal form.
●
Confidentiality of participants (if at risk)
As no company secrets were shared during the interviews all participants agreed to share their
names as part of the research.
●
Autonomy of participants
All participants agreed to participate without any incentives. They just wanted to share their
knowledge and learnings to pass further down the line.
4.3.4 Bias
It is correct to state that the author of this paper has worked for a few years in a remote
leadership role himself. However, the author was aware that bias could affect how he perceived
the results, so he purposefully sought out variability by utilizing a sampling scheme to assure
the accuracy of the results. Most of the data gathered during the interview process was
documented to avoid measurement bias.
4.3.5 Reliability and Validity
According to Kirk & Miller (1986), the reliability and validity of any research are determined by
how comparable the findings would be if another researcher conducted a similar study. They
also state that the results of most research projects will vary, and maintaining validity is a major
challenge.
Because this research was collected through conducting a number of informal interviews, there
was an expectation that there would be a level of variance in the data. There are a variety of
variables that could have an impact on how reliable the data is, including:
==PAGE:33==
●
The interviewer desire to gain precise information
●
Limited pool of candidates
●
The relationship between the interviewer and some of the interviewees
●
Type of interviews
5. Interview results
The researcher interviewed startup leaders across several industries mentioned in the previous
chapter. In this chapter, the researcher presents the findings from interviewing twelve people.
Question 1 – team size and common interactions
How big is your immediate team? people within your team you interact with on a daily /
bi-daily basis? How do you interact?
This question confirmed that the interviewee is a leader. Furthermore, this question tells the
researcher the size of the team. Most of the candidates (92.6%) spoke with a team of under ten
people they interacted with. The interactions they had varied, from daily to several times a
week. Most of the interactions were through a video call or text in the form of chat or email.
They typically interact in two consistently occurring meetings throughout the pool of candidates:
●
Daily stand-ups – in this meeting, all the members of the team participate through a
video call. Each of the members would go through what they worked on the day before.
Next, all the team members are normally going through all the things they need to do
that day. Lastly, they go through any potential roadblocks.
For the leaders, roadblocks this is a time where they pay the most attention. This usually is
some of the “first signs of trouble,” as they mention, and the perfect opportunity to make
everyone aware of a potential team roadblock.
Furthermore, leaders say that this is a good opportunity to “give some quick tips” if there are any
or agree on another time slot.
The length of this type of interaction varies from 15-30 min, depending on the team size.
The purpose of this meeting is to make the whole team aware of the overall status.
==PAGE:34==
The researcher observed additional differences between these types of meetings in a hybrid
setting and an asynchronous setting.
Hybrid companies – they would do this meeting online even if some of the team members
were in the same room. They did this “to make an equal playing field” when it comes to
interaction, and to make sure there was nothing that was discussed in person that the other
team members missed.
Asynchronous companies – as a rule, they do this in person, but they are more forgiving if
some extreme time zones miss them as long as they follow up later. They also record or
transcript this meeting. Some of the team members are just before bedtime so they can “catch
up on their own time.”
●
Weekly one-on-ones – in these meetings, there are usually only two team members,
the leader, and an individual contributor. They “discuss in-depth things that could not be
covered during the week”, this can include personal issues, teachings, feedback
sessions, and conflict management. There is no one frame that fits all here.
The length of this meeting varies from 30 - 60 min.
The main purpose of this meeting is to spend time apart from group meetings and create a
deeper connection with all the team members.
Furthermore, there are also as-needed meetings. These meetings are typically task-related
and vary quite a bit from task to task and from team member to team member.
Additionally, apart from the two main types of meetings, many weekly unscheduled meetings
and chat interactions happen as needed for the completion of tasks between individual team
members and the leader.
Question 2 – location and time zones
From what location do you and your team work?
The data from this question confirms that this leader works with a distributed team. Additionally,
it tells us where the team is located and how big the time difference is.
The answers to this question are quite varied. Time zones vary from the west coast of the USA
to Middle Asia.
Depending on the time distances, companies would use different means of communication. The
most interesting were the extreme, under 8-hour overlap and how they handled the time
difference challenge. The researcher covers more about communication in Question 9
==PAGE:35==
For a detailed look at all the different time zones, please consult Table 1
Question 3 – being an accessible leader
Do you make yourself accessible in a remote setting? Why? How?
The information from this question helps understand if the leaders consider making themselves
visible in a remote setting important. Furthermore, this question tells us how exactly they do this.
Some of the leaders made a real effort for them to be approachable and considered this quite
important. Others not so much.
One of the leaders mentioned that “ you need to be accessible if you want to be a good leader,
how can you help people achieve their task if you hide behind a digital wall?”
The leaders that were easily accessible made their work calendars sharable. The way they do it
is through tools like Calendly. Calendar software tools like Calendly allows them to have several
different types of events that can be easily scheduled without overlapping. One of the leaders
mentioned that tools like “calendly was a game changer when i discovered it back in 2018”. This
allows for the leader to schedule events.
Additionally, leaders that make themselves easily accessible tend to be power users of slack.
They have a library of addons that they employ to make them visible. One simple way was
explained by one of the candidates “single most used feature for availability is syncing my
google calendar with my slack. It helps my status to update so people know I am in the middle
of something and should not spam me with messages.”
All leaders have some form of Weekly one on ones, all of them make time for this meeting.
Some of the candidates consider this the main way they make themselves accessible to the rest
of the team.
Furthermore, there seems to be a correlation between how much effort a leader puts into being
approachable and visible and the number of work hours that overlap. The fewer overlapping
hours, the more effort the leaders put in.
Question 4 – fun in a remote setting
Do you ever try to make things fun in a remote setting? Why? How?
Data from this question helps understand if making things fun in a remotely distributed team is
important. Furthermore, this question tells us how exactly they do this.
==PAGE:36==
The answer to these questions was varied. Some of the leaders try to keep an overall light
atmosphere in their day-to-day interactions. This could mean non-polarising jokes, or the
occasional photoshopped memes are allowed.
One of the leaders had an interesting LED light system in his room that made it feel more like an
art installation than a workspace. Another leader likes to play with their online meeting
backgrounds, pretending to be in places worldwide. Others organize video game nights with
their teams. In this particular case, they had Minecraft game nights.
The most popular approach to creating a bit of fun is to do online Friday bars. These events are
very casual. There is no requirement to attend. Some of the teams have actual beers all on their
end. Kids are welcome to attend. There are games and jokes.
An interesting aspect is that these events are on company time. It turns out that this increases
attendance dramatically.
Question 5 – teaching junior roles
How do you teach your junior roles in a remote setting?
One of the fundamental roles of a leader is to teach junior roles. In a remote setting, this can be
challenging. This question looks at the different methods leaders use to teach junior roles.
Most of the leaders mention that teaching happens naturally. They do not allocate separate time
for this type of activity. Most of the time it happens in as-needed meetings when the junior roles
are stuck in completing a task.
Furthermore, one of the leaders mentioned that "the senior roles in my team help a lot with that."
This implies that, in some cases, teaching junior roles is more of a team effort than a leader's
responsibility.
Most leaders see the weekly one-on-one meetings as an opportunity for the junior roles to ask
questions related to their work. However, it turns out that most of the time, that is not the case.
Question 6 – motivation in a remote setting
How do you motivate / encourage people in a remote setting?
==PAGE:37==
Another core attribute of a leader is to motivate/encourage people to do their tasks. In a remote
setting, this comes with challenges. This question looks at the different approaches leaders take
to solve this challenge.
Most leaders agree that motivation is a challenge in a remote setting. Some leaders use
one-on-one weekly meetings to encourage their team members through positive and
constructive feedback.
Empathetic leaders know who needs more motivation than others, and here again, the
one-on-one weekly meetings come into play. These meetings are key to observing each team
member's feelings and giving them the attention they need.
Tools like Jira and Salesforce help leaders show how the project is progressing. They believe
this motivates the team members to keep up the good work.
Another interesting observation here is that some of the startups tend to hire self-driven people,
people that want to get things done. They inherently have a high drive level and do not
necessarily need much support regarding motivation.
Question 7 – overcoming distance
How do you overcome the distance between you and your team?
This question looks at ways the leader overcomes distance with their colleagues. Additionally,
this question looks to understand if this is important in the first place.
Seven out of twelve leaders mentioned that they organize some kind of in-person events. Most
of the time, in-person events mean that the close team flies to one location, typically for a week
or two. For that time period, they work together in a coworking space, but they also do activities,
sometimes that could mean workshops, sometime this could mean exploring the city and the
city night life. The startup normally subsidizes the events. One of the candidates mentioned that
they “…went carting, it was crazy fun…”
Leaders mention an underlying problem with remote leadership and remote work, the absence
of rapport. “In a brick and mortar office, you get to build common experiences.” One example
they gave was “could be that someone falls off the chair and makes a funny sound, then that
could become a new meme around the office” and experiences like that are important because
they create rapport and a feeling of togetherness.
==PAGE:38==
Question 8 – effective remote leader
What does it mean to be an effective leader in a remote setting?
The data from this question helps the researcher understand what it means to be an effective
leader from the leader's perspective.
This was a very broad question to ask leaders. They struggled to come up with clear answers at
first.
However, there were quite a few interesting ideas here:
●
Leadership capital
One of the leaders discussed leadership capital and that every time a leader is good, they gain
leadership capital; every time a leader is bad, they lose leadership capital. He stressed the
importance of keeping an overall positive balance.
He mentioned that "every time you are nice, you are supportive, you relate to their situation, you
gain positive leadership capital". Every time leaders are too critical and do not show support.
They lose positive leadership capital.
●
Great communicator
Most leaders agree that communication is a problem. As they mention it, "communication as a
remote leader is tough," and they believe that to be an effective leader in a remote setting, they
need to be an excellent communicator.
●
Allow for ownership and trust.
Effective remote leaders help their team members to take ownership of their tasks. "Get them a
lane to run in." They believe that this gets people to work much harder, take more responsibility,
and develop better solutions.
●
Aftercare
One of the candidates mentioned a common behavior he is doing called aftercare.
Every time he pushes a bit too hard or is being too critical. He reaches out to that person and
tells them, "Hey man, just wanna let you know, I really appreciate the work. I appreciate your
feedback. I'm listening to you, this is what we're doing now. This is just now, but it's not
personal. So that anytime you do a little damage, making sure you're also repairing it."
He believes that by doing this, he minimizes the previous damage done in a previous
conversation.
●
Empathy
==PAGE:39==
Most leaders mentioned that the ability to relate to your team is an extremely important aspect
of an effective leader. They mention that because you have a number of limited connection
points throughout the day, it is important to be able to look beyond that and pick up on things
that are not that obvious.
●
Take good care of yourself.
One of the leaders mentioned that in order to be a nice positive leader, you need to have all
your things in the right place, "you can't project positivity if you yourself are in a bad place."
Questions 9 – remote technology
What software tools do you use on a daily basis?
This question gives the researcher insight into what digital tools and technology leaders use to
be effective at leadership.
Throughout the interviews, three types of digital tools emerged:
1.
Communication tools – effective remote leaders are power users of communication
tools. Through the interviews, five different communication tools are used.
●
Chat tools (instant messaging) — 75% of all the participants are using Slack 25% are
using Telegram and Whatsapp. Chat tools are mostly used for internal communication.
Chat communication tools are normally used for non-formal communication. These tools
allow for a fast succession of text exchanges between recipients. Chat is typically used
to get fast replies to time-sensitive matters.
Another surprising finding is that fully remote startups also use Chat to create rapport in
the startup. They normally have a chat channel to share anything with the whole
company/department/team. This type of channel is normally used to share memes,
jokes, pictures of colleagues in their remote work location, kids, etc.
These types of chat channels are becoming essential to remote company culture. Helps
distributed teams have a point of reference into their colleagues' lives and relate to their
present situation.
Another common use for chat tools is to share files. See Figure 5.1
==PAGE:40==
●
Emails tools — 100% of the people the author interviewed use Gmail as their primary
work email. Emails are commonly used for external communication. Communication
through emails is more formal compared to Chat. Furthermore, emails are used more
commonly in asynchronous startups
Emails are used to communicate more complex subjects that have several points to
consider.
Emails are a universal communication tool. It is normally the first step in communication.
Furthermore, emails are used for validation, ensuring this person works for this company
and is whom they pretend to be. See Figure 5.1
●
Video/audio communication tools — 66% of the people the researcher interviewed
use Google meets, 25% use zoom, and 9% use Slack Video Calls.
Video communication is used for essentially everything else. This can include any
face-to-face conversation you would normally have in a brick-and-mortar office.
Some startups are using tools like Teemyco (a video calling platform with a floorplan that
allows users to interact in a virtual office) to level up the digital interaction to another
level. However, it is normally used for special events and celebrations. None of the
companies use it on a daily basis. See Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1 – Pie charts technology use
●
Documentation tools (asynchronous communication) — For documentation tools, 50%
of the participants use Google docs, 25% use notion, and 25% use a combination of the
two.
==PAGE:41==
Documentation is a passive way to communicate. Most of the time it comes in two types
of format:
●
Summaries – meeting summaries/meeting notes
●
Instructions – guides on what needs to be done and/or how to achieve it.
An interesting observation is that documentation becomes an extremely important tool
the bigger the work time overlap difference is. In a way, it makes total sense. The less
face-to-face time they have, the more they need to put on “paper” for your colleagues to
catch up on their own schedules.
Both summaries and instructions can be made in a video/audio format to help with
interpretation and to increase the depth of non-verbal communication.
●
Visual communication — 84% use Miro, 8% use Google Jamboard, and 8% use
Figjam
Visual communication is not that common compared to the rest of communication, but it
helps get more complex ideas across. This resembles a normal whiteboard in a physical
office.
Figure 5.2 – Pie charts technology use
2.
Task management tools – Effective remote leaders employ task management tools to
help them keep track of all the tasks in a format that is easily accessible from many
locations.
Task management tools tend to be industry specific; most of the software development
teams use Jira, Asana, and Trello, while the sales team leader primarily uses Salesforce.
==PAGE:42==
Another reason task management tools are helpful for leaders is because they help keep
track of team performance and help the leaders see if some members fall behind.
3.
Industry related tools
Commonly, individual contributors are promoted to team leads and managers. Effective
leaders are normally good at the software tools they are using specific to their industry.
If it is a software startup, then there is a high chance that they know how to write code. If
it is an IOT startup, then there is a high chance that they are an electrical engineer, and
so on.
As leaders progress into their leadership roles, their knowledge shifts from how to
achieve something to how it is supposed to look when it is achieved.
Leaders say that prior knowledge of the tools and practices in a set domain is
instrumental in a remote setting. It helps emphasize with the team and understand what
they are going through. One example of this comes from one of the candidates the
researcher interviews – “If the team is going through a massive log of errors, this most of
the time means that they are in a bad mood…”
Question 10 – advantages as a remote leader
What do you like about being a remote leader?
This question helps understand the benefits of being a remote leader.
Throughout the interviews, leaders like two main factors.
First is the ability to stay flexible. As one of the candidates mentioned, "if I want to pet my dog, I
can. If I want to go for a walk, I can do that too." Another candidate mentioned, "why would I go
to a mediocre office when I have all the best things right here."
Flexibility is important in why leaders choose to be in a remote setting. They get to split the day
into chunks that work best for them and still achieve the needed results.
The second advantage remote startup leaders like is that they get to save money and time.
They do not need to get to an office far away and spend hours commuting. They save money by
living in less central areas and paying less for mortgage and rent.
==PAGE:43==
Question 11 – disadvantages as remote leader
What do you dislike about being a remote leader?
This question helps understand the disadvantages of being a remote leader.
Throughout the interviews, leaders disliked three factors.
●
Leaders mentioned that it is hard to relate to people due to the restriction of
communication and interactions. It costs extra time that would otherwise not be needed.
●
Secondly, they said that it is hard to detect if someone is working way more than usual.
"In a physical office, you see when people come to work, when they leave, and how they
take care of themselves. In a remote setting, all this is missing."
●
Lastly, leaders do not like that all interactions are deliberate. There is no "watercooler"
effect. This is hard to get used to.
6. Discussion
In this chapter the researcher is discussing some of the findings from Chapter 5.
This paper is an investigation into the factors that influence effective leadership of remotely
distributed startup teams. The researcher is looking at what exactly influences effective remote
leaders in a startup environment. The central hypothesis of this study is that remote leaders in
startup environments require a set of skills on top of what constitutes an effective leader on site,
this study is trying to identify this set of skills.
6.1 Effective remote leaders
Throughout the interview the researcher observed several factors that might influence remote
leadership efficiency in startup teams. Below the researcher analyzed each one of them.
●
Great communicator
Mehrabian (1960) analyzed what percentage of communication is non-verbal. It turns out
that 70% - 93% of communication is non-verbal, depending on how well you know that
person and how familiar you are with the context of the conversation.
Some examples of non-verbal communication can be; facial expressions, vocal tone,
body posture, physical distance, hand gestures, head movement, fidgeting, etc.
==PAGE:44==
Within this lies one of the biggest challenges when it comes to remote leadership. Good
and clear communication is the pillar of every successful organization, remote or
otherwise.
In a remote setting, leaders are limited by the technology they are using. Technology is
limiting non-verbal communication. Consequently, leaders in remotely distributed teams
need to put in extra effort to fill this gap.
Furthermore, if we compare startup remote leaders and established organization
leaders, there are additional limitations. Startup leaders have to juggle many more
responsibilities. Specifically, in communication, one of the most time-consuming tasks is
documentation. Compared to remote startup leaders, established organization remote
leaders have additional resources to help with documentation. It could be an assistant or
something similar.
Moreover, the study supports and complements Zander’s (2013) findings. Zander (2013)
mentioned that communication is one of the biggest problems for remote organizational
leaders. From the results of this study, we can see that remote startup leaders
experience various degrees of intensity depending on their level of distance, with
asynchronous startups having the most intense communication problem.
●
Allow for ownership / building trust
During the interviews, another interesting pattern emerged. Remote leaders tend to
encourage their team members to take responsibility for their tasks. This still remains
true in the case of a remote startup leader. However, some startup leaders take it to the
extreme. One of the leaders mentioned that "we will not hire this person, if they do not
show signs of taking charge and responsibility."
It seems like for some remotely distributed startup teams, the best candidates are
leaders, a team of leaders.
An observation here is that this extreme tends to be true for early-stage startups, where
leaders are likely to take responsibilities beyond their initial job description.
One potential reason for this is that there are a lot of unexplored avenues within the
startup field that are trying to succeed. In startups, the founders rarely have enough time
to explore each domain (marketing, sales, engineering, etc) to its full depth. So people
that can do this exploration on their own are more valuable and help the startup progress
faster to finding product market fit.
Following Chapter 3.6, Zanders (2013) mentions two main typologies of motivation,
autonomous and controlled. Findings support autonomous motivation. Effective leaders
==PAGE:45==
are becoming aware that self-motivation plays an important role in distributed teams.
The extreme example mentioned previously can represent their attempts at combating
this.
●
Heightened empathy
The researcher observed that effective remote startup leaders tend to be more
empathetic than other leaders.
This can be because for two main reasons:
1.
Being empathetic is a requirement to succeed in a remote environment. This is a
recruitment because communication is quite limited, so leaders need to rely on prior
knowledge of similar situations. They need to be able to relate and understand what is
on their team member's minds. Furthermore, they need to know how to navigate this
type of situation in order to achieve the best results.
2.
Remote leaders in a startup environment talk to users/customers often. There, they are
required to be empathetic with them in order to understand their needs. To be able to
relate to them. The researcher believes that this mindset might be carried over into team
interaction.
One example of this is the concept of aftercare, which is regularly employed by one of
the leaders mentioned in Chapter 5, question 8.
At a closer look, the aftercare approach has similarities to the sales process and
customer support. There the concept is called follow-ups.
●
Tech proficiency
Remote leadership is closely intertwined with technology. This is especially true for
startup remote leaders. They tend to have limited resources and capital, so if there is a
software tool that can help them be more efficient and bypass some expenses, they
need to know how to use that.
Startup remote leaders tend to combine technology tools in ways that they never met to
be combined. One example was from one of the candidates. He was using a recruitment
platform to make sales. The free recruitment platform achieved the same result as a paid
premium sales platform.
Throughout the interviews, the reliance on technology was clear. Furthermore, effective
remote leaders in startup environments are many times early adopters of new
technology.
==PAGE:46==
The reasoning here is that they would adopt anything that would give them an edge to
conquer the market faster and at scale.
Furthermore, the tech affinity of remote startup leaders is also supported by the results
presented by Avolio, Kahai & Dodge (2000) in their more general study of what
constitutes an E-Leader in established organizations.
6.2 In person events
During the interviews, an interesting pattern emerged. Most startup leaders (75%) organize
in-person events for their immediate team every 3-6 months. These events vary across startups.
Some of them are only meant for fun. Some of them are a combination of fun and work.
In-person events are separate from the big company event, and they happen in addition to
those.
When asked why leaders mention two main reasons:
●
To make things fun – This is an important aspect because being stuck in the same
place looking at a screen day in and day out can be lonely, and people start questioning
if this is something they really want to do with their lives. Creating fun events helps
people look forward to something.
Furthermore, a study on happiness in the work environment by Sgroi (2015) mentions that
happier employees can be between 12 - 20% more productive compared to their counterparts.
●
To create rapport – One good example "could be that someone falls off the chair and
makes a funny sound, then that could become a new meme around the office." These
types of situations help create common memories and experiences and, in turn, stronger
connections.
Furthermore, stronger connections make it easier to relate in an all remote environment where
the interactions are mostly limited to formal meetings.
There is a tendency to go back to what is familiar, and this would be true if all the leaders
started as traditional leaders and then moved on to become remote leaders. However, some of
the candidates in the interview were never traditional leaders, and they still organize in-person
events. This might indicate that a physical connection might be needed regardless of the
leader's prior experiences as an in-person leader.
Another reason could be that leaders want to create a whole picture of their team and the
individuals within it. In-person events sometimes involve alcohol and more leisure activities
==PAGE:47==
which further helps combat the incomplete digital images created by the remote work
environment.
Furthermore, the results of this research complement Zanders (2013), In-person events help
create the rapport needed to help with goal setting and goal alignment in remotely distributed
teams.
6.4 The concept of leadership capital
During the interviews, an interesting concept emerged. Every time a leader is caring, thoughtful,
and correct – qualities that everyone would consider good for a leader – they gain positive
leadership capital. Every time the leader is rash, critical, or rude – qualities that everyone would
consider bad for a leader – they lose positive capital.
Overall an interesting concept. However, one of the inherent complications of leadership and
why we still cannot define it clearly is because it is very subjective. Allocating “currency” / value
to every action a leader takes on paper sounds great. The problem is how to allocate this value
consistently and objectively so that everyone agrees with it.
Here we also need to consider different perspectives; the manager's, the leader's, and the
individual contributors' perspectives. Depending on what priorities each group has, the
leadership capital value would also change.
This concept might be something leaders subjectively count for themselves to keep an overall
positive image for their team. Beyond that, it becomes too subjective and unreliable.
6.5 Does different types of distance require a different set of
leadership skills?
First, the researcher would like to build on prior knowledge in this domain. As mentioned before
in Chapter 3.4 Antonakis & Atwater (2002) identified eight typologies of distance.
The researcher would like to dive deeper into the physical distance typology. He wants to look at
the types of physical distance present today.
The author finds the most relevant typology to be number three, Virtual close leadership. He
would like to define four additional subcategories to this typology that would bring the focus to
today's highly digitized environment.
If you look at physical distance from a global scale, leaders need to consider time zones. The
four main subcategories of the Virtual close leadership were identified as:
==PAGE:48==
1.
Hybrid - Same time zone. The team and the leader are part of the same country/town.
Leaders and their teams in this type of environment normally are required to have a
physical presence in an office between one and four days of a typical work week.
Many startups today adopted this type of distance, many of them as an intermediate step
towards fully remote teams.
2.
Remote - These are teams that have the same time zone but do not meet physically.
This can mean that the team is located in one or several different countries.
3.
Fully remote - Normally have only +8 hours time overlap. The leader and the team are
normally in different countries. This environment allows teams to work from different
locations as long as there is enough time overlap to communicate daily for at least 8
hours.
4.
Asynchronous - Normally, if a team has less than 8 hours of overlap time it is
considered asynchronous, meaning that they don't normally rely on synchronous types
of communication. These types of teams are not limited to a specific country or time
zone. It can even be implemented as a way to communicate between planets.
Different types of distance require the same set of skills. However, the focus shifts from
communicating face-to-face to communicating through a recorder / written format. The limitation
of face-to-face time forces leaders to become great communicators through a written format. It
forces them to use recording tools similar to Otter (online auto transcript tool) and Loom (online
video recording tool). As the work hours overlap decreases, the reliance on technology
increases.
Additionally, as the work hours overlap decreases, leaders tend to pay more attention to their
visibility and accessibility. Effective remote leaders that have little to no overlap are extremely
aware of this, as we see in our findings Chapter 5
Furthermore, in a startup's early stage, asynchronous distance is extremely complicated to
achieve. The documentation part requires too much time. Time taken away from the validation
of the idea. We are yet to see a startup that can successfully achieve an asynchronous status
from the beginning.
6.6 Practical applications
The researcher looked at how these findings can be put into practice. One potential way to help
leaders identify tools and best practices based on their level of remoteness. Furthermore,
depending on the size of the team and the stage of the startup, suggestions can be made as to
how to approach individual problems present in that particular configuration.
==PAGE:49==
This small test can help startups understand how the requirements change from one level of
remoteness to another. This will help them avoid pitfalls and loss of resources.
6.7 Limitations of the study
The main limitation of this study is the participant pool size. The subject of leadership is
subjective and requires a much larger sample size to future validate the findings. The industry
sample size is too broad. Future studies might look at individual industries, individual time zone
overlap, and individual departments' team leaders. There is an overwhelmingly large number of
male leaders in the study so the findings might be skewed towards male remote leadership
stereotypes. The study, in a way, reflects already present gender misrepresentation in the
entrepreneurial domain.
7. Conclusion
The aim of this study was to investigate the factors that influence effective leadership in
remotely distributed startup teams. After conducting interviews and analyzing the gathered
information, the researcher addressed the aims of this study.
1.
How is remote leadership different from traditional leadership?
The researcher concluded that the skills required to be an efficient remote leader in a startup
environment are not necessarily different from the skills required to be an effective onsite leader.
However, there is a big difference to what level certain skills are exercised. Compared to
traditional leaders, leaders in remotely distributed startup teams tend to have major limitations
that they need to overcome. This is the main area where the two types differ.
2.
What challenges need to be addressed as a remote leader?
The researcher identified two major limitations startup leaders in remotely distributed teams
need to address:
●
The first limitation is related to communication. Compared to their counterparts, remote
startup leaders need to be more efficient in the way they communicate. They generally
have limited window synchronous communication.
Furthermore, remote leaders are limited by the present level of technology. Most of the
communication is done through video calls and text. Which has inherent restrictions on
how much can be communicated in one session.
==PAGE:50==
Moreover, the communication session tends to be scheduled with a clear purpose, this
has the effect of creating a formal image of the team members. Which further degrades
the leader’s ability to communicate and relate to their team.
●
The second limitation is their ability to observe the team. A big part of communicating is
non-verbal communication. In a remote setting, leaders have no way of observing their
team and their body language to complement verbal communication.
Because of these limitations they need to rely on heightened empathy and higher levels
of technology proficiency to succeed in this relatively new leadership environment.
3.
What are some of the perceived benefits of being a remote leader?
Throughout the interviews, the researcher identified two major benefits that consistently came
up:
●
Flexibility – leaders like the freedom to be able to choose their own workspace, time
frame, and location.
●
Cost and time savings – leaders like to avoid commuting for work on a daily basis
through crowded highways or public transport. Furthermore, leaders want to be able to
save costs on rent and mortgages and avoid staying in expensive cities.
4.
What are the factors that make startup remote leaders effective?
During the study, the researcher identified patterns that certain remote leaders employ to boost
their efficiency in a remote setting.
●
Efficient leaders are good at building rapport in a remote setting. They are aware that the
number of casual interactions are limited, so they create events that help the team
create common experiences, in the form of in-person events, online Friday bars, etc.
●
As the number of synchronous hours decreases, efficient remote leaders put more effort
to be visible and approachable. In an asynchronous startup, this becomes extremely
important as the number of face-to-face interactions go down dramatically.
●
Allow for more trust towards their team. Remote leaders trust their team more, and allow
for more ownership of tasks.
==PAGE:51==
●
Efficient remote leaders focus on results and not on the process
5.
How does different levels of distance influence the leadership effectiveness in
remotely distributed startup teams?
As the level of remoteness increases from Hybrid to Asynchronous the researcher observed two
main factors that effective remote leaders do:
●
Communication style – changes from face-to-face/instant messaging to emails, video
recordings and text.
●
The amount of effort leaders put into being visible and available for the team.
These two factors are directly related to the amount of synchronous hours the team has
together.
8. Future work
This study represents a snapshot of what remote leadership is as a whole. The researcher
wants to encourage future research on this subject to minimize the knowledge gap.
1.
As mentioned in Chapter 3.2 there are several perspectives to what constitutes an
effective leader. In an ideal situation, both managers and individual contributors would
also be interviewed. This will help the data be more reliable. Furthermore, this will help
understand if effective leadership can be perceived as effective by all parties involved.
This will help identify relevant leaders more accurately. Thus maximizing the learnings
from appropriate leaders.
2.
In-person events represent a direct response to the lack of physical presence in remote
startups. In theory, this should have a positive effect on the performance of the leader
and the team. A potential future study would be needed to validate these assumptions
through reliable, repeatable data. It would be relevant to understand how much of an
impact this type of event has on the different stages of remoteness.
==PAGE:52==
Appendix
Transcripts
There was a lot of text so the researcher placed the transcripts in a separate document. You can
find all transcripts →here
Online interview were also recorded if you would like to hear the recordings please follow this →
link
References
1.
M. Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. B. (2008) – Leadership, followership, and evolution: Some
lessons from the past. American Psychologist, 63(3), 182–196.
2.
Mullins, L. (1995) – Management and Organisational behaviour (4th ed.). London:
Trans-Atlantic Publications.
3.
Yukl, G. (2013) – Leadership in Organizations Global Edition (8th Edition). United States:
Pearson Education (US)
4.
Duarte, D. L., & Snyder, N. T. (1999) – Mastering virtual teams: Strategies, tools, and
techniques that succeed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.,U.S.
5.
Blanks (2012)
6.
McGrath, J. E. Groups (1984) – Interaction and Performance. Upper Saddle River, N.J.:
Prentice Hall
7.
Gully, S. M., Incalcaterra, K. A., Joshi, A., & Beaubien, J. M. (2002) – A meta-analysis of
team-efficacy, potency, and performance: Interdependence and level of analysis as
moderators of observed relationships. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(5), 819–832.
8.
Minniti, M., & Bygrave, W. (2001) – A dynamic model of entrepreneurial learning.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 25: 5–16.
9.
Hyytiäinen, J. (2014) – The "means" that matter: Transforming ideas into promising
business opportunities. Master’s thesis, Aalto University
10. M. D.Ensley, A.P. Craig, L.Pearcec (2003) – Top management team process, shared
leadership, and new venture performance: A theoretical model and research agenda,
Human Resource Management Review — 2003, Volume 13, Issue 2, pp. 329-346,
Mississippi State University.
==PAGE:53==
11. Napier, Barbara J.; Ferris, Gerald R. (1993) – Distance in organizations,  Human
Resource Management Review — 1993, Volume 3, Issue 3, pp. 321-357, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
12. Antonakis, J.,  Atwater, L. (2002) – Leader distance: A review and a proposed theory,
Leadership Quarterly — 2002, Volume 13, Issue 6, pp. 673-704, Faculty of Economics
and Business Administration.
13. Avolio, Kahai, and Dodge (2000) – E-leadership: Implications for theory, research, and
practice : Implications for theory, research, and practice, Leadership Quarterly — 2000,
Volume 11, Issue 4, pp. 615-668, West Texas A and M University.
14. Kegan, J. (1987) – The mask of command. New York: Penguin Books.
15. Willner, A. R. (1984) – The spellbinders: charismatic political leadership. New Haven:
Yale Univ. Press
16. Waldman, D. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (1999) – CEO charismatic leadership:
levels-of-management and levels-of analysis effects. Academy of Management Review,
24(2), 266 – 285
17. Carlyle, T. (1841) – On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and The Heroic in History. N/A: eBook
format on July 26th, 2008 by Project Gutenberg. Retrieved January 30, 2017
18. Spencer, H. (1895) – The principles of psychology. Unknow: D. Appleton
19. Stogdill, R. M. (1974) – Handbook of leadership: A survey of theory and research. New
York: Free Press
20. McGregor, D. (1960) – The human side of enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill.
21. White, R. K., & Lippitt, R. (1960) – Autocracy and democracy: An experimental inquiry.
New York: Harper & Row
22. Lewin, K. (1997) – Resolving social conflicts: and, Field theory in social science.
Washington, D.C: American Psychological Association.
23. Hersey, P., & Blanchard, K. (1977) – Management of organizational behavior: Utilizing
human resources (3rd ed.) – Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
24. Bass and Avolio’s (1994) – Transformational leadership and team performance, Journal
of Organizational Change Management 17:177-193
25. Avolio, Kahai & Dodge (2000) – Avolio, B. J., Kahai, S., & Dodge, G. E. (2000).
E-leadership: Implications for theory, research, and practice. The Leadership Quarterly,
11(4), 615–668.
26. Bolden, R. (2011) – Distributed Leadership in Organizations - A Review of Theory and
Research. International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 13, 251–269.
==PAGE:54==
27. Harris, A. (2009) – Distributed leadership: what we know. In. London: Springer.
28. Gronn, P. (2000) – Distributed properties: a new architecture for leadership. Educational
Management Administration & Leadership, 28, pp. 317–338
29. Spillane, J. P. (2012) – Distributed leadership (Vol. 4). San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons
30. Bennett, N., Wise , C., Woods, P., & Harvey, J. A. (2003) – Distributed leadership: A
review of literature. London England: National College for School Leadership. Retrieved
from National College for School Leadership
31. Kayworth, T., & Leidner, D. (2002) – The global virtual manager: a prescription for
success. Journal of Management Information Systems, 18 (3) pp.7–40.
32. MacBeath , J. (2006) – Leadership as distributed: a matter of practice. School
Leadership & Management , Pages 349-366 | Published online: 21 Aug.
33. Cameron, E., & Green, M. (2015) – Making sense of change management (pg 147).
London: Kogan Page.
34. Eggers, John H.; Leahy, Kim T. (2007) – Entrepreneurial leadership in the U.S,
Leadership in Action, Volume 14, Issue 1, pp. 1-5,
35. McCauley, C. D., Velsor, E – The Center for Creative Leadership handbook of leadership
development, printed book.
36. Mark Snyde (1979) – Self-Monitoring Processes, Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, University of Minnesota Minneapolis
37. Svensson and Wood (2005) – The serendipity of leadership effectiveness in
management and business practices,
38. Chen and Silverthorne (2005) – Leadership effectiveness, leadership style and
employee readiness, leadership & Organization Development Journal
39. Hersey, P., Blanchard, K. and Johnson, D.E. (1996) – Management of Organizational
Behavior:Utilizing Human Resources, 7th ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
40. L. Zander, P. Zettinig, K. Mäkelä (2013) – Leading global virtual teams to success,
Organizational Dynamics Journal.
41. Anne Nederveen Pieterse, Daan van Knippenberg and Dirk van Dierendonck (2015) –
Cultural Diversity and Team Performance: The Role of Team Member Goal Orientation,
Academy of Management JournalVol. 56, No. 3.
42. P. Žukauskas, J. Vveinhardt, R. Andriukaitienė (2017) – Management Culture and
Corporate Social Responsibility
43. R. Fitzpatrick (2017) – The Mom Test: How to Talk to Customers and Learn If Your
Business is a Good Idea when Everyone is Lying to You
==PAGE:55==
44. Creswell, J. W. (2006) – Qualitative inquiry & research design: choosing among five
approaches. London: SAGE, Thousand Oaks
45. Berg (2009) – Berg, B. (2009.). Qualitative Research Methods. 7th ed. Boston:: Allyn &
Bacon.
46. Kirk & Miller (1986) – Kirk, J., & Miller, M. (1986). Reliability and Validity in Quantitative
Research. USA: Sage
47. Mehrabian, A., & Wiener, M. (1967) – Decoding of inconsistent communications. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 6(1), 109–114.
48. D. Sgroi (2015) – Happiness and productivity: Understanding the happy-productive
worker.
49. Antonakis J. & Atwater L. (2002) – Leader distance: A review and a proposed theory,
Leadership Quarterly — 2002, Volume 13, Issue 6, pp. 673-704
