==PAGE:1==
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVES­
TIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYS­
TEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
Optical Alignment System For A Gamma­ray
Lens
Master Thesis
DTU Space
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGN­
MENT SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
Optical Alignment System For A Gamma­ray Lens
Master Thesis
Juli, 2022
By
Sebastian Bredegaard Petersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Sebastian Petersen, 2022
Published by:
DTU, , Elektrovej, Building 327, DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This project has been prepared over 20 weeks, as master thesis project in Elec­
trical Engineering under the specialisation Space Technology, supervised by Irfan
Kuvvetli and Niels Lund, at the Section for Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics,
Department of DTU Space, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science, MSc.
Sebastian Bredegaard Petersen ­ s162116
Signature
Date
ii
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Astronomical observations in the soft gamma­ray domain have been near­blind
for many decades. This is mainly due to instrumental difficulties in achieving an
adequate signal­to­background ratio and a lack of directional information of the
detected gamma­ray photons. The tunable Laue lens will provide a solution by
acting as a flux collector for photons of specific energies in the soft gamma­ray
domain (0.2­2.5MeV). In addition, the lens can control the diffraction of gamma­ray
photons by tilting thousands of crystals. Therefore, the gamma­ray lens requires
an accurate optical alignment system to ensure the crystals are tilted correctly.
An autocollimator with an aperture of 15cm will be used to measure the crystal
angles down to a few arc seconds by measuring the reflection of optical mirrors
mounted on each crystal. Through experiments, the autocollimator has resolved
the angle of multiple mirrors simultaneously, with an accuracy of 3.8 arc seconds.
This is under the required precision of at least 10 arc seconds.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
[Niels Lund], [Emeritus Associate Professor], [ National Space Institute Astro­
physics and Atmospheric Physics]
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/niels-lund
[Niels Lund has been a great supervisor throughout this project, and has deep­
ened my knowledge in a new area of engineering and science.]
[Irfan Kuvvetli], [Senior Researcher], [National Space Institute Astrophysics and
Atmospheric Physics]
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/irfan-kuvvetli
[I want to thank Irfan for his supervision of the project, availability and time.]
iv
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:7==
MASTER THESIS
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Gamma­ray Astrophysics of the tunable Laue Lens
3
2.1
Gamma­ray Interaction with Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Photoelectric Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Compton Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Pair Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Gamma­ray Astrophysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Instrumental Challenges and the Laue lens . . . . . . . . .
9
3
The Laue Lens
11
3.1
Bragg’s Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Crystal Diffraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Ideal and Mosaic Crystals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Classical Laue Lens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Tunable Laue Lens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Mission Aspects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.1
Crystal Diffraction and Crystal Choice . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.2
Crystal Alignment Requirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Optical Alignment System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6.1
Point spread function (PSF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6.2
Optical Aberrations and Distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Optical Alignment System Analysis
29
4.1
System Performance Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
System Tilt Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Lens Sizing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.3
Footprint and Angle Step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Alignment System Simulation Software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Alignment System Simulation Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.1
Initial Design Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.2
Analysis of Mirror Displacement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.3
Proposed Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Summary of Alignment System Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Verification of an Optical Autocollimator
49
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
v
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
5.1.1
Atik 420 Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.2
Image Capture Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.3
Laboratory Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Image Processing Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
System Noise Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.1
Dark Current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4
Initial Mirror Reflection Image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.5
Multiple Mirror Reflection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.5.1
Result and Analysis of Multiple Mirror Reflection
. . . . . .
62
5.6
Initial Alignment Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Integration of Beamsplitter
65
6.1
Integration of a Beamsplitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.1
The 450nm­650nm Beamsplitter Cube . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.2
3D­Print Model for Camera Mounting
. . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Autocollimator with Beamsplitter Performance . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2.1
Diffuse Light with Beamsplitter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2.2
Collimated Light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2.3
Single Light Dot with Beamsplitter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2.4
Image Stability with Beamsplitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3
Active Mirror Tilt Demonstration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.3.1
Algorithm for Handling Moving Light Dots . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.3.2
Mirror Tilt Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7
Future Work
77
7.1
Improved Optical Bench . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.2
Clean Up 3D­Print . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.3
Construction of a Mock­Up Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8
Conclusion
81
Bibliography
83
A Appendix
87
A.1 Optical Alignment System Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.1.1
Mirror Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.2 Tilt Mechanism Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.2.1
Image Stability with Beamsplitter ­ More Images
. . . . . .
91
A.2.2
Collimated Light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
vi
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:9==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 1
Introduction
Gamma­ray astronomy generally refers to the electromagnetic spectrum over about
100keV, whereas radiation below refers to X­ray radiation[1]. However, this is
not a strictly defined boundary between the two spectrums, as it depends on the
detector material and even the detection methodology. The first directly detected
gamma­ray from a source in outer space was achieved in the 1950s in the low en­
ergy domain (measured average 1/2MeV) [2]. In the 1960s, detection of gamma­
ray in the medium domain was measured (measured up to 3MeV [3]) and not
soon after high­energy domain (measured over 50 and 100MeV [4] [5]) was de­
tected, and even found higher activity than expected. Very high energy (measured
>100GeV [6]) gamma­radiation was observed in the 1980s. Especially the high
energy­ and very high energy range has achieved impressive results with over
3000 steady sources confirmed in the former and over 100 steady sources con­
firmed in the latter. In contrast, the low­ and medium energy gamma­ray range
has not experienced the same breakthrough, with only a few tens of measured
steady sources, and has remained a blind spot in astronomy (called the MeV­
gap). This is despite many extreme objects and events in the universe, has their
peak emissivity between 0.1MeV and 50MeV (referred to as low­ and medium
energy in this thesis, but is a loosely defined boundary). Examples of these ex­
treme events and objects are gamma­ray bursts, blazars, pulsars and the 511keV
positron­annihilation line [7]. Furthermore, most of the radioactive decay lines
associated with nucleosynthesis inhabit this spectrum, which allows mapping of
where it occurred millions of years ago and where it is occurring now [8].
The MeV­gap exists due to many constraints, but they include impractical optics
(flux collection instruments), high detector background noise from particle inter­
actions and unwanted photons (from outside the region of interest). Furthermore,
an essential and dominant photon interaction in this region is Compton scatter­
ing, which allows directional information of the incoming photon, but is difficult
instrumentation­wise. However, due to low gamma­ray flux, a large detector is
necessary to achieve a large collecting area, increasing the background noise si­
multaneously. Shielding the detector is not a perfect solution for removing back­
ground photons, as the shield material will also contribute background in this re­
gion (from radiation and photon interactions). Despite the challenges, scientific
interest in the MeV range has increased in recent decades, and many mission
proposals and technologies are being developed to observe this otherwise unex­
plored domain.
The Laue lens is a gamma­ray telescope for flux collection between 0.2 to 2.5MeV,
where several crystals diffract gamma­ray photons onto a common focal point
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
1
==PAGE:10==
due to Bragg’s law. Bragg’s law dictates that the diffraction angle depends on
the photon energy, crystal plane separation and photon incidence angle relative
to the crystal planes. The crystal diffraction results in a select narrow energy
band that is focused onto the detector, where the diffracted beam is a projected
image of the crystal itself. By positioning a small detector in the focal point, the
smaller detector dimension will minimize the background while still achieving a
high collecting area from the Laue lens. However, in the conventional Laue lens,
the crystal arrangement is permanent once the crystals have been arranged with
a position and angle on the Laue lens, which ensures Bragg diffraction onto a
common focus. Since the diffraction angle depends on the photon incident angle,
this arrangement results in a permanent lens response.
The Laue lens technology can be improved by placing the crystals on a tilt mecha­
nism [9]. With only a slight change in the crystal angle, the observed energy band
will change, and the tunable functionality of a Laue lens telescope will allow the
lens response to be tuned to observe galactic objects and events in the universe.
This tunable Laue lens can be tuned to diffract broader energy bands onto the
detector or narrow gamma­ray lines with increased flux collection (such as the
511keV annihilation line). Since the diffraction performance is highly sensitive to
the crystal angle, the tilt angle of the crystals must be fine­controlled for a few
arcseconds. To this end, small optical mirrors are placed on top of each crystal,
and an optical alignment system in the form of an autocollimator will be used to
measure the mirror tilt angle accurately [10]. As a result, the crystal tilt angle can
be found with high accuracy.
This thesis will explore the possibility of using an autocollimator for a tunable Laue
lens alignment system. It is currently unknown if the autocollimator can satisfy the
conditions required in the tunable Laue lens. For example, autocollimators can
resolve tilt angles to a fraction of an arc­second (using image processing soft­
ware) [11]. However, the conditions present in the Laue lens would require the
autocollimator to image multiple light dots simultaneously. In the thesis, the re­
quired operating conditions of the autocollimator in the Laue lens will be analysed.
In addition, laboratory experiments will be conducted to evaluate the autocollima­
tor feasibility for the tilt alignment of several small mirrors. Since this is the first
iteration of developing the tunable Laue lens optical alignment system, the exper­
imental setup will be developed from the ground up. Therefore, the importance of
the project will not only be to determine the feasibility of the optical alignment sys­
tem but to determine the limitations of the current experimental setup and required
future development.
The project objectives are listed as follows
• Analyse the performance requirements of the tunable Laue lens alignment
system
• Determine the performance requirement of the autocollimator
• Develop Software for noise removal, light dot detection and centroiding
• Confirm the possibility of having multiple mirrors in a single image
• Analyze the image stability of the optical system
• Verify a mock­up model of the optical alignment system
2
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:11==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 2
Gamma­ray Astrophysics of the
tunable Laue Lens
2.1
Gamma­ray Interaction with Matter
Figure 2.1: Dominant gamma­ray processes in MeV energy band. Refer to ref­
erence [12] Figure 6.19.
In the energy range from 50keV to about 50MeV , most interactions are due to one
of three processes: photoelectric absorption effect, scattering of atomic electrons,
and pair production [13]. The dominating process changes throughout the MeV
energy range, as seen in Figure 2.1. Since the Laue lens will operate between
0.2 to 2.5MeV, Compton scattering will be the most dominant interaction [10].
However, the interaction curves are depend highly on the material it interacts with.
The gamma­ray interaction in the matter is characterized by the probability of a
gamma­ray photon from the incident beam interacting with the material per unit
path length. [14]
I = I0e−µx
(2.1)
Where I is the number of photons transmitting through the material, x is the thick­
ness of the traversed material, and I is the number of incident photons. µ is the
linear attenuation coefficient equal to the sum probability of the three interaction
types mentioned before. If the radiation is homogeneous, then µ is constant.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1. GAMMA­RAY INTERACTION WITH MATTER
2.1.1
Photoelectric Absorption
Photoelectric absorption (or photoelectric effect) is the dominating process at lower
energies (in and close to the X­ray spectrum). The probability of the photoelectric
effect becomes more likely for higher energies for heavier elements such as lead.
When a photon gives all of its energy to a bound electron, the electron uses part of
the energy to overcome its binding to the atom, and the photon is completed ab­
sorbed in the process. The rest is used as kinetic energy, creating a free electron
called a photoelectron.
Figure 2.2:
Illustration of photoelectric absorption in an atom.
Cf.
https://
clinicalgate.com/effects-of-radiation/, figure 10.2 (last accessed 10­06­2022).
Photoelectric absorption effect is seen in Figure 2.2. A photoelectron may be
ejected from any of the atom’s K, L, M, ... shells. The resulting photoelectron can
be read as a signal by the detector. The energy of the photoelectron Ee resulting
from the interaction is the difference between the gamma­ray energy Eγ and the
electron binding energy Eb
Ee−= Eγ −Eb
(2.2)
The photoelectron is quickly stopped in the active volume of most detectors, and
the lost kinetic energy by the photoelectron emits a small output pulse. The pulse
amplitude is proportional to the energy deposited by the photoelectron. Further­
more, the freed electron will cause a vacancy, which will be filled by an outer
shell electron. The electron binding energy is converted to characteristic X­rays
or an auger­electron emitted in coincidence with the photoelectron. The X­ray or
auger­electron is absorbed in the detector along with the photoelectron, making
the resulting output pulse proportional with the total energy of the incident gamma­
ray.
2.1.2
Compton Scattering
The scattering of gamma­rays by electrons is known as the Compton effect (Comp­
ton scattering). The gamma­ray interacts with a bound electron (Eγ » Eb) and
transfers a part of its energy to the electron. A bound electron will become a free
electron due to this interaction, and applying the conservation of energy and mo­
mentum, the kinetic energy of the freed electron equals the difference between
4
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:13==
2.1. GAMMA­RAY INTERACTION WITH MATTER
the energy lost by the gamma­ray and the electron binding energy. The partial en­
ergy transfer happens as the electron not being bound tightly enough to the atom
to absorb the recoil energy, and the electron is freed from its orbit. The photon
is not absorbed in the Compton scattering process, but is scattered as well. The
energy of the scattered electron is equal to
Ee−= Eγ −E´
(2.3)
Where Ee is the electron energy, E´ is the energy of the scattered gamma­ray.
Figure 2.3: Schematic representation of Compton scattering. Cf. [14], Figure 2.6
Figure 2.3 shows a sketch of the Compton scattering effect. After the inbound
gamma­ray transfers energy to the electron, the freed electron and scattered
gamma­ray leaves the interaction site with a new direction for both particles. The
directions depend on the amount of energy transferred to the electron from the
collision.
E´ =
m0c2
(
1−cos(ϕ′)+m0c2
E
)
(2.4)
Where m0c2 is the electron’s rest energy, which is equal to 511keV . ϕ′ is the
angle between the incident and scattered gamma­ray. The energy of the scattered
gamma­ray is minimum for a collision where the gamma­ray is scattered 180◦, and
the electron moves forward in the direction of the incident gamma­ray.
E´(min) =
m0c2
( 2+m0c2
E
) ≃m0c2
2
= 256keV
(2.5)
Ee(max) =
E
( 1+m0c2
2E
) ≃E −m0c2
2
= E −256keV
(2.6)
From the equations above, it is clear that the energy of the scattered gamma­ray
will only be slightly less than the energy of the incident gamma­ray for very small
scattering angles (ϕ′ ≃0◦, and the scattered electron will only takes very little
energy from the interaction. In a detector, the scattered electron is usually stopped
in the detection medium, and the detector produces an output pulse proportional
to the energy lost by the incident gamma­ray. Because the Compton effect can
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1. GAMMA­RAY INTERACTION WITH MATTER
happen for a varying binding energy and scattering angle, it produces a spectrum
of output pulses from zero to the maximum energy by equation 2.6. Therefore, it
is difficult to relate the Compton scattering spectrum to the energy of the incident
gamma­ray.
Figure 2.4: Spectrum of Cs137 showing full­energy photopeak, Compton edge and
backscatter peak. Cf. [14], Figure 2.8
Figure 2.4 shows the measured gamma­ray spectrum of a mono­energetic Cs137
gamma­ray source. It has a full­energy peak at 662keV , formed by interactions
where the gamma­ray deposits all of its energy in the detector. The full energy de­
position can happen either by photoelectric absorption or by a series of Compton
scattering events followed by photoelectric absorption. The spectrum below the
full­energy peak is events from Compton scatterings where the gamma­ray only
deposits parts of its energy in the detector. The slope near 470keV corresponds
to the maximum energy that can be transferred to an electron by a 662keV photon
in a single Compton scattering and is called the Compton edge. The small peak at
188keV forms when a gamma­ray scatters in the material surrounding the detec­
tor with a large scattering angle of about 180◦. The photon is thereafter absorbed
in the detector, and the peak is referred to as the backscatter peak. It has a max­
imum energy of 256keV from equation2.5. Note that the sum of the backscatter
peak and the Compton edge equals the energy of the incident photon.
2.1.3
Pair Production
A gamma­ray with an energy of at least 1.022MeV can create an electron­positron
pair when a strong electromagnetic field influences the gamma­ray close to the
vicinity of a nucleus. The nucleus receives a small amount of recoil energy but is
otherwise unchanged, and the gamma­ray disappears in the process. The min­
imum energy required to create the electron and positron is 1.022MeV thus the
interaction threshold of pair production. Recall that an electron has a mass of
511keV from the last section 2.1.2.
6
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:15==
2.2. GAMMA­RAY ASTROPHYSICS
Figure 2.5: Schematic representation of pair production.
All of the gamma­ray energy above 1.022MeV is shared between the electron and
positron as kinetic energy, see Figure 2.5. The electron and positron are rapidly
slowed down in the absorber material in the detector. After losing its kinetic energy,
the positron will combine with an electron in a process that annihilates both of the
particles. This produces two gamma­rays with energies of 0.511MeV , and they
may interact further with the absorbing material or escape the detector. This often
induces 3 peaks for a high­energy gamma­ray. If both gamma­rays are absorbed,
they will contribute to the full­energy peak in the measured spectrum. If only one
is absorbed and the other escape, the absorbed gamma­ray will contribute to a
single escape peak at 0.511MeV below the full­energy peak. If both escape, they
contribute to a double escape peak at 1.022MeV below the full­energy peak.
2.2
Gamma­ray Astrophysics
Many of the extreme objects and events in the universe can be studied by mea­
suring their emitted high energy electromagnetic radiation (gamma­rays) [1] [7]
[15] [16]. These objects and events are so extreme that they can be measured
over long distances and provide valuable information about when the universe
was young and the formation of early galaxies. A substantial part of the radi­
ated gamma­rays can be measured in the MeV band (about 0.1MeV to 100MeV),
where most extreme objects have their peak emissivity. The tunable Laue lens will
operate within the MeV band from 0.2 to 2.5MeV, which is referred to as the soft
gamma­ray band, where many crucial radioactive decay lines can be measured,
as well as the electron­positron annihilation.
Extreme objects include gamma­ray bursts, blazars and pulsars, and it is essential
to study their physical properties directly in this band. Blazars are located in the
centre of a galaxy, where a supermassive black hole draws in material such as
gas and stars in a spiral. This creates a hot accretion disk that emits high­energy
particles. Pulsars are neutron stars with a high rotation speed and emit a beam
of electromagnetic radiation from their magnetic poles. Since the magnetic poles
spin with the neutron star’s rotation, it will ”pulsate” when observing it (hence the
name). The source of the electromagnetic radiation divides the pulsars into three
classes: rotational energy loss of the star provides electromagnetic radiation, the
accreted matter is the source (producing X­rays) or a strong magnetic field is the
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2. GAMMA­RAY ASTROPHYSICS
source of electromagnetic radiation (called magnetars).
Gamma­ray bursts are another event of great interest in the MeV band. However,
due to its nature of lasting a few milliseconds to several minutes [17], they are
not particularly suited for the Laue lens. The Laue lens will allow a relatively high
flux collection from a small part of the sky (seen from the detector perspective),
and the probability of detecting gamma­ray bursts by chance or rotating the entire
structure to point at it will therefore be minuscule.
Cosmic gamma­ray lines are an important source of information about celestial
objects’ nuclear reactions and how they impact astrophysical objects [18]. The
cosmic gamma­ray originates from radioactive decays or high­energy collisions
that result in the excitation of nuclei. Gamma­ray lines from the important electron­
positron annihilation inhabit the MeV window as well. The gamma­ray lines range
from about ≃0.1MeV to ≃15MeV, with important energy lines relevant to the Laue
lens shown in the table below
Energy
(MeV)
Source Process
Astrophysical Relevance
0.158
56Ni radioactive decay
Supernova nucleosynthesis
0.478
7Be radioactive decay
Nova nucleosynthesis
0.511
Electron­positron annihilation
Nucleosynthesis, compact starts, binaries
0.812
56Ni radioactive decay
Supernova nucleosynthesis
0.847
56Co radioactive decay
Supernova nucleosynthesis
1.157
44Ti radioactive decay
ccSN interior nucleosynthesis
1.173
60Fe,Co radioactive decay
ccSN ejected nucleosynthesis
1.238
56Co radioactive decay
Supernova nucleosynthesis
1.275
22Na radioactive decay
Nova nucleosynthesis
1.332
60Fe,Co radioactive decay
ccSN ejected nucleosynthesis
1.634
20Ne radioactive decay
Cosmic ray / ISM interactions
1.809
26Al radioactive decay
Massive star and ccSN nucleosynthesis
Table 2.1: Table of relevant gamma­ray lines to the Laue lens. Adapted from table
1 in About cosmic gamma ray lines by Roland Diehl, Published 2017 [18]
8
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:17==
2.2. GAMMA­RAY ASTROPHYSICS
2.2.1
Instrumental Challenges and the Laue lens
Figure 2.6: ”Continuum sensitivity of different X­ray and gamma­ray instruments:
past missions are shown in dotted lines, currently operating instruments in solid
lines and future planned missions in dashed lines”, figure and description adapted
from Figure 1 in Introducing the MeVCube concept: a CubeSat for MeV observa­
tions, by Lucchetta et. al., 2022 [19]
The grey region highlighted in Figure 2.6 depicts the soft gamma­ray region (de­
fined from ≃200keV to ≃50MeV [19]. This region is often referred to as the MeV
gap, as it is one of the least explored regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
From the sensitivity of the different displayed missions, it is clear that sensitivity is
much worse in the MeV gap than in the neighbouring X­ray spectrum or for higher
gamma­ray energies. This is due to the background being relatively large, and
the absence of a flux collector requires the detector surface to be large. Gener­
ally, more mass results in more background, as scattering and radioactive decay
from the material becomes larger. Removing unwanted background photons from
sources outside the region of interest are not easily removed either, as shielding
will become a contributor to the background.
The Laue technology can improve on the mentioned instrumental challenges. The
Laue lens acts as a flux collector, and therefore detector size can be reduced
substantially. This achieves more information from the object that the Laue lens
and detector are pointed towards. Since Compton scattering is dominant in the
soft gamma­ray region, it is required that at least two scattering interactions are
measured from an incident photon to reconstruct the directional information of the
original photon. If the directional information can be reconstructed, it is possible
to tell which photons arrived from the Laue lens reliably. As a result, all other
photons can be filtered out and the background reduced.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2. GAMMA­RAY ASTROPHYSICS
Figure 2.7: Illustration of a conic projection from Compton scattering reconstruc­
tion. Cf. [20] figure 1.
The reconstruction of 2 Compton scattering events is illustrated in Figure 2.7.
Several detection layers separated by a gap would be needed to detect the events.
A conic projection would indicate which part of the sky the incident photon came
from [20]. This layered construction is referred to as a Compton telescope, and
an upcoming mission called COSI is scheduled to launch in 2025 and is designed
for surveying between 0.2 to 5 MeV [21].
10
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:19==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 3
The Laue Lens
3.1
Bragg’s Law
The foundation of the Laue lens is the coherent scattering of electromagnetic rays
from a crystal lattice, formulated by Bragg’s diffraction law [22],[23].
2dhklsin(Θ) = nλ
n = 1, 2, 3, ...
(3.1)
Where dhkl is spacing between the lattice planes, defined by the Miller indices hkl,
n is the diffraction order, λ is the wavelength, and Θ is the incidence angle of the
photons relative to the crystal planes. The atoms in a crystal are seen to be a pe­
riodic array of coherent scatterers. A coherent scattering happens due to photons
interacting with the crystal atoms and is elastically scattered without changing the
atom property. For example, Compton scattering is incoherent as it ejects an elec­
tron from the shell. Coherent scattering is predictable while incoherent scattering
will leave in a random direction.
The energy dependence of the Bragg angle can be deduced from the relation
between photon wavelength and energy λ(˚
A) =
12.39
E(keV ). Bragg’s law can subse­
quently be rewritten to
sin(Θ) = n
hc
2dhklE
n = 1, 2, 3, ...
(3.2)
Figure 3.1: Illustration of Bragg Diffraction of a beam that are scattered by an atom
within the crystalline solid. The beam is scattered in a specular fashion from the
lattice planes and undergoes constructive interference.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
11
==PAGE:20==
3.2. CRYSTAL DIFFRACTION
The process of Bragg diffraction is seen in Figure 3.1. A photon wave is inbound
on the crystal plane and is scattered by an atom within the structure. The structure
is assumed crystalline (solid). Bragg’s model assumes the incoming waves are
specularly reflected, meaning the reflected angle equals the incident angle. The
diffracted beams are only found for special conditions, where the reflected beams
from parallel planes of atoms interfere constructively.
3.2
Crystal Diffraction
3.2.1
Ideal and Mosaic Crystals
Figure 3.2: [24]
The concept of an ideal crystal, meaning defect­free crystal, refers to a crystalline
pattern being continuous throughout the crystal structure [25] [26]. Some crys­
tals, such as highly perfect Silicon and Germanium crystals, are very close to this
ideal. However, imperfect crystals are more common (Mosaic crystals) and can
be modelled as being composed of many small crystallite structures, where each
can be assumed ideal but slightly misaligned between one another, as illustrated
in Figure 3.2. The spread of the deviations, ω, of the orientation of a lattice plane
in one block from the mean for the entire mosaic crystal is described utilizing a
probability Ω′(ω), called the mosaic probability distribution function1.
The mosaic distribution is found experimentally for a given crystal by measuring
the rocking curves. Rocking curves refers to the measured intensity of the scat­
tered beam as a function of angle, ωi, for an incident beam of parallel monochro­
matic gamma­rays. The intensity is measured from a constant diffraction angle,
ωr.
1Private communication, N. Lund
12
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:21==
3.2. CRYSTAL DIFFRACTION
Figure 3.3: Measured rocking curves at 412keV for a few metal crystals with dif­
ferent degrees of mosaicity. The tree numbers shown along the crystal name are
the Miller indices, identifying the lattice planes used for diffraction. Figure from
”A STUDY OF FOCUSING TELESCOPES FOR SOFT GAMMA RAYS” by Niels
Lund, 1992, c.f. [27]
Examples of measured rocking curves can be seen in Figure 3.3. As the X­ray
source intensity is known and the scattered intensity is measured, the Y­axis can
be expressed as an absolute efficiency. Miller indices are used to identify the
crystal lattice planes used for diffraction and are determined with the three inte­
gers hkl. For near­ideal crystals, the mosaic distribution can be approximated
as a Gaussian function, which can be seen clearly in the Figure. The FWHM or
standard deviation of the rocking curve approximation is called the mosaic width
of the crystal. These widths are specified as angular quantities, and the FWHM
noted in the Figure is in arc minutes.
As the rocking curves are measured at a constant diffraction angle, the diffracted
photon energy is therefore constant. However, in the case of the Laue lens, the
source direction (ωi) is a fixed quantity. The mosaic distribution as a function of
the energy offset from the specific energy EB is of interest. Noting the standard
deviation of the distribution as a function of energy as σ, the Bragg angle can be
related as
σ
EB
= σθ
θB
(3.3)
Where σθ is the standard deviation of the rocking curve.
The characterization of rocking curves is essential to determine if a crystal is suit­
able for the Laue lens. Each crystal must possess a single narrow peak (small
FWHM) to function optimally. If the crystal contains many structural impurities,
the crystal can possess multiple peaks and a wide FWHM.
Another important point to characterise the which crystal properties are important
for the Laue lens. This has been done by Niels Lund in the article A STUDY OF
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
13
==PAGE:22==
3.3. CLASSICAL LAUE LENS
FOCUSING TELESCOPES FOR SOFT GAMMA RAYS from 1922 [27]. It was
reported that crystals with a high atomic number and atomic density was suitable
for the Laue lens.
Figure 3.4: Variation of atomic density with atomic number. Cf. [27] figure 3
From Figure 3.4, the atomic density of crystals as a function of atomic number
Z. The atomic density has a systematic variation for increasing atomic number.
Suitable elements include Cu, Ag and Au. They include properties that are partic­
ularly well suited for crystals growth that the Laue lens require, such as low defect
and ability to grow large crystal structures. Especially copper crystal growth is a
well developed field.
3.3
Classical Laue Lens
The classical Laue lens is made up of several crystals in a transmission config­
uration called Laue geometry. The geometry is designed such that the incident
gamma­ray photons are focused onto a focal spot from the crystals. This geome­
try is of great astrophysical importance, as it achieves a large collecting area. By
placing a detector in the focal spot, it is possible to achieve a high flux on a small
area [10].
14
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:23==
3.3. CLASSICAL LAUE LENS
Figure 3.5: Concept of a Laue lens. Crystals are placed in a circular arranged, so
the diffracted photon will intersect at the detector. Figure from Technologies for
tunable gamma­ray lenses by Niels Lund[10], Figure 1.
The Laue geometry is achieved by arranging the crystals in concentric rings to
maximise crystal density in the Lens. This geometry maximises the collection of
photons to a single focal spot, see Figure 3.5. A detector will be located in the
focal spot, and the image on the focal plane will be a projection of the crystal itself,
meaning the size of the image is dependent on the crystal size.
The photon band collected is determined by Bragg’s law, making it possible to
design the telescope to observe gamma­rays in specific narrow band regions,
such as the 511keV annihilation line.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3. CLASSICAL LAUE LENS
(a) The critical alignment angle δα of the crystals in
the Laue lens seen along the telescope axis. α refers
to the azimuth axis on the telescope. Cf. [10] figure
3.a.
(b) The critical alignment angle Θ
of the crystals in the Laue lens
seen on the diffraction plane. Cf.
[10] figure 3.b.
Figure 3.6
The focal requirement of the lens can be found by considering the distance, R,
of a crystal centre to the Laue telescope axis and the orientation of the crystals,
see Figure 3.6a. Every crystal has to be oriented such that the normal to the
diffracting planes bisects the angle between the direction to the distant source
and the direction to the centre of the detector to ensure that diffracted beams will
meet at the common focus as seen from the crystal. See Figure 3.6b. For a given
crystal in the lens, there will be specific energy, EB, that maximizes the diffraction
efficiency. Given the crystal lattice spacing of copper and silver from Section 3.2
and the energy of photons in the soft gamma­ray spectrum, the Bragg angle in
equation 3.2 becomes small. Thus assuming small angles, the Bragg angle can
be written as
sin(ΘB) ≈r
F
(3.4)
The energy dependence of the scattered photon by the crystal can be found by
combining equation 3.2 and 3.4
EB = hc F
rdhkl
(3.5)
From equation 3.5, it is clear that crystals close to the telescope axis diffract higher
energies while lower energies are diffracted from crystals further away. As a result,
a single ring can only diffract photons from a narrow energy band, meaning more
rings are needed to cover a broader spectrum. Furthermore, each ring will have
a larger diffraction area as more crystals are in the ring the further away from the
telescope axis. This results in a peculiar effect on the effective area of the lens.
16
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:25==
3.3. CLASSICAL LAUE LENS
Figure 3.7: Effective area of a classical Laue lens with 4cm diameter silver crys­
tals, Ag(111). Calculated for 100m focal length, detector diameter of 5cm and a
Laue lens diameter of 3.51m. Figure from Wide band, tunable gamma­ray lenses
by Niels Lund[9], Figure 3.
Figure 3.7 visualises the effective area of classical Laue lens for varying energy
for 100m focal length, silver crystals and a 5cm diameter detector. The effective
area is higher for lower energies due to the larger number of crystals diffracting
and falls off for higher energies relatively quickly. Another factor is that the crystal
reflectivity falls off for higher energies as well, and this is a fundamental problem
for Laue lenses. With a diameter of 3.51m and a crystal diameter of 4cm, it be­
comes apparent that many thousands of crystals can fit into the lens. The mass
is therefore also substantial for a Laue lens, and in this example, the total crystal
mass is 328kg. It should be noted that the lens in this example is designed to
have a peak gain at about 300keV line.
For a particular energy, all diffracted photons on the detector must originate from
a specific circular band on the lens. The mean radius, rband, of this band is given
by
rband = hc F
Ed
(3.6)
The width of a diffraction band is therefore simply equal to the detector diame­
ter, and is independent of photon energy, focal length an crystal properties. The
diffraction bands are useful to visualise the fundamental property of the Laue lens,
that due to Bragg’s law, dictates that gamma­rays of a specific energy, E, must
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
17
==PAGE:26==
3.4. TUNABLE LAUE LENS
originate from a specific point inside the diffraction band. Outside the diffraction
that same specific gamma­ray energy is still diffracted, but will never arrive at the
detector.
3.4
Tunable Laue Lens
As described in the section before, the effective area of the Laue lens decreases
relatively fast with increasing gamma­ray energy. This is a considerable drawback
of the Laue lens, as the spectrum with enough effective area to image sources
with a suitable SNR is smaller than the total covered spectrum of the Laue lens.
Therefore, a solution to this problem is highly desired for future development in
the Laue lens field.
One possible solution is incorporating different crystal types in the lens. This will
allow the Laue lens to obtain a more uniform effective area as a function of energy
or improve the sensitivity for energies of interest. However, this configuration will
lower the effective area for other energies and narrow its total covered energy
spectrum.
This leads to a second solution where multiple layers of crystals are used. The
layers will still have a common focus, meaning that crystals with the same radius
from the telescope axis must have the same diffraction angle. Each layer should
employ different Bragg planes with different crystal types (dhkl­spacing), leading
to different energies diffracted to the common focus. This will increase the flux
collection of the lens and allow the lens to be tuned to specific energies of interest
with a high effective area. However, the diffracted beam of one layer will be slightly
attenuated by layers underneath it, decreasing the efficiency of the top layer to a
limited extent. The number of use­full layers is limited by the mosaic width of the
crystals.
18
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:27==
3.4. TUNABLE LAUE LENS
Figure 3.8: Effective area of single layer Laue lens and a multi­layer Laue lens
for a 100m focal length. The single layer uses 6000 silver Ag(111) crystals of
4cm diameter. The double layer uses 5300 silver Ag(111) in the first layer and
5000 silver Ag(200) crystals in the second layer. Both layers have their thickness
reduced by 30% and cut­off in radius to limit the energy range to 300­800keV at
the chosen focal length. This reduces the overall mass by 10%.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the effective area of a two­layer Laue lens compared to a
single­layer Laue lens. The mosaic width of the crystals is 0.5 arc minutes, and
the effective area increase is about 65%. Adding a third layer will not increase the
effective area considerably, and the cost and added mass will be unjustifiable.
A third solution, and the solution considered in this thesis, is the tunable Laue
lens. This Laue lens design places the crystals on a piezo­electric mechanism
that can control the tilt angle of the crystal in­situ instead of glueing the crystal
onto the support as with the classical Laue lens. This allows the tunable Laue
lens to control the Bragg plane, and the photon band collection can be tuned for
multiple energies throughout the covered spectrum.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
19
==PAGE:28==
3.4. TUNABLE LAUE LENS
Figure 3.9: The classical Laue lens hard mounts the crystal on top of a support
with glue, and as such, the crystal has a fixed Bragg angle. The tunable Laue
lens will allow for the crystal angle to be adjusted, and the Bragg angle can be
changed as such. Figure from Technologies for tunable gamma­ray lenses by
Niels Lund[10], Figure 2.
The crystal mounting concept is illustrated in Figure 3.9. As established in the pre­
vious sections, ensuring the Bragg planes are correct for the Laue lens to function
optimally is crucial. In the classical Laue lens, the crystals are glued to the support
material to mount them at the desired angle. Despite the apparent simplicity of
this method, it has its own set of drawbacks. Mainly, the glue contracts when it
hardens, which causes its spatial shape to change. This makes it challenging to
ensure the arc­second precision needed for the crystal orientation, and diffraction
efficiency can suffer greatly. Another drawback is the long­term stability of the
lens support is difficult to guarantee due to its large size. The support should be
designed with minimal weight and transparency to gamma­ray.
By mounting the crystals on top of a tilt adjustable pedestal, the tuning of the crys­
tal Bragg angle can be done to compensate for structural stability problems, and
the unavoidable misalignment of the crystals from the shaking by being launched
into space. The adjustment pedestal is a piezoelectric element that can control
the crystal angle down to arc­seconds precision. The verification of this angle can
be done by using an optical autocollimator, that can resolve angles under and
arc­second. By controlling Bragg angle of the lens, it is possible to enhance the
flux collection for multiple gamma­ray lines of interest, which realizes the classic
broad­band Laue lens as well as the possibility of increasing the lens sensibility
to specific energies.
20
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:29==
3.5. MISSION ASPECTS
Figure 3.10: Comparison of nominally tuned Laue lens with re­tuned Laue lens
for specific energies. The lens diameter is 3.51m, with a detector diameter of 5cm
and crystal mosaic of 0.5 arcmin.
In Figure 3.10, the effective area for a double layer [Ag(111) Ag(200)] Laue lens
is displayed for nominal tuning (red graph line) at a focal length of 130m. The
re­tuned lines (green graph line) display a high increase in effective area. This
increase is more than double for most lines.
3.5
Mission Aspects
3.5.1
Crystal Diffraction and Crystal Choice
Ideal crystals are not well suited for Laue lenses. They will have high efficiency,
but only for a narrow band of energies. This band is called the Darwin width
and is defined as a finite angular width over which the diffraction occurs and is
smaller than an arc­second [28]. One obvious consequence is that these crystals
would require an almost impossible level of precision from the alignment system.
However, Darwin’s width of a fraction of an arc­second would result in a diffraction
band of under 1keV in the soft gamma­ray spectrum, which would be too narrow
to observe astrophysical sources.
Mosaic crystals are therefore preferred, which is fortunate as they are easier to
grow and more plentiful [29]. The mosaic width can be controlled to an extent
during growth or treatment, and the crystal can therefore be specifically grown to
maximize its performance in the Laue lens context. Copper crystals are a great
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
21
==PAGE:30==
3.5. MISSION ASPECTS
possibility as they can be grown to large sizes, high quality and high atomic density
(high efficiency).
3.5.2
Crystal Alignment Requirement
The angles defined in Figures 3.6a and 3.6b are critical angles that must be con­
trolled with high precision.
∆α = rδα
(3.7)
The most critical alignment angle is θ. This angle will ensure that the diffracted
beam of all crystals will arrive at a common focus at a distance F from the lens.
The expression that will ensure this correct alignment angle is
η = 1
2tan−1 ( r
F
)
(3.8)
It is apparent that the error margin, ∆η, is dependent on the detector size, as a
larger detector will allow the projected image of the crystal to still arrive on the de­
tector even though the crystal might be slightly misaligned. This angle is critical to
ensure high precision for not only having a functional Laue lens and high­efficiency
diffraction but ensuring a high precision will allow as small a detector as possible,
that in theory, could be as small as the crystal image. Due to the reasoning dis­
cussed in Section ??, it’s desirable to decrease the mass (therefore physical size)
of the detector to decrease the background signal.
From the equation above, one would assume that the adjustment precision re­
quirement is linearly dependent on the focal length F. This is only true for ideal
crystals. For mosaic crystals, the internal structure will not have precisely defined
Bragg planes ­ it should be viewed as a collection of smaller individual Bragg
planes lying close to each other, as defined by the mosaic width. As explored
before, the crystal diffraction efficiency falls for slight deviations from the optimal
specific energy. The drop­off rate of the efficiency is the mosaic width. As a re­
sult, the adjustment required is a function of both the focal length and the crystal
tilt adjustment relative to the gamma­ray source. If this can be achieved within a
small fraction of the mosaic width, the crystal will diffract photons at the selected
energy with a lowered efficiency (close too full efficiency near the selected en­
ergy). As long as the actual tilt angle is within the mosaic width of the required
tilt angle, diffraction will occur of the specific energy, where it will arrive at the de­
tector. However, the intensity of the diffracted beam is highly variable and follows
the Gaussian curve from the crystal rocking curve. The actual tilt angle should be
within the FWHM, allowing close to maximum diffraction efficiency. The mosaic
width varies with crystal type and the subsequent manufacturing, but the value
for copper crystals can be assumed to be 30 arc seconds. From the FWHM of
copper crystals, the alignment system should be within 10 arc­seconds precision.
The alignment will be controlled by piezo­electric mechanisms, as already men­
tioned, and the verification of the angle can be done with an optical system that
will measure the angle of mirrors located on top of each mirror.
22
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:31==
3.6. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM
3.6
Optical Alignment System
Figure 3.11: Tunable Laue lens with turret system in the center, that carries 3
optical autocollimators. Drawing not to scale. Figure from Wide band, tunable
gamma­ray lenses by Niels Lund[9], Figure 2.
The optical alignment system has yet to be developed for the tunable Laue lens
proposed by Niels Lund2. The system will function as an autocollimator, measur­
ing angles to a fraction of an arc­second [11]. This resolution will satisfy the 10
arc­second precision needed to ensure correct diffraction, as specified in the pre­
vious section. The autocollimator can be used to measure the tilt angle of every
crystal on the tunable Laue lens by placing a planar mirror on top of each crys­
tal. A turret will be placed in the centre of the tunable Laue lens and will carry
three autocollimators (for redundancy), see Figure 3.11. This comes at the cost
of fewer crystals in the centre, but the ability to control the diffraction angle of spe­
cific gamma­ray photons far out­weights this loss. Furthermore, the turret will be
able to turn around, which allows each collimator to measure all mirror tilt angles
(thus crystal tilt angle) of the entire system.
The basic principle behind the autocollimator is simple. By directing a collimated
beam at a flat reflecting surface, it is possible to determine the angle of the re­
flecting surface (reflector) by analysing the angular position of the reflected light,
[30],[31]. The term collimated beam means that the beam divergence is infinitely
small, which can be difficult to achieve practically. However, even a small beam
divergence can be a significant error source. The autocollimator can measure
angles in a few arc seconds or even a fraction of an arc second. Furthermore,
system stability is an essential factor as well. If the tilt of the autocollimator sys­
tem is slightly misaligned with the reflector, the collimated beam reflection might
not enter the autocollimator for detection as the beam is reflected beside the sys­
2https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/niels-lund
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
23
==PAGE:32==
3.6. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM
tem. This will limit the operating distance of the system and be a source of error
as well.
Figure 3.12: Sketch of the principle mechanism of the optical autocollimator with
planar mirrors located on the optical axis.
The sketch seen in Figure 3.12 displays the operating principle of an autocollima­
tor. A beam splitter is used to reflect light from a source, marked in red, out of the
collimator and through a collimating lens. The width of the source light beam can
be controlled with a slit. By utilising the fact that a lens will focus incoming light to
a focal point, the reverse case is also true. Light from the focal point of a lens will
be collimated as it travels through the lens. A photo­sensor is placed in the focal
plane (CCD), allowing digital images to be captured of the reflected light (digital
autocollimator). By applying algorithms to the image, it is possible to resolve very
small angles of a fraction of an arc­second.
The beam splitter has to be placed at the precise distance between the focal plane
and the lens (these make up the focal length f), where the distance from the
source light to the beam splitter is the same as from the beam splitter to the focal
point. The reflected light, marked in green, will travel through the lens and focus on
the focal plane. The deviation angle of the reflector with reference to the normal of
the autocollimator optical axis is noted η. The reflected beam angle is thus 2η. The
deviation s on the focal plane will depend on the reflector angle. It is also apparent
that the aperture D of the collimating lens will directly limit the maximum possible
detection angle of the reflector, as the beam will not enter the autocollimator if the
angle is too large.
The relationship between the deviation s and the angle α is given by a right triangle
geometry
s = f tan(2η)
(3.9)
And the angle of the reflector can be calculated as
η = arctan
( s
2f
)
(3.10)
24
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:33==
3.6. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM
From the equation above, it is clear that the accuracy of the autocollimator can
be improved by increasing the focal length and by using a photo­sensor with a
high spatial resolution. Furthermore, it is possible to determine the focal plane
deviation to sub­pixel accuracy with dedicated algorithms for further improvement.
3.6.1
Point spread function (PSF)
The resulting image on the focal plane ideally follows an Airy Disc.
Figure 3.13: Diffraction through a circular surface http://electron9.phys.utk.edu/
optics421/modules/m5/Diffraction.htm, last visited: 08­04­2022
On Figure 3.13, diffraction through a circular surface is displayed. It is important
to note that the aperture size depends on the incoming light beam diameter. In
the cause of the autocollimator, this light beam diameter is the same dimension
as the mirror surface from which it reflects from. The proposed mirror dimensions
for the Laue lens are 3x7mm (c.f. [10]).
The radius of the inner Airy Disc can be expressed as[32]
r ≈1.22λf
D
(3.11)
Where r is the radius of the inner Airy Disc, f is the focal length and D is the
aperture of in entrance beam. The inner ring contains about 85% of the energy of
the light beam reflected from a single mirror. The airy disc expression is important
to not only predict the response of the optical system but to determine the severity
of aberrations (how non­ideal the optical system is). The FWHM of the Airy disc
is given by
FWHMairy = 1.028 λ
D
(3.12)
The Airy disc assumes an ideal situation without aberration present in the system.
In reality, the light spots will be elliptical in shape. An easy approximate shape is
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
25
==PAGE:34==
3.6. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM
the Gaussian 2D function, (see https://mathworld.wolfram.com/GaussianFunction.
html, last accessed 24­06­2022).
f(x, y) = A0exp
(
−
((x −x0)2
2σ2
x
+ (y −y0)2
2σ2
y
))
(3.13)
Where A0 is the amplitude/peak, x0, y0 is the center and σx, σy define the spread
x, y of the elliptical edge.
3.6.2
Optical Aberrations and Distortions
An optical system using lenses has several inherent aberrations and distortions,
which are unwanted properties[33]. They may stem from a variety of sources
that range from the physical interaction between electromagnetic radiation and a
medium, to errors in the lens structure during production. Due to these effects,
the resulting reflection shape will not follow the Airy disc, but will be smeared.
One of the most impacting aberrations is chromatic aberration. The lens bends
light (electromagnetic radiation) at different angles depending on wavelength and
essentially acts as a prism. The different wavelengths (colors) do not focus at the
same point, i.e., the focal point varies. A changing focal point due to wavelength
makes it difficult to create sharp images of an observed object. However this can
be mitigated by choosing a monochromatic light source. The monochromatic light
source should be of smaller wavelength in the visible light spectrum (for example
green or blue color) to reduce the Airy disc size.
Another aberration source is that defect free lenses are practically impossible to
make, as a consequence it is not possible to make an optical system that is com­
pletely shift invariant. Shift invariant meaning that an object located at one part
of the image will have the same representation if it was located at another part of
the image.
Figure 3.14: The effect of barrel (center) and pincushion (right) distortion on a grid
(left), (c.f [34], Figure 1).
The most prevalent form of lens distortion is in the form of barrel­ or pincushion
distortion, see Figure 3.14. These distortion effects are nonlinear and generally
radial (away from the image center) distorted, where in some some cases there
might be tangential distortion (tangentially of the image center). Barrel distortion
26
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:35==
3.6. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM
is more prevalent for wide angle lenses, as they have higher magnification in the
center than at the periphery. Pincushion distortion has the opposite effect, where
the periphery is more magnified. However, these distortion effects assumes a
shift invariant response, which will not be the case for most optical systems due
to aberrations. To mitigate these shift variant distortions, careful calibration and
analysis of the image response will have to be done at some point. This project
will not analyse this too deeply.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
27
==PAGE:36==
3.6. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM
28
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:37==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 4
Optical Alignment System Analysis
4.1
System Performance Requirements
4.1.1
System Tilt Angle
The system tilt angle, θ, will ensure that all mirrors can be seen without shadowing
each other. The system tilt angle will determine the angle of the autocollimator with
reference to the optical axis and the mirror tilt angle normal to the optical axis. This
analysis will solve the system tilt angle for the situation where the crystals have
not tilted η = 0. This means that the incoming light ray angle equals the mirror
angle.
Figure 4.1: Sketch the mirror­shadowing geometry, showing a front mirror (right­
side) and back mirror (left side). dcrit is the critical distance between mirrors (small­
est distance), and A is the travel distance of the light ray from the front mirror top
to the back mirror incidence point. Z is the mirror shadowing height, and h is the
height of the mirror. B is the distance from the first mirror top to the back mirror
bottom. β is the angle of the mirror with reference to the telescope axis. Illustration
adapted from [35] figure 3.2.
From the identities seen in Figure 4.1, it is clear that the length of A and B makes
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
a right triangle, and from trigonometric identities, the shadowed vertical length is
Z =
√
B2 −B2. Thus the vertical length of the illuminated part of the mirror, S, is
found as
S = h −Z = h −
√
b2 −a2
(4.1)
Where the illuminated part can be between 0 and mirror height h, the required
system tilt angle can be found for varying mirror heights.
Figure 4.2: The illuminated height of different sized mirrors as a function of system
tilt angle.
The critical distance in the tunable Laue lens is 24.5cm. Solutions to the system
tilt angle for varying mirror heights can be seen in Figure 4.2. The system tilt
angle must be larger for mirrors with a larger height. A larger lens will be required
to illuminate all the mirrors to compensate for the larger tilt angle. However, this
will be more susceptible to aberrations and considerably increase the alignment
system mass.
Although it might then seem obvious to decrease the mirror height, a smaller mir­
ror size will obviously decrease the intensity of reflected light. This can be com­
pensated by increasing the integration time, but will introduce more noise to the
image. An adequately cooled system will barely suffer from the increased integra­
tion time, meaning a well cooled camera system is important for decreasing the
size of the mirrors. A mirror size is therefore desired, but this might be limited by
their production and the mirrors should have enough surface area for the glue to
keep them in place properly.
30
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:39==
4.1. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Mirror height [mm]
System tilt angle [deg]
3
≈7.1
5
≈11.8
7
≈16.7
9
≈21.6
Table 4.1
The solutions to the system tilt angle are summarised in Table 4.1.
4.1.2
Lens Sizing
The required lens diameter can be determined by considering the geometry in­
volved between the collimated light that is inbound on the mirror surface and the
reflection from the mirror to the lens aperture. The tilt of the mirrors from the optical
tilt angle is noted η.
Figure 4.3: Sketch of the reflection geometry of the autocollimator. The system tilt
angle is noted θ and the mirror tilt angle η will result in a reflection of 2η. The mirrors
closest to the autocollimator is noted with distance ri and the mirrors farthest is
noted with distance ro.
The geometry is illustrated in Figure 4.3, where the autocollimator and mirrors
nominal tilt angle is the system tilt angle θ. If the system is set to its nominal
angles, the outgoing light ray will be normal to the mirror surface, and the crystal’s
tilt angle will be zero. However, as the mirrors are subsequently tilted to ensure
the correct diffraction angle, they will have a different tilt angle η. The reflected
angle will thus be 2η.
To find the required aperture size, the mirror farthest from the autocollimator will
be considered. The tunable Laue lens diameter is 3.6m, and the radius from the
Laue lens centre is 1.8m [10]. This is the radius to the outer ring noted ro, and the
tunable Laue lens also has an inner ring radius of 0.6m. Therefore, the autocol­
limator lens should be placed close to the inner radius to optimize its collimated
footprint (this will be discussed in further detail later). The length from the Laue
lens centre to the aperture of the autocollimator will be referred to as the optical
length and includes the focal length of the optical system, camera length and clear
space behind the system for electronics (optical back).
The tilt angle of the mirror can be found from equation 3.8. The Laue lens focal
length will vary between 50m to 300m, where the mirror tilt will be largest at 50m
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
31
==PAGE:40==
4.1. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
[10]. The tilt range between the two focal lengths is about 0.86◦, however the
range is larger to leave room for initial misalignments. This results in a total tilt
angle of about ≈1.5◦. The aperture diameter should be large enough to illuminate
the mirrors on the outer radius and be able to ”catch” the subsequently reflected
light.
D = tan(θ)ro + tan(2η)ro = ro(tan(θ) + tan(2η))
(4.2)
Figure 4.4: Diameter of autocollimator aperture as a function of system tilt an­
gle. Found for lens distance to inner = 5cm. Results of 4 system tilt angles are
highlighted. Figure adapted from [35] figure 3.3.
From the system tilt angles found in Table 4.1, the required lens diameters for
the four scenarios can be seen in Figure 4.4. This calculation will assume an
optical back of 10cm for electronics, a camera length of 5cm and a focal length
equal to 40cm. This results in a total optical length of 55cm, which places the
autocollimator aperture 5cm from the inner ring. The focal length should be as
large as physically possible to improve the resolution of the autocollimator, as seen
from equation 3.10. The mentioned aperture sizes are too large to be practical
in the Laue lens, and it is therefore detrimental to increase the critical distance
between mirrors. This will be discussed further in this chapter.
It should be noted that the mirrors are considered so small that the difference be­
tween the top and bottom parts of the mirrors is neglected. Another effect that
is not considered in the geometry is the displacement of the top part of the auto­
collimator lens from the bottom part. Due to the tilt angle of this system, the top
part will be slightly closer to the mirrors. This effect could result in a r0 difference
of a few centimetres for larger tilt angles and apertures, which could lead to a
decreased aperture of a few per cent.
32
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:41==
4.1. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
4.1.3
Footprint and Angle Step
The autocollimator footprint is important to analyse for determining the azimuth
angular step of the autocollimator. The step should be small enough such that a
mirror is not missed when changing the look angle of the autocollimator.
Figure 4.5: Sketch of autocollimator footprint on the mirror plane. The length
from the Laue lens centre to the aperture of the autocollimator is called the optical
length. It includes the focal length of the optical system, camera length in the back
and clear space behind the system for electronics. lchord is the chord length of the
footprint at the inner ring, and Lchord is the chord length of the footprint at the outer
ring. The chord lengths do not have to be the same dimension.
A sketch of the autocollimator footprint can be seen in Figure 4.5. The aperture
size should be large enough such that the footprint can cover the inner lens span
between the inner­ and outer ring. This design constraint means the circle’s chord
lengths overlap with the footprint lchord > 0 and Lchord > 0. Noting the sagitta of
the two chords as ychord and Ychord for the bottom and top chord relatively, and
the distance from the aperture to the inner­ and the outer ring is noting ri and ro
relatively. Let D note the aperture diameter. Then the subsequent chord lengths
are given as
lchord = 2
√
ychord(D −ychord)
(4.3)
Lchord = 2
√
Ychord(D −Ychord)
(4.4)
Where ychord = tan(θ)ri and Ychord = D −tan(θ)ro
The maximum step size can be defined from the chord length Lchord. When chang­
ing the look angle of the autocollimator, a given point located on the outer ring in
the footprint should not change its position more than the length Lchord when a
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION SOFTWARE
new look angle is performed. Meaning the footprint of the former angle should
overlap with the footprint of the new angle at a distance ro, where the step angle
αstep is expressed as
αstep = arcsin
(
Lchord
ro + Foptic
)
(4.5)
Where Foptic is the length from the Laue lens centre to the autocollimator aperture.
The footprint will increase for larger autocollimator apertures. From an initial as­
sessment, this might appear as an advantage. A larger footprint means fewer
steps are needed to cover the whole lens when aligning mirrors. This will reduce
the total alignment time of the Laue lens. However, it is essential to verify how
many mirrors can simultaneously be present in the image. This parameter could
set a constraint on the autocollimator lens diameter.
4.2
Alignment System Simulation Software
The alignment system simulation software was developed to validate the perfor­
mance of the alignment system with different constraints. Fundamentally, the ray
traces outgoing beams from the aperture finds interaction sites of each beam and
mirrors and traces the subsequently reflected beam and its entrance into the aper­
ture. With a specified step size, the program will step from its start angle at 0 rad
around the whole lens 2π rad. Crystal coordinates (with reference to the telescope
centre) will be a loaded input from a data file, and the mirrors will be assigned from
this data file. This software will, therefore, not only predict which mirrors can be
seen, it will be able to determine at which angles mirror shadowing is a problem
and if the returned rays enter the aperture. The simulation software should be as
dynamic as possible, which is why it has been programmed to initialise depend­
ing on many input variables. Simulation results should not only be written out as
a data matrix, but it is important to focus on generating graphics such that the
user can understand the results visually. The user­controlled input variables are
summarised below
34
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:43==
4.2. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION SOFTWARE
Input Parameter
Note
Crystal List
The list should contain the: crystal number [1,2,...,n],
(x,y)­coordinates [cm], R radius from telescope axis [cm]
and α angle to telescope axis [rad]
F
Focal length of the Laue lens [m]
Crystal R
Radius of the crystals [cm]
Pedestal R
Radius of the pedestals located in the center of the crystal [cm]
Mirror width
Width of mirrors [cm]
Mirror height
Height of mirrors [cm]
Aperture
Aperture diameter [cm]
f
Focal length of the autcollimator [cm]
Camera Length
Length of the camera for optical system sizing [cm]
Optical Back
Length of clear area behind camera (electronics) for sizing [cm]
N rays
Number of rays simulated (at least 1000 is recommended)
Tilt angle
Tilt angle of the system (autocollimator and mirrors) [deg]
Wavelength
Wavelength of light for finding diffraction limit [nm]
Angle step
Step angle of alignment system [deg]
The simulation software relies on the geometry between the rays and each mirror.
Since the problem is in 3D, each ray will be generated with a start x,y position and
will be assigned a z­coordinate that relates to the height of the beam. The height
of each beam is used to determine its footprint on the mirror plane.
Figure 4.6: Illustration of how rays are generated. Only a few beam are generated
(green) in this illustrated to highlight the spacing between them.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
35
==PAGE:44==
4.2. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION SOFTWARE
An illustration of how the beams are generated is shown in Figure 4.6. The spacing
between beams is found from the specified aperture and the amount of simulated
number of rays. The height span of each beam (from bottom to top) can be found
from the chord length, which is expressed as
beamZ = 2
√(aperture
2
)2
−
((aperture
2
)
−N ·
(aperture
Nrays
))2
(4.6)
Where beamZ is the height span of each generated beam, from this geometry, the
footprint of the outgoing rays will be elliptical on the mirror plane.
Since the start coordinates of the rays are known from generating them, their end
coordinates can be found, as the footprint is known. From the mirror dimensions,
the coordinates for their top and bottom side can be found. As a result, the inter­
section between rays and mirrors can be found by solving the two equations of
a line written in general form (https://www.cuemath.com/geometry/intersection-of-
two-lines/, last accessed 26­06­2022)
a1x0 + b1y0 + c1 = 0
a2x0 + b2y0 + c2 = 0
(4.7)
Where x0 and y0 is the intersection point between the two equations. This system
can be solved by using Cramer’s rule to write the equations as
x0
b1c2 −b2c1
=
−y0
a1c2 −a2c1
=
1
a1b2 −a2b1
(4.8)
The point of intersection can thus be rewritten as
(x0, y0) =
( b1c2 −b2c1
a1b2 −a2b1
, a1c2 −a2c1
a1b2 −a2b1
)
(4.9)
This equation can be solved by iterating over a matrix containing the (x,y)­span
of every ray and comparing it with every mirror (x,y)­span by again iterating over
them. However, since there are over 10.000 mirrors in the Laue lens, this compu­
tation can be significantly optimized by limiting the comparison with mirrors with
the azimuth angle inside the azimuth span of the simulated lens. In addition, it is
essential to realize that the intersection only accounts for the (x,y) plane while the
z plane is neglected. However, this should be compensated for by comparing the
beam height with the mirror height at any given intersection.
A Matlab package is used to find the intersection. The package is called InterX NS
(2022). Curve intersections (https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/22441­
curve­intersections), MATLAB Central File Exchange. Retrieved July 16, 2022.
Mirror overlap will be checked by looking at every beam’s intersection history. For
a given beam it might have multiple intersections (or none) before it reaches the
36
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:45==
4.2. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION SOFTWARE
end of its footprint. This intersection history data can be sorted by intersections
closest to farthest away from the Laue lens centre. Iterating through the history
and comparing the distance between two neighbouring mirrors, the overlap can
be found in the first mirror’s top beam arriving at the second mirror’s foot. This
calculation should also compensate for the Airy disc. This is because even if the
top beam arrives close (but not on) to the foot of the second mirror, it will still result
in an overlap in the image.
The returned rays onto the autocollimator aperture can be found from the mirror’s
reflection. If a reflected ray returns outside the aperture boundary, the mirror from
which the reflection arrives, should be noted as invalid.
The source code for the simulation program can be found in the source_code.zip
file, in the folder named Laue Lens Simulation.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
37
==PAGE:46==
4.2. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION SOFTWARE
Figure 4.7:
Flowchart of the Alignment System Simulation Software.
The
flowchart is very simplified and skips several operations, but the overall code struc­
ture is included.
38
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:47==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
4.3
Alignment System Simulation Results and
Analysis
4.3.1
Initial Design Assessment
The initial analytical approach shows that the required aperture dimension is sub­
stantial and probably not feasible. The system’s weight would be substantial, as
there would be three autocollimators, and the autocollimator lenses would suf­
fer heavily from aberrations that would worsen the resolution. Since the required
angular resolution is in a few arc seconds, one could argue that this is near im­
possible.
The proposed mirror dimension for the Laue lens will be 3x5mm in this design
assessment. The reasoning for a mirror height of 5mm is that it relates to the
proposal by Niels Lund, c.f. [10]. A mirror width of 3mm will allow for a proposed
solution to displace the mirrors left and right on the pedestal. The radius of the
pedestals that the mirrors are mounted on is 4mm. Since the mirror width is 3mm,
the mirror can be moved to the edge. By drawing a vector with a constant angle
from the Laue lens centre to the outer ring, every second mirror can be displaced
left/right, creating about a 1­centimetre gap between a pair of mirrors. This con­
cept is illustrated in Appendix A.1.1. The new critical distance between mirrors is
73.6mm, which will provide a new solution for the system.
The system solution for 3x7mm mirrors is found in the Figures in A.1.1. The re­
quired system tilt angle is 3.9◦with an aperture diameter of 12.9cm. However,
this is the minimum requirement for the system, and the parameters should be
up­scaled to a tilt angle of 5◦and aperture diameter of 15cm to allow for some
systematic errors in the system tilt angle.
The parameters used in the simulation is shown in the table below.
Input Variable
Note
Crystal List
Provided by supervisor
F
50 & 300 [m]
Crystal R
20 [mm]
Pedestal R
4 [mm]
Mirror width
3 [mm]
Mirror height
5 [mm]
Aperture
15 [cm]
f
40 [cm]
Camera Length
5cm [cm]
Optical Back
10cm [cm]
N rays
1000
Tilt angle
5 [deg]
Wavelength
550 [nm]
Angle step
1 [deg]
Note that the maximum angle step of about 4◦will not be used; instead, 1◦is used
in the simulation. This is because some mirrors might have specific look angles for
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
39
==PAGE:48==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
when they are not overlapping; thus, a small step angle will evaluate the overlap
of the Laue lens most accurately.
40
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:49==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8
The above Figures visualise the Laue lens simulated at 90◦azimuth angle, which
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
41
==PAGE:50==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
is one of the critical angles, i.e. where the distance between a mirror pair is the
smallest. No mirror displacement has been introduced in Figure 4.8a, and all
mirrors are marked in purple. As a result, meaning their light dots will overlap in
the image. However, after introducing a mirror displacement algorithm in Figure
4.8b, the mirrors will have no overlap with each other. This solution might seem
straightforward and easy to implement: displace every second mirror left and right.
However, it is a more complicated matter, as displacing a mirror can lead to the
overlapping of other mirrors and the way mirrors are displaced on the aperture
size. Therefore, this system will have many solutions, which is why this simulation
program is a strong tool. An analytical approach might be too complicated to
resolve, if not near impossible. But the algorithm written in the simulation software
can displace the mirrors as the autocollimator steps through the lens, and this
appears to work as seen above. For a zoomed in version, see appendix Figure
A.4a and A.4b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9
Interesting patterns of the reflected light can be seen in Figure 4.9, where the light
is plotted on the autocollimator lens entrance. The light dots appear to be centred
narrowly on the horizontal axis while they are spread out on the vertical axis. This
pattern is due to the mirrors being centred towards the Laue lens centre, which
will create a parabola focusing effect from the collimated light. This effect will be
interesting to see in future images of the Laue lens ­ if it impacts overlapping light
dots.
42
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:51==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Figure 4.10: Simulation result before mirror displacement. Note that this simula­
tion was done with the maximum step angle of 4.37◦. Due to time constraints, it
was not possible to simulate this with a 1◦. This will result in some artifacts being
present in the lens, but the overall point still stands.
The result of the simulation is seen in Figure 4.10 for a situation with no mirror
displacement. 2511 mirrors out of a total 10632 (23.6% invalid) will be invalid due
to overlap resulting in their tilt angle will be unknown. There is a clear pattern
in where the invalid mirrors appear. There are 6 larger critical areas and 6 lesser
critical areas. The displacement of the mirrors should ideally solve all invalid areas
or at least solve the 6 large critical angles such that the majority of mirror tilt angles
can be determined.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
43
==PAGE:52==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Figure 4.11: Simulation result after mirror displacement.
The simulation result is now visualised for the situation with mirror displacement
in Figure 4.10. Mirrors are displaced with an algorithm that identifies overlapping
mirrors in a beam and sorts them up afterwards. While the overlapping mirrors
are solved for critical areas identified before, the mirror displacement has caused
the overlap to smooth out in the lens. Only 652 mirrors out of 10632 (6.1% invalid)
are now invalid. The displacement algorithm applied solves for the vast majority
of crystals. As mentioned earlier, the mirror displacement might seem straightfor­
ward, but this result makes it clear that it is a difficult question to ensure all mirrors
can be seen without overlapping.
4.3.2
Analysis of Mirror Displacement
A more comprehensive study will be made on mirror displacement that can lead
to an improvement in the mirror displacement.
44
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:53==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12
Two situations of invalid mirrors are identified, and the two examples are displayed
above in Figure 4.12. A red line is inserted that traces the simulated rays. The
system is simulated for 86◦in the example. In the situation 4.12a the distance
between the two mirrors is 5.2cm. This will cause overlap in the image, as we
can determine from a tilt angle of 5◦and mirror height of 5mm, that the minimum
distance between two mirrors should be 5.7cm. Furthermore, the diffraction limit
due to the Airy disc radius times two is also considered and will add about an extra
0.1cm to the minimum distance. Therefore, the two mirrors will overlap. The situ­
ation in 4.12b is obviously a cause for overlap. However, one might assume that
the mirror algorithm has failed in this case, as the mirrors are displaced wrongly,
and thus the algorithm does not work. This is not the entire story, as these cases
happen when there is no solution to this azimuth angle. The displacement algo­
rithm looks to its neighbours to determine which way to displace, and sometimes
there will be no correct solution for a pair at a certain azimuth angle.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
45
==PAGE:54==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
4.3.3
Proposed Design
A direct way to decrease the required autocollimator lens diameter is to turn the
alignment system upside down on the Laue lens (flipped on its head). Instead
mounting the optical mirrors on top of the crystal (and the autocollimator on the
top plane), the mounting would be on the bottom of the crystals.
Figure 4.13
The proposed reconstruction is illustrated in Figure 4.13. From Figure 4.9, the
reflection from mirrors nearest the autocollimator intersect with the bottom part
of the lens, while the reflection farthest from the autocollimator intersects at the
top of the lens due to the travel distance of the reflected light. The reflected light
beams will move downwards on the lens when the mirrors are tilted in the new
design. However, the bottom beams will only move a slight distance, meaning the
aperture does not need a larger size to ”catch” reflected rays for higher tilt angles.
The required autocollimator diameter is now simply given as
D = ro tan(θ)
(4.10)
From the mirror displacement analysis earlier and the realisation that the align­
ment system can be turned upside down, the system tilt angle θ can be set to
6◦. This reduces the minimum distance between mirrors to about 4.2cm, ensur­
ing more mirrors can be seen. Furthermore, the minimum required aperture size
is 13.1cm meaning that the aperture can be kept at 15cm to leave room for sys­
tematic errors. It is possible that the aperture could be reduced to 14cm if the
systematic errors certainty can be kept under a threshold. Simulation of this sys­
tem shows that only 305 mirrors out of 10632 (2.9%) are invalid, which is about
half as much as the previous system.
46
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:55==
4.3. ALIGNMENT SYSTEM SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14
The reflected light rays are much more compact for high tilt angles, see Figure
4.14a, while they are more spread out for a small tilt angle 4.14b. How this will
look in a resulting image will be an important question to answer. However, the
autocollimator will still ”catch” the reflected rays in the proposed upside­down sys­
tem.
Figure 4.15: Number of mirrors seen illuminated by the autocollimator as a func­
tion of azimuth angle. Step angle is 1◦.
The plot in Figure 4.15 displays the number of illuminated mirrors as a function
of 1◦azimuth step angle. The mean is 192, and is quite a substantial amount of
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
47
==PAGE:56==
4.4. SUMMARY OF ALIGNMENT SYSTEM ANALYSIS
mirrors that will have to fit in the image. This will require a large CCD.
4.4
Summary of Alignment System Analysis
General performance parameters has been evaluated for the alignment system
such as maximum step angle in azimuth and It has been analytically established
that for a critical distance between mirrors of only 24.5cm, the required system tilt
angle will become large which results in an very large autocollimator lens. This
large lens will subject to many aberrations and carry a large weight, which is not
suitable for the Laue lens. Therefore, a displacement scheme of the mirrors was
developed to increase the critical distance between mirrors. Using a developed
simulation toolkit to solve this system and evaluate its performance, it is suggested
that with a system tilt angle of 6◦and an aperture diameter of 14/15cm, the vast
majority of mirrors will be resolvable for the autocollimator. Furthermore, the au­
tocollimator system should expect to image about xxxx number of mirrors on av­
erage, with some angles have xxxx mirrors present.
48
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:57==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 5
Verification of an Optical
Autocollimator
5.1
Experimental Setup
5.1.1
Atik 420 Camera
The camera used for the experiments is the Atik 420 camera features a 2­
megapixel Sony ICX­274 sensor. Values for relevant parameters for this CCD
and overall camera are summarised in the table below and are found from the
product websites:
https://www.atik-cameras.com/product/atik-420/, last visited 21­04­2022.
https://www.qmt-group.com/pdf/Technical_product_documentation/Comparaison_
performances_capteurs_monochromes.pdf.pdf,
last
visited
21­04­2022
https:
//www.atik-cameras.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/AtikSeries4Manual.pdf,
last
visited 21­04­2022
Parameter
Value
Array Size
1619 × 1219
Pixel Size
4.4µm × 4.4µm
Qe
0.59% @ 550nm
Dark current
∼0.0001 electrons/second at ­10◦
Readout noise
4e­
Maximum Exposure Time
∞
Minimum Exposure Time
1/1000 s
Thermoelectric cooling set point
max ΔT=­30◦
Back focus
13mm±0.5
Table 5.1
5.1.2
Image Capture Software
The software used to control and capture images with the Atik 420 camera is the
Artemis Capture (see manual: https://www.atik-cameras.com/wp-content/uploads/
2015/07/Artemis-Capture.pdf, last visited 24­06­2022). This software has tools that
allow the preview of images and saves them as standard FITS files. It’s solely
designed for image capturing, and it is not designed as an image processing pro­
gram. However, it has tools that let the user review the image histogram. This
makes it possible to assess image detail, such as pixel saturation. The file format
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
49
==PAGE:58==
5.1. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
is 16­bit (each pixel is 16­bit), but this will automatically be changed to 8­bit at the
start of the image processing software developed for this project. A 16­bit depth
per pixel would require a much larger data handling unit on board the satellite.
Thus converting to 8­bit would make the image processing software and results
more relevant to the final system.
Figure 5.1: Artemis Capture Software. USE IMAGE WITH A CAPTURED LIGHT
DOT.
The image capturing software is seen in Figure 5.1. Relevant parameters that can
be controlled are
• Exposure time
• Cooler control
• Binning [1, 2, 4, 8]
• Sequencer (N­number images over time)
5.1.3
Laboratory Test Setup
Due to the early phase of this project, the available equipment for the experimental
setup is almost none. Therefore, much of the equipment had to be built by hand
from material that was possible to get. The first part is the optical bench, ensuring
stability from vibrations and a workstation for running the experiments.
50
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:59==
5.1. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
(a) The optical bench structure.
(b) Light source and fiber cable.
Figure 5.2
A large metal structure was used as the foundation of the optical bench. By drilling
the required holes in the metal, metal rails could be screwed together with the
metal structure to support a table and optical rails at each end, see Figure 5.2a.
The light source used in the experiments was a lamp light for bicycles, see Figure
5.2b. A white source light and a metal tube are placed over the lamp. An optical
fibre connects to the metal, which is inserted into the camera mount.
(a) CHANGE IMAGE WITH THE CAMERA
MOUNTED.
(b) TRY AND GET THE MIRROR IN FO­
CUS
Figure 5.3
The camera mount is a metallic disc shape than can be screwed onto the optical
system, and the camera can be connected to the disc after that, see Figure 5.3.
Furthermore, the mount has a collimating mirror located at the focal point. The
optical fibre will connect to this entrance, which illuminates the mirror from the light
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
51
==PAGE:60==
5.1. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
source. However, since the mirror is located in the focal point, the CCD behind
the mirror is essentially halved by the structure. This limits the imaging capability
considerably, but there are still many pixels available for initial imaging.
Figure 5.4: Wafer containing the 3x7mm mirrors.
The mirror wafer in 5.4 contains many small 3x7mm mirrors produced by DTU
Nanolab. The wafer is made up of silicium with a thickness of 650µm and diam­
eter of 150mm. The top of the wafer is coated with 100nm aluminium and is the
reflecting part of the mirror.
52
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:61==
5.1. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 5.5: Sketch of the experimental setup with collimating mirror. Distances
are not to scale, and some sizes are exaggerated for visual purposes.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
53
==PAGE:62==
5.2. IMAGE PROCESSING SOFTWARE
5.2
Image Processing Software
The image processing is required to take the raw image data as input and should
be able to filter noise, detect light dots and find the centroid and FWHM. This in­
volves several intermediate steps that filter the image from noise and artefacts
such that the tilt angle can be accurately calculated. These steps can be sum­
marised as
• Filter image noise
• Filter single pixels with high intensity
• Detect light dots in the image
• Centroiding each light spot individually
• FWHM analysis of chosen light spot
The program should be able to filter the noise by subtracting every pixel intensity
with a manually defined noise threshold that will ensure no noise is present in the
image and the image is prepared for further processing. The program is required
to filter single pixels (or smaller collections of pixels) with a high signal. An image
may contain pixels with signals over the noise level from different artefacts. It
is essential to filter these out, as they would otherwise be seen as light dots for
centroiding and angle estimates. Detection of light dots is straightforward as each
light dot can be easily distinguished from the now 0 intensity pixels previously
occupied by noise.
The centroiding will consist of two different algorithms. A Gaussian fit algorithm
will be performed on the light dot as a first option. This fit will utilize the Matlab
fit­function, which has the option to fit a 1D­Gaussian model to a curve, see https:
//se.mathworks.com/help/curvefit/gaussian.html (last accessed: 05­07­2022). Only
the first order Gaussian fit will be used and is defined as:
.y1 = a1 exp
[
−
(x1 −b1
c1
)2]
(5.1)
Where a1 is the amplitude, b1 is the centroid center and c1 is a parameter related
to the FWHM, which can be found as FWHM = 2
√
log(2)c1.
There could be a case where the pixel is saturated, and the Gaussian fit would
therefore suffer in FWHM accuracy. If such as case is true for a light dot, the
fitting model should be a simple centre of gravity (CoE), defined as [36]:
(xc, yc) =
∑
ij XYijIij
∑
ij Iij
(5.2)
Where I is the pixel intensity at pixel coordinate XY . xc and yc are the coordinate
of the image center.
It is important to ensure that the light dots are not saturated, as the Gaussian fit
model is assumed to be more accurate than the CoE model. CoE works best in
high flux conditions with an error of under half a pixel.
54
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:63==
5.3. SYSTEM NOISE ANALYSIS
Figure 5.6: Flowchart of the image processing algorithm. It takes a raw image as
input, filters it from noise and find the centroid of each light dot in the image.
The source code for the image processing software can be found in the
source_code.zip file, in the folder named Image Processing.
5.3
System Noise Analysis
The noise in a CCD imaging system has three primary sources: photon noise, dark
noise, and read noise[37]. During image acquisition, the noise is superimposed
on the signal and manifests as random fluctuations in signal intensity, which will
have two profound effects on the image. First, due to the properties of the optical
autocollimator and the small mirrors, the resulting light dots should only cause a
signal in a fraction of the total number of pixels in the CCD array. This should
leave most pixels with no signal intensity, but due to the fluctuating noise, every
pixel will display some intensity. This will be a problem for potential algorithms
that have to find the light dots in the image and process them for various reasons.
Furthermore, due to the noise being superimposed on the signal, the full well
capacity of the CCD will be severely reduced as pixels will not be able to reach
their maximum intensity with the signal as part of it will be noise. This phenomenon
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
55
==PAGE:64==
5.3. SYSTEM NOISE ANALYSIS
is known as the signal­to­noise ratio (SNR).
The 3 noise sources can be described as
• Photon noise is a result of the statistical variation in the time of arrival rate
of photons incident on the CCD. The interval between photo arrivals follows
Poisson statistics, and photo­electrons (signal) are generated in the semi­
conductor device in each pixel whose magnitude fluctuates randomly. The
photon noise is the square root of the signal.
• Dark noise describes the statistical variation in electrons generated from
the thermal energy in the CCD silicon material and is independent of photon­
induced signals. The rate at which the thermal electrons are generated for
a given CCD temperature is referred to as dark current. The dark noise
follows a Poisson relationship to the dark current and is equivalent to the
square root of the dark current within the image exposure time.
• Read noise is a result of the system noise due to components that converts
the CCD charge carriers into a voltage signal and the subsequent process­
ing and analog­to­digital conversion. The majority of the read noise usually
originates from the amplifier, and this noise is added to every pixel equally.
The SNR is an essential factor to improve, as the image quality and performance
of many algorithms will depend heavily on it. In a CCD, the electronic signal inten­
sity is directly dependent on the photon flux (photons per area per second) incident
on the CCD photodiodes, the quantum efficiency of the CCD (1 to 100%), and the
integration time (or exposure time) which the signal is collected over. The product
of these three factors determines the signal intensity and increases the SNR, and
reversibly the noise will decrease the SNR. It is therefore essential to identify the
noise contribution to the image so that the physical noise sources can be reduced;
otherwise, the leftover noise can be digitally processed out of the image. The SNR
for a CCD system is commonly calculated as
SNR =
PQet
√
(P + B)Qet + Dt + N 2
r
(5.3)
Where P is photon flux (photons/area/second), B is the background photon flux
(photons/area/second), Qe is the quantum efficiency of the CCD, t is the integra­
tion time (seconds), D is the dark current (electrons/pixel/second) and Nr is the
read noise (electrons rms/pixel).
Each noise component will be analysed for the optical autocollimator system used.
5.3.1
Dark Current
Due to the dark currents’ thermal dependency, the system behaviour will be anal­
ysed for varying CCD temperatures. The Atik 420 has an internal thermoelectric
cooling system that can cool up to ∆T = −30◦C below ambient, see section 5.1.1.
The ambient temperature in the laboratory was measured to be about 22.4◦C,
meaning the expected lowest cooling temperature is about ­10◦C.
56
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:65==
5.3. SYSTEM NOISE ANALYSIS
Figure 5.7: Lowest possible temperature of the Atik 420 cooling system.
From system tests, the lowest possible temperature was found to be ­10.3◦C when
setting the cooling to ­15.0◦C, meaning the cooling can perform ∼∆T = 32.7◦C
in this applied context. The expected result should follow an exponential growth,
as the dark current is often described following the equation ([38], equation 3)
De−= De−
00exp
[
∆E
(
1
EMN
−1
kT
)]
(5.4)
Where De−is the dark current in e−/s, De−
00 and EMN are positive constants, ∆E
is the activation energy and T is temperature in kelvin. The equation follows the
Arrhenius law, which is used to predict the motion of structural units such as atoms
and molecules as a function of temperature, and by applying the Meyer­Neldel rule
(MNR) it arrives at the presented form. MNR is found in many fields with diffusion
or conductivity of semiconductors and is observed often for processes that follow
the Arrhenius law. The values needed to calculate the dark theoretical current are
unknown, and the system should thus be fully analysed from experiments.
During the experiment, the aperture of the optical system is completely covered,
and all lights are turned off, meaning only noise from dark current and read noise
will be present. 10 images will be taken for each temperature interval spanning
ambient 22.4◦C to 20.0◦C and then decreasing with 5◦C to the minimum temper­
ature of ­10◦C.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
57
==PAGE:66==
5.3. SYSTEM NOISE ANALYSIS
Figure 5.8
The mean noise intensity for each temperature can be seen in Figure 5.8. The
expected exponential dependence of the temperature is clear, and the activation
energy is seen to be overcome at about 5◦C. From the information in this graph,
the CCD should be cooled to 5◦C or less.
Other phenomena found observed for noise are so­called hot pixels. They appear
in the image as individual pixels displaying a high intensity, where the intensity can
easily reach well above the noise level and be seen as part of the signal. These
pixels will be problematic for data­processing algorithms that treat these hot pixels
as mirror reflections.
58
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:67==
5.3. SYSTEM NOISE ANALYSIS
Figure 5.9
A box plot of the noise intensity distribution is seen on the Figure above 5.9. Each
box displays the distribution of all individual pixels of all 10 images for each tem­
perature. This is 1619 × 1219 × 10 = 19, 735, 610 data points for each box. The
box plot visualises statistical distribution as follows (c.f. https://se.mathworks.com/
help/stats/boxplot.html):
”On each box, the central mark indicates the median, and the bottom and top
edges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively.
The
whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered outliers, and the
outliers are plotted individually using the ’+’ marker symbol.”
The outliers (’+’ symbol) appear more frequently and with higher intensity for
higher temperatures. Below 5◦C, the outliers are less frequent and with much
less intensity. Furthermore, the width of the box containing data points from the
25th to 75th percentile is much wider for high temperatures and almost negligible
for lower. The influence of even a small increase in temperature between 20.0◦C
and 22.4◦C is profound and demonstrates the importance of a well­cooled system.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
59
==PAGE:68==
5.4. INITIAL MIRROR REFLECTION IMAGE
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10
The images seen in Figure 5.10a were captured at ambient temperature. A no­
table aspect is the uneven distribution of noise intensity. The disparity between
the top and bottom of the image is over a factor of 2. The reason for this unequal
distribution could be that the temperature distributes itself unevenly over the sen­
sor. After cooling the sensor, the image in Figure 5.10b was taken at 0◦C. The
intensity is now even throughout the image. This distribution attribute of the de­
vice is noteworthy and is another reason adequate cooling is necessary to provide
stable imaging.
5.4
Initial Mirror Reflection Image
Four mirrors was placed in the front of the autocollimator on a planar surface.
The mirrors were taped onto the planar surface, so they wouldn’t move around.
This exercise will test if the optical system functions as intended as well as the
algorithms
60
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:69==
5.5. MULTIPLE MIRROR REFLECTION
Figure 5.11: Image of 4 mirrors placed on a planar surface.
The reflection of the 4 mirrors can be seen in Figure. They appear well focused.
Figure 5.12: CHANGE THIS IMAGE
5.5
Multiple Mirror Reflection
A mirror cradle made in aluminium was created to allow the autocollimator to im­
age multiple mirrors simultaneously.
This experiment will verify the possibility
of multiple small mirrors being present in the same image without overlapping
so much that their centroid estimation is not possible. Thus the feasibility of the
alignment system for the tunable Laue lens.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
61
==PAGE:70==
5.5. MULTIPLE MIRROR REFLECTION
Figure 5.13: Cradle containing multiple mirrors with numbering.
The cradle, along with the 32 mirrors, can be seen in Figure 5.13, where they are
numbered from left to right. The collimated light does not cover the whole cradle,
and it is estimated that 22 mirrors should be visible. This is ideal, but because of
errors in the cradle due to construction precision and dust, some mirrors might be
too titled to be seen by half of the CCD array. Furthermore, this might cause some
reflections to overlap in the image. Some of the mirrors have damaged parts in
them, see mirror 1, 18 and 29 for examples in Figure 5.13, and their resulting
reflection in the image might be undesirable for image analysis.
5.5.1
Result and Analysis of Multiple Mirror Reflection
Figure 5.14: Cradle mirror reflection
An image of multiple mirrors can be seen in Figure 5.14. The light dots are brighter
and better focused on the left side of the image, while they are more dim and
62
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:71==
5.6. INITIAL ALIGNMENT SUMMARY
elongated on the right side. This effect is due to a combination of different factors.
Firstly, the reflection is focused by hand onto the lens centre. This manual align­
ment can lead to the test object not being physically centred in the autocollimator
FOV, and the subsequent angling to make the reflections appear in the image can
cause image distortion seen.
The lens aberrations have an effect as well, but the contribution of the effect is
difficult to characterize. It’s worth noting that the lens has an aperture of 90mm
and a thickness of 110mm. This is a sizeable lens which makes it more exposed
to aberrations as a result. It is possible to compensate for lens aberrations by
characterizing the light dot response throughout the image [39]. However, this
would require precise control of the mirrors under test, which is impossible with
the current experimental setup.
Figure 5.15: Cradle containing multiple mirrors with numbering.
The image processing program counts each light dot and marks its index and
position (as well as the centroid) in Figure 5.15. It is able to count the 16 light
dots correctly. This is an important result, as this image processing software will
provide the data of each image that will be used to calculate the tilt angle of a
mirror.
5.6
Initial Alignment Summary
The initial results were an important demonstration of the possibility of using an au­
tocollimator in the Laue lens alignment system. It was possible to image multiple
mirrors at the same time. However, the current optical system is severely limited
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
63
==PAGE:72==
5.6. INITIAL ALIGNMENT SUMMARY
as the collimating mirror structure blocks half the CCD array. A beamsplitter will
have to be integrated into the system for future experiments. The collimated light
came out in a rectangular shape as well, which indicates that the collimating mirror
is not correctly aligned. As a result, the illuminated area is not maximized, which
a beamsplitter can solve if implemented correctly.
64
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:73==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 6
Integration of Beamsplitter
6.1
Integration of a Beamsplitter
6.1.1
The 450nm­650nm Beamsplitter Cube
From the experiments done in Chapter 5, it was determined that a beamsplitter
should be integrated into the optical setup to allow more of the CCD Array to be
used in future imaging.
Figure 6.1: Sketch of a beamsplitter. The incident ray (I) is split, where 50% of
the light is a transmitted ray (T) and 50% is a reflected ray (R)
A beamsplitter splits incident light into 50% transmitted light and 50% reflected
light, see Figure 6.1. It was possible to acquire a 10mm×10mm×10mm broadband
beamsplitter cube (450nm−650nm), see https://sp3plus.co.uk/product/broadband-
beamsplitter-cube-450-650nm-wavelength-4/, (last accessed: 04­06­2022). The di­
mensional tolerance is ±2mm and the splitting of light, T/R, has a deviation of
5%. The beamsplitter’s side­length is 10mm corresponds to 10mm
90mm = 11.11...% of
the aperture, and calculating this ratio from the focal length of 325mm, the beam­
splitter should be placed at maximum 36.11mm from the CCD to ensure all of
the apertures is collimating outgoing light (max FOV). However, the beamsplitter
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
65
==PAGE:74==
6.1. INTEGRATION OF A BEAMSPLITTER
should be moved even closer to the CCD, as the mirror reflection will be focused
up and down on the focal plane depending on the mirror tilt. If the beamsplitter is
positioned too far from the CCD, part of the CCD will be shadowed as the incoming
rays can be out of the beamsplitter plane.
6.1.2
3D­Print Model for Camera Mounting
A 3D printed model will be designed to integrate the beamsplitter into the optical
system. It will ensure the correct dimensions for the light source to the beamsplit­
ter centre to illuminate the whole aperture. The design should try to minimize the
distance from the CCD to the beamsplitter and ensure stability and rigidness of
the camera and beamsplitter. The first design to be made is the beamsplitter hold.
It should have an easy design to secure onto other parts and ensure a stable grip
of the beamsplitter while avoiding covering the CCD as much as possible. The
accuracy of the design has to be very precise, as even a few errors will worsen
the image capabilities of the system.
Fortunately, the 3D­printer available at DTU Skylab1 is the Ultimaker 3 Extended.
This printer can print profiles down to a 0.06mm accuracy (https://ultimaker.com/
3d-printers/ultimaker-3, last accessed 01­06­2022). Taking the ”printing resolution”
into account in the design, as well as the nature of 3D printing (building models
from the bottom and up), very fine structures can be made.
(a) Beamsplitter hold seen from the front.
(b) Beamsplitter hold seen from the side.
Figure 6.2
The beamsplitter­hold design is seen on Figure 6.2b and 6.2a. It is a square struc­
1https://www.skylab.dtu.dk/Technology/Fabrication
66
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:75==
6.1. INTEGRATION OF A BEAMSPLITTER
ture encapsulating the beamsplitter with pillars, and nearly all the beamsplitter is
visible at the front. More of the beamsplitter side is covered by the pillars, about
1mm from each pillar. This is a total of 2mm or 20% and is another reason the
distance between the beamsplitter and the CCD should be reduced (at least 20%)
to ensure maximum FOV.
(a) Front entrance of camera without
beamsplitter.
(b) Front entrance of camera with
beamsplitter
(c) Back­end of camera.
(d) Camera mounted on the optical
system.
Figure 6.3
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
67
==PAGE:76==
6.2. AUTOCOLLIMATOR WITH BEAMSPLITTER PERFORMANCE
The final camera mount design with integrated beamsplitter is seen in Figure 6.3.
With a back focus of 13.5mm from the camera system, the final design places the
beamsplitter 25.0mm in front of the CCD. This is a reduction of about 31% and
satisfies the stated design parameters. Note that the mount is designed to have
four threaded rods from top to bottom for added stability.
6.2
Autocollimator with Beamsplitter Performance
The performance is evaluated with the same image processing algorithm and ex­
perimental setup as in Chapter 5.
6.2.1
Diffuse Light with Beamsplitter
The system’s capability to isolate diffuse light noise was tested for three circum­
stances. One where no light is on in the laboratory (external light) and the light­
fibre source is switched off as well (internal light). This will be the neutral test,
and the pixel intensity is due to dark current and read­out noise only. The second
test will have the light­fibre source switched on to measure the internal diffuse
light noise in the system. The third test will have the laboratory light switched on
(external light).
For each test, 10 images of 1 second exposure time and ­10C◦cooling will be
averaged to find the mean pixel intensity.
No Light On
Light­fiber On
External Light On
Mean Pixel Intensity
4.9982
4.9983
5.0036
Table 6.1
The results of the tests can be seen in Table 6.1 above. The mean pixel intensity
barely changes from the neutral intensity for the two scenarios of internal and
external light. Therefore, the new optical system with the beamsplitter can be
assumed to be well isolated from noise contributions from external sources and
the light fibre optics used.
6.2.2
Collimated Light
The shape of the collimated light has been greatly improved from the shape seen
in Figure A.8 in appendix A.2.2, which is from the system before beamsplitter,
to the optical system with a beamsplitter in Figure A.9. The former shape only
covered about two­thirds of the horizontal autocollimator aperture which would
severely limit the amount of mirrors that could be covered. The entire lens area
is now collimating light. This result indicates that the 3D­print design is correct.
It should be noted, that tin foil was used to image the collimated light, as the
brightness was too dim otherwise. Either a better camera or stronger light source
is needed to evaluate the collimated light properly.
6.2.3
Single Light Dot with Beamsplitter
A single mirror reflection was tested to verify the new autocollimator system’s
performance.
68
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:77==
6.2. AUTOCOLLIMATOR WITH BEAMSPLITTER PERFORMANCE
(a) Single light dot seen with the optical system after
beamsplitter was integrated.
(b) The same light dot but zoomed in on.
Figure 6.4
A single light dot is seen in Figure 6.4. The SNR of the image is high, and the
light dot appears small and focused. This result is very similar to what is found in
5, and the beamsplitter can be assumed to be function properly.
Figure 6.5: The FWHM of the single light dot through the Y and X­axis. The fitted
data is shown with a red line and the measured data is shown with blue dots for
each pixel.
The FWHM of the light dot is seen in Figure 6.5. It is equal to 83.6µm through
the X­axis. This size can be compared to the theoretically expected Airy disc,
by assuming the wavelength of the light source average 550nm, which is about
52µm. The light dot is very close to ideal. In the final Laue lens, the distance
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
69
==PAGE:78==
6.2. AUTOCOLLIMATOR WITH BEAMSPLITTER PERFORMANCE
between each light dot should be at least twice this width to ensure no light dot
overlaps, as an overlap would interfere with the accuracy of the calculated tilt
angle. There are 1619 pixels throughout the X­axis, meaning the image could fit
about 42 light dots if evenly distributed on the X­axis, which is far less than the
192 found from the simulations. Assuming this scenario, and seeing the mirror
tilting on the Laue lens restricts the light dot movement to the vertical Y­axis (1219
pixels), the maximum tilt angle can be found as ≈28.3arc­min from equation 3.10.
The limited vertically displacement will allow a maximum of about 0.24◦. This as­
sumes the light dot start position is at the image centre to maximize the resolvable
tilt range. The final optical alignment system should be able to resolve an angular
tilt of 1◦, which would require a much larger CCD than used in this project. Fur­
thermore, the alignment system should handle a further 0.5◦tilt range to correct
initial misalignments in the mirror mounting. If the pixel size is 4.4µm, there must
be about 3870 pixels vertically in the image to cover this range. After that, the
light dots can move freely up and down. Seeing there must be room for about 30
mirrors on a straight line, and they must be individually separated by two times
FWHM (2· ≈80µm), it adds up to about 1090 pixels vertically. This means that
the CCD should consist of about 5000 pixels on the vertical axis, and while this
number is only an initial estimate, it is clear that the required CCD will have to be
quite large in the final design.
6.2.4
Image Stability with Beamsplitter
The image stability is analysed for many light dots by using the mirror cradle as
the object under test. By moving the lens slightly, the cradle reflections can be
imaged at the bottom, middle and top of the image. 20 images will be captured at
each position.
70
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:79==
6.2. AUTOCOLLIMATOR WITH BEAMSPLITTER PERFORMANCE
Figure 6.6: Stability distribution of 20 images taken from the bottom of the image.
The distribution is displayed as box plots with a centroid displacement in µm (Y­
axis) for different light dots (X­axis)
The distribution of light dot centroid around their mean over 20 images can be seen
in Figure 6.6. The middle­ and top (A.5 and A.6) positions are seen in appendix
A.2.1. The largest deviation from the mean is about 4µm. However, outliers are
seen at about 6µm. Assuming a worst case scenario with 12µm deviations, the
angular resolution can be found
∆θ = arctan
(12 · 10−6m
2 · 0.325m
)
≈3.8′′
(6.1)
This resolution is below the desired resolution of 10′′ stated in Section 3.5.2. The
fact that a simple, mostly homemade optical system can achieve this resolution
indicates that the final optical autocollimator (with higher quality parts and cali­
brated) will be well under the required resolution.
The current optical system in itself has sources that can cause a vibrating light
dot. Firstly, the cooling system of the camera consists of a fan that blows out hot
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
71
==PAGE:80==
6.2. AUTOCOLLIMATOR WITH BEAMSPLITTER PERFORMANCE
air. This could be a source of mechanical vibration, depending of how much its
center of mass is off balance (it’s almost impossible to achieve perfect balance). A
second source of vibration is the light source. The light source is a simple bicycle
light, that radiates with white light. However, the spectral radiation could vary
significantly but this is only speculation since it has not been possible to evaluate
the light source further in this project.
The lens smearing can be evaluated by creating an image with many light dots.
An image was created by combining three different separate images. Each image
contains the reflections from the mirror cradle, where the autocollimator lens was
moved slightly such that the whole image would eventually be covered with light
dots. The image can be found in Figure A.7 in appendix A.2.1.
Figure 6.7: FWHM ratio between the X­ and Y­axis width as a function of angular
deviation from the image centre.
Figure 6.7 illustrates the smearing of light dots as a function of angular deviation
from the image centre. The amount of smearing can be characterized by the ratio
of the FWHM through the X­axis and Y­axis. If the ratio is close to 1, the smearing
would be circular and can be considered minimal. The further the ratio deviates
from 1 the more profound the smearing can be considered, as the light dot shape
will be elliptical as it elongates. Light dots far from the image center becomes
highly smeared, which highlights the importance of calibration for future projects.
The source code for the image processing software can be found in the
source_code.zip file, in the folder named Moving Lightdot.
72
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:81==
6.3. ACTIVE MIRROR TILT DEMONSTRATION
6.3
Active Mirror Tilt Demonstration
6.3.1
Algorithm for Handling Moving Light Dots
When processing an image, the previous algorithm in Chapter 5 starts from pixels
1 (x,y = 1,1) and iterate over the all pixels from the top left corner (first counting
all x­axis pixels before incrementing y­axis) and ends in the bottom right corner.
When creating data matrices for the light dots in the image, they are counted from
1 to the end, which works for an image with still light dots. However, when the tilt
angle is adjusted, the light dots will move in between each other, which will cause
the centroid data matrix to mix between the light dots. This is a problem when
finding the tilt angle, as it requires knowledge of the previous­ and new position of
the same light dot.
Figure 6.8: Illustration of the data­handling program for tracking moving light dots
and finding tilt angle over multiple images.
The structure of the light dot handling program is illustrated in Figure 6.8. The
input image is passed to the image processing algorithm from Chapter 5, where
if the image is the first iteration, it will be used to build a reference matrix for the
light dots. This matrix will contain the centroid location of each light dot as well
as their reference number and tilt angle (when tilt angle can be calculated). All
other images are thereafter passed to a threshold that will determine if the light
dot has moved, and if this is true, the tilt angle can be found and the reference
matrix updated.
As seen from Section 6.2.4, the light dot centroids will not be entirely still but almost
”vibrate”. The amount of vibration will therefore determine the lowest resolution of
the autocollimator. The vibration is very dependent on the structure it is mounted
on, where thermal expansion could be a source for vibration in the spacecraft.
Lens aberrations can have an impact, as well as dark count due to temperature
fluctuations. From the image stability analysed, the threshold is set to at least
8µm. The minimum threshold would probably be about 6µm. However, with 8µm
the algorithm performance will be more accurate.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
73
==PAGE:82==
6.3. ACTIVE MIRROR TILT DEMONSTRATION
6.3.2
Mirror Tilt Series
A quick mockup experiment was done by placing the piezoelectric actuator with
a mirror on top next to the mirror cradle. There will be one controllable light dot
alongside several constant light dots. This experiment will illustrate a comparable
situation to the actual context of the alignment system in the Laue lens. It should
be noted that the mirror on the piezoelectric actuator is 5x5mm while the mirrors
in the cradle are 3x7mm, so from the larger area of the 5x5mm mirror, it will be
slightly brighter in the image as well.
Figure 6.9: Moving light dot through multiple frames. The tilt angle is calculated
between each frame. A red line marks the distance covered by a detected moving
light dot.
This demonstration gives an idea of what it will look like with the mirror reflections
moving up and down on the tunable Laue lens. The optical alignment system
should probably have a look up table (LUT) for image processing, where the po­
sition of each mirror is stored. By analysing the light dot centroid pattern in an
74
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:83==
6.3. ACTIVE MIRROR TILT DEMONSTRATION
image, the autocollimator will be able to compare it with the look up table and
from there determine its azimuth look angle and which mirrors are in the image.
The look up table should be updated at a time interval in case the mirror tilt will
drift over a long time.
The full videos of the moving light dot can be found in The source code for the
image processing software can be found in the source_code.zip file, in the folder
named Moving Lightdot.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
75
==PAGE:84==
6.3. ACTIVE MIRROR TILT DEMONSTRATION
76
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:85==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 7
Future Work
7.1
Improved Optical Bench
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1: The autocollimator was placed on the side of a wooden platform. This
would make it easy to handle experiments, as the object being tested would be
placed on the optical table. However, the weight of the autocollimator would bend
the wooden platform forward and the solution was to bind many threads to a coun­
terweight.
The optical bench used in this project was completely homemade. Despite this,
the project was able to ascertain that the autocollimator is suitable for the optical
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
77
==PAGE:86==
7.2. CLEAN UP 3D­PRINT
alignment system in the Laue lens. However, the experiments were time con­
fusing and many times difficult. Every part was manually placed/changed in the
setup, and the reflection from the mirrors would need to be manually tilted onto
the autocollimator lens ­ which is not easy when the angle precision should be
within a few degrees. This makes studies of the lens quality infeasible and the
comparability between finer experiments less accurate. A stable optical bench is
desired for future generations of this project. It would allow parts to be stable and
fine­controlled and the light dot smearing the image to be characterised.
A monochromatic light source that allows more control of its radiated power would
be desirable for future experiments as well.
7.2
Clean Up 3D­Print
The 3D­print design was able to perform as intended for this project. Due to time
constraints and limited accessibility of 3D­printers, the design went through few
iterations. One design choice that should be optimised is the screw holes, which
are placed inconvenient for the screwdriver to reach it (it connects a bit sideways).
It is possible screw the camera onto the autocollimator, but it should be fixed for
future use, or otherwise it will be worn over time.
7.3
Construction of a Mock­Up Model
Figure 7.2: 24 pedestals with mirrors glued on top. Note that half the mirrors are
displaced right and the other half left.
It was possible to construct an initial mock­up model of the Laue lens optical sys­
tem by the end of the project. 24 mirrors were placed on a line with the same
geometry that will be present in the Laue lens, see mirrors mounted on pedestals
78
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:87==
7.3. CONSTRUCTION OF A MOCK­UP MODEL
in Figure 7.2. The mirrors was mounted on 3D­printed pedestals with glue, match­
ing the final pedestal dimension. The mirrors should have an angle of about 5◦
after being mounted. However, the angle error will be substantial from the 3D­
printer precision and hardening of the glue. This future project will require good
craftsmanship
Figure 7.3: Mock up of the Laue lens.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
79
==PAGE:88==
7.3. CONSTRUCTION OF A MOCK­UP MODEL
Multiple mirrors could be illuminated by the autocollimator and their reflection was
clear to see. However, it is a difficult task to align the mirrors perfectly, which was
not possible to correct for due to time constraints, and thus the reflections were
all over the room. The mock up can be seen in Figure 7.3.
80
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:89==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The optical alignment system for the Laue lens was analysed by simulation soft­
ware developed in this project. It found a solution for the mirror alignment that
indicates the vast majority to be seen without overlap by the autocollimator, where
only 2.9% (a few hundred mirrors) will be invalid with current scheme. Further­
more, an optical alignment system has been proposed to be placed under the
Laue lens facing the detector side. The previous system had the alignment sys­
tem facing the gamma­ray source being measured. The autocollimator should
have a focal length of 40cm to improve angular resolution and an aperture diame­
ter of 15cm. The system tilt angle of the autocollimator and optical mirrors (when
the crystals are not tilted) is suggested to be 6◦.
A significant milestone for the Laue lens optical alignment system was verifying
multiple mirror reflections in a single image. The sizes of the reflections were
relatively small, although the CCD used in the project will probably become too
small for future experiments as more mirrors are included. However, this proves
that the optical autocollimator could be used to measure the tilt angle of crystals
in the Laue lens.
The optical system was improved further by integrating a beamsplitter. This allows
the entire CCD to be exposed to the reflected light. It was found that the 3x7mm
mirrors used in the experiments would have an FWHM of about 80 to 90 µm ­
assuming they are well focused. The light dots should be separated by twice
the FWHM to ensure they can be resolved and the centroiding is accurate. This
means that 42 light dots can be present in the horizontal direction for the CCD
used in these experiments (1619 pixels x 4.4µm). From simulations of the Laue
lens, it was found that about 192 mirrors will be present in the image on average.
The current CCD is far too small for the alignment system.
Since the vertical axis consists of 1219 and the light dot movement is constricted
to this axis in the Laue lens, the maximum tilt angle that can be measured is ≈28.3
arc minutes or 0.24◦. This is far from the total required tilt range of 1.5◦, and the
CCD in future systems should be much larger than what is currently used.
The image stability was analysed statistically by calculating the centroid of multi­
ple still light dots throughout multiple images. This stability analysis will provide
a threshold for how much the centroid estimation fluctuates from a mean. It was
found that the centroid precision was about 12µm, which corresponds to an angu­
lar resolution of about 3.8 arc seconds. Therefore, the change in centroid position
should only be considered valid over this threshold. Otherwise, it will be unknow­
able if the measured deviation is due to fluctuations or actual tilting of the mirror.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
81
==PAGE:90==
However, the alignment system should be within 10 arc­seconds precision for the
Laue lens to function correctly, which can already be obtained in this project.
Overall, this thesis indicates through simulations that the optical alignment sys­
tem will be able to resolve the vast majority of optical mirrors in the Laue lens.
Furthermore, through experiments, the autocollimator can see multiple mirrors
simultaneously and resolve their tilt angle to a precision that will allow efficient
gamma­ray diffraction from the Laue lens.
However, since this project was the first iteration of the experimental evaluation of
the autocollimator system, it has been limited by the unavailability of professional
optical equipment. For future iterations of this project, it is suggested that a bet­
ter optical bench can be implemented as well as a better light source. This will
significantly improve the stability of the experiments and their validity.
The construction of a mock­up model of the Laue lens optical alignment system
was begun by the end of the project, but it was not completed due to time con­
straints. This will naturally lead the project’s next iteration to evaluate the auto­
collimator image quality. In addition, the lens response should be described to
obtain better imaging capability. This will clearly be necessary, as the smearing
in the image becomes severe away from the image center.
82
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:91==
MASTER THESIS
Bibliography
[1]
Jürgen Knödlseder. The future of gamma­ray astronomy. June 2016. DOI:
10.1016/j.crhy.2016.04.008.
[2]
L. Peterson and J. R. Winckler. “Short γ­Ray Burst from a Solar Flare”. In:
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1 (6 Sept. 1958), pp. 205–206. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
1.205. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.1.205.
[3]
James R. Arnold et al. “Gamma rays in space, Ranger 3”. In: Journal of
Geophysical Research 67.12 (Nov. 1962). ISSN: 0148­0227. DOI: 10.1029/
JZ067i012p04878. URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/4769327.
[4]
W. L. Kraushaar and G. W. Clark. “Search for Primary Cosmic Gamma Rays
with the Satellite Explorer XI”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 8 (3 Feb. 1962), pp. 106–
109. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.8.106. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.8.106.
[5]
W. Kraushaar et al. “Explorer XI Experiment on Cosmic Gamma Rays.” In:
apj 141 (Apr. 1965), p. 845. DOI: 10.1086/148179.
[6]
T. C. Weekes et al. “Observation of TeV Gamma Rays from the Crab Neb­
ula Using the Atmospheric Cerenkov Imaging Technique”. In: apj 342 (July
1989), p. 379. DOI: 10.1086/167599.
[7]
A. De Angelis and M. Mallamaci. Gamma­ray astrophysics. Aug. 2018. DOI:
10.1140/epjp/i2018-12181-0.
[8]
John Tomsick et al. “The Compton Spectrometer and Imager project for MeV
Astronomy”. In: American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #233.
Vol. 233. American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts. Jan. 2019,
p. 136.05.
[9]
Niels Lund. “Wide band, tunable gamma­ray lenses”. In: Experimental As­
tronomy 51.1 (Feb. 2021), pp. 153–163. ISSN: 15729508. DOI: 10.1007/
s10686-020-09680-x.
[10]
Niels Lund. “Technologies for tunable gamma­ray lenses”. In: Experimental
Astronomy 51.1 (Feb. 2021), pp. 165–179. ISSN: 15729508. DOI: 10.1007/
s10686-020-09683-8.
[11]
Jie Yuan and Xingwu Long. “CCD­area­based autocollimator for precision
small­angle measurement”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 74.3 I (Mar.
2003), pp. 1362–1365. ISSN: 00346748. DOI: 10.1063/1.1539896.
[12]
GREGORY R. CHOPPIN, JAN­OLOV LILJENZIN, and JAN RYDBERG.
“Absorption of Nuclear Radiation”. In: Radiochemistry and Nuclear Chem­
istry. Elsevier, 1995, pp. 123–165. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-7506-2300-1.50010-
5. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780750623001500105.
[13]
C.M. DAVISSON. “INTERACTION OF γ­RADIATION WITH MATTER**See
also App. 1 at the end of this volume.” In: Alpha­, Beta­ and Gamma­Ray
Spectroscopy. Elsevier, 1968, pp. 37–78. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-7204-0083-
0.50007-9.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
83
==PAGE:92==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[14]
G. Nelson and D. Rewy. 2Gamma­Ray Interactions with Matter.
[15]
A. De Angelis et al. “Science with e­ASTROGAM”. In: Journal of High En­
ergy Astrophysics 19 (Aug. 2018), pp. 1–106. DOI: 10.1016/j.jheap.2018.07.
001. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jheap.2018.07.001.
[16]
Alessandro De Angelis et al. “Gamma­ray astrophysics in the MeV range”.
In: Experimental Astronomy 51.3 (June 2021), pp. 1225–1254. ISSN: 0922­
6435. DOI: 10.1007/s10686-021-09706-y. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.
1007/s10686-021-09706-y.
[17]
Chryssa Kouveliotou et al. “Identification of two classes of gamma­ray
bursts”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 413 (Aug. 1993), p. L101. ISSN: 0004­
637X. DOI: 10.1086/186969.
[18]
Roland Diehl. “About cosmic gamma ray lines”. In: 2017, p. 040004. DOI:
10.1063/1.4984861.
[19]
Giulio Lucchetta et al. “Introducing the MeVCube concept: a CubeSat for
MeV observations”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01325 (2022).
[20]
Mirela Frandes, Bogdan Timar, and Diana Lungeanu. “Image Reconstruc­
tion Techniques for Compton Scattering Based Imaging: An Overview
[Compton Based Image Reconstruction Approaches]”. In: Current Med­
ical Imaging Reviews 12 (Jan. 2016), pp. 1–1. DOI: 10 . 2174 /
1573405612666160128233916.
[21]
John A. Tomsick et al. The Compton Spectrometer and Imager Project for
MeV Astronomy. 2021. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2109.10403. URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2109.10403.
[22]
Charles Kittel. Introduction to solid state physics. 2nd ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Apr. 1960.
[23]
Vincenzo Liccardo et al. “LAUE LENSES FOR HARD X–/SOFT γ–
RAYS: NEW PROTOTYPE RESULTS”. In: International Journal of Mod­
ern Physics: Conference Series 23 (Jan. 2013), pp. 11–15. DOI: 10.1142/
S2010194513011008.
[24]
Julien Roussselle et al. SPIE article. June 2015.
[25]
C.G. Darwin. “XXXIV. <i>The theory of X­ray reflexion</i>”. In: The Lon­
don, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Sci­
ence 27.158 (Feb. 1914), pp. 315–333. ISSN: 1941­5982. DOI: 10.1080/
14786440208635093.
[26]
C.G. Darwin. “XCII. <i>The reflexion of X­rays from imperfect crystals</i>”.
In: The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal
of Science 43.257 (May 1922), pp. 800–829. ISSN: 1941­5982. DOI: 10.
1080/14786442208633940.
[27]
Niels Lund. “A study of focusing telescopes for soft gamma rays”. In: Ex­
perimental Astronomy 2.5 (1992), pp. 259–273. ISSN: 0922­6435. DOI: 10.
1007/BF00690085. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00690085.
[28]
Gunnar Thorkildsen and Helge Larsen. “X­ray diffraction in perfect t ×
l crystals. Rocking curves”. In: Acta crystallographica. Section A, Foun­
dations of crystallography 55 (Oct. 1999), pp. 840–854. DOI: 10 . 1107 /
S0108767399002986.
84
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[29]
P. Courtois, K. H. Andersen, and P. Bastie. “Copper Mosaic Crystals for
Laue Lenses”. In: Experimental Astronomy 20.1­3 (Nov. 2006), pp. 195–
200. ISSN: 0922­6435. DOI: 10.1007/s10686-005-9018-x.
[30]
Nikolaus Dragostinoff, David Alexander Müller, and Nicole Plank. “A
reference­beam multi­slit autocollimator built using off­the­shelf compo­
nents with variable number of slits and increased sensitivity at frequencies
from 1 to 100 Hz”. In: Journal of Measurements in Engineering 8.1 (Mar.
2020), pp. 15–26. ISSN: 2335­2124. DOI: 10.21595/jme.2020.21210.
[31]
EURAMET. Guidelines on the Calibration of Autocollimators EURAMET
Calibration Guide No. 22 Version 1.0 (07/2017). 38116 Braunschweig, 2017.
ISBN: 9783942992459. URL: www.euramet.org.
[32]
ASTR 511/O’Connell Lec 13. POINT SPREAD FUNCTIONS. Tech. rep.
URL: http://web.ipac.caltech.edu/staff/fmasci/home/astro_refs/PSFtheory.
pdf.
[33]
William J. Kaufmann III Roger A. Freedman Robert M. Geller. Uni­
verse ­ Stars and Galaxies. Fifth Edition. W. H. Freeman and Com­
pany, Houndsmills, Basingstoke RG21 6XS, England, 2014. ISBN:
9781464135279.
[34]
Gergely Vass. “Applying and removing lens distortion in post production”.
In: 2003.
[35]
Irfan Kuvvetli Sebastian B. Petersen Niels Lund. Optical Alignment System
For Gamma­ray Telescope. 2022.
[36]
Akondi Vyas et al. “Performance of Centroiding Algorithms at Low Light
Level Conditions in Adaptive Optics”. In: 2009 International Conference on
Advances in Recent Technologies in Communication and Computing. IEEE,
2009, pp. 366–369. ISBN: 978­1­4244­5104­3. DOI: 10.1109/ARTCom.2009.
30. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5329393/.
[37]
Thomas J. Fellers and Michael W. Davidson. CCD Noise Sources and
Signal­to­Noise Ratio. URL: https://hamamatsu.magnet.fsu.edu/articles/
ccdsnr.html#:~:text=The%5C%20three%5C%20primary%5C%20broad%5C%
20components,they%5C%20are%5C%20temporal%5C%20or%5C%20spatial..
(accessed: 12.04.2022).
[38]
Ralf Widenhorn et al. “Temperature dependence of dark current in a CCD”.
In: ed. by Morley M. Blouke, John Canosa, and Nitin Sampat. Apr. 2002,
pp. 193–201. DOI: 10.1117/12.463446.
[39]
Charles S. Williams and Orville A. Becklund. Introduction to the Optical
Transfer Function. SPIE, Sept. 2002. ISBN: 9780819443366. DOI: 10.1117/
3.2265056.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
85
==PAGE:94==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
86
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:95==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter A
Appendix
A.1
Optical Alignment System Analysis
Figure A.1: The illuminated height of different sized mirrors as a function of system
tilt angle for critical distance between mirrors of 736mm.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
87
==PAGE:96==
A.1. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM ANALYSIS
Figure A.2: Diameter of autocollimator aperture as a function of system tilt an­
gle. Found for lens distance to inner = 5cm. Results of 4 system tilt angles are
highlighted.
88
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:97==
A.1. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM ANALYSIS
A.1.1
Mirror Displacement
Figure A.3: Illustration of the concept of mirror displacement.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
89
==PAGE:98==
A.1. OPTICAL ALIGNMENT SYSTEM ANALYSIS
(a) No displacement of mirrors (marked with a blue bar on the black pedestals).
(b) Displacement of mirrors (marked with a blue bar on the black pedestals).
Figure A.4
90
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:99==
A.2. TILT MECHANISM VERIFICATION
A.2
Tilt Mechanism Verification
A.2.1
Image Stability with Beamsplitter ­ More Images
Figure A.5: Stability distribution of 20 images taken from the middle of the image.
The distribution is displayed as box plots with a centroid displacement in µm (Y­
axis) for different light dots (X­axis)
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
91
==PAGE:100==
A.2. TILT MECHANISM VERIFICATION
Figure A.6: Stability distribution of 20 images taken from the top of the image. The
distribution is displayed as box plots with a centroid displacement in µm (Y­axis)
for different light dots (X­axis)
92
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:101==
A.2. TILT MECHANISM VERIFICATION
Figure A.7: Image that can evaluate smearing by combining 3 separate images
of light dots focused onto the bottom, middle and top of the image.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
93
==PAGE:102==
A.2. TILT MECHANISM VERIFICATION
A.2.2
Collimated Light
Figure A.8: Collimated outgoing light autocollimator lens before beamsplitter. Tin
foil was used to reflect the light.
94
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
==PAGE:103==
A.2. TILT MECHANISM VERIFICATION
Figure A.9: Collimated outgoing light autocollimator lens after beamsplitter. Tin
foil was used to reflect the light.
THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN OPTICAL ALIGNMENT
SYSTEM FOR A GAMMA­RAY LENS
95
==PAGE:104==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will
look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there
no information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest
gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected
font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain all
letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no need
for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
