==PAGE:1==
Design, development and validation of a deci­
sion support application for patients with type
2 diabetes
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
DTU Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients
with type 2 diabetes
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Prashanna Raveendra Kumar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Prashanna Raveendra Kumar ­ s192140
Signature
Date
ii
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As a newly diagnosed patient with diabetes, your diet goes through a lot of changes.
There is a lack of better or easier applications in the market which includes continuous
blood sugar measurements. Based on the workshop by Persson et al, it is found that
there is a need for an application that provides a best guess on how a full meal would
affect blood glucose levels [1]
The application is planned to be a decision support tool that helps in the continuous mea­
surement of blood glucose levels. This is then presented as a timeline with other events
such as activities, medicine and meals. From this, the users would be more mindful of
their meals, and perhaps even have suggestions to go for a walk afterwards.
The application is envisioned to be able to recognize meals and predict the blood glu­
cose levels after consumption. The data is visualized in a form of a timeline with events,
medication intake and meals.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Prashanna Raveendra Kumar, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
iv
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Type 2 Diabetes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Statistics in Denmark and Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Challenges living with Type 2 Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
The Quantified Self . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Existing Mobile Applications
9
3.1
Google Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
App Store . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Direction of state of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Problem Statement
13
5
Methodology
15
5.1
Design Thinking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.2
Atomic Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6
Analysis
17
6.1
Stakeholder goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.2
Elements of Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6.3
Data Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.4
Analysis: Design Space for Personal Health Technologies . . . . . . . . . . 20
7
Design
23
7.1
Data Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7.2
Typography and Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.3
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8
System Design Considerations
31
8.1
Use case diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
8.2
Component Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
8.3
Data Flow Chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
8.4
Implementation on mobile phone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
9
Discussion
35
10 Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
.1
Appendix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Over the last years the world has seen an increase in people who have diabetes. With
more people suffering from this condition, it is very important to keep people informed and
educated. However, it always take time for newly diagnosed people to get used to the new
challenges and the new lifestyle. This is where a system, such as a mobile application,
that can clearly and simply show all the required information in an understandable fashion
can be life changing. In this work, I will explore some aspects behind the diabetes and
how people interact with it, as well as describe a design for such an application that would
help people get around diabetes easier.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Type 2 Diabetes
Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) is a long­term condition caused by an influx of sugar circulating
in the bloodstream. It is the most common type of diabetes worldwide. This is why it is
important for patients to obtain the right amount of information and support to optimise their
quality of life, and most importantly, to prevent future complications. There are universal
guidelines in place out there to help patients get a foothold during the initial stages of
diagnosis. Across the board of diabetes associations worldwide, the management of T2D
heavily revolves around:
• Food and nutrition
• Stress and emotions
• Physical activity
• Preventing complications
• Staying on track
The American Diabetes Association positively expresses that every journey is unique and
it starts fresh every day [2]. This notion in itself acknowledges how patients need more
than just guidelines, they need personalized treatments and a sufficient support system.
2.2
Statistics in Denmark and Malaysia
This section explores the statistics of the prevalence of T2D in both Denmark and Malaysia.
The chart below at section 2.2, shows the rising percentage of people currently living with
diabetes as well as its estimated percentage in 2030.
The data source for section 2.2 is obtained from a combination of these sources:
• A study by Carstensen B, Rønn PF, Jørgensen ME that discussed the prevalence
of diabetes in Denmark from years 2011, 2015, 2019, 2020 [3]
• The Danish Diabetes Association showed the expected prevalence of diabetes in
2030 [4]
• The 10th edition Atlas of the International Diabetes Federation(IDF) provided data
about diabetes in Malaysia for 2020 and 2030 [5]
• The NHMS Report 2019 National Health and Morbidity Survey 2019 provided data
for 2011, 2015, 2019[6].
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: The prevalence of diabetes in both Denmark and Malaysia
By taking a closer look into the details of both countries, it can be summarized that the
majority of diabetes related cases are from type 2 diabetes. These next subsections
section 2.2.1 and section 2.2.2 dive into the details of each country.
2.2.1
Malaysia
Out of 22 million Malaysian adults, 3.9 million are currently diagnosed with diabetes, with
an annual growth rate of 0.4 per cent.The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) evalu­
ates that around 49% of the people living with diabetes, around 2.1 million people, have
undiscovered diabetes. In 8 years, 5,024,900 out of 22,714,000 Malaysia adults will have
diabetes (22%). This would mean that 1 in 4 Malaysians would be living with diabetes.
The National Diabetes Registry (NDR) of Malaysia has a total of 1,614,363 patients reg­
istered and 99.2% of patients have type 2 Diabetes.The mean age of type 2 Diabetes
diagnosis is 53 years old.The average age range of people living with Type 2 Diabetes is
from 58 till 63 years old [6].
Health Literacy
Health literacy is the ability to find, understand health risk factors, information and medical
instructions easily and to use services needed for making everyday health decisions. It
also encompasses being able to analyse the risks and benefits of the treatment given
and to organise health care appointments accordingly.The National Health and Mobility
Survey 2020, found that 1 in 3 Malaysian adults had low health literacy.
2.2.2
Denmark
Approximately 80% of people living with diabetes in Denmark, live with type 2 Diabetes.
The amount of people living with it is around 250,000 people. However, an estimated
360,000 people have prediabetes. This would potentially cost the community 87 million
kroners[4]. In addition to this, some 76,000 people do not even know they are living with
4
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:13==
type 2 diabetes. The prevalence of type 2 diabetes is expected to increase by 66% by
2030 [3]. Thus, over the past 20 years, the proportion of Danes with type 2 diabetes has
tripled (4.5%), while the proportion of Danes with type 1 diabetes is largely unchanged
(0.5%) [3].
2.2.3
Cultural similarities
Socioeconomic
Patients with T2D tend to fall into the low socioeconomic background category in both
Denmark and Malaysia. A study done in Denmark looking at social disparities in diabetes
care found that these patients had low socioeconomic status and were often obese and
had poor lifestyle habits [7]. Similarly, a report done in Malaysia titled ”Social Inequalities
and Health in Malaysia”, reported a higher prevalence of T2D among those with lower
household income compared to those who were from higher income backgrounds [8].
2.2.4
Non­governmental organizations (NGO’s) working with Diabetes
Both NGO’s described here have played a role in the development of this thesis work.
Diabetes Malaysia (DM)
Diabetes Malaysia (DM) is a non­profit, non­governmental organization aims to raise
awareness of diabetes and its complications via education and to assist in diabetes care
[9].
Danish Diabetes Association (DDA)
The Danish Diabetes Association (DDA) is one of largest Associations of Patients in Den­
mark with the aim of preventing diabetes, living well with diabetes and also conducting
research in diabetes [4].
2.3
Challenges living with Type 2 Diabetes
Being diagnosed with any chronic illness can be disheartening, shocking and overwhelm­
ing. The surge of emotions while trying to figure out how best to manage the illness can
be intimidating. Being diagnosed with Type 2 Diabetes is no different. It can be challeng­
ing to know what works for your body and you constantly worry if you are taking good
enough care of your diabetes. It is also tough to read about the physical and mental con­
sequences of having this illness. This causes diabetic stress and can develop into an
actual depression or anxiety circling around the illness [4].
Diabetic Distress
The first mention of the diabetic distress in literature is dated back to 1995 by from the
Joslin Diabetes Centre[10]. This term refers to the negative impact on the emotional or
affective experience due to the adjustments in the lifestyle that the patients suffering from
diabetes are experiencing [10]. According to the paper written by Skinner et al., the stud­
ies show that around 36% of patients diagnosed with diabetes are also experiencing the
significant diabetic distress. People diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes start to experience
the diabetic distress very soon after the diagnosis [10]. The primary source of this dis­
tress is linked to the diagnosis itself, as well as the potential future with all the lifestyle
and social adjustments required due to the diagnosis [10]. Skinner et al., also mention
how there is evidence that the current state of communication between the healthcare
professionals and diabetes patients may aggravate the distress. According to Skinner et
al., when dealing with Type 2 diabetes patients many therapists attempt to use threats of
the complications to convince the patients to use insulin. While this method is meant to
be a motivation to increase self­care of the patients, in reality it is more likely to drasti­
cally increase the distress rather than motivate people. Moreover, if the patient doesn’t
have a proper social support or social network is associated with higher risk of the dia­
betic distress.The paper also mentions how different sources have different impact on the
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
5
==PAGE:14==
diabetic distress. According to Skinner et al., the most common and significant source of
distress is the fear of the future complications. The authors state that in many psycholog­
ical models the increase in the seriousness of a condition or perceived threat is usually
associated with increased motivation to act, thus allowing us to make a conclusion that
the distress about the future could be thought to increase in self­care. On the other hand,
literature also suggests that when perception of a patient that the condition is very serious,
especially if it’s combined with the low confidence in ability to change the course of the
condition, leads to a decrease in self­care[10].
Measuring diabetic distress
The Diabetic Distress Scale (DDS) consists of a set of 17 questions that measures dis­
tress experienced by the patients within the past month. It’s core components focuses on
emotional burden, physician distress, regimen distress and interpersonal distress. The
Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale is a questionnaire of 20 questions that tries to navigate
the problem areas within diabetes.
Navigating Diabetic Distress
In order to manage diabetic distress, Skinner et al., recommends good patient­provider
communication to set the tone for a trusting, collaborative and supportive relationship.
Seemingly the best way to reduce the diabetic distress is to address both the diagno­
sis and the emotions of the patient. This way seems more promising compared to the
psychological interventions. In addition to this, creating a social environment such as
peer support and meeting in groups can help reduce diabetic distress. Other methods
of interventions also show diminishing diabetic distress such as goal­setting, reflection,
addressing emotional challenges and improving emotion regulation skills. These needs
are expressed in chapter 4.
2.4
The Quantified Self
The ”quantified self”, coined back in 2007 by Wired magazine is a movement of the con­
scientious collection and analysis of data about your individual body and lifestyle with
the intention of hacking better health[11]. These days, personalized health technologies
[12] are ubiquitous in the form of wearable devices such as wristbands, watches, rings,
patches and even your own mobile phone are used to accurately and subtly collect data.
The quantified self means that people are now understanding their own bodies in a much
deeper level, something that was not possible before and are finding new ways to im­
plement their new findings for a better lifestyle. People are getting more comfortable with
having technology monitor their everyday lives so much so that it is now an integral part of
their management of their well­being. Personalized systems and recommender systems,
such as, personalized playlists or recommended step counts are becoming less alarming
and is now considered a selling point in the market. About 80% of the burden of disease
in America is caused by lifestyle factors, and many poorer countries are not far behind.
Drugs work as intended in only 30­50% of people [11]. For many diseases there are no
therapies at all. Digital health care, however, can deal with many of these problems.
The growing array of health variables tracked by wearable devices lead to big changes in
the prevention of chronic ailments especially diabetes. Continuous measurement of vital
measures such as blood glucose levels, step count, sleep count allow unique patterns
to emerge about the user which in turn would allow their physicians to recognise signifi­
cant deviations in lifestyle prior to a disease development. Spotting unhealthy lifestyles,
however, is only useful if the said lifestyle changes as result. This is something that the
devices can now help with, too.
For systems to keep body processes in check, they have to be adhered to. Knowing
6
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:15==
what is happening inside your body is no help if you do nothing to change the pattern of
behaviour involved. Just being told that it is in your interest is not, typically enough. So,
apps sold as a way of achieving health gains on the basis of measurements made by
wearable devices typically incorporate a variety of behavioural nudges to keep the user
focused.
Apple and Google App stores contain over 400,000 health and wellness apps with 250
new ones added daily [11].Appetite for them is healthy, with around 5 million downloads
per day. However, 95% of those downloaded apps will be deleted within 24 hours. The
problem is that people do not just need a product that is well designed, they need a product
that is well designed for them, says Liz Ashall Payned from Orcha, a British organization
that evaluates the quality of health apps for clients like the National Health Service[11].
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:17==
3
Existing Mobile Applications
The research question here is aimed at discovering what mobile applications were in­
tended for patients with type 2 diabetes and which of those applications were currently
used to monitor blood glucose levels and manage diabetic distress. Google Play [13] and
the App Store [14] were used to find and analyse existing applications.
3.1
Google Play
Figure 3.1: 1st iteration of search series: The flowchart of existing mobile applications in
Google Play [13]
While doing initial search on the diabetes applications in Google Store, the search query
”Diabetes Type 2” was used, which resulted in 30 applications being found. Of those 30,
18 of them were excluded due to being not relevant to the scope of this work, and the
other 12 were included and can be seen on figure section 3.1.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2
App Store
Figure 3.2: 2nd iteration of search series: The flowchart of existing mobile applications in
App Store [14]
Initial search on the App Store with the same search query resulted in 174 applications
total. Of all these applications, only 18 were included and can be seen on figure sec­
tion 3.2. The rest of the applications were excluded, of which 133 were not relevant, 12
were identified or listed previously, and 2 didn’t have enough information on the security
of the app or its features.
3.3
Direction of state of the art
Most applications are developed to support the needs of all diabetic patients regardless
if the patients have Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes. When newly diagnosed, patients with
pre­diabetes and patients with T2D are recommended to use some of these applications
to help support their lifestyle. They are expected to use the features of the application
10
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:19==
that are best suited for themselves. It seems that the applications are geared towards a
one­size­fits­all type of system. Some of these applications are inherently geared towards
insulin dosage and recommendations and thus may not be suitable for the newly diag­
nosed patient and it cannot be personalized to what is actually needed for the T2D user.
It is bizarre that whilst it is widely accepted that the diabetic journey is unique for each
individual patient, however, there is no specific and highly personalized application that
focuses solely on the needs of the T2D user with regards to continuous glucose measure­
ments or blood glucose measurements paired with diabetic distress that would be more
inherently useful for their management.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:21==
4
Problem Statement
This thesis explores how might I visualize blood glucose easily that would allow the users
to create actionable steps after reflecting on the visualizations. I delve into what kind
of visualizations and interactions would be suitable for a mobile application in the health
space.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:23==
5
Methodology
5.1
Design Thinking
In prelimary research, I incorporated some elements of design thinking. The first phase of
preliminary research included the empathize phase with the users, where I had interviews
with stakeholders which was further discussed in the 6.1.
5.2
Atomic Design
Atomic design is a methodology used to express design systems, which is a system that
sets the tone of the design language and formulates the context for branding in an appli­
cation. When constructing the user interface of the system, atomic design was used as a
mental model. By using this approach, it allows us to craft design systems that are tailored
to the content that lives inside them. The purpose of using an atomic design method is to
provide a sense of hierarchy in the design system, promote consistency and modularity
within components.
How does it work?
Atomic design works by extracting the principles of an atomic structure in chemistry such
as atoms, molecules and organisms and uses that as a metaphor in the design of systems.
Atomic design comprises of five stages; atoms, molecules, organisms, templates and
pages and it is further described as follows.
Atoms would be an element such as a button, text, advertisement, search bar etc. Molecules
would be made up of more than one atom, for example, a navigation bar, footer etc. Or­
ganism would be a group of molecules that serve a common functionality. Template would
comprise of reusable components which are made up of organisms, molecules and atoms.
Pages are specific instances of templates that demonstrate how the final user interface
should look like.
Figure 5.1: The five stages of Atomic Design developed by Brad Frost [15]
Outcome
All sketches and ideas were broken down into atoms, molecules and organisms. This
was then grouped into a living design system as attached in the appendix. The design
system checklist [16] was used as a reference to ensure all the design tokens exist in the
system. This allowed for more efficient prototyping because the design system acted as
a single source of truth. It was consistently updated according to the design changes.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:25==
6
Analysis
6.1
Stakeholder goals
6.1.1
What are the goals that need to be addressed in this application?
The prototypes discussed in the co­creation workshop from D.R. Persson et al. [1] was
constantly referenced as the basis of this project. From stakeholder meetings, Anna­
Marie Karin Wegener from the Danish Diabetes Association, provided valuable insight
into the overall purpose of the application which was to help people make the connection
in their everyday life and commit to taking care of themselves.
Goals
The meeting resulted in a list of goals described as follows:
• Enable patients with Type 2 diabetes to learn to react
• Quickly interpret results that can be useful during discussion with your Gen­
eral Practitioner
• Establish motivation to stick to habits
• Identify if there is a need for a change of medication when lifestyle is balanced
• Develop a mind shift that focuses on the positives and possibilities
6.1.2
Interview with Madam Parameasvari, Diabetes Malaysia
Headquarters
The interview was aimed to identify the steps of what happens to a newly diagnosed
patient with Type 2 Diabetes in Malaysia. I discussed the advice and resources currently
given and how it could be improved. The full interview is listed in the appendix.
The early management of Type 2 Diabetes in Malaysia works on a case­by­case basis
and this is where Diabetes Malaysia, a non­profit, non­governmental organization comes
to help.
Madam Parameasvari has been in the industry for 20 years and has extensively worked
with patients with diabetes from all walks of life.
I discussed what the initial steps were for someone who was newly diagnosed:
1. Remember when to test your blood sugar; before a meal and 2 hours after a meal,
check in the middle of the night as well
2. Understand what you eat and how it affects you. More information is explained in
the box below.
3. Test yourself regularly around 6­7 times a day and observe yourself for a period of
at least 3­4 days.
4. Wait for a couple of days, and repeat the process to notice again where the glucose
level fluctuations occur.
5. Remember to take your HBA1C test every 3 months
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
17
==PAGE:26==
How should I eat?
• When eating main meals, use the plate form [17] method.
• You could choose to have 3 main meals, or eat smaller meals more frequently
• If you have a low blood sugar level, try to take a teaspoon of honey or some­
thing that is made up of a simple sugar. Wait 15 minutes, and then take a
complex carbohydrate.
• If you have high blood sugar levels, notice if a type of food could have trig­
gered it. Discuss with your doctor if you would need to increase your basal
medication.
Next, I discussed recommended applications that would aid patients at the start, such as
”mySugr” and ”Contour Diabetic”. These applications are further discussed in Section 2:
Existing Applications.
Form here on onward, I was able to pinpoint some of the gaps within those applications
that are needed by the diabetic patients. The first gap was that those applications were
aimed at Type 1 Diabetes patients. The second gap, was that it lacked the option of
connecting with your local doctor via teleconsultation. The third gap was developing
a sense of community because it seemed that diabetes was still a taboo discussion.
The fourth gap was encouraging exercise paired with a healthy diet.
6.2
Elements of Value
The fundamental attributes of the goals needed for the application can be further defined
using the ’Elements of Value Pyramid’ [18]. The main element that is focused on in this
application is its life­changing element because it is aim to aid users in their management
of Type 2 diabetes in the long run. To be able to deliver on that life­changing element, the
application must build off of a combination of elements such as emotional and functional
elements [18] .
Life Changing
The data visualization developed would allow the user to reflect on their lifestyle. The
user would gain self­actualization by being mindful of their habits and become more in
tune with their body’s needs. By observing their progress, it would nurture motivation
to keep going. In the long run, it would provide a sense of hope and possibilities for a
healthier lifestyle.
Emotional
It is evident that the intention of this application revolves around encouraging the overall
wellness of the user. By observing the progress their making, this in turn would reduce
anxiety that revolves around the disease.
Functional
It is hoped that in the long run, users would be able to reduce the cognitive workload of
constantly logging in a lot of data to pinpoint how to better manage their diabetes with the
use of this application. Data visualized should be demonstrated in a simplified manner to
save time. Information from the visualizations should be organized in a way to meet the
needs of the user.
18
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:27==
Figure 6.1: A summary of the Elements of Value pyramid adapted from [18] for this
application
6.3
Data Visualization
Primarily, each pattern has a fixed location within a hierarchical order structure that allows
the user to preselect a certain subset of patterns which fit his interest or specific needs.
Starting from the top level, this hierarchy is separated into three major categories that fos­
ter different application purposes: Display patterns describe how information is depicted
in the context of certain data material and usage purposes. The patterns of the second
category called Behavior deal with the dynamic characteristics of interactive infographics:
Which functionalities are provided to navigate a map, to rearrange a chart view or to filter
data according to user input? The third category, Interaction, discuss­ es essential inter­
face elements that let the user give input to an information system and hence interact with
an infographic.[19]
6.3.1
Types of Data
Quantitative
Quantitative data are used when a researcher is trying to quantify a problem, or address
the ”what” or ”how many” aspects of a research question. It is data that can either be
counted or compared on a numeric scale.
Collection Methods
• Interviews
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
19
==PAGE:28==
• Questionnaire observation
• Document review
Qualitative
Qualitative data describes qualities or characteristics. It is collected using questionnaires,
interviews, or observation, and frequently appears in narrative form.
Collection Methods
• Content analysis
• Narrative analysis
• Framework analysis
6.4
Analysis: Design Space for Personal Health
Technologies
Intervention Model: This determines the scope of the system
6.4.1
Disease Model
Health & Wellness
The focus on this system is to support patients with Type 2 Diabetes. It is meant to aid
with clinical treatment, and keeps track of the overall wellness of a patient with Type 2
Diabetes.
6.4.2
Treatment model
Personal
Based of Badram & Frost (2021), several questions were proposed in order to determine
the treatment model of the application. The system is mainly for personal purposes and
if necessary, the data can be shared with a medical professional based on the digression
of the patient. An application so highly personalized, would pose problems in privacy and
trust for the users. Although the system could work as part of the clinical treatment, it is
heavily relied on the user itself for setup and configuration. The data should be owned by
the user itself.
Questions
Clinical
Personal
Is the system to be used as part of a clinical treatment?
✓
✓
Should medical professionals have access to the data?
✓
Should the system be controlled from the clinic?
✓
Will there be clinical support during use?
✓
Can the system be used independent of clinical treatment?
✓
Who will do the system configuration and setup?
✓
Who owns the data produced?
✓
Who pays for the system (the clinic or patients)?
✓
Table 6.1: Questions to determine if the application should be personal or clinical [12]
Data Processing: It involves gathering data, making sense of it and using the data.
6.4.3
Data Sampling
The collection of data depends on both automatic sensors and self­reporting from the user.
Self­reporting is considered based on how subjective the data is. Automatic collection of
data is captured from sensors that is independent of human involvement.
Automatic
20
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:29==
Glucose Levels
Continuous Glucose Measurement (CGM) is a physiological sensor monitors aid in gath­
ering data 24/7 for the patient, and it is expected that this CGM monitor would be worn by
the user for at least 14 days.
Steps and Sleep
The number of steps taken in the day and hours of sleep is automatically collected using
an accelerometer, a built­in behavioural sensor that measures the movement of the user.
Self­reporting
Mood
Users input moods and stress levels daily and biweekly.
Meal
Uploading images of food would get the estimate of carbohydrates in a meal. This would
allow users to make a correlation between CGM data and the meal data.
6.4.4
Pattern Recognition
Supervised
With supervised data, know the input and output variables are known from a previous
experience. Based on the data collected from the CGM monitor, it would be possible train
a model to predict future glucose levels.
6.4.5
Data Analysis
Forecasting
Forecasting glucose levels would be helpful for users to learn the reaction of different
types of food in their body.
Feedback Model: Displays a list of observations such as data visualization methods and
behaviour intervention approaches
6.4.6
Visualization
Visualizations can be displayed using pure data and using a metaphor.
Data
Data­driven information focuses on statistics that can be easily understood by the user.
It’s main purpose is to inform and enlighten the user.In our system, the users need a
visual confirmation. Users want affirmation if what they suspect is true. They want to
make sense of what is going on. A combination of both data­driven information and and
visual confirmation turns into a visual discovery and this creates an opportunity for the
user to find anomalies, patterns or trends[20].
Metaphor
Having a metaphorical display, just like in Google Fit with Heart Points [21], it could create
a sense of achieving a goal and reducing stress because it takes the users mind of off
the issue at hand and focuses on something that is positive. The concept of having a
metaphor is subjective to each user. Some users prefer direct information while others
prefer something a little more indirect [12]. Both methods are testing in this system.
6.4.7
Behaviour Intervention
In this system, users find information on their own using passive feedback. This is based
on data collected that may give insight into long­term behavioural patterns. From these
observations, it could motivate a more healthy behaviour. For future works, there could
be a possibility of micro­interventions that provide active feedback to prompt the user on
potential problems.
Regulatory Issues: This helps decide if the system is part of a medical device and if it
needs approval from higher authorities
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
21
==PAGE:30==
6.4.8
Privacy Model
The system is meant for individual use and is correlated with the design of the treatment
model. Data gathered and displayed is private. This was one of the many concerns raised
by the users, and it would make sense to keep it private to ensure trust within the system.
Figure 6.2: Summary of the personal health design space introduced by Badram &
Frost(2021) applied to this application
22
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:31==
7
Design
7.1
Data Visualization
I created visualizations using the D3.js library and developed it on a platform called Ob­
servable. I chose to work with D3.js instead of a chart package because I wanted to
customize interactive data visualizations. In addition to this, it also uses low­level meth­
ods and is flexible. Observable is a platform for the community that shares the works of
other developers and chart designs that is specific to D3.js.
The data gathered is adapted from the research within type 2 diabetes and the continuous
glucose measurements to give a real life­like feel to how the data is visualized. This was
then discussed with Anna­Marie to see if it was feasible. The result of this was discussed
in 7.1.3. It was then further simplified and covered in 7.1.1 [].
When designing, I have tested some of the charts with a data visualization expert who
gave me feedback on developing the chart and also the narration of the visualizations.
The charts and the feedback can be found in the appendix under section appendix .1.3.
7.1.1
Simple Line chart (Chosen)
Description
The line chart is easily and quickly understood for its simple structure. This explains why
it is so common to create visualizations this way. Any dataset that expresses quantitative
values over a continuous interval is almost always displayed using a line chart. The chart
consists of a set of points at fixed intervals that is shown with respect to independent vari­
ables. These variables are applied to the horizontal­axis and its dependent variables are
applied to the vertical­axis.The gradient of the curve provides information about the inten­
sity of the attribute’s change over time. Each individual value, especially the maximum
and minimum values are also easily pointed out in such a representation [19].
Required Data
Given its versatility of usage, the line chart is the best option for displaying data in the
Blood Glucose Module. The independent variable assigned in this chart is the time during
the day. All numerical values gained from the Continuous Glucose Measurements (CGM)
monitor of choice, are assigned to the dependent variable, the y­axis of the chart. This
interval comprises of a regular, continuous series of glucose level measurements with
respect to the time during the day.
Usage
A two­dimensional Cartesian coordinate system is created.Both axes are labeled where
the x­axis is the time during the day and the y­axis is the blood sugar level in mmol/L. The
intervals are 4 hours in between as adapted from Google Fit’s line chart. The combination
of 4 hour intervals creates a perfect display of 7 ticks on the x­axis, which creates a
seamless and comfortable view. Although there are 7 seen ticks on the axis, there are 48
data points plotted continuously on the chart. These 48 points are collected in 30 minutes
intervals throughout a 24 hour day.
Rationale
As mentioned previously, line charts are one of the most widely used diagram types[19].
The user is able to interpret the meaning of the line by observing how the chart moves
from left to right[19]. The user is able to quickly observe an overview of their blood glucose
levels without going into too much strain over the details.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 7.1: Data visualization line chart
7.1.2
Multiset Line Chart
Description
There are situations in which it is important to let the user directly compare several vari­
ables and their development over the same interval. A single coordinate system in this ex­
ample, the mood and stress scores, help map the multi­line chart.The Multiple Line Chart
pattern in­ corporates several simple line charts within the same coordinate base[19].
Required Data
Mood and Emotions are quantitative variables and their development over a shared reg­
ular interval in scores and they all share the same reference variable in days of the week.
[19]
Rationale
The user is able to compare different variables such as mood levels and stress within
the same chart. By combining several variables within one single chart can save you a
substantial amount of space. It is later discussed why this chart could not be the best
option when dealing with quantitative data.
24
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:33==
Figure 7.2: Multiset Line Chart of mood and stress
7.1.3
Area Chart
Description
For this visualization, the area below the line is filled with a certain color or texture.Initially,
this was tested to see if it was better to use an area chart compared to a plain line chart
when monitoring CGM measurements.
Rationale
A quick test was conducted with Anna­Marie from the Danish Diabetic Association and the
results expressed that the chart seemed too medical and complicated. She suggested a
simple line chart with a smooth curve be designed instead.
7.1.4
Accessibility and Visibility
The next steps of of integrating the chart was to ensure that the color schemes made
sense. Since, a design system ?? has already been established in this project, the colour
schemes selected were based off of something that was soothing and calming for the
user. The concept of data­driven color schemes was interesting to me, and I have tried to
dabble with using the Viz Palette, developed by Suzie Lu and Elijah Meeks [22] to ensure
that there were no conflicting colours and it was as accessible as possible.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:35==
7.2
Typography and Accessibility
The typography system speeds up my design process and ease developer handover. I
used Type Scale and Material Design to include a range of contrasting styles. These
platforms provided constant checks on readability.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:37==
7.3
Prototype
The final prototype for the system is shown here. The front page displays cards of details
that are created based of the analysis from section 6.1, the needs of the user.
7.3.1
Front Page
Figure 7.3: The front page of the app
When the user clicks on Track Glucose Levels, it goes to the specific day, which then
showcases the range of blood sugar levels throughout the 24 hour timeline. The average
blood glucose level is displayed as well as the time in range.
7.3.2
Visualization for the day
Figure 7.4: The second and final iteration
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:39==
8
System Design Considerations
This section discusses the system design considerations in both the use case diagram
and component diagram.
8.1
Use case diagram
A use case diagram is drawn to display the requirements needed for the system as gath­
ered from 6.1.
Figure 8.1: Use case diagram
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
31
==PAGE:40==
8.2
Component Diagram
The component diagram was made in the start of the project to get an understanding of
the components involved. The continuous glucose monitor provides data for the glucose
level component. The user provides information about his experiences from the com­
munity meeting or about his day in the community and mood module respectively. This
information is stored in the user component. The API HealthKit is connected to the in­built
sensors in most mobile phone applications and this allows the data from steps and sleep
component to be collected quite easily. All the data from sleep, steps, community, mood
and blood glucose levels are stored in the user component and is then stored in Firebase,
which is part of Google Cloud Storage.
Figure 8.2: Component Diagram
8.3
Data Flow Chart
The data flow charts shows how the data is passed from one point to another. First,
the glucose levels data is collected by a CGM device that are measured every 5 minute
intervals. The user has CGM for 2 weeks long. Once the data is collected by CGM, it is
sent to the user’s phone connected to the device. Once the phone collects the data from
the device, it is then stored in the cloud database, in this case it is Firebase.
Figure 8.3: Data Flow Chart
32
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:41==
8.4
Implementation on mobile phone
8.4.1
Testing on phone
The testing on a mobile phone was done with Framer. The design file of the front page
from Figma was uploaded onto Framer and tested with five users to check typography
and and if the design made sense.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:43==
9
Discussion
9.0.1
A summary of everything
This thesis focused on the design and needs of patients with Type 2 diabetes. It re­
volved around gathering requirements from stakeholders in Non­governmental Organiza­
tions (NGO’s) such as Diabetes Malaysia and the Danish Diabetes Association. Some
elements of design thinking were incorporated such as empathizing with the users, and
conducting interviews with experts in the field. The analysis are results from the inter­
views and working with users. I worked with Figma to create a design system and I used
Framer to showcase my work on a mobile application. I created some data visualizations
with D3.js library and focused on blood glucose levels and moods.
9.0.2
Thoughts behind development
Why D3.js and not a Chart package?
I wanted to design something specific to the needs of the user, especially with the glucose
reading that had area of red and green and radial charts with time in range.
ReactNative and Flutter
I pivoted the architecture of my development from Flutter to ReactNative. The reason
for this was because it was easier to integrate D3.js into a React Native platform. I had
learned Flutter for about a month and still had not been able to understand charts and
packages. I figured it would be best to approach the project with just focusing on D3.js
and then I had to figure out how to test my application with the charts on a mobile device.
Framer Motion, Firebase, D3.js, React
My plan was to design data visualizations with D3.js and attach it to Firebase as it provided
a cloud database for real time data. Perfect for CGM monitoring. From D3.js, I would be
able to plug these features onto ReactNative. And lastly, create my animations easily
using Framer Motion.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:45==
10
Conclusion
I have learned about building a design system using atomic design. I played with colors
and typography. I worked with basic system architectural concepts. In addition to this,
I discussed with stakeholders and gathered requirements. Lastly, I worked with Framer
and Figma as my design tools and applied some design considerations such as design
thinking in my project.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Dan Roland Persson et al. “Co­creation of health solutions for type 2 diabetes with
end­users, stakeholders designers”. In: (2021).
[2]
The Official Website of the American Diabetes Association. URL: https://www.
diabetes.org/diabetes/type-2.
[3]
“Components of diabetes prevalence in Denmark 1996–2016 and future trends until
2030”. In: (). URL: doi:%2010.1136/bmjdrc-2019-001064.
[4]
Diabetes Foreningen Type 2 Diabetes Handbook. Danish Diabetes Association.
[5]
International Diabetes Federation. URL: https://www.idf.org.
[6]
National Diabetes Registry Report 2013­2019. URL: https://diabetesmalaysia.org.
my/aboutdiabetesmalaysia.php.
[7]
Andreas Heltberg et al. “Social disparities in diabetes care: a general population
study in Denmark”. In: Scandinavian journal of primary health care 35 (Mar. 2017),
pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1080/02813432.2017.1288702.
[8]
Khazanah Research Institute. Social Inequalities and Health in Malaysia: The State
of Households 2020 Part III. 2020.
[9]
Diabetes Malaysia Official Website. URL: https://diabetesmalaysia.org.my/aboutdiabetesmalaysia.
php.
[10]
T. C. Skinner, L. Joensen, and T. Parkin. “PSAD Special Issue Paper: Twenty­five
years of diabetes distress research”. In: Diabetes Medicine (2019). DOI: 10.1111/
dme.14157.
[11]
“Technology Quarterly : The Quantified Self”. In: (2022). URL: https://www.economist.
com/technology-quarterly/2022-05-07.
[12]
Jakob E. Badram and Mads Frost. “The Personal health Technology Design Space”.
In: IEEE Pervasive Computing (2016).
[13]
Google Play. URL: https://play.google.com/store/games.
[14]
Apple App Store. URL: https://www.apple.com/app-store/.
[15]
Brad Frost. Atomic Design. 2016.
[16]
Design System. URL: https://www.designsystemchecklist.com/category/design-
tokens.
[17]
What is the Diabetes Plate Method? URL: https://www.diabetesfoodhub.org/articles/
what-is-the-diabetes-plate-method.html.
[18]
Eric Almquist, John Senior, and Nicolas Bloch. “The Elements of Value”. In: (). URL:
https://hbr.org/2016/09/the-elements-of-value.
[19]
Christian Behrer. The Form of Facts and Figures. 2008.
[20]
Scott Berinato. “Visualizations That Really Work”. In: (). URL: https://hbr.org/2016/
06/visualizations-that-really-work.
[21]
Google Fit. URL: https://www.google.com/fit/.
[22]
Viz Palette. URL: https://projects.susielu.com/viz-palette.
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:49==
.1
Appendix
.1.1
Interview with Patient 1 ­ First Iteration
Shanna : You’ve now just woken up, and you see this page, what do you understand from
this? It would really cool if you could say your thoughts out loud.
Patient 1: It seems that my range not good. My personal goal is from 5­6.5. So anything
higher is bad for me.
Shanna: What else do you understand from the tabs?
Patient 1: Is this a calendar? I see that this is the average for the day and the graph looks
like it for the day. How do you see the hba1c?
Shanna: I get the calculations from chart given by the diabetic association.
Shanna: What else do you feel about this?
Patient 1: I like that there is an easy understanding and the green soothing to the eye.
.1.2
Interview with Patient 2 ­ First Iteration
Shanna : You’ve now just woken up, and you see this page, what do you understand from
this? It would really cool if you could say your thoughts out loud.
Patient 2: I see that there is a sugar level and time.
Shanna: Could you explain more about the colours perhaps?
Patient 2: It says that at noon, during lunch, the sugar levels goes up. The red points are
bad and green points seem like it is OK.
Shanna :What else do you understand from the tabs?
Patient 2: I understand that it is my day, month and year.
Shanna :Do you have any extra comments or thoughts you’d like to share?
Patient 2: I see that my long term sugar level is OK. I think you should label the axis.
.1.3
Expert review ­ CGM (Daily)
Figure 1: CGM ­ 3 main meals
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 2: CGM ­ 6 small meals
Results from Expert review in data visualization:
Expert: What do you want to show the users? It’s a little hard to understand the purpose
of the charts. What does the y axis mean? Perhaps it would be wise to label the axes.
Shanna: I would like to display the average time, and get the results on that. But right
now the chart looks very complicated, what can I do so it does not stress the users out?
Expert: Try to use a rolling average for the data every hour. You can show a slow of 3
hours prior, 1 hour during and 3 hours after.
Shanna: What about considerations for a meal?
Expert: Try showcasing a sparkline to show what meals affected when.
.1.4
Design System
42
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
==PAGE:51==
Colors
Black
F2F6FF
3913B8
8352FD
DCCBFF
68589C
73B3FF
73B3FF 
& 
3913B8
7389FF 
& 
902FDD
Colors for blood glucose info 
F83950
69D1A5
FDFFA5
Typography
Scale Category
Font
Size
Letter Spacing
Weight
Headline H3
Headline H4
Headline H2
Headline H1
Roboto
Medium
0px
24px
Headline H5
Roboto
Medium
0.15px
20px
Roboto
Light
-1.5px
96px
Roboto
Light
-0.5px
60px
Roboto
Medium
0px
48px
Roboto
Medium
0.25px
34px
Headline H6
Roboto
Normal
0.1px
14px
0.5px
Open Sans
Normal
16px
Normal
0.25px
Open Sans
14px
1.25px
Open Sans
Normal
14px
0.4px
Open Sans
Normal
12px
1.5px
Open Sans
Normal
10px
Subtitle 2
Roboto
Normal
0.15px
16px
Subtitle 1
Body 1
Body 2 
Button
Caption Text 
O v er l i n e 
Card
How do you feel today?
How do you feel today?
Tabs
Day
Week
Month
Day
Week
Day
Month
Week
Month
Day
Week
Month
Blood Glucose Levels
Button
Tabs
Day
Day
Week
Week
Month
Month
Log meal
Blood glucose levels 
mmol/l4
mmol/l
12
mmol/l
12
mmol/l2
OK
Low
High
==PAGE:52==
Illustrations
List of Cards
How do you feel today?
Let’s get moving
Community Support
Track blood glucose
List of Cards- Variant
Track blood glucose
How do you feel today?
Let’s get moving
Community Support
==PAGE:53==
Design, development and validation of a decision support application for patients with type 2 diabetes
45
==PAGE:54==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
