==PAGE:1==
Recommender System Based on process
Mining
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Recommender system based on process mining
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Fatemeh Nikraftar Khamene
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
DTU Compute
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Software and Process
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree of Master of Science in
Computer Science and Engineering.
Fatemeh Nikraftar Khamene ­ s216815
Signature
Date
ii
Recommender system based on process mining
21/07/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Automation of repetitive tasks can be achieved with Robotic Process Automation (RPA)
using scripts that encode fine­grained interactions with software applications on desktops
and the web. Automating these processes can be achieved through several applications.
It is possible for users to record desktop activity, including metadata, with these tools. The
very fine­grained steps in the processes contain details about very small steps that the
user takes. Several steps are involved in this process, including clicking on buttons, typing
text, selecting the text, and changing the focus. Automating these processes requires con­
nectors connecting them to the appropriate applications. Currently, users choose these
connectors manually rather than automatically being linked to processes.
In this thesis, we propose a method for recommending the top­k suitable connectors based
on event logs for each process. This method indicates that we can use process discovery,
create the process models of the train processes with identified connectors, and calculate
the conformance checking between the process models and test event logs (unknown
connectors). Then we select top­k maximum values of the conformance checking results
and observe that we have the suitable connector with 80% accuracy among the top­3
recommended connectors. This solution can be configurable by changing the parameters
and the methods of process discovery and conformance checking.
Recommender system based on process mining
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
It is with deep gratitude and sweet appreciation that I, Fatemeh Nikraftar Khamene, the
author of this thesis, wish and express my utmost gratitude and deep appreciation to all
the people who have contributed greatly to the development and shaping of this thesis.
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, Software and Process Engineering at DTU
my supervisor professor, who has helped me tremendously with my thesis, always giving
me advice and directing me to achieve better results.
Michal Sroka, Senior Applied Scientist, Microsoft
my co­supervisor, who helped me provide the data I needed and always provided his
expert insights and feedback during my development of the thesis.
Mohammadreza Fani Sani, Senior Applied Scientist, Microsoft
for helping me with his valuable suggestions during the solution and evaluation phases.
Gemma Di Federico, Ph.D. student, Software and Process Engineering at DTU
for helping me with different parts of the thesis and also supporting me as a friend.
iv
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Domain
5
3
Related Works
7
3.1
Recommander Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Recommender Systems in Process Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Problem Statement & Proposal
11
4.1
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Methodology
13
6
Solution
15
6.1
Solution overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.2
Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.3
Solution Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6.4
Algorithm Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
7
Evaluation
21
7.1
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
7.2
Evaluation and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7.4
Evaluation of Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
8
Conclusion and Future work
39
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
8.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Bibliography
41
A Python Codes
45
Recommender system based on process mining
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
A process mining approach is an emerging field in data science that employs an organiza­
tion’s transactional digital footprint to examine its business processes and identify process
challenges. A process mining study looks at business processes as they are exposed to
digital data stored in various systems through the metaphor of an X­ray. Process mining
provides several techniques to extract actionable knowledge and insights into a process
based on historical execution data[1].
Global business environments are highly competitive, requiring enterprises to turn to tech­
nology to maintain leading market positions. To perform process mining, all that is re­
quired is transactional data, along with the date and time stamps. This data is available
for most companies that have an IT system supporting their business. Understanding
how processes are executed is critical to maximizing automation’s value. Robotic Pro­
cess Automation (RPA) is rapidly gaining traction as an essential method for automating
office processes. Using RPA tools to automate business processes makes it easy to have
software ”robots” that can trigger responses, manipulate data, and communicate[2].
A comprehensive view of all user activities in a process is necessary in order to auto­
mate office processes efficiently. Understanding how processes are executed is critical
to maximizing automation’s value. Using automating tools, users get a deeper under­
standing of the way people work and can discover which time­consuming processes can
be automated. Using one of these process mining tools, Microsoft Process Advisor [3],
you can easily identify common workflows and convert them into flows. By recording the
tasks that make up a business process, the desktop tool creates a process diagram. A
recommended set of automation can then be delivered using this information. A new way
of capturing and documenting how tasks are carried out can then be created and shared
with others within the organization.
Users can record desktop activity, including metadata, with Microsoft Process Advisor.
There are details for very small steps that the user takes in the very fine­grained steps.
These steps include clicking on buttons, typing text, selecting the text, selecting menu op­
tion, sending keys , etc. These steps together create the processes for an activity which
can be done automatically. Several applications can be used for automating these pro­
cesses, like using email applications for automating sending the emails or using calendar
applications for automating scheduling the meetings, etc.
One obvious thing is that the processes should be linked to these applications. These
applications that should be connected to the processes are called connectors. For each
process, several connectors can be used, and users, based on the tasks done in the
processes, select these connectors manually. There could be several ways to automate
selecting the appropriate connectors for the processes, such as machine learning and
data mining.
In this thesis, we present a framework for recommending the top­k best­related connec­
tor for the event logs of a process. We used recorded data published by Microsoft and
labelled the cases in the event logs with known connectors. The methods that were em­
ployed are process discovery and conformance checking.
Recommender system based on process mining
1
==PAGE:10==
Process mining techniques can be categorized into three categories: process discovery,
conformance checking, and process enhancement. In the context of process discov­
ery, businesses can study the underlying structure of existing processes using data logs,
employee insights, and other documents that provide detailed insights into the process.
Process discovery is intended to make processes explicit so that everyone in the process
can understand them and share them.
Using conformance checking techniques, you can observe how well an event log and
a system net fit together. It is possible to check conformance for a variety of reasons.
The first reason for using this method is to audit processes to determine whether reality
conforms to some normative or descriptive model. The second advantage of conformance
checking is that it can be used to evaluate the results of process discovery [4].
Considering a large number of options for an item, it is difficult to determine what might be
a good choice without thoroughly checking out the available options. Using recommender
systems, this task can be automated and performed in an efficient manner. By using
process mining techniques and having train and test event logs, we can have trained
process models and use conformance checking to allow us to assess to what degree
such process models and test event logs process correspond to one another. So we can
have a recommender system to recommend the best identified processed models for an
event log.
By having models of the tasks processes and using different methods for different steps,
this solution should not only be configurable but also allow users to use it to recommend
what previously known tasks were performed during the new process.
1.1
Goals
A key aim of this thesis is to validate a solution that recommends the best identified pro­
cessed model in order to find out which models are appropriate for the definition of an
event log based on the information provided in the event log. The proposed solution
should be configurable and allow users to use it for similar, varying other problems and
also use different methods for different steps of this method.
1.2
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2: Problem Domain
This chapter presents and describes the problem that the thesis aims to solve.
Chapter 3: Related Works
A summary of the existing work for the different components of the thesis solution will be
presented in this chapter.
Chapter 4: Problem Statement & Proposal
In this chapter, the main problem of this thesis is defined, and the research questions
proposed to solve the problem are provided.
Chapter 5: Methodology
The methodology used during the development and evaluation phases of the project is
discussed in this chapter.
Chapter 6: Solution
This chapter provides a detailed description of a solution to conceptualize our thesis’
scope.
2
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 7: Evaluation
Throughout this chapter, the implemented solution is tested and evaluated, providing in­
sights into its process, reflections, and limitations.
Chapter 8: Conclusion and Future work
In this chapter, the thesis’s achieved goals are discussed as well as possible improve­
ments for future work.
Recommender system based on process mining
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:13==
2
Problem Domain
To improve performance, reduce costs, and minimize errors, many organizations are au­
tomating their manual processes in the context of digital transformation. It has been noted
that process automation and process mining are key technologies for digital transforma­
tion [5]. The use of process mining can be an effective complement to process automation
and provides the required transparency for digital transformation [6].
An emerging process automation approach, robotic process automation (RPA), uses soft­
ware robots to automate human tasks. A virtual bot automates the execution of a process
workflow after recording the actions performed by humans in the graphical user interface
[7]. The system allows organizations to automate repetitive clerical tasks using scripts
that encode interactions with desktop and Web­based applications. Clerical tasks include
opening files, selecting fields in Web forms or cells in spreadsheets, copy­pasting data
between fields and etc. [8]. Using RPA can be challenging, and you can face some key
challenges such as choosing the wrong process, lack of suitable infrastructure, working
with a third party, etc. By analyzing the historical behavior of a process, you can have a
jump start on what and how to automate.
There are several ways to automate processes and too many tools within the RPA area.
One of these tools is Microsoft Process Advisor, a service that allows you to create auto­
mated workflows. A comprehensive view of all user activities in a process is necessary
in order to automate office processes efficiently. Understanding how processes are exe­
cuted is critical to maximizing automation’s value. Using such tools, users get a deeper
understanding of the way people work and can discover which time­consuming processes
can be automated. Users can record desktop activity, including metadata, with Microsoft
Process Advisor. There are details for very small steps that the user takes in the very
fine­grained steps. These steps include clicking on buttons, typing text, selecting the text,
and changing the focus.
To automate the processes, these tasks should be connected to the applications through
connectors. A connector1 is a proxy or a wrapper around an API that allows the underly­
ing service to communicate with Microsoft Power Automate, Microsoft Power Apps, and
Azure Logic Apps. Users can create apps and workflows by connecting their accounts
and using prebuilt actions and triggers [9]. There are over 275 prebuilt connectors and
thousands of prebuilt templates available. Connectors, actions, and templates allow for
easy integration of popular apps and services in workflow development [10].
One of the challenges of automation is selecting the suitable connector among the con­
nector lists after recording the process. Without having knowledge of the process, select­
ing the connectors is complicated. The problem, in this case, is that you should manually
select a connector for each step of your process, and you do not get any recommenda­
tions for choosing the best connector for your task. We need a recommender system to
suggest the top­k best connectors for automating the processes. For making this recom­
mender system, we need to discover the processes and features to find the similarities
between the test and train logs.
With this recommender system, users do not waste time searching for the best connector;
they just select the best connector among the recommendations and go through the au­
1https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/connectors/connector-reference/
Recommender system based on process mining
5
==PAGE:14==
tomation of the process. Additionally, when someone does not know anything about the
process and did not do the task himself/herself and wants to automate it if the names of the
activities are not clear and obvious, it is challenging to select the appropriate connector,
so this recommender is needed.
6
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:15==
3
Related Works
In this project, we present a recommender system to find the suitable model among dis­
covered models for our event logs based on process mining techniques. For this reason,
in this section, firstly, we briefly discuss recommender systems and process mining tech­
niques. Secondly, we report some related works within the recommender system in the
process mining area.
3.1
Recommander Systems
Increasingly, data can be collected about user buying behaviors due to the widespread
use of web­based transactions. Users’ profiles, interests, browsing, buying, and rating
information are included in this data. To recommend products or services based on these
data, it makes sense to use this data in order to make recommendations to clients.
Each user­item pair in the recommendation problem has a utility value. In this case, the
utility values of n users and d items are reflected in a n×d matrix D. It is also known as the
utility matrix. Users­item pairs can be categorized based on both their buying behavior
and their ratings. Recommendations should be based on these specified values [11].
These recommendation engines are designed based on the domain and the specific char­
acteristics of the data available. Analytic technology is used to compute a user’s proba­
bility of purchasing one of the products at each location so that they can receive recom­
mendations based on these data. Generally, recommendation systems are classified as
collaborative filtering (CF) or content­based filtering (CB) [12].
A collaborative filtering system analyzes historical interactions, whereas a content­based
filtering system analyzes profile attributes; a hybrid technique combines both (Fig 3.1)
[13]. Real­world examples of industry­strength recommender systems include the rec­
ommendations for books on Amazon and movies on Netflix.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the recommendation system types
Recommender system based on process mining
7
==PAGE:16==
3.2
Process Mining
A process mining analysis provides both data­oriented and business­process­oriented
analysis at the same time. In process mining, three major subfields exist: process dis­
covery, conformance checking, and operational support [1].
A process discovery method is intended to help identify the underlying process captured
in the event data and create a model of that process. Described process behavior ac­
cording to the specifications of a particular process modelling language forms a process
model. Process discovery algorithms take an event log as input, and they then generate
a descriptive process model as an output which contains control­flow information across
activities in different notations.
In process modelling, there are two types: declarative (defining behavior that is not per­
mitted) and procedural (defining behavior that is permitted). Modelling languages such as
Unified Modelling Language (UML) activity diagrams, event­driven process chains (EPC),
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) and Petri nets [14] are among the sec­
ond type. Declare, Dynamic Condition Response (DCR) Graphs and Case Management
Model and Notation (CMMN) [15] are examples of declarative modelling languages.
A second task is to perform a conformance check, which analyzes the degree of com­
patibility between event data and a process model. A better reflection of reality can be
obtained by exploiting the differences between the discovered/reference process model
and the corresponding event log. The following four quality dimensions are typically mea­
sured when assessing conformance [16]:
• Fitness: the found model should allow for the behavior seen in the event log;
• Precision: according to the discovered model, behavior should not be totally different
from what is seen in the event log;
• Generalization: the discovered model should generalize beyond the example be­
haviour shown in the event log;
• Simplicity: the best model is one that is as simple as possible.
Taking a look at the first dimension modelling language in Dunzer et al. [17], Petri nets
are by far the most frequently used process modelling language in conformance checking
literature. The Petri net is a visual representation of execution logic such as restrictions,
control flow, and concurrency. Petri nets have been developed as a formal process mod­
elling language because of their mathematical background, their ability to capture con­
current behavior, and their function as state charts. As an example of this, Burattin et
al. use Petri nets as a representative language for all procedural modelling languages in
their framework for conformance checking [18].
According to Carmona et al.[19], and van der Aalst [20], log replay algorithms and trace
alignment algorithms are two general approaches to algorithms addressing these prob­
lems. As part of the log replay algorithm, the model and the log are interpreted, and then
each trace is rerun, event by event, on the model. A conformance metric can then be
determined using different computing techniques. Token­based log replay in Rozinat et
al. [21] is an example of such a technique. Unlike log replay algorithms, trace alignments
are capable of expressing deviations and conformance on an event level.
Lastly, operational support aims to improve or enhance process mining results, for ex­
ample, by directly mapping bottleneck information onto a (given) process model. This
subfield of process mining involves enriching the process model by adding emphasis and
8
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:17==
supplying further information (e.g., time­stamps, KPIs, suggestions) to enhance the pro­
cess model [22].
3.3
Recommender Systems in Process Mining
In Wang et al. [23], the authors first summarized their previous work on using reference
models to evaluate process mining algorithms empirically. As a result, the quality of a
discovered model was measured by its behavioural and structural similarities with a ref­
erence model. A fraction of the process models from the given enterprise is proposed in
this paper as reference models. To obtain two trained models, they applied regression
analysis ­ one for behavioural measures and the other for structural measures. These
trained models can then be applied to any process models within the enterprise, and the
estimated similarities between the algorithms are obtained. In order to rank the business
process mining algorithms based on their estimated similarities, their framework recom­
mended the algorithm with the highest similarity to each of these enterprises.
A labelled Petri net was used as the modelling language, and structural similarity was
measured by using dependency graphs. As the process matrix of a dependency graph,
the incidence matrix of the labelled Petri net is used. The behavioural similarity was
also assessed using the Principle Transition Sequence (PTS) metric. With over 90%
accuracy, the best mining algorithm found by their framework is almost identical to the
one found by empirical evaluation. They could use their experience to determine the best
process mining algorithm based on the enterprise’s process models instead of empirically
evaluating each process mining algorithm.
Ribeiro et al. [24] presents a recommender system that employs portfolio­based algo­
rithm selection strategies to find the best discovery algorithm for the data at hand. This
paper offers a framework for integrated algorithm selection based on machine learning.
Formally, this framework elaborates on the Algorithm Recommender System(ARS) ap­
proach. Training and recommending are two functions of this recommender system. Pre­
diction models are built using knowledge generated by the training function.
First, the experiment results were retrieved from the repository. For each event log and
measurement (performance or conformance) in the results, the ranking of discovery tech­
niques was computed. A ranking of techniques must contain all control­flow miners used
in the experiments. In the case a ranking was incomplete, a machine learning algorithm
(e.g., SVM or Neural Networks) was applied to predict the missing ranking values. The
features of the log were extracted for each event log in the results. For each measure­
ment in the results, the corresponding prediction model was trained using the rankings of
discovery techniques and the features of the logs. The recommending function used the
prediction models to obtain the top­k best­performing discovery techniques for an event
log.
Customer journey analysis is a hot topic in marketing. As a result of process mining,
we can discover the process that best describes the user’s behavior, obtains valuable
insights, compares the processes of different clusters of users, and improves the journey
by providing individualized recommendations. Terragni et al. [25] explains the new possi­
bilities offered by using process mining on web logs to explore customer journeys, predict
customer behaviors, and suggest actions to maximize particular KPIs (Key Performance
Indicators). Their dataset contained click­stream information from 2 million users in a time
frame of one month. For the preprocessing, they used hand written rules and unsuper­
vised clustering proposed in Poggi et al. [26] to map each URL with a specific activity
in the activity set. Using the Fuzzy Miner algorithm in Disco, they analyzed the general
Recommender system based on process mining
9
==PAGE:18==
behavior of the web log L. Then, they analyzed the event log using manual filtering and
unsupervised clustering to obtain more interesting insights.
They implemented a recommender system based on collaborative filtering techniques
proposed by Hu et al. for implicit dataset [27] to improve the personalized recommen­
dations provided to the users. The recommender system used the time spent on each
product page, the visit frequency, and other journey­related factors. They divided the
original data into a masked data set and an evaluation data set and checked if the users
actually visited the product pages recommended to them by the system. They calculated
the mean area under the curve (AUC) for each user that had at least one masked prod­
uct page and compared it to the mean AUC for recommending the most popular product
pages to each user.
Many process discovery techniques are available, making it difficult for practitioners to
choose the most appropriate one. Analyzing event logs was studied in SKLM Broucke
et al. [28], which provides valuable insights into the role of event log characteristics in
process discovery. For eight different structural patterns, eight process models were de­
signed and used to generate artificial event logs. The generated event logs had different
properties. There were twelve different discovery techniques studied: Alpha miner, Al­
pha miner+, Alpha miner++, Heuristic miner, Genetic miner, DT(Duplicate Tasks) Miner,
DWS Miner, AGNEs Miner, Causal Miner, ILP Miner and TS(Transition System) Miner.
For each discovery technique, the configuration options were largely kept at the defaults.
However, modifications have been made to the Heuristics Miner and Causal Miner.
The conformance checking metric was used in the third and final phase of the experi­
mental setup to assess the quality of different mined process models. They applied the
CoBeFra conformance checking benchmarking suite to facilitate the conformance check­
ing phase. Lastly, the authors applied a non­parametric statistical approach to comparing
the performance of different process discovery techniques in a robust manner as out­
lined in De Weerdt et al. [29] and Demšar et al. [30], including a Friedman test followed
by an appropriate post hoc analysis. Under the null hypothesis of no significant differ­
ences between treatments, these non­parametric tests calculate average rankings per
treatment. Therefore, this test compares the different process discovery techniques to
the best­performing one. A general recommendation for choosing a process discovery
technique was formulated based on general performance results, event log and model
characteristics (from the regression analysis) and timing issues.
10
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:19==
4
Problem Statement & Proposal
A process mining technique enables process stakeholders to see process information,
therefore allowing them to identify the process flow using actual data. Process discovery
is the most well­known process mining technique. For many organizations, it is surprising
to see that existing techniques are indeed able to discover real processes merely based
on example behaviors stored in event logs.
Process discovery and conformance checking can be very helpful in recommending the
appropriate model to describe the event log when we have a set of discovered models
with different algorithms and a set of unknown event logs. The most recent solutions that
have been developed are for recommending the best algorithm among a set of algorithms
which is somehow different from what we need, but we can use parts of their methods
and idea.
There is also the problem where automation of the processes is needed by numerous
organizations where the process must be automated. Therefore, in order to choose the
best platform for processing the tasks, the platform selection for each step is made man­
ually. Without proper insight into their processes, process stakeholders could even make
wrong decisions based on false assumptions. They cannot make correct selections with­
out knowledge of the steps involved in a process.
4.1
Research questions
To propose a solution that addresses the problem, this thesis needs to be developed
based on some research questions that must be considered when approaching the thesis.
The following research questions are:
RQ1: Are process mining algorithms such as Inductive Miner and Heuristic Miner
able to discover desktop recorded events acceptably?
RQ2: Is it possible to use conformance checking algorithms such as alignments
for recommending the best process connectors for automating the processes?
RQ3: Can we use the fitness values from conformance checking to recommend
top­k best connectors?
Recommender system based on process mining
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:21==
5
Methodology
The chosen methodology for this thesis is Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). In
KDD, adequate, practical, and understandable patterns are identified in large and complex
data sets. The KDD method is based on data mining, which involves analyzing data,
building models, and discovering previously unknown patterns.
The model of the KDD process consists of the following steps in an iterative and interactive
way:
1. Understanding goal: This is the initial preliminary step. It lays the groundwork
for understanding the problem and how to proceed with the various decisions. In
this thesis, the goal is to present a recommender system to recommend the most
suitable model from the identified discovered models for an unknown event log.
2. Creation of a target dataset – selection: Once the objectives have been defined,
the data to be used for knowledge discovery should be determined. Since this thesis
is in collaboration with Microsoft, the data has been published by them.
3. Data cleaning and preprocessing: The purpose of this step is to find missing
data and remove noisy, redundant, and low­quality data to enhance data reliability
and effectiveness. Throughout this thesis, data was labelled, and parts of the data
that were missing information were filled in manually based on the other provided
information.
4. Data reduction and projection: Identifying useful features of the data (based on
the goal), including dimension reductions and transformations, should be done in
this step.
5. Selection of data mining task: This is the time to decide what kind of Data Mining
task to use, such as classification, clustering, regression, or another task. Since we
want to recommend the best model for defining the event log, we can say that our
task is classification. We classified the test event logs to their most relevant model.
6. Selection of data mining algorithm(s): Having chosen the technique, we can now
decide which strategy to employ. A particular technique will be selected during this
stage to search for patterns with multiple inducers. This thesis uses different process
discovery models and conformance checking algorithms from process mining.
7. Data mining: Finally, the implementation of the Data Mining algorithm has been
reached. Our algorithm may need to be used several times before a satisfactory
result can be achieved.
8. Interpretation of mined patterns: After the data mining techniques have been ap­
plied and iterations have been completed, these patterns need to be represented in
discrete forms, such as bar graphs, pie charts, histograms, etc., in order to examine
the impact of data collected and transformed in previous steps. Furthermore, this
helps determine the effectiveness of a given data model in a particular domain. The
results of this thesis are shown in the tables.
9. Consolidation of discovered knowledge: The knowledge can now be incorpo­
rated into another system for further activity. When changes are made to the sys­
tem, and their impact is measured, knowledge is made effective. By completing this
Recommender system based on process mining
13
==PAGE:22==
step, KDD becomes effective. Our approach should be tested on Process Advisor,
but since it takes time to do so, it is not included in this dissertation.
Fig 5.1 represent the spiral model of some part of our methodology. The first iteration
took about two months since the problem was not indicated properly, and the data was
not published completely. Each second and third iteration took about one month. The
spiral model has four main steps. A detailed explanation of each step is indicated below.
• Plan: The data processing (third and fourth steps of methodology) was carried out
during this phase to plan the most effective solution for our problem. In the process
of processing data, two main steps were performed: Labeling the steps in event logs
and splitting the data for training and testing. A total of two iterations were needed
to complete the steps.
• Design: As part of this phase, we completed the sixth step of the methodology. In
this step, we selected algorithms for process mining techniques such as process
discovery and conformance checking after studying the data.
• Development: During this phase, the implementation of the algorithms (step seven
of the methodology) was accomplished by coding. To implement our code, we used
PM4PY, a python library designed for process mining approaches.
• Evaluation: This phase consists of evaluating the results and interpreting patterns
(step eight of the methodology). Looking at each iteration’s results allowed us to
plan the next iteration to improve the results. The conformance checking fitness
values were the metrics for evaluating the results.
Figure 5.1: Spiral model of the project
14
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:23==
6
Solution
In the following sections of chapter 6, the creation of the recommender system framework
will be discussed. The first section shows an overview of the project domain and solution
and an introduction to the following sections. An introduction to the various important
algorithms of our solution is presented in the second section of this chapter. The third
section of the chapter will go over the solution implementation of the system. At the
end of this chapter, we provide the implementation of our solutions by showing them as
algorithms.
6.1
Solution overview
As mentioned in chapter 1, the data is provided by Microsoft Process Advisor. The data
we use are event logs containing various information from monitoring and recording a
user’s desktop while performing tasks.
These tasks are becoming increasingly automated these days, so some platforms and
applications are needed to automate them. The event logs of the recording processes
need to be connected to the connectors (platforms and applications). Hence, the first
thing we have to do is to understand which event logs are related to which connectors in
order to automate them.
There are many ways to use such as supervised and unsupervised machine learning
algorithms to classify the logs. However, the use of machine learning is unnecessary
when simpler and equally effective alternatives are available. Machine learning models
are a black box. Despite knowing the underlying mechanics behind these models, it’s still
not very clear how they get their final results. Based on these assumptions, we found a
more straightforward way to classify the event logs and recommend the best connectors
for them based on the ranking results. Here you can see the overview of the recommender
system in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: An overview of the recommender system
Recommender system based on process mining
15
==PAGE:24==
The recommender system takes the train and test logs as input and returns the connector
name, the fitness value of conformance checking and the ranking of that result among the
fitness results.
As we can see, everything starts with the data. In order to determine the appropriate
methods and algorithms to apply, we must first understand the structure of the data. For
our solution to be developed, we need the event logs recorded from desktop activities. A
detailed description of the data and the required preprocessing is provided in section 7.1.
To test our solution and see its results, we should split these event logs into two groups:
train and test. Using process discovery, we make a process model for each connector
using the train data. Following that, the test data are used to calculate the conformance
checking between them and the process models. Based on the results of the conformance
checking on all the test event logs, we can identify the top­K maximum values of the
conformance checking for each log and match each log with the process models according
to their ranking.
Section 6.2 contains a complete description of the algorithms, including process discovery
and conformance checking. A comprehensive review of the implementation is given in
section 6.3, including how the recommended rankings are determined.
6.2
Techniques
Our approach can be used to build a recommender system, with event logs as input
objects and discovery techniques as algorithms. The process­mining spectrum is quite
broad, and this thesis focuses on process discovery and conformance checking.
6.2.1
Process Discovery
The process discovery process uses event data to learn process models. By using an
event log, a discovery technique can produce a process model without requiring any ad­
ditional information. The α­algorithm, for instance, produces a Petri net to explain the
behavior recorded in the event log [31].
During the discovery experiment, a control­flow algorithm is applied to an event log in
order to produce a model of the process [24]. Having discovered a process model from
an event log, it can be used for a variety of purposes, such as performance analysis,
compliance checking, and predictive analytics [31]. Numerous techniques have been
proposed for process discovery over the last two decades.
Increasingly, new process discovery methods have been proposed since 2010. The Lee­
mans et al. [32] family of inductive mining techniques can be used as an example. These
discovery techniques (IM, IMf, IMc, IMd, IMfD, IMcD, etc.) produce well­structured mod­
els and are highly scalable. The result of published results on how discovery algorithms
were evaluated [29, 33, 34, 28, 35], led us to choose Heuristic Miner [36] and Inductive
Miner [32] algorithms. This selection is also due to the evaluation method where we use
PM4PY, which is limited to some algorithms.
One of the most significant techniques in process mining is the Alpha Miner algorithm.
Alpha Miner algorithm discovers a workflow model from the local dependence between
events based on Petri nets. The Alpha algorithm assumes that event logs contain no
noise and are complete with respect to all allowable binary sequences. This means that
the α­algorithm is sensitive to noise and the incompleteness of event logs.
An extension of the formal α­algorithm is Heuristic Miner. There are two main steps in
the HM algorithm. The first step is to create a dependency graph. When building the
16
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:25==
Petri net model, this dependency graph will contain all the causal dependencies. When
calculating the strength of causal relations, the Heuristics Miner takes into account the
frequencies of the basic ordering relations. The algorithm creates one dependency on
the most suitable causal successor and predecessor of a given task by default. The next
step is to determine the semantics of the split/join points in the dependency graph. Based
on the frequencies of the dependencies, the type of split/join is determined. A Heuristics
Miner can handle noise and express the main behavior (i.e., not all details and exceptions).
Except for duplicate tasks, it supports mining of all common constructs of process models
(i.e., sequence, choice, parallelism, loops, invisible tasks) [35, 36].
The process of IM involves, recursively, selecting the root operator that best describes
log L, dividing the activities in log L into disjoint sets, and then using these sets to split
log L into sublogs. As a result, sublogs are mined recursively until they contain just one
activity in a sublog [37]. By adding infrequent behavior filters to all steps of IM, Inductive
Miner ­ Infrequent (IMf) was introduced. When IM is used, frequencies of traces and
events are ignored, whereas IMf measures frequencies to distinguish between frequent
and infrequent behaviours.
Some of the advantages and disadvantages of these mining algorithms are shown in table
6.1.
Table 6.1: Advantages and disadvantages of the mining algorithms
Alpha
Heuristic
Inductive
Cannot handle loops of length one and length two
Takes frequency into account
Can handle invisible tasks
Invisible and duplicated tasks cannot be discovered
Detects short loops
Model is sound
Discovered model might not be sound
Does not guarantee a sound model
Most used process mining algorithm
Weak against noise
After having the process models for each connector in the train data, we go through the
conformance checking part to get the result values to start the ranking part.
6.2.2
Conformance Checking
In conformance checking, differences and commonalities between an event log and a pro­
cess model are identified and diagnosed [38]. It is possible to use conformance checking
to determine if the recorded reality matches the model and vice versa. To measure fit­
ness and precision, several techniques and measures have been proposed, including
token­based replay [21], alignments [39, 40], etc.
Using token­based replay, a trace is matched with a Petri net model, starting from the
initial point in order to discover which transitions are executed and where tokens remain
or are missing. This algorithm also has some problems. Due to the handling of invis­
ible transitions, which are included in the output models of algorithms like the heuristic
miner or the inductive miner, this technique suffers from several known drawbacks. It
is possible, for instance, for models to get flooded with tokens in highly non­conforming
executions, which could enable unwanted parts of a process model and compromise the
overall analysis of the fitness process [41].
It must be noted that a significant portion of the identified literature uses trace alignment
algorithms to calculate the conformance of processes. Accordingly, trace alignments are
currently considered the standard conformance checking technique [42]. Procedural pro­
cess modelling languages are most commonly used in trace alignment algorithms. Unlike
Recommender system based on process mining
17
==PAGE:26==
log replay algorithms, trace alignments can express deviations and conformance at the
event level and provide a more robust conformance analysis. As a result of alignment­
based conformance checking, the events of a particular case are aligned with the closest
matching path permitted by the process model. Using such alignments, we are able to
determine the degree of conformance between the observed events (the reality) and the
process model. Using alignment­based conformance checking, fitness is evaluated by
aligning the event log traces, and the visible traces of the process model [42]. A fitness
metric is calculated using different kinds of cost functions in trace alignments [17].
6.3
Solution Implementation
There are several process mining tools available today, including both open­source, such
as ProM and Apromore, and commercial, such as Disco, Celonis, ProcessGold, etc. Of­
ten, these process mining tools are only accessible through a graphical user interface,
making them limited for large­scale experimentation. Since we have a bunch of data and
it would be hard to work with software tools, we used the Python library called PM4PY.
There are many mainstream process mining techniques in the PM4Py library [43], includ­
ing: Process discovery algorithms such as Alpha Miner, Heuristic Miner, Inductive Miner,
Conformance Checking algorithms such as Token­based replay, alignments, footprints
and assessment of fitness, precision, generalization and simplicity of process models.
There are also other techniques such as graphs, filtering, and so many others which are
not included in this thesis.
Based on the previous information and the PM4PY python library, we used the Heuristic
Miner and Inductive Miner process discovery algorithms, and for the conformance check­
ing, we selected alignments and token­based replay methods for our experiment. The
python coding was done in Google Colab1. Our implementation steps are as follows:
1. Importing all the event logs (CSV files) such as train and test from the drive and
converting them to the event logs with the selected caseid, activity and timestamp.
2. Creating a function with the event logs as input and configurable discovery and
conformance checking algorithms. This function gets the train event log and creates
a process model based on the selected model in the function, and then calculates
the conformance checking between the processed model and the test event log.
3. Creating a table containing the train log names as models and the test log names,
and all the mean fitness values achieved from the function.
4. Sorting and selecting top­k maximum values of the fitness values and their assigned
connector model names.
5. Check if the correct connector name is among the top­k recommended connectors.
6.4
Algorithm Implementation
This section presents the implementations as algorithms for this thesis. The first subsec­
tion shows the main function for process discovery and conformance checking calcula­
tions and the second subsection represents how we used the main function for the train
and test data. The last subsection provides the algorithm of the recommendation system.
6.4.1
Algorithm for process discovery and conformance checking
This function includes all the procedures of calculating the conformance checking between
the model and the logs using different algorithms both for discovery and conformance
1https://colab.research.google.com/
18
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:27==
checking. As indicated, there are two inputs as training and testing event logs and two
other inputs as discovery and conformance checking methods. As mentioned before, the
algorithms for discovery are Inductive Miner, Inductive Miner Infrequent (both with default
parameters and noise threshold equal to 0.5) and Heuristic Miner (defaults parameters).
Also, the conformance checking algorithms are Alignments and Token­based Replay. This
algorithm first discovers the process model from the training event log, and then after
calculating the conformance between the model and the test log, it returns the mean
conformance checking fitness value (code A.2).
Algorithm 1: Main Function for process discovery and conformance checking
Input
: T rainingEventLog
/* event log for training */
Input
: T estingEventLog
/* event log for testing */
Input
: Discovery
/* discovery algorithm to use */
Input
: Conformance
/* conformance algorithm to use */
Output: MeanF itnessV alue
1 Model ←−Discovery (T rainingEventLog)
2 Conformance ←−Conformance (Model, T estingEventLog)
3 return mean( Conformance)
6.4.2
Getting the experiment results of all train and test data
By having the train and test lists containing all the train and test logs, and discovery and
conformance checking algorithms as inputs, we iterate through the train and test logs lists
and apply the first algorithm 1 on the logs (codes A.1, A.3). The returned value will be a
dictionary containing the conformance fitness value among the train models and the test
logs.
Algorithm 2: Applying the algorithm 1 on all train and test data for getting the ex-
periment results
Input
: T rainingLogList
/* collection of logs for training */
Input
: T estingLogList
/* collection of logs for testing */
Input
: Discovery
/* discovery algorithm to use */
Input
: Conformance
/* conformance algorithm to use */
Output: performance Matrix
1 performance ←−(empty dictionary)
2 for logT raining in T rainingLogList do
3
for logT esting in T estingLogList do
4
performance[logTraining][logTesting] ←−
Algorithm1(logTraining, logTesting, Discovery, Conformance)
5
end
6 end
7 return performance
Recommender system based on process mining
19
==PAGE:28==
6.4.3
Recommendation algorithm
After having the experimental results, we can have the recommendation system algorithm
3 using the discovered models from algorithm 2. The third algorithm takes the list of mined
models, the log for getting the recommendation, K value and conformance checking al­
gorithm as inputs. K value indicates the number of first K elements of the list we want to
have as the recommendation. In this algorithm, the conformance fitness value is calcu­
lated between the models in mined model lists and the log for the recommendation. Then
we have the list of all conformance fitness values, and by sorting them, the algorithm re­
turns the first K elements of the list of highest conformance values and the corresponding
models.
Algorithm 3: Recommendation algorithm
Input
: MinedModelList
/* list of mined models starting from all training logs
*/
Input
: LogF orRecommendation
/* new log for which we'd like to have a
recommendation */
Input
: K
/* how many recommendations to get */
Input
: Conformance
/* conformance algorithm to use */
Output: Model
/* the recommended model */
1 maxConformance ←−{}
2 for model in MinedModelList do
3
c ←−Conformance(model, LogForRecommendation)
maxConformance ←−maxConformance ∪{ (model, mean(c)) }
4 end
5 listOfBestConformance ←−sort(maxConformance)
/* sorts the set
maxConformance according to c and generates a list with highest conformance on top */
6 return listOfBestConformance[1..k] /* return the first k elements on the list,
which are the elements with highest mean conformance value */
20
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:29==
7
Evaluation
In this chapter, we show the results after our implementation discussed in section 6.3.
Based on the results, we also answer the research questions mentioned in chapter 4.
The first section provides a description of the data that we used for the project. The data
creation process, preprocessing, and labelling of the data will be described in this section.
The second section will discuss the results and outcomes.
7.1
Data Processing
7.1.1
Overview of Process Advisor
As mentioned before, the data is from Microsoft Process Advisor, which is an important
component for using process mining, allowing you to identify common workflows and con­
vert them into a flow. With this desktop tool, you can record the various steps required
to complete a business process (fig. 7.1) and generate a process diagram of all those
steps. A recommended set of automation can then be generated by editing the data and
modifying it. This process can then be shared with other members of your organization,
which provides a new way to document how tasks are completed.
Using all the relevant data from the recording, Process Advisor is able to produce a pro­
cess map (fig. 7.2) that provides insight into how a process functions. This map can be
used to assist you in refining your process and suggesting where it could be automated.
In a process map, the activities are shown with a start and an end. A node is an activity
in the map, and you can see the paths and times taken through the activity in different
recordings. An automation designer tool is then available to assist with automating busi­
ness processes.
Figure 7.1: The recorded data shown in Process Advisor
Recommender system based on process mining
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 7.2: The process map shown in Process Advisor
7.1.2
Data Details
To achieve the results of our experiment, we needed to collect a lot of data in order to
perform the experiments. As a result, we have a dataset published by Microsoft1 contain­
ing daily business tasks for a period of time. The tasks were labelled based on what they
were doing, such as sending an email to a colleague, checking the weather, requesting
approval, etc. Data includes 50 folders containing 165 CSV event logs. Each folder con­
tains different instances of a certain process done with different applications at different
times. There are 45 folders, each with three instances of a process, and five other folders,
each with six instances of a process which in total are 165 files. The published data may
be different in the future since we had the first draft of data, and there can be no folders
in the published data, and just the event logs can be seen.
The recorded processes are event logs consisting of different information such as record­
ing ID, Process ID, Time Stamp, Step Name, Step Description, Application Process Name,
Application Parent Window Name, Automation Step, Label Event Name and Label Event
ID. The Process ID is the same for the instances of a process, and the Recording ID is
unique for each event log. Also, we have 19 different Step Names where you can see the
top 5 frequent ones in table 7.1.
1https://github.com/microsoft/50BusinessAssignmentsLog
22
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:31==
Table 7.1: Top­5 frequent Step Names
Step Name
Frequency
Click UI element in window
2504
Press button in window
1406
Populate text field in window
718
Select menu option in window
404
Send keys
387
There is also an information file containing the related connectors for each process where
the user selects the best connector for automating the process. There are more than 300
connectors now available on Power Automate, but in this experiment, we have only 25
connectors used while automating the processes (Table 7.2). There is more than one
connector related to an event log, mainly two used for automation, but three as well.
Table 7.2: Connectors for the experiment
Connector
Recordings
Googlecalendar
30
Approvals
30
Onenote
24
Office365users
21
Microsoftforms
21
Outlook
21
planner
21
Sharepoint
18
Sendmail
18
Rss
18
Teams
18
Excelonlinebusiness
15
Conversionservice
15
Powerbi
15
projectonline
15
Dynamicscrmonline
15
Wordonlinebusiness
15
Notifications
12
Onedriveforbusiness
12
Onedrive
12
Msnweather
12
SQL
9
Projectonline (project roadmap)
Commondataservice
6
Uiflow
6
Recommender system based on process mining
23
==PAGE:32==
7.1.3
Labelling
We had the event name labels for each step of the event log that described the activity
of that step, but we did not have the connector labelling for each step. There was only
knowledge of the connectors for the entire event log, but no details about the connectors
for each step were given. Therefore, the labelling for the connectors for each step in the
event log was done manually based on the other information such as Step Description
and Application Process Name, Automation Step and Label Event Name.
7.1.4
Preprocessing and Splitting
For discovery, we need three main requirements of process mining which are Case ID,
Activity and Timestamp. For the case ID, we need a case identifier to distinguish different
executions of the same process. So we selected the recording ID as the case ID. Ac­
tivity should be the names for different steps of the process and make sense during the
processing. As mentioned in the previous section, we have a Step Name which can be
used as an activity, but this is too general, and the discovered processes need to be more
specific for each task and connector. To achieve this, we concatenated the Application
Process Name column with the Step Name and set it as an activity. Fig 7.3 is an exam­
ple of an event log Petri net processed using inductive miner, and the activity names are
shown.
Figure 7.3: An example of visualized petri net of an event log
After labelling the steps, we needed to order the event logs based on the connectors. In
order to split the data into training and test folders, first, we needed to group the cases
of the event logs based on the connector labels. Therefore, for each connector, a CSV
file was created, and all the cases of the event logs with the same connector label were
copied to that file.
For splitting, since we had three or six instances of each process, about 20% of these
instances with different process IDs were selected for the test, and the rest were chosen
for the training procedure. As a result, there were two folders named train and test; the
train folder contained files with different connector names with about 80% of the total data
of each file, and the test folder contained files with different connector names with about
20% of the total data of each file(Table 7.3).
24
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:33==
Table 7.3: Train and Test recording statistics
Connector
Total recording files
Labelled files
Train files
Test files
Googlecalendar
30
26
20
6
Office365users
21
18
14
4
Approvals
30
30
23
7
Microsoftforms
21
21
16
5
Onenote
24
15
11
4
Outlook
21
21
16
5
Planner
21
18
13
5
rss
18
12
8
4
Sendmail
18
18
13
5
Sharepoint
18
15
11
4
7.2
Evaluation and Results
In this section, we will see the results of our solution on the real data to check whether we
can answer the questions in section 4. We did the evaluation in two rounds. First round
with a smaller size of data, and the second round with about the whole data.
7.2.1
First round of examination
The first round of examination was done on a smaller size of data with just six connec­
tors and selecting one process for train and another one for the test. Each process has
three event logs with the connector names labelling. In the first round, we tested all the
algorithms for discovery and conformance checking. Tables 7.7, 7.8, 7.9 show the results
for inductive miner, heuristic miner and inductive miner infrequent and both alignment
and token­based replay conformance checking algorithms. Based on these results, we
calculated top­k accuracy for the correct recommendation among the k maximum results.
Table 7.4 contains the top­1 accuracy with the highest value of 83.33% for the heuristic
miner as mining algorithm and alignments as the conformance checking. As for the top­
2 recommendation, we have the highest accuracy, equal to 100% both for the inductive
miner and inductive miner infrequent, along with alignment conformance checking (Table
7.5). Top­3 recommendation accuracy is almost 100% for all the miners using alignment
conformance checking (Table 7.6).
We could be able to build a recommendation system that recommends the accurate con­
nector among the top­3 recommendations with an accuracy of 100% based on these
results. Therefore, we concluded that we could apply the system to the entire dataset in
order to get a comprehensive view of the results.
Recommender system based on process mining
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 7.4: Top­1 correct recommendation accuracy for the first round of examinations
Top­1 Accuracy
Conformance
Checking
Miner
Inductive
Heuristic
Inductive Infrequent
Alignment
66.66%
83.33%
66.66%
Token­based Replay
16.66%
66.66%
50%
Table 7.5: Top­2 correct recommendation accuracy for the first round of examinations
Top­2 Accuracy
Conformance
Checking
Miner
Inductive
Heuristic
Inductive Infrequent
Alignment
100%
83.33%
100%
Token­based Replay
50%
66.66%
66.66%
Table 7.6: Top­3 correct recommendation accuracy for the first round of examinations
Top­3 Accuracy
Conformance
Checking
Miner
Inductive
Heuristic
Inductive Infrequent
Alignment
100%
100%
100%
Token­based Replay
83.33%
66.66%
100%
26
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:35==
Train models
Test logs
Projectonline
Powerbi
Planner
Outlook
Microsoftforms
Approvals.
Projectonline
0.6072
0.2723
0.5314
0.2289
0.2058
0.6289
Powerbi
0.4226
0.8296
0.4047
0.3792
0.7222
0.2669
Planner
0.8888
0.4405
0.9259
0.4775
0.5643
0.9424
Outlook
0.0606
0.4764
0.0768
0.6555
0.4578
0.2184
microsoftforms
0.1818
0.6277
0.2601
0.3916
0.8406
0.3566
approvals
0.5893
0.4116
0.6023
0.5395
0.5488
0.7463
Max
0.8888
0.8296
0.9259
0.6555
0.8406
0.9424
Max index (Rank)
2
1
1
1
1
2
(a) Inductive miner and alignment conformance checking
Train models
Test logs
projectonline
Powerbi
Planner
Outlook
Microsoftforms
Approvals
Projectonline
0.7479
0.7512
0.7471
0.7034
0.4552
0.7691
Powerbi
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Planner
0.9345
0.9528
0.9435
1.0000
0.9020
0.9808
Outlook
0.4444
0.7162
0.4778
0.8907
0.8435
0.6378
microsoftforms
0.3167
0.8948
0.5831
0.5983
0.9260
0.7538
approvals
0.8073
0.7986
0.8536
0.8427
0.8662
0.9126
MAX
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Max Index (Rank)
4
1
2
3
2
3
(b) Inductive miner and token­based replay conformance checking
Table 7.7: 7.7a: Conformance checking results for Inductive Mining and Alignment con­
formance checking. 7.7b: Conformance checking results for Inductive mining and token­
based replay conformance checking. The columns represent the conformance checking
fitness values for alignment method and trace fitness for token­based replay method. The
green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong classification for the test
logs. Max row indicates the maximum value in the corresponding column and the Max
index shows the ranking of the correct classification among the values in that column.
Recommender system based on process mining
27
==PAGE:36==
Train models
Test logs
projectonline
Powerbi
Planner
Outlook
Microsoftforms
Approvals
Projectonline
0.7205
0.2291
0.5400
0.2611
0.1630
0.6617
Powerbi
0.4438
0.7247
0.3496
0.3500
0.5220
0.2377
Planner
0.6981
0.4500
0.8073
0.4180
0.6368
0.6689
Outlook
0.1454
0.4250
0.1028
0.5820
0.3765
0.1275
microsoftforms
0.2000
0.5000
0.1906
0.5238
0.8510
0.2959
approvals
0.5168
0.3691
0.5255
0.3889
0.3187
0.4439
MAX
0.7205
0.7247
0.8073
0.5820
0.8510
0.6689
Max Index (Rank)
1
1
1
1
1
3
(a) Heuristic Mining and alignment conformance checking
index
projectonline
Powerbi
Planner
Outlook.csv
Microsoftforms
Approvals
Projectonline
0.8611
0.7083
0.6976
0.7000
0.1795
0.5844
Powerbi
0.7778
0.7917
0.7143
0.7222
0.6250
0.4702
Planner
0.7421
0.6500
0.6361
0.7500
0.2222
0.5872
Outlook
0.7500
0.6611
0.7500
0.8194
0.5152
0.3028
microsoftforms
0.1944
0.6143
0.3115
0.5000
0.6778
0.6951
approvals
0.7143
0.6361
0.6917
0.6667
0.3081
0.4539
MAX
0.8611
0.7917
0.7500
0.8194
0.6778
0.6951
Max Index (Rank)
1
1
5
1
1
5
(b) Heuristic Mining and Token­based Replay conformance checking
Table 7.8: 7.8a: Conformance checking results for Heuristic Mining and Alignment con­
formance checking. 7.8b: Conformance checking results for Heuristic mining and token­
based replay conformance checking. The columns represent the conformance checking
fitness values for alignment method and trace fitness for token­based replay method. The
green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong classification for the test
logs. Max row indicates the maximum value in the corresponding column and the Max
index shows the ranking of the correct classification among the values in that column.
28
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:37==
Train models
Test logs
projectonline
Powerbi
Planner
Outlook
Microsoftforms
Approvals
Projectonline
0.7205
0.2738
0.6043
0.3222
0.2289
0.7184
Powerbi
0.3907
0.6541
0.3706
0.3835
0.5485
0.2051
Planner
0.9023
0.5053
0.9041
0.4694
0.5622
0.8764
Outlook
0.0333
0.4375
0.0478
0.7010
0.4452
0.1760
microsoftforms
0.1666
0.5791
0.2408
0.4285
0.7384
0.3141
approvals
0.6129
0.3583
0.5977
0.5132
0.5364
0.7415
Max
0.9023
0.6541
0.9041
0.7010
0.7384
0.8764
Max Index (Rank)
2
1
1
1
1
2
(a) Inductive Mining infrequent(default parameters) and alignment conformance checking
Train models
Test logs
projectonline
Powerbi
Planner
Outlook
Microsoftforms
Approvals
Projectonline
0.9447
0.8710
0.9351
0.8622
0.8353
0.9292
Powerbi
0.9770
0.9020
0.9286
0.8614
0.8353
0.7603
Planner
0.9462
0.8892
0.9685
0.8219
0.8343
0.9633
Outlook
0.5000
0.7770
0.5556
0.9597
0.8784
0.7278
microsoftforms
0.8077
0.9145
0.8517
0.7842
0.9264
0.8668
approvals
0.8363
0.8406
0.8736
0.8690
0.8958
0.9289
Max
0.9770
0.9145
0.9685
0.9597
0.9264
0.9633
Max Index (Rank)
3
2
1
1
1
3
(b) Inductive Mining infrequent (default parameters) and token­based replay conformance check­
ing
Table 7.9: 7.9a: Conformance checking results for Inductive mining infrequent and align­
ment conformance checking. 7.9b: Conformance checking results for Inductive mining
infrequent and token­based replay conformance checking. The columns represent the
conformance checking fitness values for alignment method and trace fitness for token­
based replay method. The green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong
classification for the test logs. Max row indicates the maximum value in the correspond­
ing column and the Max index shows the ranking of the correct classification among the
values in that column.
Recommender system based on process mining
29
==PAGE:38==
7.2.2
Second round of examinations
In this section, we examine our recommender system on the entire data mentioned in
section 7.1. But for the connectors, we selected the top­10 frequent ones among the
connectors in table 7.2. Also, the numbers of the train and test recording files for each
connector were indicated in table 7.3. As a result of the poor results from the token­based
replay conformance checking algorithm in the first round, we did not use it in the second
round. But we changed the noise threshold parameter of inductive mining infrequent, and
we got better results. The noise threshold indicates how much behavior can be ignored
by the miner. The default value for the noise threshold in PM4PY is 0.
The results that we can see in tables 7.10,7.11 and 7.12 are the results that we obtained
from tables 7.13,7.14,7.15,7.16. As we can see from the table, we were able to achieve
a 60% accuracy for the top­1 recommendation, a 70% accuracy for the top­2 recom­
mendation, and an 80% accuracy for the top­3 recommendation of the correct connector.
According to the top­1 recommendation, inductive miner infrequent had the best perfor­
mance with a noise threshold of 0.5. For the top­2 and top­3 recommendations, inductive
miner and inductive miner infrequent were equal in performance, but overall based on
the detailed results in conformance checking values, we can say that inductive miner in­
frequent is the best algorithm. The problem with heuristic miner can be that it can not
guarantee a sound model and when we calculate the conformance checking, this can
lead to low accuracy.
Table 7.10: Top­1 correct recommendation accuracy for the second round of examinations
Top­1 Accuracy
Conformance
Checking
Miner
Inductive
Heuristic
Inductive Infrequent
Inductive Infrequent (nt:0.5)
Alignment
40%
10%
40%
60%
Table 7.11: Top­2 correct recommendation accuracy for the second round of examinations
Top­2 Accuracy
Conformance
Checking
Miner
Inductive
Heuristic
Inductive Infrequent
Inductive Infrequent (nt:0.5)
Alignment
70%
20%
70%
70%
30
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:39==
Table 7.12: Top­3 correct recommendation accuracy for the second round of examinations
Top­3 Accuracy
Conformance
Checking
Miner
Inductive
Heuristic
Inductive Infrequent
Inductive Infrequent (nt:0.5)
Alignment
70%
50%
80%
80%
Recommender system based on process mining
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 7.13: Conformance checking results for Inductive Mining infrequent (noise threshold : 0.5) and Alignment conformance checking.The
columns represent the conformance checking fitness values. The green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong classification
for the test logs. Max row indicates the maximum value in the corresponding column and the Max index shows the ranking of the correct
classification among the values in that column.
Train models
Test logs
googlecalendar
Office365users
Approvals
Microsoftforms
onenote
Outlook
Planner
rss
Sendmail
Sharepoint
googlecalendar
0.6208
0.501
0.3917
0.4723
0.5826
0.3755
0.3136
0.673
0.593
0.595
Office365users
0.405
0.6729
0.418
0.610
0.5351
0.339
0.4743
0.748
0.499
0.6357
Approvals
0.241
0.595
0.699
0.574
0.479
0.238
0.572
0.561
0.348
0.647
Microsoftforms
0.340
0.5830
0.634
0.6281
0.589
0.372
0.5093
0.733
0.600
0.787
onenote
0.309
0.4767
0.371
0.3917
0.6125
0.341
0.2563
0.585
0.435
0.4502
Outlook
0.578
0.606
0.4593
0.686
0.629
0.7777
0.271
0.607
0.5556
0.781
Planner
0.288
0.364
0.6844
0.3658
0.504
0.166
0.683
0.170
0.3401
0.8772
rss
0.099
0.2293
0.2267
0.326
0.291
0.0
0.2865
0.1590
0.277
0.548
Sendmail
0.5396
0.6370
0.451
0.665
0.6676
0.391
0.4458
0.805
0.7497
0.746
Sharepoint
0.3098
0.5409
0.4206
0.5520
0.6108
0.3716
0.2695
0.5246
0.3806
0.6849
MAX
0.6208
0.6729
0.6999
0.6867
0.6676
0.7777
0.6836
0.8056
0.7497
0.8772
Max Index (Rank)
1
1
1
3
3
1
1
10
1
5
32
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:41==
Table 7.14: Conformance checking results for Inductive Mining infrequent (default parameters) and Alignment conformance checking. The
columns represent the conformance checking fitness values. The green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong classification
for the test logs. Max row indicates the maximum value in the corresponding column and the Max index shows the ranking of the correct
classification among the values in that column.
Train models
Test logs
googlecalendar
Office365users
Approvals
Microsoftforms
onenote
Outlook
Planner
rss
Sendmail
Sharepoint
googlecalendar
0.6414
0.5077
0.3798
0.4700
0.5164
0.2853
0.4523
0.7360
0.6378
0.6695
Office365users
0.4789
0.8979
0.4717
0.9148
0.6634
0.4711
0.5309
0.9516
0.845
0.7958
Approvals
0.4789
0.8727
0.9857
0.8737
0.6991
0.4600
0.8431
0.9397
0.7685
0.9494
Microsoftforms
0.5412
0.7458
0.7660
0.8622
0.7884
0.5730
0.6469
0.8921
0.7675
0.9286
onenote
0.4814
0.6003
0.5234
0.4940
0.7180
0.5155
0.2876
0.7941
0.4714
0.5035
Outlook
0.6968
0.7727
0.4955
0.7837
0.7527
0.8652
0.3400
0.8563
0.7783
0.9008
Planner
0.3232
0.4118
0.8299
0.5452
0.5711
0.2005
0.8383
0.1818
0.5868
0.9541
rss
0.1333
0.2615
0.2137
0.3668
0.2916
0.0
0.386
0.2045
0.3332
0.5730
Sendmail
0.6357
0.7943
0.4807
0.8501
0.6641
0.4373
0.5008
0.9433
0.9361
0.7791
Sharepoint
0.4162
0.6508
0.4830
0.6607
0.6784
0.4275
0.3936
0.6675
0.4560
0.8495
MAX
0.6968
0.8979
0.9857
0.9148
0.7884
0.8652
0.8431
0.9516
0.9361
0.9541
Max Index (Rank)
2
1
1
2
3
1
2
9
1
5
Recommender system based on process mining
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 7.15: Conformance checking results for Inductive Mining and Alignment conformance checking. The columns represent the conformance
checking fitness values. The green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong classification for the test logs. Max row indicates
the maximum value in the corresponding column and the Max index shows the ranking of the correct classification among the values in that
column.
Train models
Test logs
googlecalendar
Office365users
Approvals
Microsoftforms
onenote
Outlook
Planner
rss
Sendmail
Sharepoint
googlecalendar
0.7780
0.6343
0.4518
0.5977
0.6232
0.4136
0.4810
0.8184
0.7355
0.7220
Office365users
0.5444
0.9544
0.5066
0.9432
0.7884
0.5111
0.5642
0.9635
0.8699
1.0
Approvals
0.5027
0.9663
1.0
0.9623
0.7884
0.4711
0.9047
0.9635
0.8699
1.0
Microsoftforms
0.5700
0.8384
0.7302
0.9566
0.7884
0.5309
0.7240
0.9880
0.8582
0.9722
onenote
0.5027
0.6658
0.4852
0.5537
0.7627
0.4732
0.4166
0.9047
0.6565
0.4815
Outlook
0.8493
0.8735
0.5098
0.8474
0.7527
0.9271
0.4843
0.9040
0.8653
0.9286
Planner
0.3881
0.5684
0.8396
0.6312
0.6322
0.2589
0.9666
0.2380
0.7052
0.9722
rss
0.2222
0.3604
0.2740
0.4068
0.3907
0.0620
0.4543
0.2159
0.4180
0.5730
Sendmail
0.6243
0.7968
0.4915
0.8581
0.6638
0.4589
0.4834
0.8726
0.9393
0.7442
Sharepoint
0.4075
0.8214
0.4302
0.8375
0.7335
0.4198
0.525
0.9397
0.7957
0.9286
MAX
0.8493
0.9663
1.0
0.9623
0.7884
0.9271
0.9666
0.9880
0.9393
1.0
Max Index (Rank)
2
2
1
2
4
1
1
10
1
6
34
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:43==
Table 7.16: Conformance checking results for Heuristic Mining and Alignment conformance checking. The columns represent the conformance
checking fitness values. The green colors show the correct and red colors show the wrong classification for the test logs. Max row indicates
the maximum value in the corresponding column and the Max index shows the ranking of the correct classification among the values in that
column.
Train models
Test logs
googlecalendar
Office365users
Approvals
Microsoftforms
onenote
Outlook
Planner
rss
Sendmail
Sharepoint
googlecalendar
0.3965
0.5670
0.2978
0.4813
0.4105
0.4746
0.2137
0.7052
0.5598
0.3337
Office365users
0.2305
0.3615
0.1630
0.3040
0.3239
0.2569
0.0823
0.2430
0.3656
0.3987
Approvals
0.2305
0.5508
0.4394
0.4216
0.3684
0.3028
0.3767
0.2529
0.4756
0.4654
Microsoftforms
0.2218
0.3708
0.5560
0.4103
0.3397
0.5198
0.3923
0.3224
0.2680
0.5413
onenote
0.2211
0.4519
0.2573
0.2836
0.4679
0.3447
0.1678
0.6354
0.1752
0.3202
Outlook
0.4982
0.5370
0.2670
0.4441
0.4452
0.4632
0.1972
0.2544
0.5728
0.4878
Planner
0.1900
0.2159
0.3767
0.3698
0.3440
0.2005
0.3132
0.0341
0.3986
0.6689
rss
0.1900
0.2297
0.1563
0.3378
0.2093
0.1720
0.1758
0.0682
0.4560
0.4080
Sendmail
0.4416
0.3128
0.1870
0.3857
0.3239
0.2464
0.1028
0.2430
0.5409
0.5814
Sharepoint
0.1871
0.3391
0.2161
0.2743
0.3119
0.2120
0.3593
0.2757
0.2924
0.4920
MAX
0.4982
0.5670
0.5560
0.4813
0.4679
0.5198
0.3923
0.7052
0.5728
0.6689
Max Index (Rank)
3
6
2
4
1
3
4
9
3
4
Recommender system based on process mining
35
==PAGE:44==
7.3
Limitations
In this section, we discuss the limitations that we faced during the development of this
thesis. The limitations are described in this section, and all of them can be solved and
re­implemented in the future.
The data we used had just 165 CSV files without the labelling of the connectors for each
step in the event logs. Labelling all the steps manually would have some mistakes and
problems and would considerably affect the results. In our solution, we tried to label
the step acceptably according to other information in that corresponding step, such as
the description or application name, but still, there were some steps that we could not
label. However, this problem can be solved whether by labelling automatically or using
an unsupervised system where there is no need for labels.
Another limitation of the data was the way the users recorded the tasks. The tasks were
limited to some business activities, such as sending an email or scheduling a meeting,
and they just used a number of connectors for the automation. This has an impact on the
generalism of our system, where it could have different results with the selected algorithms
on another set of processes.
There are over 100 algorithms for process discovery that are able to discover the pro­
cesses. Also, there are several conformance checking techniques. Due to our limitation
of tools and time, we could just test a small part of them. We used the PM4PY python
library for implementing our system, and this library does not support so many process
discovery algorithms that exist. Also, process mining tools such as PROM and DISCO
were difficult to use for that amount of data.
36
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:45==
7.4
Evaluation of Research Questions
This section answers the research questions outlined in section 4.1 of the Problem State­
ment. The answers to the questions will be based on the evaluation of our results.
RQ1: Are process mining algorithms such as Inductive Miner and Heuristic Miner
able to discover desktop recorded events acceptably?
A1: One of the metrics for analyzing a process model is to compare it with the event logs
by using conformance checking. Based on our first (7.7a, 7.8a, 7.9a) and second rounds
(7.13,7.14,7.15,7.16) of examinations where we calculated the conformance checking be­
tween the processed models and the event logs using inductive miner(also inductive in­
frequent mining) and heuristic mining , the alignment conformance checking values in
diagonal axis of the result tables were more than 0.60 for 88.88% of the first round and
67.5% of the second round. When the fitness value is equal to 1, the trace is perfectly
fitting the model. This shows that the discovered models were matched to the event logs
with a conformance value of more than 0.5, which indicates that the discovery algorithms
such as inductive and heuristic miner were able to discover the recorded events ade­
quately.
RQ2: Is it possible to use conformance checking algorithms such as alignments
for recommending the best process connectors for automating the processes?
A2: As presented in the previous section 7.2, we used the conformance checking algo­
rithms such as alignments and token­based replay for the first round and the alignments
for the second round of examinations. Using inductive infrequent mining with the noise
threshold parameter equal to 0.5 in the second round of examinations, we found that with
60% accuracy, we achieved the highest values of conformance for the correct connec­
tor selected for the test event logs. Based on these values, it is possible to select their
corresponding connectors to recommend the most suitable connector to automate the
processes.
RQ3: Can we use the fitness values from conformance checking to recommend
top­k best connectors?
Considering a process model and a sequence of activities observed in a log, if the same
sequence of activities (or a very similar one) is allowed by the model, then the fitness of
the trace is high. As a consequence of this fact and the results from the second round of
evaluation, where 80% accuracy was achieved when choosing the top­3 best connectors
using maximum values of fitness, we can conclude that we can use fitness values to
recommend the top­k appropriate connectors.
Recommender system based on process mining
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:47==
8
Conclusion and Future work
8.1
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to design a recommender system using process mining
to automatically recommend the best connector for automating the recorded tasks by the
users. This thesis validates a solution that recommends the best identified processed
model in order to find out which models are appropriate for the definition of an event log
based on the information provided in the event log.
In our development, we used two main methods of process mining. The first technique
was process discovery which takes an event log as input and generates a process model,
and the second was conformance checking to assess the degree of compatibility between
event data and a process model. The data we used were event logs containing various
information from monitoring and recording a user’s desktop while performing tasks pub­
lished by Microsoft.
One of the important parts of our research was finding the proper process discovery algo­
rithms to appropriately discover the desktop recorded event logs. There are several algo­
rithms to test, but we selected some well­known ones, such as Inductive Miner, Heuristic
Miner and Inductive Miner Infrequent. As we were able to identify Inductive Miner Infre­
quent as the best­performing algorithm, we also discovered that we could improve it by
modifying the parameters, such as the noise threshold, to achieve even better results.
The second key metric of our system was conformance checking. While using it, you can
observe how well an event log and a system net fit together. Also, the advantage of con­
formance checking is that it can be used to evaluate the results of process discovery. We
needed numerous analytics for the examinations to determine whether we could correlate
the appropriate process models to the test event logs. The fitness metric of conformance
checking allowed us to evaluate our models on test event logs. The conformance check­
ing algorithms used in our research were Alignments and Token­based Replay, where the
best­performing one was alignments.
The evaluation process took place in two rounds, where in the first round, the smaller
size of data was chosen both for train and test event logs and the connectors. Based on
the results in section 7.2.1, we had the best accuracy for top­1 recommendation using
Heuristic miner and alignment conformance checking. However, since we just selected
one process for each of the train and test data, the results were not accurate.
Then for the second round of examinations in section 7.2.2, we achieved the compre­
hensive results where we had the best accuracy for the inductive miner infrequent and
alignment conformance checking by getting 80% of accuracy for the top­3 recommenda­
tion of the accurate connectors.
Hence the results delivered more results such as the importance of the data and the
behaviour inside the processes, where by increasing the noise threshold in inductive miner
infrequent we could achieve better performance. The provided solution was supervised
since we used the labelled data and made process models out of them. Hence a user
should have the processed model before starting the automation of the processes.
The GitHub repository with the implemented codes developed is available in the following
Recommender system based on process mining
39
==PAGE:48==
link with the name ”Recommender­System­Based­on­processMining” 1.
8.2
Future Work
It has been discussed in section 7.3 that there are many limitations, hence so many im­
provements we can make to obtain better results and accuracy.
According to the data collected, it looks like we can have more event logs by creating
some desktop records by using desktop process automation tools to produce more event
logs. The number of instances of each process increases by having more data, and this
can help us improve our models. The automation we implement should also include a
greater number of connectors. With more and varying connectors, we should be able to
gain a deeper understanding of the results, trying to improve the outcomes.
The process of labelling the steps in the event logs was one of the most time­consuming
parts of our project. This can be improved by either automating the labelling procedure
during the automation of processes or trying to use machine learning methods such as
clustering, which is unsupervised learning.
We were only able to achieve an accuracy of 80% for the top­3 recommendations, as
described in section 7.2. These results can also be improved through the application of
other procedural and declarative process discovery methods. While this thesis only uses
a few well­known process mining methods, a wide range of methods for process discovery
and conformance checking could be selected to improve performance and results.
Another way that you can achieve better results is by changing the parameters of the al­
gorithms. For example, by changing the noise threshold for the inductive miner infrequent
we observed an improvement in this project. There is a possibility to find the optimal pa­
rameter setting in the context of process mining by applying an adapted version of the
k­fold­cv set­up, which is an adapted version of the k­fold­cv in machine learning [44].
1https://github.com/nikraftarf/Recommender-System-Based-on-processMining
40
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil Van Der Aalst. Process mining: data science in action. Vol. 2. Springer, 2016.
[2]
Stefan Z Jovanović, Jelena S Đurić, and Tatjana V Šibalija. “Robotic process au­
tomation: overview and opportunities”. In: International Journal Advanced Quality
46.3­4 (2018), pp. 34–39.
[3]
Process Advisor. URL: https : / / powerautomate . microsoft . com / en - us / process -
advisor/.
[4]
Wil Aalst and H.M.W. Verbeek. “Process Discovery and Conformance Checking
Using Passages”. In: Fundamenta Informaticae 131 (Jan. 2014). DOI: 10.3233/FI-
2014-1006.
[5]
Marc Kerremans et al. “Market guide for process mining”. In: Gartner Inc (2018).
[6]
Lars Reinkemeyer. “Process mining in action”. In: Process Mining in Action Princi­
ples, Use Cases and Outloook (2020).
[7]
Martin Quinn and Erik Strauss. The routledge companion to accounting information
systems. Routledge, 2018.
[8]
Volodymyr Leno et al. “Robotic process mining: vision and challenges”. In: Business
& Information Systems Engineering 63.3 (2021), pp. 301–314.
[9]
Connectors overview. URL: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/connectors/connectors.
(accessed: 06.07.2022).
[10]
Mitchell Pearson et al. “Introduction to Power Automate”. In: Pro Microsoft Power
Platform. Springer, 2020, pp. 73–78.
[11]
Charu C Aggarwal et al. Data mining: the textbook. Vol. 1. Springer, 2015.
[12]
Deuk Hee Park et al. “A literature review and classification of recommender systems
research”. In: Expert systems with applications 39.11 (2012), pp. 10059–10072.
[13]
Prem Melville and Vikas Sindhwani. “Recommender systems.” In: Encyclopedia of
machine learning 1 (2010), pp. 829–838.
[14]
Jan Recker et al. “Business process modeling­a comparative analysis”. In: Journal
of the association for information systems 10.4 (2009), p. 1.
[15]
Stefan Schönig and Stefan Jablonski. “Comparing declarative process modelling
languages from the organisational perspective”. In: International Conference on
Business Process Management. Springer. 2016, pp. 17–29.
[16]
Anne Rozinat et al. “The Need for a Process Mining Evaluation Framework in Re­
search and Practice”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. Ed. by Arthur
ter Hofstede, Boualem Benatallah, and Hye­Young Paik. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 84–89. ISBN: 978­3­540­78238­4.
[17]
Sebastian Dunzer et al. “Conformance checking: a state­of­the­art literature review”.
In: Proceedings of the 11th international conference on subject­oriented business
process management. 2019, pp. 1–10.
[18]
Andrea Burattin et al. “Online conformance checking using behavioural patterns”.
In: International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer. 2018,
pp. 250–267.
[19]
Josep Carmona et al. “Conformance checking”. In: Switzerland: Springer.[Google
Scholar] (2018).
[20]
Wil Van Der Aalst. “Process mining: Overview and opportunities”. In: ACM Trans­
actions on Management Information Systems (TMIS) 3.2 (2012), pp. 1–17.
Recommender system based on process mining
41
==PAGE:50==
[21]
Anne Rozinat and Wil MP Van der Aalst. “Conformance checking of processes
based on monitoring real behavior”. In: Information Systems 33.1 (2008), pp. 64–
95.
[22]
Mansoureh Yari Eili, Jalal Rezaeenour, and Mohammadreza Fani Sani. “A system­
atic literature review on process­aware recommender systems”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.16654 (2021).
[23]
Jianmin Wang et al. “On recommendation of process mining algorithms”. In: 2012,
pp. 311–318. ISBN: 9780769547527. DOI: 10.1109/ICWS.2012.52.
[24]
Joel Ribeiro et al. “A recommender system for process discovery”. In: International
Conference on Business Process Management. Springer. 2014, pp. 67–83.
[25]
Alessandro Terragni and Marwan Hassani. “Analyzing customer journey with pro­
cess mining: From discovery to recommendations”. In: 2018 IEEE 6th International
Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud). IEEE. 2018, pp. 224–
229.
[26]
Nicolas Poggi et al. “Business process mining from e­commerce web logs”. In: Busi­
ness process management. Springer, 2013, pp. 65–80.
[27]
Yifan Hu, Yehuda Koren, and Chris Volinsky. “Collaborative filtering for implicit feed­
back datasets”. In: 2008 Eighth IEEE international conference on data mining. Ieee.
2008, pp. 263–272.
[28]
Seppe KLM Broucke et al. “Uncovering the relationship between event log charac­
teristics and process discovery techniques”. In: International Conference on Busi­
ness Process Management. Springer. 2013, pp. 41–53.
[29]
Jochen De Weerdt et al. “A multi­dimensional quality assessment of state­of­the­art
process discovery algorithms using real­life event logs”. In: Information Systems
37.7 (2012), pp. 654–676.
[30]
Janez Demšar. “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets”. In:
The Journal of Machine learning research 7 (2006), pp. 1–30.
[31]
Wil MP Van Der Aalst. “Process discovery from event data: Relating models and
logs through abstractions”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 8.3 (2018), e1244.
[32]
Sander JJ Leemans, Dirk Fahland, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. “Discovering block­
structured process models from event logs containing infrequent behaviour”. In: In­
ternational conference on business process management. Springer. 2013, pp. 66–
78.
[33]
Lulu Ma. “How to evaluate the performance of process discovery algorithms”. PhD
thesis. Master thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands, 2012.
[34]
Adriano Augusto et al. “Automated discovery of process models from event logs:
review and benchmark”. In: IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering
31.4 (2018), pp. 686–705.
[35]
Boudewijn F Van Dongen, AK Alves de Medeiros, and Lijie Wen. “Process mining:
Overview and outlook of petri net discovery algorithms”. In: transactions on petri
nets and other models of concurrency II (2009), pp. 225–242.
[36]
AJMM Weijters, Wil MP van Der Aalst, and AK Alves De Medeiros. “Process mining
with the heuristics miner­algorithm”. In: Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Tech.
Rep. WP 166.July 2017 (2006), pp. 1–34.
[37]
Sander JJ Leemans, Dirk Fahland, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. “Discovering block­
structured process models from event logs­a constructive approach”. In: Interna­
tional conference on applications and theory of Petri nets and concurrency. Springer.
2013, pp. 311–329.
42
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:51==
[38]
Wil Van der Aalst, Arya Adriansyah, and Boudewijn van Dongen. “Replaying his­
tory on process models for conformance checking and performance analysis”. In:
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2.2 (2012),
pp. 182–192.
[39]
Arya Adriansyah et al. “Alignment based precision checking”. In: International con­
ference on business process management. Springer. 2012, pp. 137–149.
[40]
Arya Adriansyah, Boudewijn F van Dongen, and Wil MP van der Aalst. “Confor­
mance checking using cost­based fitness analysis”. In: 2011 ieee 15th international
enterprise distributed object computing conference. IEEE. 2011, pp. 55–64.
[41]
Alessandro Berti and Wil MP van der Aalst. “Reviving Token­based Replay: In­
creasing Speed While Improving Diagnostics.” In: ATAED@ Petri Nets/ACSD. 2019,
pp. 87–103.
[42]
Wai Lam Jonathan Lee et al. “Recomposing conformance: Closing the circle on
decomposed alignment­based conformance checking in process mining”. In: Infor­
mation Sciences 466 (2018), pp. 55–91.
[43]
Alessandro Berti, Sebastiaan J Van Zelst, and Wil van der Aalst. “Process mining
for python (PM4Py): bridging the gap between process­and data science”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.06169 (2019).
[44]
AJMM Weijters. “An optimization framework for process discovery algorithms”. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Data Mining, Las Vegas, Nevada,
USA. 2011.
Recommender system based on process mining
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:53==
A
Python Codes
1
import os
2
Model_directory = 'Path to your train/test logs'
3
4
file_list_model = []
# define file_list to save all csv files
5
for subdir , dirs, files in os.walk(Model_directory or
log_directory):
6
for file in files:
7
if file.endswith('.csv'):
8
file_list_model.append((Model_directory or
log_directory) +file)
# save the filenames in
file_list
9
10
file_list_model
Listing A.1: Importing train and test logs
1
def Function_Name(model,log):
2
model = pd.read_csv(model, sep=',',encoding='latin1')
3
log = pd.read_csv(log, sep=',',encoding='latin1')
4
model_csv= model[['RecordingId','
ApplicationProcessNameStepName','TimeStamp']]
5
log_csv= log[['RecordingId','ApplicationProcessNameStepName'
,'TimeStamp']]
6
7
cols = ['case:concept:name','concept:name','time:timestamp']
8
model_csv.columns = cols
9
model_csv['time:timestamp'] = pd.to_datetime(model_csv['time
:timestamp'])
10
model_csv['concept:name'] = model_csv['concept:name'].astype
(str)
11
12
log_csv.columns = cols
13
log_csv['time:timestamp'] = pd.to_datetime(log_csv['time:
timestamp'])
14
log_csv['concept:name'] = log_csv['concept:name'].astype(str
)
15
16
model = log_converter.apply(model_csv , variant=log_converter
.Variants.TO_EVENT_LOG)
17
log = log_converter.apply(log_csv , variant=log_converter.
Variants.TO_EVENT_LOG)
18
19
# process discovery using Inductive Miner
20
net, initial_marking , final_marking = inductive_miner.apply(
model)
21
22
# process discovery using Inductive Miner infrequent
Recommender system based on process mining
45
==PAGE:54==
23
net, initial_marking , final_marking = im_f.algorithm.apply(
model,parameters=None)
24
25
# process discovery using Inductive Miner infrequent with
noiseThreshold equal 0.5
26
net, initial_marking , final_marking = im_f.algorithm.apply(
model,parameters={"noiseThreshold" : 0.5})
27
28
# process discovery using Heuristic miner with default
parameters
29
net, initial_marking , final_marking = heuristics_miner.apply
(model,parameters={heuristics_miner.Variants.CLASSIC.
value.Parameters.DEPENDENCY_THRESH: 0.5})
30
31
32
# Conformance checking using alignments
33
aligned_traces = alignments.apply_log(log, net,
initial_marking , final_marking)
34
35
# Conformance checking using Token-based Replay
36
aligned_traces = token_replay.apply(log, net,
initial_marking , final_marking)
37
38
df = pd.DataFrame(aligned_traces)
39
# Fitness value related to alignment
40
dff = df["fitness"].mean()
41
42
# trace_fitness value related to token-based replay
43
dff = df["trace_fitness"].mean()
44
45
return dff
Listing A.2: The main function for the discovery and conformance experiment
1
x = file_list_log
2
y = file_list_model
3
4
data_new=[]
5
for i in file_list_model:
6
row=[]
7
for j in file_list_log:
8
row.append(Function_Name(i,j))
9
data_new.append(row)
10
11
12
df_new = pd.DataFrame(data_new , index=y, columns=x)
13
df_max = df_new.max()
14
df_max = pd.DataFrame(df_max)
15
df_max.columns= ['MAX']
16
df_max= df_max.transpose()
17
df = df_new.append(df_max)
46
Recommender system based on process mining
==PAGE:55==
18
df
Listing A.3: Running and getting the results
Recommender system based on process mining
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 322
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
