==PAGE:1==
Optimizing permanent magnet
assemblies using Landau-Lifshitz theory
by
Nataniel Andreas Olden-Jørgensen (s163936)
Under supervision by
Professor Rasmus Bjørk
Assistant professor Andrea Insinga
Department of Energy
Technical University of Denmark
July 31, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
An increasing scientific and economic focus is being put on permanent magnet systems caused by recent
innovation in the field strength and coercivity of permanent magnets and their important role in sustainable
energy. This increasing focus along with enviromental considerations makes it important to be able to
optimise magnet systems as much as possible.
Existing optimisation methods utilise topology optimisation to find the optimal magnet shape. However,
topology optimization has limitations. It is not very computationally efficient and it can be prohibitive to
apply it to complex magnet design problems. It is also a black-box algorithm in the sense that it does not
provide any intuitive understanding about why the output solution is optimal. We here introduce a new
way to optimise the shape of magnet systems in conjunction with finding the optimal magnetisation and
show that the method produces consistent results, that is based on a gradient descent approach.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
The Reciprocity Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Functional Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
The Landau-Lifschitz Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Magnetisation Optimisation
10
2.1
Shape Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Non-linear Optimisation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
The Boundary Evolution constant α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Volume sweep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Shape optimisation for Homogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Local and Global Optima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Discussion
23
4
Conclusion
24
5
Future Work
24
6
Appendix
24
Bibliography
24
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Magnetic materials are used in a wide variety of fields, from medical applications like MRI scanners to
energy applications like[1] energy harvesters, magnetic refrigeration, electromechanical motors and rotary
devices like magnetic gears and magnetic bearings. Modern advances to the coercivity and maximum
remanent field of magnets with the development of Nd-Fe-B magnets has brought on the possibility to
optimize the design of permanent magnets much more. The global market for magnetic materials was
22 billion euros in 2020, with a projected market share of 178 billion euros in 2030 [2]. This is expected
in part due to the increasing focus on sustainable energy, which puts requirements on efficient energy
production, transportation and conversion, of which magnets plays a crucial role. Neodymium’s status as
a rare earth element also makes it important to utilize and reuse effectively[3].
Developing a general framework to find the optimal magnet design to for example minimize material
used, maximize efficiency or reach a general objective is still a challenge as many designs include multiple
design materials, for example iron, air and magnet. Some objectives are nonlinear, which are notoriously
hard to solve for and optimize. In this paper, we aim to further develop the optimization of nonlinear
objectives by investigating and developing the newly developed Landau-Lifschitz gradient based method
for finding optimal magnetization distributions in conjunction with a shape optimisation algorithm[4].
Other existing optimisation approaches already exist, for multimaterial systems, topology optimisation
has been succesfully used to optimise permanent magnet motors and actuators[5], another approach is to
use genetic algorithms[6], which rougly speaking is based on the principle of evolution and fitness to evolve
better solutions by killing off bad solutions and mutating good ones. However, topology optimisation is
non-intuitive, often requires a good starting guess to converge, and doesn’t offer and justification for why
the structure is optimal. Genetic algorithms are simple to implement, but often struggle to find the global
optimum if the search space is too large, thus they shine in design problems with a constrained amount of
configurations. An example could be a lot of magnets distributed on a rectangular grid and permitted to
rotate only in 90 degree steps. The method we present, which relies on an analytic gradient descent could
potentially offer a better understanding of the optimal configurations as well.
Theory of Magnetism
The fundamental electromagnetic equations are given by Maxwell’s equations. Expressed in differential
form they are written as:
∇· D = ρfree
(1)
∇· B = 0
(2)
∇× E = −∂
∂tB
(3)
∇× H = Jfree + ∂
∂tD
(4)
Where E and D are the electric field and electric displacement fields, and B and H are the magnetic flux
density and the magnetic field. ρfree respresents free electric charge density and Jfree represents free
electric current density. Here, we have split the total charge and total current into phenomological "free"
and "bound" parts. The bound parts are bound to materials, the bound charge refers to electrons localised
around molecules which cannot be moved too far away from them, and the bound currents represent those
electrons orbiting around to create a magnetic field, conversely, the "free" charges and currents refers to
charges and currents not bound to materials. We will be working in the magnetostatic case, this means
we have no change in currents and the time change of D is 0, that means the electric equations decouple
from the magnetic equations and we are left with the following magnetostatic equations:
∇× H = J
(5)
3
==PAGE:5==
∇· B = 0
(6)
The fields B and H are related by the introduction of the field M, called the magnetization, by the
following equation:
B = µ0(H + M)
(7)
where µ0 is the magnetic vacuum permeability. The intuition behind M is that it expresses the number
of magnetic dipoles per unit volume. From the equations it can be shown that if you scale the geometry
by a constant k, one can simply rescale the fields by that same factor and keep a valid solution. This is
very useful as we can then be sure that all the simulations that we will produce will be valid at any size
as long as the relative geometry is the same.
In vacuum, we have that M = 0, but in magnetic materials, we have a permanent magnetic field, even in
the absence of an applied field. The simplest relation between B and H in a magentic material is a linear
proportionality:
B = µH
(8)
Where µ is the magnetic permeability for the material. This leads to the following relation between M
and H:
M = 1
µ0
B −H = µ
µ0
H −H = µrH −H = χH
(9)
Where χ and µr = χ + 1 are introduced for historic reasons and to simplify. χ is called the magnetic
susceptibility. The magnetic susceptibility is best understood as how easily a material is magnetised in the
presence of an applied field. The relative permeability µr represents the ratio between the permeability of
the material and vacuum.
In this work we assume a linear constitutive relation in every point of the geometry, except for the design
area. As we explain in Sec. 1.2, the magnetization inside the design area is specified directly as the design
variable of our optimization problem.
In vacuum, B = µ0H which gives M = 0, which means µr = 1 and χ = 0. For a permanently magnetic
material however, there will be a magnetic field present even in the absence of an applied field. Real
magnets showcase a wide range of complicated behaviours like hysteresis, non-linear H −B-relations
and microscopic grain boundaries. In the following COMSOL simulations, we will however work with a
uniform, linear magnet with a susceptibility of 0. This means that no matter what field is applied, the
magnetisation is unchanged, this is not too far from the real case of Neodymium magnets, as they possess
a coercivity - that is, the ability to withstand changes in its magnetisation under an applied field. With
this short review of the fundamental theory of magnetism, we now move on to the Reciprocity theorem,
which lies at the foundation of the optimization scheme we develop.
1.1
The Reciprocity Theorem
We will use a few assumptions to arrive at the reciprocity theorem, namely that:
• The fields are localised, this means that when we expand the volume, V, around our configuration,
the surface integral, S, around the volume eventually goes to 0. The reason this is possible is because
the fields decrease in intensity at least as fast or faster than
1
r2 . This argument can be found in
Griffith’s[7].
• We are in a steady state, the time derivative of H and M is 0
• There is no free current density J. Then ∇× H = 0, H is irrotational. Irrotational fields can be
expressed simply as the gradient of a scalar field: H = −∇ϕ
• B and H are linearly related as previously mentioned is our assumption throughout.
4
==PAGE:6==
Since ∇· B = 0, we remember that the divergence of the curl of a field is always 0, which allows us to
write B in terms of a vector potential, B = ∇× A. Using that H is irrotational and B is solenoidal, we
can show that the following integral is zero:
Z
H1 · B2 d3x = 0
(10)
Where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote two seperate fields. We start by rewriting H1:
−
Z
∇ϕ · B2 d3x
(11)
We use the vector identity B · ∇ϕ = ∇· (ϕB) −(∇· B)ϕ:
−
Z
∇· (ϕB2) −(∇· B2)ϕ d3x
(12)
The second term is zero, because ∇· B2 = 0. The first term is rewritten using the divergence theorem:
−
Z
S
ϕB2 · −→
n dS
(13)
Where ˆn is the normal vector to the surface. Now can we simply expand the surface all the way to infinity,
and know that the field goes to 0. Hence, this integral is 0 as well, thus finally proving Eq. 10.
Using the definition of the magnetization M, we can substitute H1 with
1
µ0 B1 −M 1:
Z 
M 1(x) −1
µ0
B1(x)

· B2(x) d3x = 0
(14)
Z
M 1(x) · B2(x) d3x =
Z
1
µ0
B1(x) · B2(x) d3x
(15)
Now we substitute B2 = µ0(H2 + M 2) on the right side:
Z
M 1(x) · B2(x) d3x =
Z
1
µ0
B1(x) · µ0 (H2(x) + M 2(x)) d3x
(16)
The integral
R
B1 · H2 dV = 0, so we get:
Z
M 1(x) · B2(x) d3x =
Z
B1(x) · M 2(x) d3x
(17)
From here, we can substitute away B1 and B2 one last time to get:
Z
M 1(x) · H2(x) d3x =
Z
H1(x) · M 2(x) d3x
(18)
This expression is the reciprocity theorem, which can be used to solve magnet design problems. We
will later be denoting the two regions the air gap region, Rg, and the magnet design region, Rm. When
looking at corresponding fields in the same region i.e. Hg and M g or Hm and M m, we will assume
that a magnetisation in one region will create what’s called the demagnetisation field in that region.
The demagnetisation field is opposite the magnetisation direction, and thus serves to "demagnetise" the
magnet, hence the name. The relation is given by:
H(x) =
Z
dV ′ N(x, x′) M(x′)
(19)
We will shorten the expression using operator notation as:
H = NM
(20)
Where N is the demagnetisation tensor, which is a linear operator. More information about the demag-
netisation tensor can be found in for example Blundell’s book on magnetism [8]. But for now it suffices to
say that the demagnetisation tensor is dependent on the shape of the magnet, and we will not be working
with it directly, as Comsol has the calculations of the demagnetisation field as an inbuilt function. The
equation tells us that if you want to know H field is at point x, you sum over all the contributions from
M at different spots in the entire volume.
5
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Functional Theory
We will typically be optimizing for objectives like macroscopic properties of the field average field strength
and field homogeneity, which can be described by a single scalar value, this means we want to express the
goodness of a particular field solution with a single number and optimize towards a better one. This is
where functionals come in, while functions take scalars as inputs and returns scalars, a functional takes
functions as inputs and returns scalars. In this case, we want a functional S that will take in a square
integrable function H in R3 and return a scalar value: S : R3 →R. A general, linear functional in R3 can
be written as:
S[H] =
Z
H(x) · u(x) dx3
(21)
Where u(x) is some arbitrary vector function. We now introduce the functional derivative, which is most
intuitively done by comparing it to a normal function of several variables: F(H1, H2, ..., Hn) = F(H). If
we change each variable by a small amount Hi →Hi + ϵgi and let ϵ be small, to first order we get the
variation of F:
δF = F(H + ϵg) −F(H) =
X
i
∂F
∂Hi
· ϵgi
(22)
The variation of a functional can be thought of as the continous limit of this equation, where P
i →
R
dx,
Hi →H(x) and yi →y(x):
F[H + ϵg] −F[H] =
Z
δF
δH(x)ϵgdx3
(23)
The funcational derivative is defined as the term
δF
δH(x). A quick example of the functional derivative
is given in the following example: What is the functional derivative of F[n] =
R
n(x)2dx? We find the
variation:
F[n + ϵg] =
Z
(n(x) + ϵg(x))2
(24)
F[n + ϵg] =
Z
n(x)2dx +
Z
2n(x) · ϵg(x)dx +
Z
(ϵg(x))2dx
(25)
The first term is simply F[n], the last term is proportional to ϵ2 so it disappears:
F[n + ϵg] = F[n] +
Z
2n(x) · ϵg(x)dx
(26)
We thus identify the functional derivative:
∂F
∂n = 2n(x)
(27)
With a grasp of the idea of the functional derivative, we will combine the reciprocity theorem and functional
theory to arrive at the optimisation strategy. We imagine space being divided into two regions, an air gap,
Rg and the design region where we have our magnetic material, Rm.
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1: Caption
We might have a particular objective field in mind, like a vertical field, which is our target field, u. The
trick is to imagine a virtual magnet inside the air gap, Rg which we align with u as can be seen in figure
b). The reciprocity theorem then tells us, that looking at the integral of the magnetisation of the virtual
magnet M g and the objective field Hm is the same as looking at the magnetic field created by the virtual
magnetisation Hg and the magnetisation of the real objective field M m:
Z
M g(x) · Hm(x) d3x =
Z
Hg(x) · M m(x) d3x
(28)
This can be seen as the objective field being a functional dependent on:
S[Hm] =
Z
Hg(x) · M m(x) d3x
(29)
Assuming we can’t increase the norm of the magnetization of the magnetic material, the way to maximise
the integral and thus the functional is to align the magnetisation M m of the real magnet with the virtual
magnetic field Hg everywhere. In the example above, the magnetisation of the circular magnet should
thus simply be magnetised along the field lines of the dipolar-looking field created by the virtual magnet.
This appraoch is very straightforward and can solve a linear magnet design problem in one step. However,
this approach doesn’t work when we consider non-linear objectives. For example, consider the non-linear
objective of optimising for the magnetic energy in the air gap, which scales with |H|2. We don’t know
which field maximises this objective, so we have to use the second option which is guessing at a starting
field. Hg is now no longer a constant, but a field that will be changed as we optimize for our objective.
A way to show this in the language of functional derivatives is to say that before, the variation of the
functional was:
(δS)H∗=
Z
Rg
δS
δH(x)[H∗] · δH dV
(30)
Taking the gradient of the functional tells us which way to go to increase or decrease the value of the
functional, that is, it gives us an idea of which way to change the real magnetisation in. We thus introduce
the derivative of the functional defined in Rg, which we for reasons that will be made clear, will call M eff:
M eff[H∗] = (∇HS)H∗
(31)
This says that the value of the derivative of the functional at a certain point H∗, is the derivative of S
with respect to H at point H∗. We also introduce the derivative of the functional with respect to M
instead, defined in the region Rm:
Heff[M ∗] = (∇MS)M ∗
(32)
7
==PAGE:9==
Here we are taking the derivative with respect to M instead of H, to express it in terms of H, we use
the chain rule, which we will express in loose notation:
∂S
∂M =
 ∂S
∂H

H∗·
 ∂H
∂M

M ∗=
 ∂S
∂H

NM ∗·
∂NM
∂M

M ∗=
 ∂S
∂H

NM ∗N = N T
 ∂S
∂H

NM ∗
(33)
where N T is gotten when commuting the two terms. However, N is a symmetric operator, meaning
N = N T . Thus we finally get:
Heff[M ∗] = NM eff[NM ∗]
(34)
This equation gives us what we want, a direction in which to change the virtual field Hg, we then align the
real magnetisation with the updated virtual field, which leads to an increase in the value of the functional.
We have arrived at a viable optimisation algorithm, where we do the following:
• Guess at M m - the starting magnetisation of the real magnet.
• Calculate the field inside the air gap, Hm, using H = NM
• Take the gradient of the relevant functional expression with respect to H to obtain M eff
• The effective field is found using Heff = NM eff
• Change the current magnetisation direction in the direction of Heff
Virtual system
Real system
Optimization
scheme
1
2
3
4
Figure 2: A schematic illustration from ref[9] showing the 4 steps and final optimisation step explained above.
We can optimize for any objective, however, in this thesis we will be focusing on optimising for field homo-
geneity and the average field in the y-direction direction squared. The functional and the corresponding
M eff is shown here
S[H] =
Z
Rg
dV H2
y(x) ⇒M eff(x) = 2Hy(x)ˆey
(35)
S[H] =
Z
Rg
dV ∥H(x)∥2 −
 Z
Rg
dV H(x) ·
 1
Vg
1/2
ˆey(x)
!2
⇒M eff(x) = 2H(x)−2ˆey⟨Hy⟩Rg (36)
8
==PAGE:10==
The first objective and corresponding M eff are straightforward. The derivation, which can be found in
full in [9], of the second objective follows from considering the field as a sum of multipole fields, where we
optimise for the first term - the constant term, as a constant field has perfect homogeneity.
1.3
The Landau-Lifschitz Equation
We could simply nudge the real magnetisation in the direction of Heff. This we will call the Direct Field
method:
d
dtM = βHeff
(37)
Where β is a constant that we can adjust. However, this method doesn’t preserve the norm of M. In
a real magnet, the norm of the magnetisation is usually fixed and dependent on the magnet material.
It would therefore be useful to have a norm-preserving method instead. Recent work done at DTU
has been using the Landau-Lifschitz equation from micromagnetism for optimization purposes[9]. The
Landau-Lifschitz-Gilbert equation is a phenomelogical model in micromagnetism for how magnetic spins
evolve their direction in the presence of an effective field:
d
dtM = −βM × Heff −α M × M × Heff
(38)
The equation consists of two terms, the first being a precession term which makes the magnetization
revolve around the applied field Heff. The second term is a damping term which turns the magnetization
towards Heff and in the end aligns it with Heff. We will dismiss the precession term and only keep the
alignment term and call this the Landau-Lifschitz Evolution equation (LLE):
d
dtM = −α M × M × Heff
(39)
LLE is a norm-preserving time evolution of the magnetization, where α is a constant which controls how
large the change to M will be. The following diagram shows the difference between the Direct Field
approach and LLE:
Figure 3: Direct Field vs LLE. The length of M is not conserved in the first approach but it in the second.
9
==PAGE:11==
2
Magnetisation Optimisation
A test case will be presented, in which we optimize for a homogenous field in the y-direction in a square
cavity. The magnet material will start off distributed as an offcenter circle, presumably making reaching a
homogenous field harder. We evolve this configurations using the LLE and the Direct Field approach:
Initial state, LLE
(a) test 1
Final state, LLE
(b)
Initial state, Direct Field
(a)
Final state, Direct Field
(b)
While the direct field approach has a rather straightforward field distribution and converges quickly to a
stable solution, the LLE approach reaches a complicated magnetization around the edge of the cavity, that
somehow results in a homogenous field. The magnetization switches rapidly in the region surrounding the
region, which is not optimal for realising the magnet. To try and quantify the "non-optimality" of the
solution, we will be lending ideas from the paper "Maximally efficient permanent magnet structures"[4].
They introduce the Figure of Merit:
M =
R
Rg ∥B1∥2dV
R
Rm ∥M 2∥2dV
(40)
10
==PAGE:12==
Where Bm is the field produced in the region of interest and M m is the real magnetization of the mateiral
in the design region. The figure of merit can be seen as quantifying how well the magnet produces a field
outside itself, and we always want to maximise this figure of merit M. M is useful because its value
correlates reasonably well with relevant real-life parameters like weight and magnet mass. Plotting M as
a function of time for the two evolutions, we get:
Figure 6: The figure of merit, M plotted over time, decreasing for both approaches.
We see that the figure of merit for the LLE approach falls much below that of the direct approach. To
further quantify the decrease in the figure of merit, we look at what equations a maximally efficient
structure fullfills. Abele states 4 equations that must be fullfilled for a magnetization to maximize M:
∇· M = 0
(41)
∇× M = 0
(42)
Z
S
M · −
→
n dS = 0
(43)
M × −
→
n = 0
(44)
Where −
→
n is the normal vector to the magnet border. The two first equations require that M is irrotational
and divergenceless. Thus the degree by which M is not irrotational or solenoidal will give us an estimate
of how suboptimal the solution is. We therefore plot the curl of the magnetisation:
11
==PAGE:13==
Curl of Final state, Direct Field
(a)
Curl of Final state, Direct Field
(b)
We see that ∇× M is much larger for the norm-preserving LLE than the Direct Field approach, located
at the places with complex magnetization, some areas, the curl reaches a value 2 order of magnitude larger
than for the direct method. This is showing us that the LLE magnetization distribution doesn’t maximise
M. While there is no reason to expect the LLE approach to maximize M, what is important to note
is, that even though we evolve with a norm-preserving method, there is no garantee our solution will be
realisable and they are often harder to realise with a fixed magnetisation than when the magnetisation is
allowed to vary. The plots above then show a way to quantify the reasonableness of a solution.
12
==PAGE:14==
2.1
Shape Evolution
We now move on to the subject of shape evolution, in which we seek to distribute the magnetic material in
the most optimal way possible. Looking back at the functional maximising the objective, we see that when
the real magnet is aligned with the virtual field everywhere, the contribution from a point in the magnet
to the value of S is proportional to the norm of the virtual field ||Heff||. We therefore expect optimal
borders between the magnet and air to be given by the level curves of ||Heff||. For linear objectives, in
which we know the desired field, we can simply calculate the equipotential lines and line up the air-border
with the desired equipotential line. Shown below are the equipotential potential lines calculated from the
virtual field of a 2x1 length rectangular magnet.
Figure 8: Equipotential lines for a rectangular magnet.
We see that the initial distribution of magnet material was a square. The blue outline shows where the
equipotential line that encloses the same volume lies, and when aligning the border with this line, an
improvement to the average field was seen, which was the objective in this case.
However, for non-linear objectives, we don’t have a target field, we need an iterative version of this that
evolves towards the same shape as was gotten in the linear case. We therefore introduce the boundary
time evolution equation. We know that maximizing the product Heff · M maximizes the magnetic energy
in that area, which gives us a metric to improve the boundary of the magnet towards. We define the
following scalar field on the boundary:
S(x) = Heff(x) · M(x)
(45)
We want the scalar field to be normalised on the boundary, so that the volume is conserved and material
is shifted around, otherwise the magnet would simply grow outwards in all directions, as simply adding
more magnet will increase the functional. We do this by subtracting by a constant to shift the integral
around the boundary, C, to 0, this constant is found to be:
I
C
f(x) −k dx = 0
(46)
k
I
C
dx =
I
C
f(x) dx
(47)
k =
H
C f(x) dx
H
C dx
(48)
Having found the normalisation constant, we introduce the normalised scalar field as:
S(x) = Heff(x) · M(x) −
H
Heff(x) · M(x)dx
H
dx
(49)
13
==PAGE:15==
Multiplying by the unit normal vector to the boundary of the magnetic structure we have now constructed
a volume-preserving vector-field that we can use to evolve the shape of the magnet:
V (x) =

Heff(x) · M(x) −
H
Heff(x) · M(x)dx
H
dx

· ˆn
(50)
This approach ensures a monotonic increase in the optimization objective. We then run this evolution
in tandem with the evolution of magnetization using the LLE approach. Below we show the same 2x1
length cavity, and see that this shape optimisation approach in the linear case arrives at what the analytic
calculation of the equipotential line predicted:
(a) The shape of the magnet before shape optimisation
(b) The shape of the magnet after shape optimisation
Figure 10: Plot of the avarage field value as function of time.
Notice the small red normal vectors at the surface, showing which direction the magnet will change in. We
observe that the functional, that is, the average value of the field component in the air gap, monotonically
increased slightly dureing the shape evolution.
14
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Non-linear Optimisation Results
We now show an example, where we find the structure that maximizes the y-component of the field
squared. We remember the functional that we want to maximize as:
S[H] =
Z
Rg
H2
y(x) dV →M eff(x) = 2Hy(x)ˆey
(51)
Using both of these optimization strategies on a 2x1 rectangle, now with a slightly different magnet
volume, we get:
(a) Magnet at initial timestep
(b) Final magnet shape
To test the stability and potential uniqueness of the solution, the structure was evolved from 3 different
starting shapes with equal volumes and was found to converge to the same final shape. To know whether
Figure 12: Caption
or not convergence has truly been reached, we can look at the value of the shape evolution scalar field
around the magnet boundary:
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 13: Caption
We see that convergence was reached, as the scalar value all around the edge has gone to approximately
zero, meaning that we are now aligned with an equipotential surface of Heff.
2.3
Hyperparameters
We are using Comsol for simulations, specifically we are using the "Deformed Geometry" module to
change the shape of the geometry. This requires the specification of some hyperparameters like the mesh
quality, geometry shape function, mesh smoothing type and the smoothing parameter, δ. The mesh
quality is a measure of how many small triangular sections we cut our geometry in. A too coarse mesh
can lead to loss of convergence and untrustworthy final results. A too fine mesh increases simulation time
substantially, so usually a mesh size of normal with several levels of refinement in the magnet design
region was chosen. The geometry shape function is specified by an order, which reflects which order
polynomial is used to fit between mesh points in the geometry. An order of 2 was seen to be sufficient.
The mesh smoothing type refers to which partial differential equation is used to smooth the boundary
with. Here, the Winslow smoothing type was chosen. This method was found to be the most stable, while
also being less time-consuming than more complex, non-linear solvers like the Hyperelastic smoothing
method. Lastly the smoothing parameter δ has a large influence on the quality of the magnet boundary
and often had to be tuned individually for each run. It’s a delicate matter, as too little smoothing often
leads to inversions of the mesh and overall degredation of the boundary, eventually leading to loss of
convergence. A too large smoothing however runs the risk of overcorrecting the structure, leading to
shapes that might not be optimal. For example, it might be the case that the optimal solution consists of
spatially seperated magnetic structures, and a too large smoothing can keep the structure from seperating
in the first place. Therefore the smoothing parameter was generally kept as low as possible while still
allowing for convergence. The smoothing parameter also doesn’t conserve the volume, leading to loss of
volume, which becomes worse the larger the parameter is.
2.4
The Boundary Evolution constant α
The boundary evolution rate has been weighted with a constant α, which determines how much the
boundary moves per time step. This constant on its own is not very significant for the evolution, but
the relation between the the boundary evolution constant and the magnetization evolution constant is
important. This parameter was also subject to adjustment, as evolving the boundary too quickly can lead
16
==PAGE:18==
to wrong shapes and loss of convergence. An example is shown here, where the shape optimisation of a
magnet a bit thinner than the one before lead to the magnet segmenting it into 4 disjoint pieces:
(a) Inital starting shape
(b) Last shape before magnet segments
into 4 and simulation ends
(c) Monotonically increasing figure of
merit
This will however soon be shown to be not quite correct. This can be very hard to see, the objective
monotonically improves, so there’s no reason to suspect it’s a bad solution. The evolution had to be
stopped when the magnet split into 4 segments, and restarted as 4 seperate magnets. However, the 4
seperated magnets then grew back together again. Thus we have some convergence issue. The reason for
the failure to find a stable optimum is that we’re far from the optimal magnetization, if we let only the
magnetization evolution run for a time, we see a more complicated solution arise, and having arrived at
the final optimal magnetization, we can now evolve the shape to a stable optimum.
(a) The true stable optimum of the
magnet
(b)
(c)
We arrive at a slightly higher functional value, but plotting the scalar field around the edge this time
yields:
Figure 16: Caption
The rapidly switching magnetisation leads to a very ill-behaved scalar field, and the hotspots with
17
==PAGE:19==
problematic behaviour do not decrease mcuh during the evolution. The rapid fluctuations can often cause
the mesh to invert or degrade too much to converge. The timestep at 20 s was the last available solution
before simulations crashed.
2.5
Volume sweep
We now investigate volume changes to the optimal shape and magnetization of the magnet. We have done
a scan of different volumes and evolved all the shapes until convergence. Two figures at the maximum and
minimum volume are included, which show that the figures converges towards the theoretical prediction
in the linear case - the equipotential surface, which is the expected result:
(a) A large magnet optimised for the linear case
(b) A small magnet optimised for the linear case
Now the objective was changed to be the y-field squared, and the same parameter sweep was run:
(a) A large magnet optimised for the non-linear case
(b) A small magnet optimised for the non-linear case
We see a surprising result. At large volumes, the optimal shape and magnetization are identical for both
objectives, but for smaller objectives, the obtimal magnetization and shape diverge. In the nonlinear
optimisation plot for the smallest rectangle, figure b), we have included the contour lines of Heff. We see
that while the structure might locally align with the contour and be optimal, the contour lines only show
the optimal surface very locally and diverge from the optimal shape very quickly. We now plot showing
the average field in the inner air gap ⟨H⟩and the squareroot of the average of the square of the field
p
⟨H2⟩when optimizing for the squared objective:
18
==PAGE:20==
(a)
(b)
We clearly see a bifurcation occur. At a certain volume, the average field quickly goes to zero as the field
switches polarity inside the volume while the squared field continues to decrease approximately linearly.
This corresponds to the optimal magnetisation changing from an approximately dipolar field with an
average field everywhere to a complicated field, that maximises the field at the cornes of the airgap. The
following 4 figures at different volumes show this transition:
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
19
==PAGE:21==
2.6
Shape optimisation for Homogeneity
Optimising for field homogeneity is a very common goal, many applications require an extremely high
homogeneity like MRI and NMR scanners which need a field deviation of max 10−9 T for NMR and
10−6 T for MRI. However, we encounter a problem when trying to evolve the magnet shape when a
homogeneous field is the objective. The effective field is defined as M eff(x) = 2H(x) −2ˆey⟨Hy⟩Rg in the
homogeneity case, and from the expression we can see that when a homogenous field is reached, M eff
drops to almost 0. Since we’re using the value of M eff which depends directly on M eff in the shape
evolution approach, the scalar field goes to zero almost everywhere very quickly:
(a) The shape evolution scalar field in an offcenter circlular
magnet at initial magnetisation
(b) The shape evolution scalar field in an offcenter circlular
magnet at a later timestep.
And this isn’t because we are already at an optimal shape, we know that the figure of merit and the
homogeneity will be bigger for a centered circle. We therefore can’t directly co-evolve LLE and shape
optimisation with all objectives.
20
==PAGE:22==
2.7
Local and Global Optima
When doing non-linear optimisation and gradient descent, we are plagued by lots of local optima, that is,
we can arrive at a magnetisation and shape that is locally the best, but not globally optimal. Usually
one can try to avoid getting stuck in local optima but varying the step size taken to "jump" out of a
local optimum, which is frequently done in machine learning or one can initialise many different shapes
and magnetisations to explore the search space more efficiently. Since we are not employing any of these
methods, it is easy to get stuck in a local optima for us. An example can be seen, if we now make the
magnet even thinner. Simply depending on tweaking of hyperparameters, the shape evolution can lead to
different segmentations of the magnet, which goes to show how sensitive it is. Here we show one of the
ways the magnet segmented:
(a) A very thin magnet evolved towards maximising the H2
y
at the inital step
(b) The final step before the magnet break into two.
We see that the magnet segment in the middle, breaking up the magnet into an upper and lower part.
Here a different color palette has been chosen, so the rapid change in magnetisation is more easily visible.
If we resume the simulation with two segmented magnets we get:
(a) Inital shape of segmented magnet (Only half is shown
because of symmetry)
(b) Final shape before convergence loss
Which is monotonically increasing the value of the objective:
21
==PAGE:23==
(a) Inital shape of segmented magnet (Only half is
shown because of symmetry)
(b) A full plot, showing how the objective improved from the starting
guess to final magnetisation, and then improved slightly more under
shape optimisation.
We don’t manage to observe full convergence of the objective value, but notice an 8.5% increase in the
objecive. Another run was done segmenting the sides instead:
(a)
(b)
This configuration led around the same value of the objective, but has a completely different geometry.
Actually it is almost identical to the analytic solution to the linear problem of maximising Hy:
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 27: Caption
This tells us that possibly, the optimal shape of the linearised version of a non-linear objective can occupy
a local optimum, but that might not be the global optimum in the non-linear case.
3
Discussion
The shape evolution method that was derived in this thesis was succesfully tested and shown to work on
multiple examples. However, the approach is still very unstable in many cases and to reach convergence
often requires tuning hyperparameters many times and finding a good starting guess for the geometry.
Small changes to the mesh geomtery like rounding of edges and slightly changing the volume would often
crash the simulation for unknown reasons. All simulations were done in COMSOL which has the benefit
that all calculations and the theoretical framework are already implemented and ready to use. However,
COMSOL also has a tendency to be very hard to reach convergence with, when changing the geometry of
structures, forcing us to restrict a lot of variables and geometry choices to even allow for convergence. An
example of a geometry feature that was never found to work, was having two seperate meshes for the
magnet and the air gap, which would allow for the magnet material to move along the edge of the air gap
and allow for more interesting problems. Initialisation of the problem was also a challenge, starting a
shape optimisation run compared to just a magnetisation optimisation run would take orders of magnitude
longer to initialise, and if one updated the mesh to resume a simulation, the initialisation would always
fail. This meant that evolving the shape of a magnet until the simulation crashed and resume was often
not possible, as the initialisation would fail with a new mesh.
The improvement that shape optimisation provided was in many cases not very large, however that is
also a consequence of the geometries, as we can see, we have only changed the outer boundary of the
magnet in our test cases. The inner boundary has always been touching the air gap area, which means the
most "important" part of the magnet was always in place, we have only been shifting magnet materials
around at the outer edge, which has a small effect. In a more complex case like an electromagnetic motor,
with multiple design goals in different places, the shape evolution would potentially lead to much higher
23
==PAGE:25==
relative improvement. How much the objective improved is also very dependent on the starting guess, and
many of the geometries allowed for good guesses, as they are very simple structures.
4
Conclusion
In this project, we explored optimisation of permanent magnet structures using the Landau-Lifschitz
equation. We then derived a boundary evolution equation to explore running both optimisation procedures
in tandem, which produced generally improved results, compared to using only the LLE apporach alone.
Implementation of the approach was gone though and ideas for the future were presented to allow for
future work.
5
Future Work
There are still many potential directions that can be explored in this new approach. First of all, modelling
a more advanced, real system instead of prototypical setups would be desirable to show how much
of a real improvement the approach can yield. Comparing with other state-of-the-art like topology
optimisation approaches and generative algorithms to find optimal permanent magnet structures would be
very instructive in showing exactly where this approach would have merit. Modelling 3D structures would
also be very interesting, as all simulations have been confined to 2D for convergence and time purposes.
Designing an optimal 3D shape would also open up for the possibility of 3D-printing the magnet, which
is part of ongoing research at DTU. Having experimental confirmation of the approach would be very
interesting as well as potentially leading to collaborative work with other students, designing and realising
optimal structures for ongoing research.
6
Appendix
Bibliography
1.
Coey, J. M. D. Permanent magnet applications. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials
248, 441–456. issn: 0304-8853. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0304885302003359 (2022) (Aug. 1, 2002) (cit. on p. 3).
2.
Magnetic Materials Market https : / / www . reportsanddata . com / report - detail / magnetic -
materials-market (2022) (cit. on p. 3).
3.
Gielen, D. & Lyons, M. CRITICAL MATERIALS FOR THE ENERGY TRANSITION: RARE
EARTH ELEMENTS (May 15, 2022) (cit. on p. 3).
4.
Jensen, J. H. & Abele, M. G. Maximally efficient permanent magnet structures. Journal of Applied
Physics 79, 1157. issn: 00218979. http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/jap/79/2/
10.1063/1.360914 (2022) (1996) (cit. on pp. 3, 10).
5.
Lee, J., Nomura, T. & Dede, E. M. Topology optimization of magnetic composite microstructures
for electropermanent magnet. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 503, 166596. issn:
0304-8853. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304885319340041 (2022)
(June 1, 2020) (cit. on p. 3).
6.
Shaw, N. & Ansorge, R. Genetic algorithms for MRI magnet design. Applied Superconductivity, IEEE
Transactions on 12, 733–736 (Apr. 1, 2002) (cit. on p. 3).
7.
Griffiths, D. J. Introduction to Electrodynamics Higher Education from Cambridge University Press.
ISBN: 9781108333511 Publisher: Cambridge University Press. https : / / www . cambridge . org /
highereducation/books/introduction-to-electrodynamics/3AB220820DBB628E5A43D52C4B011ED4
(2022) (cit. on p. 4).
24
==PAGE:26==
8.
Blundell, S. Magnetism in Condensed Matter. Oxford Master Series in Condensed Matter Physics 79,
1157. issn: 00218979. http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/jap/79/2/10.1063/1.
360914 (2022) (2001) (cit. on p. 5).
9.
Andrea Roberto Insinga, R. B. Gradient-based optimization of permanent magnet assemblies for any
objective. 79, 1157. issn: 00218979. http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/jap/79/
2/10.1063/1.360914 (2022) (2022) (cit. on pp. 8, 9).
25
