==PAGE:1==
Deep stochastic image segmentation for
autonomous robotic inspection
Jacopo Gaetani (s202452)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Deep stochastic image segmentation for autonomous robotic inspection
Report written by:
Jacopo Gaetani (s202452)
Advisor(s):
Evangelos Boukas, Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Photonics,
DTU
Rasmus Eckholdt Andersen, Ph.D student at Department of Electrical Engineering and Photonics,
DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering and Photonics
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Project period:
31 January - 22 July 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Autonomous Systems
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Jacopo Gaetani, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Inspectrone project aims to develop intelligent drones capable of carefully detecting
possible defects on large vessels (e.g., cargo and ballast tanks). The project is a collab-
oration between Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), FORCE Technology, Lloyd’s
Register and NORDEN A/S.
This thesis is part of the Inspectrone project, and it is focusing on corrosion detection.
Currently the corrosion is inspected and identified by various experts, but different
specialists produce non-identical segmentations therefore the aim of the project is to
apply a probabilistic approach to the image segmentation in order to consider more than
one plausible solution. The goal is to develop a segmentation model and incorporate a
randomness factor using the approach of variational autoencoders. This model should be
able to combine different opinions (i.e., different segmentation for the localization of the
corrosion) and then producing different segmentations sampling from the resulting latent
distribution. Gated Shape Convolutional Neural Network (GSCNN) [23] is a state-of-the-
art model that is used for segmentation and, subsequently, it was explored the possibility
of converting it to a variational autoencoder setup inspired by the Probabilistic U-Net
[12].
The model was trained and tested using a large dataset of annotated images
rendered from a 3D simulation previously implemented.
The developed model showed better performance compared to the Probabilistic U-
Net, being capable to generalize the segmentation variants of the current dataset in less
sample and to provide a more precise segmentation due to the more accurate backbone
segmentation model, i.e. GSCNN.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Dataset
3
2.1
Types of corrosion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Dataset Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Coco annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Gated Shape CNNs
9
3.1
Regular Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Shape Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Fusion Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Loss Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Probabilistic U-Net
15
4.1
U-Net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Prior and Posterior Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Fcomb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Probabilistic GSCNN
19
5.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Loss Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Metrics and baseline
25
6.1
Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Training and results
29
7.1
GSCNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Fixed Prior
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.3
Prior-Posterior Nets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:8==
iv
Contents
8
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
Appendices
53
Appendix
55
Extra experiments for Fixed Prior architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Inspectrone is a collaborative project with the participation of Danmarks Tekniske Uni-
versitet (DTU), FORCE Technology, Lloyd’s Register, and NORDEN A/S that aims to
develop a drone that can be used for inspection of harsh environments as, for example,
closed ship ballast tanks. Rust, corrosion, and bad welds are the main objectives of the
inspection that is regularly conducted on the ballast tank of a ship. These tasks can be
considered hazardous since the persons conducting the inspection are exposed to oxygen
deprivation, gas leakage, or falling parts. Being able to commission this work to a drone
will therefore considerably reduce the risk for the maintenance crew.
This thesis aims to develop a deep learning model able to correctly detect the corro-
sion inside of the vessel’s ballast tank. The main challenge to accomplishing this goal
is that the detection of the corrosion is currently commissioned to experts and therefore
it can not be directly converted into a semantic image segmentation. Indeed looking at
the same ballast tank multiple experts can identify the position and the shape of the
corrosion differently. Due to the subjective nature of this task, the segmentation model
developed for this project is trained on 5 different experts’ opinions and uses a condi-
tional variational autoencoders (CVAE) approach to produce a stochastic segmentation.
Figure 1.1: Ballast tank.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Objectives
The purpose of this Master Thesis is to develop a segmentation model for corrosion
detection inside the ballast tank of a ship. Due to the inherited ambiguity of the problem,
the model should be able to perform different but equally plausible segmentations for
the same input image. The following objectives were therefore identified:
• Research into state-of-the-art segmentation and probabilistic segmentation models.
• Creation of new 3D rendered images to expand the current image dataset.
• Implementation of Gated Shape CNN model for segmentation of 3D rendered
annotated images.
• Implementation of GSCNN model into Probabilistic U-Net architecture to perform
stochastic segmentation.
• Optimization and training of the developed model for the corrosion detection task
• Performance comparison between the developed model and other state-of-the-art
segmentation models.
• Document the developed model and the obtained results.
1.2
Thesis outline
In the following chapters, each of the elements and architectures of the developed model
will be presented starting from the image dataset used to train the different models,
the backbone segmentation model, i.e.
Gated Shape Convolutional Neural Network
(GSCNN), the Probabilistic U-Net used as baseline and the final Probabilistic GSCNN
segmentation model. Afterward, the conducted experiments are documented, as well
as the metrics adopted to evaluate the different models’ performances, and, finally, the
outcomes and conclusions are presented.
Previous knowledge of machine learning and deep learning are required from the
reader.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Dataset
The dataset used for this master thesis, from now on addressed as corrosion dataset,
consists of 28000 rendered images, each of them with five different ground truths to
simulate the segmentations that five different experts could have performed for the same
image.
2.1
Types of corrosion
As it can be seen in Fig. 2.2, the corrosion inside the ballast tank of a ship can be
located in different places, and therefore it was decided to categorize the corrosion into
three different classes, based on the location where it may occur: on a seam, on an edge
or as a single spot. This division resembles the types of corrosion identified by Lloyd’s
Register in [16] as:
• Edge corrosion: local corrosion at the free edges of plates, stiffeners, primary
support members, and around openings.
• Grooving corrosion: typically local material loss adjacent to weld joints along
abutting stiffeners and at stiffener or plate butts or seams.
Fig. 2.1 shows some pictures regarding the above-mentioned document released by
Lloyd’s Register about the Remote Inspection Technique System (RITS) [16].
(a) Edge corrosion
(b) Grooving corrosion
Figure 2.1: Corrosion types identified by Lloyd’s Register [16]
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Dataset
In the dataset adopted for this project, the corrosion is labeled as edge corrosion,
seam corrosion (the grooving corrosion in [16]), and spot corrosion, which is assigned
to the corrosion that does not belong to either the edge or the seam class.
In [16],
Lloyd’s Register identifies another type of corrosion, called pitting corrosion, defined as
”scattered corrosion spots/areas with a local material reduction that are greater than
the general corrosion in the surrounding area”. Unfortunately, it was not possible to
replicate this type of corrosion properly in the simulation and therefore it has been
discarded.
In Fig. 2.2 it can be noticed how the corrosion is labeled differently based on the
location, and, therefore, for every picture it is computed a mask containing four possible
values:
• Label 0: background (blue).
• Label 1: seam corrosion (green).
• Label 2: edge corrosion (red).
• Label 3: spot corrosion (yellow).
(a) Rendered image
(b) Ground truth mask
Figure 2.2: Rendered image and the respective segmentation ground truth
2.2
Dataset Creation
Due to the lack of data, the dataset used for this project has been artificially created
based on the observation of real images. Using the software Blender, a 3D simulation of
the vessel’s ballast tank was created following the same geometry and proportion and,
subsequently, a specific material mask was rendered. The aspect of the interior of the
ballast tank, i.e. color, texture, dust, and corrosion, plays a crucial role in the correct
outcome of the project since the model is trained on images taken inside this simulation.
The material mask adopted, simulates a ballast tank 10-15 years old using the following
elements:
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Coco annotations
5
• The yellow color of the wall.
• The amount of dust presents inside the ballast tank.
• The amount of corrosion presents inside of the tank.
• The color and the gradient that the corrosion has.
(a) Real image from the ballast tank.
(b) Image rendered in simulation.
Figure 2.3: Comparison between real and rendered images.
In Fig. 2.3, it can be seen on the left (2.3a) a picture taken inside the real ballast
tank and on the right (2.3b) one of the images rendered from the simulation. Even if
there is no full correspondence between the two images, in [18], it was proven that the
knowledge acquired by the network on synthetic data can be transferred to real data.
The images of the corrosion dataset are rendered using a python script that spawns
the simulation’s camera, in different locations inside the ballast tank and captures images
of size [376, 672]. For each image, 5 different thresholds are used to create the corrosion
masks, simulating the opinions of different experts inspecting the same ballast tank.
2.3
Coco annotations
Once the five different corrosion masks for each rendered image have been created, the
final annotated masks are computed. The corrosion mask, indeed, is only identifying
whether there is corrosion in the image or not, without giving any information about the
type of corrosion. Therefore, to label each pixel and create the final mask, every image is
reconstructed using the respective depth image previously rendered in Blender. Together
with the depth image, also another image is rendered and it provides information about
the location of the different areas of the image, i.e. where edges and seams are. Using
this information it is then possible to annotate every pixel, based on its distance to the
nearest area, using the labels already introduced in Section 2.1. To define whether a pixel
belongs to a certain area or not, a threshold of 10 cm was used, e.g. every corrosion
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Dataset
pixel within 10 cm from an edge will be labeled as edge corrosion and the same will
apply for the seam corrosion. The pixel falling outside of this threshold will therefore be
labeled as spot corrosion and everything that is not highlighted by the corrosion mask
(the black pixels in Fig. 2.4a) is considered as background.
(a) Corrosion mask.
(b) Areas.
Figure 2.4: Images used by the annotation converter.
Fig 2.4 is showing the images rendered in the simulation, and subsequently used to
reconstruct the scene and label the pixels. In Fig. 2.4b it can be observed how the
different areas of the scene are identified: the edges in red, the seams in green, and
in blue the corrosion. This last information is not relevant for the image identifying
the areas because it will change with the different corrosion thresholds simulating the
multiple opinions, whereas edges and seams remain always the same. The information
about the corrosion is indeed identified using the corrosion mask shown in Fig. 2.4a.
The final created dataset (images and annotations) is stored using the COCO dataset
format [1]. This allows to save all the information using JSON files and the only im-
ages’ folder, without the need to store the annotated masks in the form of image files.
Therefore, using the same images, it was possible to create 5 different JSON files, one
for each different segmentation. Every JSON file is reporting the following categories of
information: info, licenses, categories, images, and annotations.
The info is a brief description of the dataset and the license contains, as the name
suggests, the license related to the dataset. In categories the information about the
different categories present in the dataset are stored:
• id: category id [1-3].
• name: name of the respective category [Seam, Edge, Spot].
• supercategory: this field is not used since there are no supercategories.
Under images is possible to find all the relevant information about the RGB images:
• id: unique image id.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Coco annotations
7
• dataset_id: id of the respective dataset (1-5).
• width: image width.
• height: image height.
• file_name: unique file name (the number in the image name does not necessarily
match the id number).
• annotated: True/False whether the image is annotated or not.
• num_annotations: number of annotation of the current image.
The annotations category contains all the annotations’ information of a specific
image:
• id: unique annotation id.
• image_id: id of the image the annotation belongs to.
• category_id: id of the category the annotation belongs to (1 - seam, 2 - edge, 3
- spot).
• segmentation: array of points defining the current segmentation.
• area: area of the polygon defined by the segmentation point.
• bbox: coordinates of the annotation bounding box [x_min, y_min, width, height].
• score: score of the annotation (1.0 is used assuming a perfect score).
Once the dataset JSON file is computed, it is possible to show the summary infor-
mation of the single dataset using a python script that, for each JSON file, will print
the following:
1 simulated_corrosion_multi_class_no_morph_aligned_1.json
2
category ids: [2, 3, 1]
3
Edge: 2
4
97047 annotations
5
21439 images
6
Spot: 3
7
16736 annotations
8
9897 images
9
Seam: 1
10
107984 annotations
11
24194 images
12
images annotated with category: 26279
13
images annotated but with no category: 39
14
images total: 26318
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Dataset
The name of the JSON file is listed at the beginning, followed by the ids used for each
category and then the information for each of these categories. In the example reported
above, it can be seen that the first dataset (since the name reports the number 1)
contains 26318 images but only 26279 of those are annotated. It is also reported how
many annotations are present for each category and how many images of this category
are present. The total number of images is the same along the 5 datasets since the
model will require that the same image is represented in each dataset, even if there are
no annotations for a particular dataset. Therefore after creating the 5 different JSON
files the datasets are aligned with each other (the same images are represented) to fulfill
this requirement and create the final corrosion dataset.
The only limitation of the way the annotation masks are computed is related to the
missing possibility of having a mask with an empty blob inside, since it is considered
part of the mask everything that is delimited by the polygon delimiting the corrosion
area. In Fix 2.5 it is shown an example of this issue.
(a) Original image.
(b) COCO annotation mask.
Figure 2.5: COCO annotation limitation.
As can be noticed the edge corrosion in the bottom right corner of the image is
presenting an area non affected by corrosion but since this region is located inside of
a bigger corroded area, the entire surface is labeled as edge corrosion by the algorithm
(Fig. 2.5b).
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Gated Shape CNNs
In this chapter, the backbone model used to perform segmentation is presented under
each aspect, and specific attention is paid to the structures that will result more relevant
for the definition of the final architecture developed for this project.
The model used to perform image segmentation is the Gated Shape Convolutional
Neural Network (GSCNN) [23]. This model was able to outperform the state-of-the-art
segmentation models being capable to produce sharper predictions around the bound-
aries of the objects in the scene and significantly increasing the performance in terms
of accuracy, especially for thinner and smaller objects. Differently from the previous
methods that compute all the information (color, shape, and texture) together in one
deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), the approach presented in [23] processes
image features and shape information in separate branches. The main component of
this architecture is a new type of gate that, connecting the layers of the two streams,
is capable to help the shape stream to focus only on the relevant information for the
boundary computation. GSCNNs were, therefore, capable to set a new state-of-the-art
performance on the Cityscapes dataset [5] for what concern both the masks, calculated
in terms of mean Intersection over Union (mIoU), with an improvement of 2%, and
contour accuracy, +4% in the commonly called F-measure/F-score [15].
Figure 3.1: Gated Shape CNN visual overview [23]
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Gated Shape CNNs
3.1
Regular Stream
As mentioned before, the regular stream has the task of producing dense pixel features.
It takes as input an RGB image and computes its output feature representation. For
this stream any type of feedforward fully-convolutional network can be used, e.g. VGG
[19] or ResNet [7] based semantic segmentation architectures. In [23] different ResNet-
like models, such as ResNet-101 [7] and WideResNet [25], state-of-the-art for semantic
segmentation, are employed in the regular stream.
In the following section, a brief overview of the ResNet model and the training issues
that it is addressing, are given, to introduce the reader to this architecture for a better
understanding of the final developed model.
3.1.1
ResNet
Once the depth of the neural network increases, one of the most commonly encountered
issues is the so-called vanishing/exploding gradient problem and the saturation and
subsequent degradation of the accuracy.
The vanishing gradient problem occurs when, during the backpropagation of the
error, the derivatives get smaller and smaller, and therefore also the weights update
decreases significantly till becoming not relevant for the learning process of the network
due to an incredibly small gradient. The opposite problem is called exploding gradient,
in this case, the derivatives during the back-propagation increase exponentially causing
a continuous update of the weights to very different values, and therefore the gradient
will oscillate and never converge to global minima.
For what concern the accuracy
degradation, due to the depth of the network, it was proven that this issue is not related
to overfitting and that adding more layers can lead to higher training error.
In [6]
the authors, through a series of experiments, show how only increasing the depth of
the network is not beneficial for CNNs since it will affect the accuracy. Also in [21],
several experiments are conducted on a plain feedforward neural network with increased
depth to show how a deeper architecture can modify the network accuracy. Further
investigation about depth-related training problems is left to the reader since it is not
crucial for the scope of this thesis.
The residual networks were indeed designed to directly address the previously men-
tioned depth-related training issues. Therefore a residual learning framework was intro-
duced inside a standard convolutional neural network, made of multiple stacked layers, to
let the previous n layers fit a residual mapping instead of a desired underlying mapping.
It is, indeed, easier to optimize the residual mapping instead of the original unreferenced
mapping [7]. As can be seen in Fig 3.2, if we consider the desired underlying mapping
as H(x), the goal for the stacked non-linear layers become to fit a different mapping,
i.e. F(x) := H(x) - x and therefore the original mapping is recast into F(x) + x. This
formulation is achieved using shortcut connections [2] and can be realized in any feedfor-
ward neural network. In the case of the ResNet, identity mapping is performed by this
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Shape Stream
11
connection and the outputs of the stacked layers are summed together with the ones of
the shortcut connections, without increasing the computational complexity or adding
any extra parameters.
Figure 3.2: Generic residual block [7]
Different types of ResNet exist and for the final model developed for this project the
ResNet50 was used, more about it in section 5.1.1.
3.2
Shape Stream
A key component of the GSCNN’s architecture is the Shape Stream that, as mentioned
before, is focusing on producing semantic boundaries. As inputs, it takes the output of
the first convolutional layer of the ResNet, the residual outputs computed by the different
layers of the ResNet, and the image gradient ∇I. The gradient is calculated for every
image at run-time, using the Canny edge detector as in [3]. As can be seen in Fig. 3.3,
where a detailed representation of the GSCNN’s architecture is shown, the Shape Stream
is composed of residual blocks separated by gated convolution layers (GCL), as in 3.2.1,
and it is supervised using binary cross entropy loss since it is possible to compute the
ground-truth semantic boundaries from the ground-truth semantic segmentation masks.
Figure 3.3: GSCNN’s architecture [23]
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Gated Shape CNNs
3.2.1
Gated Convolutional Layer
Due to the close relationship between the semantic segmentation and the semantic
boundaries, in [23], a novel Gated Convolution Layer (GCL) was designed to help the
Shape Stream to only process information relevant to the boundaries estimation task.
Indeed the Shape Stream does not incorporate information from the Regular Stream,
since it uses the GCL to filter out information not strictly related to the boundaries
computation. In this way, a close collaboration between the two streams is created,
allowing the Shape Stream to adopt a shallow architecture able to process images with
high resolution. Further information about the actual architecture of this layer is left to
the reader and can be found in [23]. What is relevant for the scope of this thesis is that
the two main elements of the GCL, i.e the attention map computation and the gated
convolution, are differentiable and therefore it is possible to perform the backpropaga-
tion.
In [23] three GCLs are employed and they are connected to the third, fourth, and
last layer of the Regular Stream. When it is needed, the feature maps coming from these
layers are then up-sampled using bilinear interpolation.
Figure 3.4: Visualization of the alpha channels from the GCLs [23]
Fig. 3.4 portrays how the GCL architecture is capable to empathize edges between
boundary/non-boundary regions in the input feature map. It can be observed how the
first gate highlights the very low-level edges whereas the second and the third empathize
more object-level boundaries. The combination of these gates is therefore able to produce
an accurate outline of the objects present in the image.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Fusion Module
13
3.3
Fusion Module
The Fusion Module is the last component of the network. It takes the outputs of the two
streams and produces the final segmentation result. The dense feature representation
from the Regular Stream and the boundary map produced by the Shape Stream are
fused in a way that preserves the multi-scale contextual information. This particular
operation is performed using an Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling [4]. The output of the
Fusion Module is a categorical distribution that represents the probability that each
pixel belongs to each of the N classes (19 in the case of the Cityscape dataset).
3.3.1
Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling
Atrous Convolutions avoid the reduction of spatial resolution of features maps that are
subjected to the repeated operation of max-pooling and striding. This goal is achieved
by convolving the full images with an up-sampled filter that contains zeros in between
the original filter values, therefore, even if the filter size increases only the non-zero
values are taken into account. In this way it is possible to compute feature responses at
the original image resolution, without learning any extra parameters [4].
The Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) is a variation of the R-CNN spatial
pyramid pooling from [8], where it is proven that resampling convolutional features ex-
tracted at a single scale it is possible to classify regions of different scales [4]. The ASPP
is implemented using multiple atrous convolutional layers in parallel and processing the
features extracted at each sampling rate in different branches. These features are then
fused to generate the final result. A visual representation of the ASPP can be observed
in the following figure, Fig. 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) [4]
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Gated Shape CNNs
3.4
Loss Functions
GSCNN architecture requires four different loss functions to run backpropagation and
update the network weights, even if the main goal is not to train a multi-task network
but to take advantage of the correlation between the segmentation and boundary pre-
diction tasks. These are indeed jointly supervised during training using the standard
cross-entropy (CE) loss on the predicted segmentation and the standard binary cross-
entropy (BCE) loss on the predicted boundaries. BCE loss is applied on the boundary
mask before it is fed into the fusion module, updating the parameters of both streams.
Whereas the final segmentation, in the form of categorical distribution, is supervised
with CE loss at the end of the network, and therefore it updates all the model parame-
ters. Due to the high imbalance between boundary and non-boundary pixels, the BCE
loss is scaled by a factor β, set to 20, when added to the CE loss pixels for the calculation
of the final loss.
As mentioned before the output of the Fusion Module is a categorical distribution,
therefore, it is possible to define the potential that a pixel belongs to a semantic bound-
ary using the spatial derivative and calculating the argmax of the segmentation output.
Using the ground truth semantic label for the boundary prediction is, therefore, possible
to write a loss function to calculate the mismatch between prediction and the ground
truth based on the non-zero pixel coordinates. Another loss function is defined to en-
sure consistency between the binary boundary prediction and the predicted semantic
mask to exploit one more time the duality between boundary prediction and semantic
segmentation in the boundary space [23]. Such loss function runs over each image pixel
and semantic class respectively and uses an indicator function with a confidence thresh-
old set to 0.8. The combination of the two loss functions just mentioned produces the
so-called Dual Task Regularizer [23]. For the way it is computed, such function entails a
problem in terms of gradient propagation during training. Indeed the argmax function is
not differentiable and therefore in [23] the authors proposed to use the Gumbel softmax
trick [10] approximating the argmax operator with a softmax function with temperature
τ during the backward pass. Detailed information about the Dual Task Regularizer and
how it is propagated is left to the reader and it can be found in [23].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Probabilistic U-Net
The following chapter presents the state-of-the-art model for segmentations of ambiguous
images, i.e. the Probabilistic U-Net [12]. Indeed, there is a particular class of images, e.g.
medical images from CT scans, where even the full image context is not able to resolve
the ambiguities present in the picture and, therefore, the classic semantic segmentation
is not enough, since it provides only a pixel-wise probability ignoring the co-variances
between pixels.
The Probabilistic U-Net directly addresses this issue by being able to produce multi-
ple plausible segmentations hypothesis for ambiguous images, combining a conditional
variational autoencoder (CVAE) [20] for modeling complex distributions with a U-Net
[17] for the segmentation task.
To produce the joint probability of all pixels in the
segmentation map, a sample is taken from the latent space, which encodes the possible
segmentation variants, and it is processed together with the output of the U-Net to
compute the corresponding segmentation.
4.1
U-Net
Since the Probabilistic U-Net was developed to tackle a problem mainly related to med-
ical images, for the pure segmentation task the U-Net architecture was adopted. This
model strongly applies data augmentation and, therefore, it can produce very accurate
results even with a not large dataset, a common situation for medical data.
The network takes the name from its shape, as can be seen in Fig. 4.1, which makes
possible to identify two sides of the network:
• the contracting path (left side).
• the expansive path (right side).
The contracting path consists of a series of two 3x3 unpadded convolutions, followed by
an activation function, rectified linear unit (ReLU) in this case, and a 2x2 max-pooling
operation with stride 2. This last component performs down-sampling of the input and
after each of these operations, the number of feature channels is doubled. Differently
from the contracting path, the expansive path focuses on the up-sampling of the feature
map. Each step is followed by a 2x2 convolution halving the number of feature channels
and the output is then concatenated with the corresponding cropped map coming from
==PAGE:24==
16
4 Probabilistic U-Net
the contracting path. The cropping is used to reshape the map due to the loss of border
pixels during the convolutions [17]. In the end, two 3x3 convolutions are applied and
each of them is followed once again by a ReLU activation function.
In [17], data augmentation is applied using elastic deformations to allow the network
to learn invariance in such transformations and provide robust performance. From a
Gaussian distribution with a 10-pixel standard deviation, displacement vectors are sam-
pled and applied on a coarse 3 by 3 grid to generate smooth deformations. Subsequently,
the per-pixel displacement is computed using bi-cubic interpolation and at the end of
the contracting path, drop-out layers are applied.
Figure 4.1: U-Net architecture [17]
4.2
Prior and Posterior Net
The key component of the Probabilistic U-Net is the low-dimensional latent space that
encodes all the segmentation variants using the so-called ”Prior net” and ”Posterior
net”.
These two networks share the same architecture and function, i.e.
estimating
the probability of these variants for a given image, the input image for the Prior net,
and the ground truth segmentation for the Posterior net.
The probabilities created
by these components are therefore called prior and posterior distribution, and they
are modeled as axis-aligned Gaussian with mean µ and variance σ. Since the network
is trained by minimizing the variational lower bound, as for a traditional VAE, the
Posterior net is trained to find the segmentation variants and map them in the latent
space using µpost and σpost. This distribution is combined with the activation map of
the U-Net and consists of the final segmentation that is then supervised with cross-
entropy loss penalizing the differences with the ground truth segmentation. Moreover,
the dissimilarity between the prior and the posterior distribution is supervised using
==PAGE:25==
4.3 Fcomb
17
the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL) [13] that pulls the two distributions towards each
other. The final loss is therefore a combination of these two loss functions summed
together with a weighting factor β scaling the KL loss.
Figure 4.2: The Probabilistic U-Net [12]
4.3
Fcomb
To combine the random sample from the latent space, with the last activation map of
the U-Net a function Fcomb is applied. It consists of a series of three consequent 1x1
convolutions that concatenate the segmentation output with the sample from the latent
distribution and map this information to the desired number of output classes. Every
convolution is followed by a ReLU activation function, except for the last one which
is mapping the processed features to the final number of classes. In this manner, it
is possible to inject the segmentation variants learned during the training process and
combine them with the output of the segmentation task coming from the U-Net.
When computing different samples from the same input image, the Fcomb function is
the only part of the network that has to be re-evaluated since both the feature activation
map from the U-Net and the distribution from the latent space can be reused.
==PAGE:26==
18
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 5
Probabilistic GSCNN
The model developed for this master thesis was given the name of ”Probabilistic GSCNN”
since it follows the same approach of the Probabilistic U-Net [12]. It is indeed focusing
on stochastic segmentation and it is employing, as backbone segmentation model, the
current state-of-the-art Gated Shape CNNs [23]. This chapter is therefore presenting
the developed architecture in every component.
Figure 5.1: Probabilistic GSCNN
5.1
Architecture
As shown in Fig. 5.1 the Probabilistic GSCNN uses the same architecture of the Gated
Shape CNNs as presented in Ch.3 but it also adds a random sample coming from a
latent distribution as for the Probabilistic U-Net [12].
Starting from the GSCNNs architecture some modifications were applied to the net-
work during this project:
• ResNet-50d is the backbone architecture for the Regular Stream.
• The non-differentiable component of the Dualtask loss, as in 3.4 is not imple-
mented.
The reason for these choices is related to the type of problem that this project is trying
to solve. Indeed, the probabilistic segmentation task addressed by this project, concerns
==PAGE:28==
20
5 Probabilistic GSCNN
only 4 different classes, i.e. background, seam corrosion, edge corrosion, and spot corro-
sion, and not 19 as in the case of the Cityscapes dataset [5], the dataset used to train
the classic GSCNN. Therefore, it was assessed that there is no need to extremely expand
the segmentation model in the Regular Stream by comparing the performance of the
ResNet-50d with the one of the ResNet-101d. The WideResNet, as used in [23] for the
final implementation of the GSCNNs, was not tested due to the lack of computational
resources needed to run this architecture. The original implementation of the GSCNN
form [23] requires 8 GPUs working in parallel, and, as reported in the original repository
from [23], that kind of implementation will not run on a single GPU as in the case of
the model developed in this thesis.
For what concern the implementation of the Dualtask loss as described in [23], the
non-differentiable part focuses on the boundary pixels mismatch to allow sharper pre-
diction of objects located far from the camera. Since for the Inspectrone Project, the
drone performing the inspection running the Probabilistic GSCNN model, is flying in
a close and circumscribed space the corrosion will never be as far from the camera as
it can happen for some objects in the Cityscapes datasets. Under these circumstances,
the non-differentiable part of the Dualtask loss is not considered crucial for the specific
application and therefore not implemented for the supervision of this model.
5.1.1
ResNet-50d
As already mentioned in section 3.1.1 the backbone architecture used for the Regular
Stream of the Probabilistic GSCNN is the ResNet-50d [9], [7]. In this configuration, the
shortcut connections are used both to perform identity mapping and up/down sampling
to have a matching dimension, since the dimensions of F and x have to be the same (see
3.1.1). This leads to the architecture of the shortcut connections shown in Fig. 5.2a:
• 1 × 1 convolution for reducing the dimensions.
• 3 × 3 convolution, bottleneck layer for mapping.
• 1 × 1 convolution for restoring (increasing) the dimensions.
Every stage of the ResNet-50, starting from stage 2, begins with a down-sampling
block, subsequently followed by a series of residual blocks. Such down-sampling block
consists of two paths, from now on called ”left-path” and ”right-path” where the left one
consists in a series of three convolutions of kernel sizes of 1×1, 3×3 and 1×1, respectively.
The first convolution has a stride of 2 to half the input size whereas the last convolution
presents an output channel 4 times larger than the previous convolutions. For what
concern the right-path, it uses a 1×1 convolution with a stride of 2 to match the input
shape of the down-sampling block with the output of the left-path. It is therefore possible
to sum together the output of the two paths to produce the final output of the down-
sampling block.
==PAGE:29==
5.1 Architecture
21
This architecture, as a downside, is prone to ignoring a relevant part of information,
both in the left and the right path, therefore, in [9] a modification to this down-sampling
block is proposed. In the left path indeed the first convolution, due to its 1×1 kernel
and a stride of 2, ignores three-quarters of the feature map provided as input. This
problem is addressed by swapping the stride sizes of the first and the second convolution
and this allows to not ignore any information and, since the convolution with a stride
of 2, i.e. the second, has a kernel of size 3×3, the final output of the left path remains
unchanged. The right path presents a similar issue using the same 1×1 kernel with a
stride of 2 for the convolution and therefore it is also ignoring a relevant amount of
input features. The suggested solution, named ResNet-D, takes advantage of a 2×2
average-pooling layer applied before the convolution, whose stride is set to 1, to avoid
ignoring any information coming from the input, at the small price of a slightly higher
computational cost. The architecture of the down-sampling block of the ResNet-D is
shown in Fig. 5.2b.
(a) ResNet-50 residual block as defined in [7]
(b) Down-sampling block of ResNet-D [9]
Figure 5.2: ResNet-50d blocks
For the development of the Probabilistic GSCNN, the ResNet-50d (and ResNet-101d)
was not implemented from scratch but an architecture already designed, taken from the
Pytorch Image Models (timm) library [24] was used. This library allows using most of
==PAGE:30==
22
5 Probabilistic GSCNN
the commonly adopted architecture by simply loading them, and their weights if needed,
from the library with a single-line command.
5.1.2
Canny edge detector
As can be seen in Fig. 5.1, at the end of the Shape Stream, right before the Fusion
Module, the image gradient of the current image is infused. Such gradient corresponds
to the actual edges of the image and in this project, it is computed using a standard
Canny Edge Detector algorithm. The input image is therefore converted into grayscale
and the corresponding gradient is computed using Canny edge detection. This algorithm
uses filters based on the first-order derivative and Gaussian kernel to smooth noises
before computing the edge strength and direction for every pixel. After this multiple
thresholding to determine the possible edges, hysteresis is used to track the final edges,
suppressing the one with the lowest score. For more information, please refer to [3].
(a) Original image
(b) Computed gradient
Figure 5.3: Result of Canny Edge Detector
5.1.3
Latent space
Since the developed model is aiming to perform probabilistic segmentation, it is required
to produce a set of different but equally plausible segmentations for the same image
and therefore randomness, from the latent distribution, is added to the feature map
computed by the GSCNN. Following the architecture of the Probabilistic U-Net, as
described in 4, the same Fcomb function is adopted from the current model to sample
from a latent distribution encoding the segmentation variants of the dataset. In [12] it
is shown how the accuracy in terms of GED (generalized energy distance), more about
that in 6.1, is not highly affected if the prior parameters, i.e. the mean and standard
deviation of the latent distribution, are fixed or learned using a CVAE architecture, as
in the former paper. Therefore two different models were experimented and compared
to identify the perfect solution for the current application. The first model uses a fixed
prior distribution to sample from, whereas the second architecture benefits from the
Prior and Posterior nets as in [12] to learn the parameters of the latent distribution.
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Loss Functions
23
In both the setups the Fcomb is applied to the output of the segmentation model, the
GSCNN, and consists of a series of 2D Convolutions (usually four) to compute the final
output. The two architectures, the one with fixed prior and the one with Prior and
Posterior nets, present some differences in the dimensions of the convolutions. Indeed,
this is the case of the model with fixed prior since with the normal convolution sizes (the
same used in the Probabilistic U-Net) in the Fcomb the network was learning to ignore
the samples coming from the latent distribution and therefore performing as a normal
semantic segmentation model. More details in 7.
5.2
Loss Functions
Even the supervision of the network presents different configurations whether a fixed
or a learned prior is used. Indeed, for the architecture sampling from a fixed latent
distribution, the loss functions involved are the same as the GSCNN developed in [23]
and reported in 3.4. Binary cross-entropy loss is adopted for the supervision of the
shape stream and cross-entropy loss for the final segmentation output together with the
so-called Dualtask loss. As already mentioned, this loss function consists of two different
functions where one focuses on the mismatch between the predicted boundaries and
the one defined by the segmentation performing cross-entropy loss among these pixel
locations. Whereas, the other uses the spatial derivative and the argmax to calculate
the loss between the prediction and the ground truth. As mentioned at the beginning of
this section, this loss was developed to ensure sharper prediction for objects located far
from the camera but, since the Inspectrone project aims to detect corrosion in a confined
environment, such loss was not implemented in the developed model.
In the case of the architecture using the Prior and Posterior networks, it was necessary
to implement all the supervision related to the CVAE architecture to learn the most
accurate latent distribution to encode the segmentation variants of the corrosion dataset.
Therefore the contribution of the KL divergence between the distribution computed
by the Prior and the Posterior nets, is added. The semantic loss is calculated again
employing all the three loss functions used for the Probabilistic GSCNN with Fixed
Prior together with the resulting KL divergence. As for the Probabilistic U-Net in [12]
the β value, scaling the KL divergence when summed to the semantic loss, was set to 1.
==PAGE:32==
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6
Metrics and baseline
In this chapter, the metrics used for the performance evaluation of the developed models
are presented together with the results obtained on the corrosion dataset by the cho-
sen baseline method, i.e. the Probabilistic U-Net, state-of-the-art for segmentation of
ambiguous images.
6.1
Metrics
For the aim of this project two different metrics were employed, one for the pure se-
mantic segmentation task and one for comparing the distributions of segmentations and
therefore the ability of the network to generalize a distribution able to accurately encode
the segmentation variants of the current dataset.
For the pure semantic segmentation task, the commonly used intersection over union
(IoU) was adopted. This evaluation metric computes the overlap between the two seg-
mentation masks, i.e. the predicted segmentation and the ground truth, to quantify the
model accuracy. In the case of image segmentation, IoU does not employ the use of
bounding boxes as for object detection purposes, since the masks can assume any kind
of shape, therefore a pixel-wise analysis is computed starting from a confusion matrix.
This matrix calculates four different values for each image:
• True Positive (TP): the intersection between the predicted mask and the ground
truth.
• False Positive (FP): the number of pixels that are predicted as belonging to a
class but that are actually part of a different one.
• True Negative (TN): Pixels not belonging to the class under investigation that
are actually predicted correctly.
• False Negative (FN): the number of pixels belonging to a class but that is
assigned by the prediction to a different class.
Since the intersection over union is defined as the ratio between the are correctly pre-
dicted and the combination of the ground truth and the number of predicted pixels it
==PAGE:34==
26
6 Metrics and baseline
is possible to define the IoU for image segmentation as:
IoU =
TP
(TP + FP + FN)
(6.1)
This metric can be used to evaluate the predicted segmentation of a single image
against its ground truth but, since this project aims to develop a model capable of pro-
ducing a set of different but equally plausible segmentation for a single image, sampling
from a latent distribution, the main metrics used to compare the Probabilistic GSCNN
with the baseline method is the mean squared generalized energy distance (mGED2) [22]
to compute the distance between the distributions of segmentations as:
GED2(Pgt, Ppred) = 2E [d(S, Y )] −E [d(S, S′)] −E [d(Y, Y ′)]
(6.2)
Where S and S’ are independent samples taken from the predicted distribution Ppred
and in the same way Y and Y’ are independent samples coming from the ground truth
distribution Pgt. d is a distance measure and as long as it is a metric then also GED is
a metric. As in [12] also in this project d was chosen as:
d(x, y) = 1 −IoU(x, y)
(6.3)
The equation 6.3 resembles the Tanimoto distance and in [14] it is proven to be a
metrics, as also mentioned in [12]. For each image belonging to the test set the squared
generalized energy distance is computed sampling it from one to 16 times and its distance
is plotted on the graph. Once all the distances are computed the mean and standard
deviation are calculated for each iteration (number of samples) and the mean of the
squared energy distance is plotted as a black cross as can be observed in Fig. 6.1. For
the rest of the report it will be referred to the mean squared energy distance as generalized
energy distance or GED.
6.2
Baseline
The baseline method used to compare the performance of the developed model, in terms
of stochastic segmentation, is the Probabilistic U-Net [12].
The model was trained
on the 28000 images of the corrosion dataset, each with five different annotations, as
already described in 2. Due to the known diﬀiculties of stabilizing the latent space of a
CVAE during training, the Probabilistic U-Net was initially trained with resized images,
128x128 pixels, for 50 epochs. Indeed, it was not possible to train the model on full-size
images with randomly initialized weights for more than a couple of epochs but, using
this resizing approach, it was managed to train the model on full-size images, loading the
weights of the network trained on down-sized images. The second training was extended
for 40 epochs and the performances of this model were used to compare with the one
achieved by the different architecture of the Probabilistic GSCNN.
==PAGE:35==
6.2 Baseline
27
The Probabilistic U-Net was trained on the three corrosion classes (edge, seam, and
spot) without accounting for the background. Each annotation mask was indeed con-
stituted of three binary layers, one for each type of corrosion and therefore for the
supervision of the network was adopted the Binary cross-entropy loss. KL-divergence
was computed between the prior and the posterior distribution and together with the se-
mantic loss was forming the final loss to perform backpropagation on the model weights.
The β value used when adding the KL-divergence to the semantic loss was set to 1 and
L2 regularization was applied only to the weights of the Fcomb and the ones of the Prior
and Posterior nets. In the following table (6.1), each parameter used for training has
been reported, in the case of the down-size images, the train lasted for 50 epochs instead
of 40.
Epochs
Batch size
Learning rate
Latent dimensions
Beta
L2 regularization
40
16
10−5
6
1
10−5
Table 6.1: Training parameters for the Probabilistic U-Net
(a) GED after training for 20 epochs.
(b) GED after training for 40 epochs.
Figure 6.1: Energy distance results for the Probabilistic U-Net.
Subsequently, the performances in terms of GED of the Probabilistic U-Net were
computed on the images belonging to the test set, 10% of the dataset, taking into account
the five different annotations for each image. The energy distance was calculated over
16 samples, same value chosen in [12] to understand how many samples the model needs
to be able to generalize the dataset. It was indeed observed that, even if the value of
GED is decreasing with more samples, the curve identified by the mean performance
(the black +) in Fig. 6.1 starts becoming flat around 14-15 samples. The accuracy will
==PAGE:36==
28
6 Metrics and baseline
probably increase by adding more samples but it was decided to keep 16 as the number
of samples also for the comparison with the developed architectures. As can be seen in
the following pictures, the generalization starts very high but it stabilizes adding more
samples, it can also be noticed that in terms of accuracy the results obtained after 20 and
40 epochs of training are very similar and therefore no further training was performed.
The final mean value of GED reached by the Probabilistic U-Net is 0.484.
Following [12] the Fcomb was placed at the end of the architecture just before com-
puting the final output. The final number of features computed by the U-Net was set to
32 and as in [12], the number of dimensions to sample from the latent distribution was
chosen to be 6. In the case of the Probabilistic U-Net, chosen as the baseline method
for this project, the Fcomb was constituted by the following layers:
• Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32, kernel size=1
• Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32, output size=32, kernel size=1
• Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32, output size=32, kernel size=1
• Convolution 2D: input size=32, output size=3, kernel size=1
As already mentioned 32 correspond to the output features of the U-Net whereas 6 is the
number of latent dimensions infused in the network. The final size is set to the number
of final classes, i.e. 3 (seam, edge, and spot) in this case.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 7
Training and results
In this chapter, the results obtained during the development of the Probabilistic GSCNN
are reported, presenting the different architectures tested and the different variations
in terms of training approach, supervision, and hyper-parameters. All the results are
compared with the chosen baseline method.
Each model used in this project was developed using the framework Pytorch and
trained on different machines based on the current availability and performance in terms
of computational time. As already mentioned in 5.1 the original GSCNN model was
trained on 8 GPUs but unfortunately, it was not possible to replace this setup, therefore,
all the models were trained on a single GPU. For the project were used both GPUs
belonging to the DTU HPCs and specifically Tesla V100 with 32 GB of memory and a
local GPU from a computer in the department, Nvidia GeForce RTX 3090 with 24 GB
of VRAM.
7.1
GSCNN
As the first step, the GSCNN was developed and trained on the corrosion dataset. The
model presents some modification from the architecture developed in [23], as already
mentioned in 5.1. The model was trained using cross-entropy loss for the supervision
and therefore the dataloader used for the Probabilistic U-Net was modified to compute a
single layer mask containing the different values for each class, as reported in 2, instead
of carrying three different binary layers, one for each class, stacked together. In addi-
tion, the class background was added in the case of the GSCNN and later Probabilistic
GSCNN. During the computation of this final mask, containing all the classes in one
single layer, it was discovered that in some cases the same pixel, of a specific image, was
annotated with more than one corrosion class, by different binary layers from the same
mask. To address this issue it was decided to prioritize a specific class over another and,
specifically, it was always given more importance to the class lower in label number, i.e.
seam over edge and spot, and edge over spot.
The GSCNN was therefore trained on the corrosion dataset using four classes and
two types of backbone architectures were tested to choose the most performing one for
the subsequent development of the Probabilistic GSCNN. Specifically, both the ResNet-
50d and the ResNet-101d were tested on the dataset, only one out of the five different
annotations for each mask was employed for a classic semantic segmentation task. No
==PAGE:38==
30
7 Training and results
relevant improvements in the accuracy of the model, computed in terms of mIoU, were
observed when using the deeper network, i.e. ResNet-101d, Therefore the ResNet-50d
was chosen as the backbone architecture for the development of the Probabilistic GSCNN
for the only specific reason that a shallower network requires less time to run back-
propagation during training. In the following table, 7.1, an overview of the training
parameters and results for both architectures.
Backbone type
Batch size
Learning rate
Epochs
mIoU
ResNet-50d
4
10−2
10
76.82%
ResNet-101d
4
10−2
10
77.30%
Table 7.1: Performance between ResNet-50d and ResNet-101d.
7.2
Fixed Prior
As shown in Appendix D in [12] different approaches for injecting the latent features
were experimented during the development of the Probabilistic U-Net. Specifically, three
different variations were compared:
• Fixing the prior: the latent distribution was fixed to a standard Gaussian dis-
tribution.
• Fixed prior and no context in the posterior: in addition to a fixed prior in
this variation the posterior ignores the context (input image), being function only
of the labeled mask (gt).
• Injecting the latent features at the beginning of the U-Net: the position
of the Fcomb is moved to the beginning of the U-Net and therefore also the latent
features pass through the segmentation model.
Looking at the results in Fig. 7.1 from [12], it is worth noticing that out of the three
approaches, the one that presents closer performance, computed in terms of GED, to
the final implementation, is the model using the fixed prior. This approach, employing a
fixed latent distribution, does not need to design and train the Prior and Posterior nets
to learn the latent distribution embedding the segmentation variants of the dataset. Re-
moving the CVAE extremely simplifies the development and the training of the network
allowing a simpler architecture, a faster training time eliminating the need of multiple
trainings to stabilize the latent space of the CVAE as described in 6.2. Following this
intuition, the Probabilistic GSCNN was initially designed to use a fixed latent distribu-
tion. Consequently, specific attention and importance were given to the design and the
position of the Fcomb inside of the architecture of the GSCNN..
==PAGE:39==
7.2 Fixed Prior
31
Figure 7.1: Different variations to the Probabilistic U-Net architecture, [12].
7.2.1 Fcomb without convolutions
In the first implementation the Fcomb function was placed at the end of the Atrous Spatial
Pyramid Pooling (ASPP), see 3.3.1, and just before the final segmentation block. This
block, in the original implementation of the GSCNN, was taking as input the output of
the ASPP, i.e. 256 features, together with the 48 features coming from the Shape Stream,
and it was returning the probability for each of the 4 classes as output. Specifically, the
structure of this final segmentation block was designed in the following way:
• Convolution 2D: input size=256+48, output size=256, kernel size=3, padding=1,
no bias.
• Batch normalization 2D + ReLU.
• Convolution 2D: input size=256, output size=256, kernel size=3, padding=1,
no bias.
• Batch normalization 2D + ReLU.
• Convolution 2D: input size=256, output size=4, kernel size=1, no bias.
The output of this final segmentation block was then up-sampled using bilinear in-
terpolation to restore the original input shape of the image and the final prediction was
==PAGE:40==
32
7 Training and results
computed using the argmax function as mentioned in 3. For this first implementation,
the Fcomb function was modified and devoted to only performing the concatenation be-
tween the 304 (256+48) input features coming from the ASPP and the 6 random features
sampled from the fixed latent distribution. The convolutions, initially performed by the
original Fcomb, were discarded due to the convolutions that the final segmentation block
performs on the Fcomb output. Starting from this implementation, different standard
deviations for the latent distribution were tested, starting from a standard normal dis-
tribution, i.e. with mean equal to zero and standard deviation equal to 1. Unfortunately,
this configuration did not bring the expected results indeed the curve designed by the
GED appeared to be completely flat, showing a total discarding of the injected latent
dimensions by the network. After observing the mean and standard deviation computed
by the Probabilistic U-Net it was noticed that these quantities can significantly vary
between different images, especially the standard deviation can assume very high values.
Therefore different values of standard deviation were tested, in particular, 2, 5, and 10
were experimented with on the first implementation.
(a) GED std=5.
(b) GED std=10.
Figure 7.2: Energy distance results for the Probabilistic U-Net.
In Table 7.2 the training parameters of the two models are reported whereas in Fig
7.2 it is possible to observe the energy distance computed for the model with standard
deviation equal to 5 and 10. The results for std=2 are not reported since there was no
variation from the case with std=1.
==PAGE:41==
7.2 Fixed Prior
33
Std
Batch size
Learning rate
Epochs
Optimizer
5
4
0.01
20
SGD
10
4
0.01
20
SGD
Table 7.2: Training parameters for models with Fcomb without convolutions
As can be seen in Fig.
7.2, the energy distance starts already very low and the
mean value with one sample is very close to the final value with 16, symbolizing that
no importance is given to the weights of the infused latent features.
This was also
proven by sampling the same image more than once, since, as already mentioned in this
report, the model should be able to produce different segmentations for the same image,
but all equally plausible. On the contrary, this first implemented model was producing
segmentations visually identical for a specific image and this was also confirmed by
quantifying the number of pixels for each class: indeed the maximum variation for the
same class between different segmentations of a specific image was 12 pixels.
7.2.2 Fcomb with convolutions
Starting from the results obtained in the 7.2.1, it was decided to move the Fcomb function
to the end of the GSCNN model and not before the final segmentation block. In this
manner, the architecture of the Probabilistic GSCNN is fully resembling the Probabilistic
U-Net [12], presenting a Fcomb function at the very end of the semantic segmentation
model and that adopts a series of convolutions to compute the final output.
These
convolutions are indeed crucial for the accurate performance of the Probabilistic GSCNN
and therefore 5 variations of the Fcomb were implemented and tested to identify the most
performing one.
The performance of the different architectures is evaluated both in
terms of generalized energy distance but also in the ability of the network to produce
considerably different segmentations for the same image, calculated in the difference of
pixels between the different predictions.
The following implementations, identified as mode 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, present the same
overall architecture and the difference between them concerns only three components:
the final segmentation block as described in 7.2.1, the Fcomb function, and the, from now
on called, final convolution, i.e. the convolution applied to compute the final output.
The models are all trained for 10 epochs with the same parameters reported in Table
7.2 and the standard deviation equal to 5.
7.2.3
Fixed Prior 0
The first implementation of the Fcomb, placed at the very end of the GSCNN architecture,
was employing the same final segmentation block without its last convolutional layer and
==PAGE:42==
34
7 Training and results
a Fcomb function having a 256-features input. In the end, the final convolution is applied
to produce the final output, leading to the following architecture:
• Final Segmentation
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256+48,
output size=256, kernel size=3
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256, out-
put size=256, kernel size=3
• Fcomb
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=256+6, output size=256+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=256+6, output size=256+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=256+6, output size=256+6, kernel size=1
• Final convolution
Convolution 2D: input size=256+6, output size=4, kernel size=1, no bias
(a) Bi-linear interpolation after Fcomb
(b) Bi-linear interpolation before Fcomb
Figure 7.3: GED for Fixed Prior mode 0 architecture.
The results obtained by this architecture can be observed in Fig. 7.3. This variation
was capable to achieve performance very similar to the Probabilistic U-Net in terms of
GED reaching a value of 0.489 after 16 samples. It is evident that since the first sample
the network is capable of almost correctly generalizing the latent distribution leading
==PAGE:43==
7.2 Fixed Prior
35
to poor performance in terms of the difference between predictions of the same image.
Indeed once again the variation in terms of pixels between multiple segmentations of
a specific image is lower than 20 pixels. It is also worth noticing the high variation
between distances for the same distributions, compared to the one computed by the
baseline method in Fig 6.1.
This variation is reduced, for the different amounts of
samples, by moving the bilinear interpolation before the Fcomb function and also the
overall performance in terms of GED benefits a bit from this modification, however the
problems related to the variance of the predictions for a single image remain.
7.2.4
Fixed Prior 1
Comparing the architecture of mode 0 with the baseline method, it was noticed the
huge imbalance between the dimension of the input features (256) and the number of
injected features (6) in the Fcomb function. Therefore, the number of output features of
the final segmentation block was decreased to 32. The final architecture for the mode 1
is reported below.
• Final Segmentation
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256+48,
output size=256, kernel size=3
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256, out-
put size=32, kernel size=3
• Fcomb
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
• Final convolution
Convolution 2D: input size=32+6, output size=4, kernel size=1, no bias
Fig. 7.4 portrays the performances of the mode 1 based on the position of the bilinear
interpolation function.
For this variation of the Probabilistic GSCNN, the different
location where the image up-sampling is applied influences the final GED value achieved
by the network. In 7.4a, interpolating the images after the Fcomb function, the model
reaches a GED value of 0.500 whereas in the second case, i.e. the input image of Fcomb
is already full size, it is achieved a value of 0.456 using 16 samples.
==PAGE:44==
36
7 Training and results
(a) Bi-linear interpolation after Fcomb
(b) Bi-linear interpolation before Fcomb
Figure 7.4: GED for Fixed Prior mode 1 architecture.
7.2.5
Fixed Prior 2
In mode 2 the 32-features output was maintained from the previous implementation but
the final segmentation block was restored to its original design, i.e. three convolutional
layers, where the last one, that in the original architecture was providing a 4-features
output for the final results, in this variation is proving an output with 32 features, the
subsequent input of the Fcomb function.
• Final Segmentation
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256+48,
output size=256, kernel size=3
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256, out-
put size=256, kernel size=3
Convolution 2D: input size=256, output size=32, kernel size=1
• Fcomb
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
• Final convolution
Convolution 2D: input size=32+6, output size=4, kernel size=1, no bias
==PAGE:45==
7.2 Fixed Prior
37
As can be observed in Fig. 7.5 the performance of this architecture varies whether
the bilinear interpolation is applied before or after the Fcomb function. Indeed for the
first case, i.e. Fig 7.5b, the variation in terms of pixel for different predictions of the
same image is more relevant than in the second case, Fig. 7.5a. On the other hand,
this second architecture is capable to achieve quite good performance in terms of GED,
reaching a final mean value of 0.490, as for the mode 0 (7.2.3) after 16 samples.
(a) Bi-linear interpolation after Fcomb
(b) Bi-linear interpolation before Fcomb
Figure 7.5: GED for Fixed Prior mode 2 architecture.
7.2.6
Fixed Prior 3
On the contrary of mode 2, in mode 3 the initial design of the Fcomb was re-established
with its four convolutional layers, whereas for what concern the final segmentation, the
same implementation of mode 1 was used, leading to the following architecture:
• Final Segmentation
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256+48,
output size=256, kernel size=3
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256, out-
put size=32, kernel size=3
• Fcomb
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
==PAGE:46==
38
7 Training and results
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D: input size=32+6, output size=32+6, kernel size=1
• Final convolution
Convolution 2D: input size=32, output size=4, kernel size=1, no bias
In Fig. 7.6 the GED performance of the mode 3 can be observed. The left plot, Fig.
7.6a portrays the GED for the mode 3 where the bilinear interpolation, to up-sample
the output of the network to the original input size, is performed after the Fcomb. This
approach is capable to achieve a good final GED value, i.e. 0.467, and at the same time
giving some relevance to the latent dimensions as can be noticed by the curve designed
by the GED values. The right figure, Fig. 7.6b, shows the GED results when, for the
same mode 3 design, the bilinear interpolation is applied before the Fcomb and therefore
the input of such function is already up-sampled to full size.
This architecture can
outperform the baseline method reaching a final GED value of 0.441 after 16 samples
improving the score of the Probabilistic U-Net by almost 9%. However, the problem
related to the variability of the produced segmentation is more accentuated for this
architecture compare to the one in Fig. 7.6a. Once again, the issue was also proven by
comparing the number of pixels for each class, during multiple predictions of the same
image.
(a) Bi-linear interpolation after Fcomb
(b) Bi-linear interpolation before Fcomb
Figure 7.6: GED for Fixed Prior mode 3 architecture.
==PAGE:47==
7.2 Fixed Prior
39
7.2.7
Fixed Prior Mode 4
Finally, the original design of the Fcomb function was adopted along with the final segmen-
tation block with 32-features output specifically modified for the Probabilistic GSCNN.
These two elements together lead to the following final architecture of mode 4.
• Final Segmentation
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256+48,
output size=256, kernel size=3
Convolution 2D + Batch normalization 2D + ReLU: input size=256, out-
put size=32, kernel size=3
• Fcomb
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32+6, output size=32, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32, output size=32, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D + ReLU: input size=32, output size=32, kernel size=1
Convolution 2D: input size=32, output size=4, kernel size=1
(a) Bi-linear interpolation after Fcomb
(b) Bi-linear interpolation before Fcomb
Figure 7.7: GED for Fixed Prior mode 4 architecture.
The performance achieved by this architecture, no matter the position in the network
of the bilinear interpolation, does not outperform the previous designs in terms of the
final GED value. On the contrary to the modification reported before, the mode 4 is
more stable against variations of the input size of the Fcomb indeed the curve designed
by the GED values results similar in both the plot of Fig. 7.7.
==PAGE:48==
40
7 Training and results
7.2.8
Fixed Prior with Adam optimizer
Out of the different modes presented above, the most promising one is the mode 3. This
architecture is, indeed, capable of reaching a final GED value that outperforms the
baseline method and, at the same time, to present some variability in the predictions.
Therefore, at the end of the project, the effect of a different optimizer on this model were
tested substituting the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with the Adam algorithm for
optimization. This is the optimizer employed by the baseline model and it applied L2
regularization only to the layers of the Fcomb function whereas SGD performs the regu-
larization to all the weights of the network. The new optimizer increases the perfomance
of the mode 3 in terms of GED without solving the issue related to the variability of the
predictions as portrayed in the plot in Fig. 7.8.
Figure 7.8: GED of Fixed Prior architecture trained with Adam optimizer.
During another experiment conducted on the mode 2, with bilinear interpolation
before Fcomb, the influence of the Adam on the network was explored computing the
GED respectively after training for 5 and 10 epochs. The respective results are displayed
in Fig. 7.9. It is very cleat how the overall GED performance improves from 5 to 10
epochs of training, but, on the other hand, the importance give to the latent features
injected, i.e. the variance between different predictions, decreases with more training.
The amount of pixels that changes in the spectrum of 50 segmentations of the same
image, is reduced to very few pixels.
==PAGE:49==
7.2 Fixed Prior
41
(a) 5 epochs.
(b) 10 epochs.
Figure 7.9: GED for Fixed Prior mode 2 architecture with Adam optimizer.
In Fig. 7.10 the region of interest (ROI) of one test image is shown. In these pictures,
the black pixels represent the background whereas in grey and white the predicted
segmentation is displayed. The white pixels are the ones that change more than 15 times
between 50 different segmentations of the same image, whereas in grey the ones that
change less than 15 times. In the top figure, Fig. 7.10a the variations over 50 predictions
after 5 epochs of training it is displayed, whereas the bottom one, Fig. 7.10b, portrays
the same results analysis but after training for 10 epochs. This comparison shows how
a long training of this model is not beneficial for the probabilistic segmentation.
(a) 5 epochs.
(b) 10 epochs.
Figure 7.10: Comparison between the ROI of the predictions after different epochs.
==PAGE:50==
42
7 Training and results
7.2.9
Other experiments with Fixed Prior
Together with the variations presented in the previous paragraphs, other configurations
were experimented to boost the performance of the network in terms of GED and vari-
ance between multiple predictions of the same image. In particular, it was attempted to
reduce the number of output features of the ASPP from 256 to 128 since the corrosion
dataset has fewer classes and ambiguities than the Cityscapes dataset, the dataset used
to train the original GSCNN. These modifications, however, turned into a loss in GED
accuracy without bringing any improvement in the variability of the predictions. To
address this issue, i.e. the network not giving relevance to the latent features injected,
the number of those was increased to 12 and 18 to understand if an bigger amount of
randomness would affect the performance of the network. Also, this approach did not
give the desired results and, after a close analysis of the weights relative to the latent
dimensions, it was assessed that their values were always very low, despite the amount
of randomness infused. The results of these experiment are reported in the Appendix.
==PAGE:51==
7.3 Prior-Posterior Nets
43
7.3
Prior-Posterior Nets
Following the same approach presented in [12], and to understand if the results obtained
by the Probabilistic GSCNN with fixed prior could be outperformed, a Prior-Posterior
architecture was implemented for the Probabilistic GSCNN as portrayed in Fig. 7.11.
This model locates the Fcomb function again at the very end of the GSCNN model
resembling the design of the original Probabilistic U-Net.
Figure 7.11: Probabilistic GSCNN with Prior-Posterior Nets
Also for this design, two different variations were trained and the performances were
compared with the baseline method and to the Probabilistic GSCNN with Fixed Prior.
For consistency of notations, also these models will be called mode 0 and mode 1. All
architectures were trained for 15 epochs on full-size images, and their relative generalized
energy distance was computed at the end of the training.
The same train-test split
used for the Probabilistic U-Net, and the Probabilistic GSCNN with Fixed Prior, was
employed.
7.3.1
Prior-Posterior Mode 0
The first developed model, mode 0, involves some minor changes to the Probabilistic
GSCNN with Fixed Prior. The fixed latent distribution was indeed substituted to a
CVAE architecture made of Prior and Posterior nets, to learn the latent distribution
==PAGE:52==
44
7 Training and results
embedding the segmentation variants of the corrosion dataset as explained in 4.2. Mode
0 employs cross-entropy loss for the supervision of the pure semantic task. i.e. on the
prediction produced by the GSCNN, binary cross-entropy loss for the boundary loss and
a Dualtask loss as described in 3.4. However, this architecture differs from the Proba-
bilistic GSCNN with fixed for what concern the optimizer adopted. The Probabilistic
GSCNN with fixed prior indeed employs stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and L2 reg-
ularization is applied to all the weights of the model, whereas the Probabilistic GSCNN
with Prior-Posterior nets applies stochastic optimization using the Adam algorithm [11].
In this model, L2 regularization is performed only for the weights of Prior and Posterior
nets and to the ones relative to the layers of the Fcomb function, except for the last layer,
i.e. the one without activation function. To closely mimic the design of the Probabilistic
U-Net, the Fcomb adopted in this architecture consists of the same layers and shapes as
the one used by the baseline method, as described in 6.2. The network was trained to
learn all the four classes, i.e. seam, edge, spot, and background, for 20 epochs, and the
GED performance can be observed in Fig. 7.3.1
Figure 7.12: GED for Prior-Posterior mode 0 architecture
==PAGE:53==
7.3 Prior-Posterior Nets
45
The results obtained from the mode 0 of the Probabilistic GSCNN with Prior and
Posterior nets show how the trained network appears to generalize the latent distribution
with only one sample for each image, and the results in terms of GED outperforms the
baseline method, with a final value of 0.392. On the other side, the curve designed by the
GED values appears to be mostly flat, and the distribution plotted for each iteration is
almost identical. This behavior corresponds to no/minimal variation between different
segmentations of the same image, and, therefore, a non-stochastic output.
7.3.2
Prior-Posterior Mode 1
As the last step in the development of this project, an architecture resembling the one of
the Probabilistic U-Net used as baseline method, was implemented for the Probabilistic
GSCNN modifying the semantic segmentation loss function, and training the network
to recognize the 3 different corrosion classes, without any attention for the background.
Therefore the cross-entropy (CE) loss from mode 0 was substituted with the binary cross-
entropy (BCE) with logits loss for the mode 1. This loss function combines together a
sigmoid layer with the binary cross-entropy in a single class and it is more mathemati-
cally stable than performing the two operations separately. To perform BCE, the initial
multi-layer binary masks were adopted, exposing the network to overlapping prediction
for the same pixels in different layers, and also the Dualtask loss was adapted to the
new employed ground truths. Unfortunately, this loss was not providing the same con-
tribution as for the case with four classes, where the Dualtask loss is the most relevant
component of the final loss.
(a) 4 classes
(b) 3 classes
Figure 7.13: Losses contributions in the case of different amount of classes
==PAGE:54==
46
7 Training and results
In Fig. 7.13b it can be observed how the semantic loss, computed with BCE, is
dominating the final loss whereas, in the case of 4 classes, Fig. 7.13a, the Dualtask loss
leads with values at least 10 times higher than the semantic loss. The order of magnitude
of the edge loss remains the same in both cases.
Figure 7.14: GED for Prior-Posterior mode 1 architecture
Fig. 7.14 portrays the results, in term of GED, achieved by the Prior-Posterior mode
1 architecture after training for 15 epochs. It can be observed that the final GED value
is more than twice the one achieved by the Probabilistic U-Net in Fig. 6.1. On the
other side, the curve depicted by the mean values of generalized energy distance at every
iteration, has a similar trend to the one produced by the baseline method ,symbolizing
that the implementation of the Prior-Posterior nets, as in [12], performs as supposed.
This assumption can also be visually proven by observing the segmentations produced
in Fig. 7.16. Inference was indeed performed 4 times on the same input image, i.e. the
top left picture in Fig. 7.15, and the produced segmentations are plotted together in
Fig. 7.16. It is easy to notice the difference between corrosion masks, proving that this
architecture is performing probabilistic segmentation.
==PAGE:55==
7.3 Prior-Posterior Nets
47
Figure 7.15: Predicted segmentation of a test-image computed by Prior-Posterior mode
1 architecture
Figure 7.16: Multiple segmentation of the same image computed by Prior-Posterior
mode 1 architecture
==PAGE:56==
48
7 Training and results
For the test image in the top left corner of Fig. 7.15, inference is computed 50 times
and the different segmentations of the ROI are compared to analyze the variation in
pixels and shapes. Fig. 7.17b displays a region of interest (ROI) of the input image in
Fig. 7.15, where seam corrosion is present. Overlapping these 50 predicted segmentation
masks, it was possible to visualize the portion of the image where the variation between
predictions occurs the most. Even if most of the pixels remain the same throughout the
different segmentations it can be noticed that there is also a relevant part of the mask
that changes between predictions. The threshold was again set to 15 variations over 50
segmentations and the pixels fulfilling this requirement are displayed in white whereas
the rest of the mask is in gray. Comparing Fig. 7.17b with the same ROI in the original
pictures it can be observed that the variation in the predictions appears to be mostly
located in the darker areas of the corrosion.
(a) ROI of the test image.
(b) Region of interest (ROI) of the predicted segmentation, in white the pixels
that change more than 15 times over 50 predictions of the same image.
Figure 7.17: Comparison between the ROI of the predictions and the original image.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to develop a model for stochastic segmentation of corrosion
using the Gated Shape CNNs (GSCNN) [23], a state-of-the-art segmentation model.
To accurately train the newly designed architecture, and avoid overfitting the training
data, the original corrosion dataset of 8000 images was expanded to 28000 samples.
Those data were rendered from a 3D simulation of the vessel ballast tank. For each
image, 5 different corrosion masks were applied to define 5 non-identical annotations,
simulating different segmentation provided by multiple experts.
Subsequently, the GSCNN architecture was effectively implemented to be trained
on the corrosion dataset for semantic segmentation, i.e. concerning only one annota-
tion. Some modifications were applied to the original architecture based on the current
dataset and the computational resources available during the project. However, the im-
plemented GSCNN showed very accurate predictions of the corrosion after training for
a relatively short amount of epochs (20) and using only one GPU, 8 were used in [23].
Two different ResNet-based architectures, ResNet-50d and ResNet-101d, were tested and
their performances compared on the same train-test split to choose the most appropriate
model for the development of the Probabilistic GSCNN.
ResNet-50d was the designated backbone model showing very close performance
to the ResNet-101d but providing a faster training time. The Probabilistic GSCNN
was therefore implemented using this architecture for the Regular Stream. Whereas to
provide a stochastic output the Fcomb function, as designed in [12], was adopted. To
provide a reliable and performing model different experiments were conducted to define
the final architecture. The optimal location to inject the randomness coming from the
latent space was researched and then experiments to establish the most effective design
of the Fcomb were conducted. The model was indeed required to achieve good results
in terms of GED, i.e. being able to correctly encode the segmentation variants of the
dataset and to provide different segmentations of the same image. To achieve this goal
two main architectures for the Probabilistic GSCNN were implemented. The first one
is employing a fixed prior distribution, meaning no learning of the latent distribution
during training, whereas the second one is adopting, as for the Probabilistic U-Net,
a Conditional Variational Autoencoder. This last architecture was indeed capable to
learn the parameters of the latent distribution encoding the segmentation variants of the
corrosion dataset using the so-called Prior and Posterior Nets. Both these two different
variations were successfully capable to produce a probabilistic output and therefore
providing stochastic segmentation.
==PAGE:58==
50
8 Conclusion
All the experiments were compared to the chosen baseline method, the Probabilistic
U-Net [12], the state-of-the-art model for probabilistic segmentation.
This architec-
ture was trained and evaluated on the same train-test dataset split of the Probabilis-
tic GSCNN. To log and track each experiment the online service ”Weights & Biases”
(WandB) was used, allowing live tracking of the training progress and creating a ”git
checkpoint” for each run to facilitate the recollecting of the specific code at the moment
the experiment started. For this kind of project, where multiple variations of the same
code were tested, this feature happened to play a very important role in the correct doc-
umentation of the results. Plots of losses, metrics, and predicted segmentation masks
were logged during training to track live the progress of the current experiment.
Finally, the most relevant steps followed to develop the Probabilistic GSCNN were
documented and presented in this report allowing the reader to recollect all the work
done, together with the results obtained by the developed model.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
url: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/rekognition/latest/customlabels-
dg/md-transform-coco.html.
[2]
C.M. Bishop. Neural networks for pattern recognition. Oxford University Press,
USA, 1995.
[3]
John Canny. “A Computational Approach to Edge Detection.” In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI-8.6 (1986), pages 679–
698. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851.
[4]
Liang-Chieh Chen et al. Encoder-Decoder with Atrous Separable Convolution for
Semantic Image Segmentation. 2018. arXiv: 1802.02611 [cs.CV].
[5]
Marius Cordts et al. The Cityscapes Dataset for Semantic Urban Scene Under-
standing. 2016. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1604.01685. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1604.01685.
[6]
Kaiming He and Jian Sun. Convolutional Neural Networks at Constrained Time
Cost. 2014. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1412.1710. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1412.1710.
[7]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1512.03385. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[8]
Kaiming He et al. “Spatial Pyramid Pooling in Deep Convolutional Networks for
Visual Recognition.” In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2014. Springer International
Publishing, 2014, pages 346–361. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10578-9_23. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-3-319-10578-9_23.
[9]
Tong He et al. Bag of Tricks for Image Classification with Convolutional Neural
Networks. 2018. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1812.01187. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1812.01187.
[10]
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical Reparameterization with
Gumbel-Softmax. 2016. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1611.01144. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1611.01144.
[11]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2014. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
6980.
[12]
Simon A. A. Kohl et al. A Probabilistic U-Net for Segmentation of Ambiguous
Images. 2019. arXiv: 1806.05034 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:60==
52
Bibliography
[13]
S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. “On Information and Suﬀiciency.” In: The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 22.1 (1951), pages 79–86. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729694.
url: https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177729694.
[14]
Alan H. Lipkus. “A proof of the triangle inequality for the Tanimoto distance.” In:
Journal of Mathematical Chemistry 26 (1999), pages 263–265.
[15]
F. Perazzi et al. A Benchmark Dataset and Evaluation Methodology for Video
Object Segmentation. 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.85.
[16]
Lloyd’s Register. Remote Inspection Technique Systems (RITS), Assessment Stan-
dard for use on LR Class Surveys of Steel Structure. October, 2018.
[17]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Net-
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1505.
04597. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
[18]
Swami Sankaranarayanan et al. Learning from Synthetic Data: Addressing Domain
Shift for Semantic Segmentation. 2017. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1711.06969. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06969.
[19]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2014. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1409.1556. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[20]
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning Structured Output Repre-
sentation using Deep Conditional Generative Models. Edited by C. Cortes et al.
2015. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/file/8d55a249e6baa5c06772297520
Paper.pdf.
[21]
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Highway Net-
works. 2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1505.00387. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1505.00387.
[22]
Gábor J. Székely and Maria L. Rizzo. “Energy statistics: A class of statistics
based on distances.” In: Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 143.8 (2013),
pages 1249–1272. issn: 0378-3758. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jspi.
2013.03.018. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0378375813000633.
[23]
Towaki Takikawa et al. Gated-SCNN: Gated Shape CNNs for Semantic Segmenta-
tion. 2019. arXiv: 1907.05740 [cs.CV].
[24]
Ross Wightman. PyTorch Image Models. https : / / github . com / rwightman /
pytorch-image-models. 2019. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4414861.
[25]
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide Residual Networks. 2016. doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1605.07146. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.07146.
==PAGE:61==
Appendices
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
Appendix
Extra experiments for Fixed Prior architecture
Higher learning rate
One of the first experiments to improve the overall performance of the network (for the
mode 0) was to increase the learning rate, the original GSCNN architecture is indeed
trained with learning rate equal to 0.01 but since the training loss after the first epochs
becomes almost flat, the effect of an higher learning rate was investigated. In Fig 2 the
loss plots for both the learning rate values are portrayed and as can be seen also in Fig.
1 the network did not benefit of this modification.
Figure 1: GED of Fixed Prior architecture trained with learning rate = 0.02.
==PAGE:64==
56
Appendix
Figure 2: Results of raining with different learning rates.
Less features
Another modification to the so called mode 0 was the reduction of the output feature
of the ASPP module, with the consequence of increasing the ratio between the input
features of the Fcomb and the amount of randomness infused.
Therefore the output
feature of the ASPP were reduced from 256 of the original GSCNN architecture to
128 feature but no improvement was observed in the performance of the network, 3.
No further investigation were conducted to the number of output feature of the ASPP
module and the value 256 was kept for the rest of the project.
Figure 3: GED of Fixed Prior architecture trained with ASPP outputting 128 features.
==PAGE:65==
Extra experiments for Fixed Prior architecture
57
Different amount of latent dimensions
Following the same reasoning of applied in the previous experiment, to change the ratio
between GSCNN output features and latent dimensions, also increasing the amount of
randomness infused in the network was experimented and the results are shown below
in Fig. 4.
(a) 12 latent dimensions
(b) 18 latent dimensions
Figure 4: GED of Fixed Prior architecture with different amounts of latent dimensions
infused.
As can be observed changing, specifically increasing, the number of latent dimen-
sions injected in the model, harms the performance as the computed GED value results
higher for both the experiments without bringing any benefit in terms of randomness
of the predictions. Since the aim of this experiment was to give more relevance to the
randomness infused, to experience more variance in different segmentation of the same
input images, decreasing the number of latent dimension below 6 was not tested.
==PAGE:66==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
