==PAGE:1==
B L O C K C H A I N  A N D
E N T R E P R E N E U R S H I P
EXPLORATORY RESEARCH INTO DEFI AND THE ENTREPRENURIAL AND INVESTOR
LANDSCAPE IN THE BLOCKCHAIN INDUSTRY

M A S T E R  T H E S I S  
S U B M I T T E D  B Y :
A N T O N  K R O G H  P E T E R S E N  
D T U  E N T R E P R E N E U R S H I P
D E P A R T M E N T  O F  E N T R E P R E N E U R S H I P

==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis is conducted to obtain a greater knowledge of the entrepreneurial and investor
landscape in the blockchain industry. The subject for this report is chosen as a personal point
of interest and is focused on a gap in current research.
This report is the result of a 35 ECTS credits master thesis conducted at the Technical University
of Denmark within the department of DTU Entrepreneurship. The project was conducted from
February 14th, 2022 to August 14th, 2022.
My gratitude goes to my supervisor, Carina Lomberg, professor at DTU entrepreneurship, for
her guidance throughout the project. Furthermore, I would like to thank the interviewees: Jakob
Mikkel Hansen, Louise Blichfeldt Fjord, Danny Dehghani, Paco Puylaert, Henrik Aasted Sørensen,
Simon Ousager, Claus Skaaning who participated with insightful and educative perspectives and
assisted in the development of the scope and final focus of this report. Moreover, my thanks go
to Freja Froberg for revising and proofreading the final draft of the report.
This master thesis is the work of Anton Krogh Petersen, graduate student in Technology and
Entrepreneurship at DTU.
Signed 14th of August 2022
Anton Krogh Petersen
Bitcoin illustration, frontpage Bezanger, J. (2021) published on Unsplash
Image retrieved from <https://unsplash.com/photos/lGk0rl_Kp6E>, Free to use under the Un­
splash License.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Innovation around public permission­less blockchains has created a fast­growing industry of
open­sourced decentralised applications (dApps), and non­custodial ownership of assets, and
enabled new token­based business models. This report investigates the entrepreneurial land­
scape on blockchain, providing holistic insights into the industry including fundraising, market
dynamics, investor landscape, and regulation. The findings and focus of this report moreover
fill a gap in academic research on entrepreneurship in blockchain and DeFi, with an exploratory
methodological approach using semi­structured interviews, carried out to gather empirical data
from experts within the Danish blockchain sphere.
It was identified that blockchain creates new decentralised business models, organisational
structures with DAOs, and fundraising opportunities for entrepreneurs enabled by tokens. DAOs
were found to be mostly pseudo­decentralised, where the tokens are concentrated at a small
percentage of owners, and the “DAO”­concept is used more as a means for avoiding regulatory
obligations, and as a marketing tool to fit into current trends of DeFi. The report also presents
incompetence in some regulators’ understanding of blockchain, while presenting a strong desire
from the industry towards regulation and safer markets. Additionally, there was found to exist
segregation of the investor landscape on blockchain. Four investor types were isolated includ­
ing a novel investor type exclusive to the crypto industry, the VC Daytrader, exploiting ICOs and
the early token liquidity that follows, harming projects and the industry overall as their actions
lead to a misallocation of capital. Additionally, the report presents the significant risks of the free
market in DeFi, where contagion in markets, amplified by leverage and nontransparent CeFi
practices, creates system risks. This further supports the hype­cycle theory from presented and
discussed literature and highlights how smart investors and entrepreneurs are seizing these
bear market opportunities to respectively get better prices, and advancing and developing their
business further. Finally, this report contributes to blockchain­specific business model research,
with a proposal of the Blockchain Startup Canvas model and investor guidance.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Introduction to Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Smart contracts, Tokens and Web3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Decentralised Finance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Blockchain Financing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Pressure on Public Markets in 2022
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methodology
26
3.1
Background and Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Empirical Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Presentation of results
28
4.1
Overview of Interviewees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
The Crypto Market and Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Regulation and Compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
DeFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Opportunism in Venture Capital on Blockchain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
ICOs and Possible Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.7
Analytical Canvas Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Limitations of the Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Conclusion
70
Bibliography
72
A Appendix
81
A.1 Crypto Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 Blockchain Model Canvas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 Aave Liquidation Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.4 ICOs that have tumbled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.5 Market share growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
iv
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The innovation of distributed ledger technologies (DLTs), i.e. blockchain technology, has seen
significant adoption and growth in recent years. With an estimated user base of 7­50M on
Ethereum alone and pacing towards reaching 1B users in 2031 [1]. It has paved the way for
a new internet, Web3, by allowing for digital non­custodial ownership of currency and digital
assets, with immutability, transparency, and freedom to participate, enabled by the underlying
technology. Web2, the internet we know today, is dominated by companies providing services
in exchange for users’ personal data [2] and has created new and innovative business models.
However, at the cost of a winner­takes­it­all mentality, that has created monopolistic tech­giants
[3]. Web3 allows for democratic platform services owned and governed by the users and where
developers, users, founders, and investors all split the profits generated by the services. Ser­
vices such as OpenSea have created fairer economics and generated $3,9B for NFT creators
in 2021. Comparatively, Spotify paid out only $7B, Youtube $15B, and Meta $300M. A market­
place taker fee from OpenSea at 2,5% compared to Youtube’s 45% and Meta’s ∼100% [1]. In
November 2022 the entire crypto market value peaked at $3T and is at the time of writing around
$1T, a decline in the market value of 66% [4]. Not a new phenomenon in crypto, where price
fluctuations are common, and have been described to follow “hype­cycles” [5]. With the rise of
blockchain technologies, new types of fundraising were made possible, e.g. initial coin offerings
(ICOs), security token offerings (STOs), and lending and yield generating opportunities on de­
centralised finance (DeFi) protocols. Expanding possibilities in entrepreneurial financing, with
crowdfunding and crowdlending services, enabled by code through smart contracts. Essentially,
allowing anyone connected to the blockchain to invest alongside accredited investors. However,
with innovation outpacing regulators, the crypto markets have mostly been unregulated, leading
to billions of dollars lost to scams, hacks, market manipulation, incompetence, or theft. This
report will examine the current and future entrepreneurial opportunities utilising the benefits of
blockchain technology, for fundraising, business model­, technological­, and organisational in­
novation. Further, it will explore the investor landscape, regulatory aspects, and technological
challenges around the novel technologies being developed. The report presents a qualitative
holistic study by interviewing a selection of key stakeholders and experts in Denmark, who are
currently involved in the blockchain industry.
1.1
The Problem
How is blockchain and DeFi impacting the entrepreneurial landscape?
• How can entrepreneurs leverage blockchain technology?
• How is the investor landscape on blockchain?
• How are regulators approaching regulation and how will it affect entrepreneurs and in­
vestors?
1.1.1
Scope
This report will focus on blockchain technologies but limited to permission­less public blockchains,
where the main focus will be on the Ethereum ecosystem. This report will include technical in­
sights into tokenisation and fundraising on blockchain, as ensures the reader can fully grasp the
potential benefits and associated risks.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
1
==PAGE:6==
2
Background
The following chapter introduces the reader to blockchain, smart contracts, tokens, and Web3
on a medium to a high level. As this is not a technical report, the reader is suggested to find
the technical details in the bibliography or elsewhere. Furthermore, it covers entrepreneurial
fundraising, crypto markets, and current regulatory measures proposed by authorities. It pro­
vides the reader with the necessary knowledge to understand the fundamentals of blockchain
technology, its value propositions, risks, and its influence on entrepreneurial activity.
2.1
Introduction to Blockchain
It is now more than a decade ago since Bitcoin was conceptualised and implemented in 2008­09
by the anonymous Satoshi Nakamoto [6]. There is a general debate if Bitcoin was a response
to the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007­08 since in the creator’s own words, Bitcoin’s
purpose was to solve the trust­based issue of transacting money through conventional banks
[7]. Criticising fractional­reserve banking and the trust in the banks to handle people’s money
and privacy safely and responsibly. Bitcoin is built on blockchain technology, which in essence is
a distributed ledger running on a P2P (peer­to­peer) network, that uses a consensus mechanism
to validate database entries on the network. The ledger is split into these so­called blocks, where
the network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of hash­based
proof­of­work1. This forms a record of transactions that cannot be changed without redoing the
proof­of­work used to calculate the hash [6]. This allows nodes in the network to validate that
a block is valid, by recalculating the hashed link to the previous block. Hereby bitcoin solved
the double­spending problem by ensuring that transactions must be valid, and not conflict with
previous transactions, resulting in a trustless P2P network of anonymous nodes. The system
is deterministic, where as soon as a block has been validated, it is stored on the blockchain
indefinitely. So with blockchain, we can publicly detect fraud e.g. insider trading, wash trading,
whitewashing, criminal activity, etc., and the public track record of data and transaction history
will persist forever [8, 9].
Bitcoin’s value proposition was to allow instant P2P transactions of money without double­
spending, with no intermediaries, by using simple cryptography, a consensus mechanism com­
bined with proof­of­work and distributed networks. Thus creating a decentralised platform for
exchanging money with inherent trust, that is deterministic and predictable. However, Bitcoin’s
capabilities are mostly limited to transactions. It was not until 2013 that a team led by Vitalik
Buterin proposed a new blockchain, Ethereum, a blockchain with a built­in fully fledged Turing­
complete programming language that allows for the creation of smart contracts, that can be
used to encode arbitrary state transition functions, which allows developers to create decen­
tralised applications by writing up the logic with code [10]. With the launch of Ethereum in 2015,
developers were now able to develop additional functionality on top of the Ethereum blockchain.
Ethereum and predecessors of Ethereum (Solana, Polkadot, Cardano, etc.) have developed
standardised smart contracts, which allow for tokenisation of assets beyond currencies, which
can be traded and used on DAOs (decentralised autonomous organisations) running on the
Ethereum network [11]. DAOs are organisations that provide a service on the blockchain, that
allow users to interact directly with each other. Hereby, creating the opportunity for eliminating
1Utilising CPU power to calculate a hash based on the hash of the previous block.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
2
==PAGE:7==
trusted intermediaries who might exploit or limit accessibility for users [12], while also increasing
transparency in both transactions and the processes around it as the code is often open­source.
This reduces overall costs of doing business, reduces the time to bring products and services
to markets, and has the potential to simplify administrative processes e.g. payment, billing and
enforcement of contracts [13]. The applications that are possible with blockchain technology
are growing, most recently digital art enabled through non­fungible tokenisation of digital files
(NFTs) has become the next big thing in the crypto space. A market growing 21.000% to $17B
in trading volume from 2020 to 2021 [14]. Some research suggests that much entrepreneurial
development in this field has taken the form of “This, but on the blockchain”, similar to what was
said during the dot­com bubble in 1999 where it was “This, but on the internet” [13]. An indication
that history could repeat itself, and that the technology while promising still is in its early stages.
Nonetheless, the ability to create blockchain tokens made developers realise the potential to
tokenise their blockchain projects to fund them. A new way of fundraising emerged called ICOs
(initial coin offering), which could bypass the traditional investment route with angel investors,
venture capital firms, or investment banks, and directly raise funds from a global crowd of in­
vestors. Similar to crowdfunding, however fundamentally different since the investors receive
tokens that are scarce, global, liquid, and tradable, hereby not limiting founders to fundraise na­
tionally, while investors can easily liquidate or sell part of their investment at any time if they no
longer believe in the company [11]. Further, open­sourcing projects provide transparency, en­
able real participation from token holders and developers, allow for auditing, and thus increase
the security of the project [15]. The tokens thus allow for a project to include supporters, early
adopters, independent developers, and other stakeholders and include them in the decision
process and shaping the future of the project [11]. ICOs have highly impacted fundraising and
business models for blockchain startups and will be a central topic in this report.
2.2
Smart contracts, Tokens and Web3
To fully grasp the value of blockchains it is important to establish a foundation of the technology
behind them. This also highlights some of the technological risks involved and can explain how
it is possible for frequent hacks and exploits.
2.2.1
Smart Contracts
Smart contracts are immutable programs that run on the blockchain. These are necessary for
developing on­chain applications, and dApps (decentralised applications), where anyone can
interact with the smart contract in a trustless way. Smart contracts are used to deploy tokens,
swap tokens, for auctions on digital assets, for arbitrage, loans, etc. They usually have differ­
ent functions that can be called and a state, which contains the data of the smart contract. On
Ethereum they are considered accounts, where they have a balance and can perform transac­
tions on the network. User accounts can interact with the contract, by submitting transactions
or by executing functions on the deployed smart contract. Once a smart contract has been de­
ployed it cannot be deleted and functions called on the contract are irreversible [2]. The code is
atomic, meaning that the smart contract will either run all the code, or it will fail and the transac­
tion will revert. The byte code of the contracts is publicly available, so everyone can read and
validate that the contract is not malicious. An owner of the contract can then post their contract
on platforms such as etherscan.io, to match the code with the bytecode of the smart contract
that has been deployed on the network. Thus, making it more readable for users who want to
analyse it for bugs or malicious code. A gas fee is paid to miners for validating transactions,
which is priced based on current network traffic and computational requirements of calling the
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
3
==PAGE:8==
functions in the smart contract. Even if the transaction fails, the fees are still paid, which ensures
attacks e.g. DoS attacks2 on the network are infeasible. At the time of writing the highest gas
fee for a transfer of ETH was $52 on January 10th and hit a low on March 12th at $5,98 [16]. But
interaction with smart contracts can be upwards of hundreds of dollars3. So, with the present
architecture on Ethereum, users pay considerable fees to transfer their assets or interact with
applications on the blockchain. A lot of resources are going into lowering fees, as these high
fees are not feasible for mass adoption. Current solutions are being worked on to solve this
issue which include sharding and scaling solutions e.g. Layer 2s [17].
High gas fees are not the only issues for many public permission­less blockchains, as they are
greatly limited in their throughput, processing, and data storage capabilities. Gas fees are paid
both for transactions and for storing data. If a user for some reason wanted to store 1 kB of
data, they would have to spend $79,3 on gas (without computational cost)4. And even if a user
would be willing to pay such a considerable fee to store data on the network, Ethereum itself
has an upper limit in throughput called the block gas limit at 30M gas per block. So, e.g. when
writing data to the Ethereum blockchain, without any computation, an estimate of the throughput
would be 3428 kB/s5, which is approximately the speed of the acoustic couplers from the early
1970s for telecommunication. Further, Ethereum’s capabilities for computation are comparable
to the Intel 4040 processor from the 1970s as well, at around 0,19 MIPS (million instructions
per second) [18]. The processor enabled programs such as calculators and simple games, e.g.
pinball machines. So, Ethereum shares many similarities with a computer from the 70s. It is slow
and expensive, and everyone has to share it. Other blockchains, e.g. Solana, have much higher
transaction throughput, data storage capacity, and lower fees, but this comes with a trade­off on
decentralisation and security.
A current issue with public permission­less blockchains is their segregation from each other.
As opposed to the internet, none of them can communicate directly, which creates isolated
ecosystems of different chains solving various problems. Bridges, which are smart contracts
that facilitate communication between blockchains, are solving this issue. They facilitate cross­
chain transfer of assets and information, dApps to access different chains and enhance their
capabilities, users to leverage the benefits of multiple chains, and developers to collaborate
cross­chain [19]. Different types of bridges exist, both trusted and trustless, however, as with any
new technology, the probability for developers to accidentally introduce a vulnerability is higher
than older technologies that have stood the test of time. And with blockchain, the rewards for
exploiting smart contracts can be hundreds of millions of dollars. Wormhole is a bridge service,
which was hacked by an adversary in February 2022 for $326M. The attacker was able to spoof a
sysvar account on Solana, and due to a missing conditional check on if the account was the real
sysvar account, it enabled the attacker to create a malicious message permitting themselves to
withdraw all the locked tokens in the bridge. Fortunately, the company was able to restore the
funds through its parent company, thus protecting the platform and its investors [20]. A simple
conditional statement was missing in the smart contract, which allowed this attack to happen,
highlighting the consequences of coding mistakes when writing smart contracts. Without the
capital injection after the attack, the project would likely not be continuing, which goes to show
the immense pressure that is put on developers and founders who are building decentralised
2Denial of Service attack: An attack where a malicious entity tries to flood a network by sending it a lot of traffic.
3At time of writing depositing to Tornado.Cash smart contract was ∼$100 https://etherscan.io/gastracker
4At the time of writing, the gas price is 37 Gwei, a word of 256bit costs 20.000 gas to store, which means one kB is
equivalent to 640.000 gas. And with a total Gwei price of $0,00000335, the total cost to store 1 kB would be $79,3
530M current block gas limit with a 14s block time()https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/blocks/ and the cost
of one word (32 bytes) of 20.000 gas (assuming no computation cost) ­ 30M/20.000 gas/14s * 32 bytes = 3248kB/s
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
4
==PAGE:9==
services on blockchain.
2.2.2
Tokens
Tokens on blockchain are classified as digital assets used within decentralised services, applica­
tions, and communities [21]. Blockchain native tokens such as Bitcoin and Ether (Ethereum) are
used for transactions on their networks and pay for the computational power or storage when
using the network. Generally two types of fungible tokens exist: utility­ and security tokens.
Utility tokens enable users to access, pay for services, or use a certain dApp or protocol on the
blockchain, whereas security tokens represent an investment opportunity, e.g. a tokenised rep­
resentation of equity in a startup. An example of a utility token is UNI, which, more specifically, is
a governance token for the Uniswap Protocol6. UniSwap is a dApp that allows for decentralised
swapping of tokens, where their token UNI is used as a governance token for managing the pro­
tocol, thereby allowing the community to decide on changes and improvements. Governance
tokens are a type of utility token where token­holders has the right to influence the protocol’s
direction, i.e. which features to develop, how to spend the budget, which integration or partners
to pursue, etc. [22]. These governance tokens play an essential role in governing DAOs and
play a considerable role in blockchain becoming more decentralised. Some tokens like UNI are
purely for voting, whereas others, such as CRV for the Curve Protocol7, an efficient stable­coin
swapping exchange, uses the CRV token for both governance and value accrual. It does this
through different mechanisms, including a vote­locking. Allowing CRV holders to vote on which
liquidity pools additional CRV is paid out to, earn fees for staking their tokens, and can boost
rewards on provided liquidity [23]. It has further born a multi­billion yield farming industry where
different protocols, e.g. yearn8 and convex 9 have built yield aggregation pools, that by partic­
ipating in, can further boost yield earned by providing liquidity. Sometimes referred to as “The
Curve Wars”, a war between liquidity aggregators on the Curve protocol fighting a governance
battle for CRV boost, and higher yields [24].
Fungible Tokens
On the Ethereum blockchain certain standardised smart contracts have been built for developers
to have standardised tools that are interoperable across the network. One of these contracts is
called ERC­2010. This contract allows for tokenisation of fungible assets, which can represent
currencies, virtual points, an equity stake in a company, access rights, voting rights, etc. Fungible
tokens have the same type and value, meaning that one token will always be equivalent to all
other tokens. The ERC­20 smart contract implements rules/functions for how these tokens can
be used, including how to transfer them and access or check token account balances. Tokens
are usually implemented with a fixed supply or follow some transparent supply schedule. As
many of these products already exist through non­blockchain services, the value of having them
on blockchain is immutability and transparency in their distribution [11].
Entrepreneurs can leverage these advantages and build services that are safer and more trans­
parent while avoiding double­counting problems and without having to build the entire system
architecture themselves. The project APY Vision, which is a Web3 analytics service for liquid­
ity providers, offers both pricing plans that are subscription­based with fiat and token­based.
Holding a specific amount of their token VISION gives lifetime access to their services, and the
customer can always exchange the tokens for other ERC­20 tokens if they no longer need APY
6https://uniswap.org/ ­ May 2022
7https://curve.fi/ ­ May 2022
8https://yearn.finance/ ­ May 2022
9https://www.convexfinance.com/ ­ May 2022
10https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-20/ ­ May 2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
5
==PAGE:10==
Vision’s service11. Reintroducing business models for technology companies that primarily have
trended towards subscription­based business models in recent years.
Distinction of Tokens
Determining if a token represents a security­ or utility token is challenging. In the EU, there
is not yet a common framework, however, in the US, they use the Howey test to determine if
the federal securities law applies. The Howey test determines that a product is an investment
contract: “when there is the investment of money in a common enterprise with a reasonable
expectation of profits to be derived from the efforts of others” [25]. The investment of money in
a common enterprise will always exist for ICOs. However, with: “a reasonable expectation of
profits to be derived from the efforts of others” is up for interpretation and discussion. From the
efforts of others refer to if there is an AP (active participant) that the purchaser relies upon. The
AP is responsible for the development, improvement, operation, or promotion of the network.
Here, most of the tasks associated with the development and improving the network falls onto
the AP, rather than on a decentralised network of contributors. It also includes managerial re­
sponsibilities and control of the capital and issuance of rewards to token­holders.
The second part, reasonable expectation of profits, exists when the token gives the holder right
to share the project’s income or profits, including dividends. That the AP’s efforts will result in an
appreciation of the token and that the token will be sold to a broader audience and not just the
users of the platform (investment intent). Additionally, if the AP raises beyond what is needed
to establish the network and the token, if the AP also benefits from holding the token, and if the
funds are used for enhancing the functionality or value of the network, they are also considered
securities. Finally, some clauses exist around marketing, and if the project is being promoted
as an investment opportunity [25].
Bitcoin was found not to be classified as a security by the former Chairman of the SEC in 2018
[26], as it was labelled a currency and not a security. However, in his definition, any token used
in an ICO should be labelled as securities [27]. The current SEC Chairman expressed in 2021,
that he thought many tokens are unregistered securities without the required disclosures and
market oversight [28].
NFTs
Fungible tokens are great to represent equivalent items. Non­fungible tokens (NFTs) are instead
tokens that represent unique items e.g. art, collectibles, game items, domain names, etc. An
NFT is equivalent to a conventional proof­of­purchase [29]. But as opposed to a simple receipt,
NFTs allow for verifiability, history of ownership, and trustless transfers. Verifiability and trustless
transfers are ensured by the blockchain which allows anyone to verify that the NFT is legitimate.
The transfer of ownership and payment to purchase happens atomically in a single transaction
in a trustless matter[30]. Most NFTs are implemented on Ethereum with the ERC­721 standard.
When an NFT is created (minted) with the ERC­721 standard, the creator can optionally add a
metadata_url that points to a JSON file with the metadata associated with the NFT. The meta­
data can include information about the NFT: a name, a description, and an URL that, e.g. could
point to an image. As previously stated, the gas cost of storing data on Ethereum is simply too
large for the data of the NFT to be stored on the network. Thus IPFS (InterPlanetary File Sys­
tem), a peer­to­peer hypermedia protocol, is frequently used as the storage network for storing
NFT data (images, gifs, video, etc.). On IPFS, an ID of the content is created from a hash of
its data, which ensures duplicates cannot exist. It means that the actual data is stored off­chain
and only a URL to the metadata is stored on Ethereum. Apparent security and integrity risk are
that the NFT is dependent on two independent networks [31]. Thus all media data associated
with NFTs are publicly stored on the internet, allowing anyone can download or copy the files.
11https://apy.vision/pro-plans?type=lifetime-access ­ July 2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
6
==PAGE:11==
The ERC­721 standard allows for changing a token’s metadata, which means that a malicious
creator/owner could change the metadata_url if the NFT smart contract allows it. And if it does
not allow it, the owner can risk the URL sometime in the future and no longer points to what it
previously did. And if the URL to the metadata changes or, e.g. the image data disappears, the
NFT essentially points to ownership of nothing [30]. From June to September 2021 [30] found
that 2,89% of NFTs had updated their metadata_urls and further found that 32,3% of NFT’s
image­URLs were inaccessible on the popular NFT platform Opensea12, while still showing a
cached image to its users on 68,21% of the inaccessible images.
2.3
Decentralised Finance
Decentralised finance (DeFi) is a part of public permission­less blockchains that encompass
different financial products and services built on smart contracts. Finance generally plays an
important role in the economy, as it boosts economic productivity by regulating the supply of
money and ensuring high utilisation of existing money supply [32]. However, the financial sys­
tem is very complex and can be exploited by wealthy organisations or individuals, leading to
financial inequality and systemic risks, as was seen in the financial crisis of 2008. DeFi offers
something new that CeFi (centralised finance), also called TradFi (traditional finance), does not
have: (1) transparency ­ everything on the blockchain is public and verifiable, with no private
agreements or backdoor deals. (2) control ­ users remain the custodian of their assets and can
use them without any central authority blocking them. And (3) accessibility ­ all parts of DeFi are
accessible to anyone with a computer and an internet connection [32]. However, DeFi is still in its
infancy and, e.g. (1) some DeFi products are not fully transparent and dependent on centralised
companies. This includes some stablecoins (Tether, USDC), which rely on a company manag­
ing the assets backing the stablecoins value or, e.g. oracles such as ChainLink, which takes
data from off­chain sources and provides them to the blockchain. Regarding non­custody (2),
many users on blockchain prefer custodial services, as they have their crypto­assets on CEXs
(centralised exchanges), e.g. Coinbase, Binance, FTX, or others, which requires the users to
trust these exchanges to safely hold their assets. Convenience is thus for some users, valued
more than the non­custodial properties of blockchain, both of course with their respective risks.
The popularised phrase “not your keys, not your coins”, refers to the people who have been
scammed by CEXs throughout the history of crypto e.g. Quadriga, Bitconnect, Bitfinex among
others [33]. And the risk of non­custodian ownership is exposure to malicious smart contracts,
transaction finality (sending coins to a wrong address cannot be reversed), phishing scams, mal­
ware, losing a wallet backup phrase or password, etc. There is no investor protection with either
model, so users must then ask themselves whom they trust most with their funds, themselves or
a third­party exchange. Regarding accessibility, (3) there still exist gatekeepers to DeFi, which
are CEXs or on­ramp services (fiat­to­crypto or crypto­to fiat services), who in most countries are
KYC/AML compliant and thus have the power to blacklist people from withdrawing or depositing
and report suspicious activity to the authorities.
DeFi has evolved to provide different services including exchanges, loans, leverage, decen­
tralised governance voting, stablecoins, and synthetics. Due to the atomic execution behaviour
of blockchains, it also created the opportunity for new types of loans, including flash loans where
a borrower can loan hundreds to billions of dollars without posing collateral, only paying a small
fee of 0,09% on Aave [34] if they can return the loan within the same transaction. If the loan
is not repaid in the same transaction, the loan was essentially never granted, and nothing hap­
pens except for paying gas fees. This can be used for different types of attacks or arbitrage
12https://opensea.io/
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
7
==PAGE:12==
trading. Beanstalk Farms, a small stablecoin on Ethereum, recently lost $182M through a flash­
loan attack where the attacker took a flash loan of more than $1B13 of assets to buy enough
of Beanstalk Farms’ governance tokens to allow the attacker to quickly pass a malicious gover­
nance proposal, which drained the smart contract’s funds into the attacker’s private wallet netting
them ∼$80M [35]. Flash loans are rarely the cause for DeFi attacks but instead leverages the
possible reward/damages by granting the adversaries access to billions of dollars. Developers
must understand the risks that flash loans impose on their projects. In Beanstalk Farms’ case,
it could have been avoided, by deploying an anti­flash loan mechanism, where, e.g. if there
existed a delay on withdrawals from the project treasury, the attacker could not complete the
attack with a flash loan in a single transaction. Some argue that flash loans democratise access
to transacting with large amounts of capital, thus lowering the entry to a market that traditionally
has been exclusive to only the wealthiest people in CeFi [32].
2.3.1
Blockchain Exchanges
In CeFi, exchanges such as NYSE are used to trade financial instruments such as stocks, deriva­
tives, or bonds. As direct access to exchanges requires significant capital and being licensed,
brokerages are used by traders and investors as intermediaries to facilitate their buy and sell
orders. Furthermore, different financial institutions such as banks will act as market makers
bearing the risk of holding securities to provide better liquidity for market participants [36].
In DeFi, no central entity is required to provide liquidity or facilitate transactions. Through smart
contracts, all users can participate on both sides of a market by swapping tokens or providing
liquidity through AMMs (Automated Market Makers). Different DeFi service providers are usually
controlled or have in their pipeline to become fully decentralised and run by the community as a
DAO. MakerDAO, who created DAI, a decentralised stablecoin that works by over­collateralising
other cryptocurrencies, is an example of a DAO that in 2021 became fully decentralised [37].
There no longer exists a legal entity behind the project, but instead, the token holders are gov­
erning the organisation and, e.g. distributing compensation to developers. Uniswap is a DEX
(decentralised exchange) that uses an AMM built on immutable smart contracts that allow for de­
centralised trading of ERC­20 tokens on the Ethereum blockchain. It works by having dedicated
smart contracts that manage the liquidity pool of the reserves of the token pairs. Compared to
regular order­book type exchanges this decreases the complexity and reduces the network traf­
fic needed by simplifying how trades/swaps are executed. Uniswap’s AMM uses the constant
product formula x∗y = k, which states that a token is swappable if the change in x and y does not
change the invariant k. Creating the property that larger trades, relative to the liquidity pool re­
serves, execute at worse rates than smaller trades, due to slippage. As the price of a token­pair
can only be changed through trading, divergence in prices on Uniswap and other exchanges cre­
ates arbitrage opportunities, that ensure that prices should always trend towards market­clearing
prices [38]. Uniswap allows all ERC­20 tokens to be traded on their DEX, whereas CEXs may
choose which tokens are available to protect their users from scams or risky projects, or for other
reasons they deem appropriate.
13https://etherscan.io/tx/0xcd314668aaa9bbfebaf1a0bd2b6553d01dd58899c508d4729fa7311dc5d33ad7
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
8
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: High level architecture of DeFi services and their connection to CeFi
DeFi has the potential to create fairer financial markets and more transparency even when it
is difficult to regulate due to its decentralised structure [39]. Even though centralised entities
are regulated, they often lead to inequalities as economies of scale has better opportunities to
comply with regulations. On DEXs such as Uniswap, all orders impact the price of the tokens
and improve price discovery, transparency is assured by all trades being public, irreversible,
and traceable, and anyone can participate as liquidity providers. Note that manipulation by
adversaries is still possible on DeFi and includes front­running, sandwich attacks, governance
attacks, wash trading, code exploits, etc. [40, 41, 30]. As promising as blockchain technology
is to provide increased transparency in financial markets, it suffers from unregulated trading
practices, scams, and attacks which, if not addressed, can hurt the long­term growth of the
industry. Further illegal trading activity in CeFi is unregulated in DeFi, thus exposing users to fall
victim to above mentioned exploitative strategies.
2.3.2
Regulation in DeFi
Regulation on crypto is fragmented, and there has not yet been any global consensus on how to
regulate this market [39]. The most important topics have been KYC (Know Your Customer) and
AML (Anti Money Laundering), which membership countries of FATF (The Financial Action Task
Force) have implemented. The intergovernmental organisation FATF is an organisation that
develops policies to combat money laundering and terrorism financing. Over 200 jurisdictions
have committed to the recommendations by FATF, which also includes policies on crypto and
DeFi 14. FATF introduced the concept of VASPs (Virtual Asset Service Providers), which are
14https://www.fatf-gafi.org/countries/ ­ May 2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
9
==PAGE:14==
entities conducting exchanges of virtual assets and fiat currencies, transfers of virtual assets,
being a custodian of those assets, or offering financial services related to the virtual assets.
This includes crypto exchanges, on­ramps, wallet custodians, etc. All businesses related to
such activities are recommended to comply with AML/CTF and KYC requirements. In DeFi, a
DEX is thus also considered a VASP as they facilitate virtual currency exchanges or transfers of
value. Further, a person that develops a DEX may be considered a VASP as they engage as a
business in facilitating these activities. So both the dApp that performs money transfers and the
owner/operators of the dApp are considered a VASP [42]. Thus, a developer may be liable for
contributing to a dApp, even when they are not in control over the application or involved after
the launch [39].
Blockchain has a mixed reputation and is often associated with scams, hacks, money launder­
ing, or other criminal activity. Some researchers even argue that blockchain enables fraudulent
activity and imposes a national security risk due to anonymity and decentralised structure [43].
However, it has not yet shown to be more of a national security risk than regular finance, and
its transparency and current lack of privacy enable law enforcement to find criminals. The 2022
Crime report by Chainalysis [44] highlights illegal activities on blockchain and how criminals
can be traced, caught or stopped. In 2021 $14B worth of cryptocurrencies was sent to illicit
addresses, an increase of 78% from 2020. But across all cryptocurrencies, total transaction
volume grew 567% to $15T, where illicit transaction activity only accounted for 0.15%. DeFi has
seen the highest growth in illegal activity at 1,964% from 2020­21, mostly due to rug pulls and
theft. With rug­pulls, developers trick investors into purchasing their token associated with their
DeFi project, then at some point draining the treasure funds and sending the token to zero. The
report further highlights the importance of educating investors in the space to know what to look
out for, e.g. missing code audits, anonymous founders, or too­good­to­be­true promises of high
ROI.
2.4
Financing
A startup is an early­stage company, that is attempting to pursue a business in an often new
or disruptive market. These companies must to financially cover research and development ex­
penses up until they can launch and generate revenue. This can be done by bootstrapping, tak­
ing loans, or through investments. However, in the early stages of a startup’s life, there is a lack
of traction and significant uncertainty, which eliminates the possibility of financing through banks
and thus more risk­willing capital is needed [45]. This section covers the different types of financ­
ing for startups, both traditional means of financing as well as new possibilities on blockchain.
2.4.1
Investment Rounds
In the first part of a startups life to cover financial obligations, it will usually bootstrap, apply
for soft­funding, which includes grants and non­interest bearing loans, and get investments or
loans from FFF (family, friends, and fools), through business angels, or pre­seed venture capital
firms. This phase is called the set­up phase, where the founders attempt to develop an MVP
(minimum viable product), build a strong team, validate their market, and show customer traction.
This phase is usually the riskiest to invest during, as there are generally not any quantifiable
business data related to any meaningful business metrics [45].
If startups survive this stage and show potential for further growth, they will be interesting to
VCs (venture capital investors) or institutional investors in the following seed rounds. The seed
rounds are split into different series: A, B, C, etc. Series A is the first seed stage, where the
company is ready to launch its product and has shown some traction. Series B is more of a
growth phase and must show an appropriate cost structure while showing continuous growth.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
10
==PAGE:15==
Series C is when the startup has shown a good product­market fit, and can begin to provide
additional products or services [45]. Closing a round can take between 3 to 6 months, depending
on the experience of the founders and the development of the company. It is expected that the
capital is used in a 12­18 months time period to grow the company, where the next round of
capital is raised [46].
Investors are diluted at each financing stage. Typically the dilution at each stage sits between
15% and 25% depending on the stage the startup is in [47]. Excessive dilution, especially in
the early stage, can lead to a loss of control for the founders and significantly reduce the size of
their exit.
Figure 2.2: Overview of the development of investment rounds (source [45])
In Figure 2.2 above the general development of investment rounds is depicted. This is the tradi­
tional and most typical journey for startups, however, alternative scenarios using crowdfunding
and blockchain can create different ways of raising capital, which will be explored later.
Typically the founders of startups going through the different investment rounds have not realised
any gains on their equity during these phases. They might sit on company equity worth millions,
which they would like to realise. This can be done either by going public with an IPO (initial
public offering) or by finding a buyer who will purchase the company. The exit is also where
the investors in the different rounds can exit their position and realise their profit [48]. When a
company goes public is when non­accredited investors, i.e. retail investors will be able to buy
equity in the company, and their stock will begin to trade on a public exchange.
Due Diligence
Startup founders can be very charismatic and convincing that their idea and business will be­
come a success. However, VCs will perform due diligence (DD), which is the process of elab­
orate analysis of the team, commercial and legal aspects, and validity of the claims from the
founders. The DD will include an analysis of the company’s financial accounts, contracts, and
obligations. The process requires significant resources and knowledge and is sometimes out­
sourced to external auditors [45].
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
11
==PAGE:16==
2.4.2
Financing Types
There exist different ways for startups to finance their companies, and the type used depends
on the maturity of the startup. Financing can take the form of long­term equity investments
by business angels, venture capital firms, or private equity, or through short­term financing with
debt. Picking one or the other is situationally dependent. Equity investments require founders to
dilute themselves and are usually limited by securities law to wealthy accredited investors, thus
reducing the available sources for capital [49]. A younger startup will likely leverage more equity­
based financing, FFF, and soft funding, whereas more mature startups can leverage debt­based
financing as well.
Soft funding: include grants from funds, and non­interest bearing loans. Soft funding can ad­
ditionally be accessed by participating in accelerators or incubators, which are programs where
startups receive mentoring from industry experts, participate in workshops, and get access to
funding and startup networks. Different types of startup competitions, hackathons, etc. also
provide grant opportunities for early startups.
Equity investment: is when accredited investors, e.g. VCs, business angels, or institutions
subscribe to new shares in a company. The equity investment often comes with a term sheet
describing the conditions of the investments, which can include preferred rights, board seats,
tranches, etc. [50]. Equity investments require the startup to have a valuation, which can be
difficult, if not impossible, to quantitatively determine in its early stages.
Convertible notes: are loans that can convert into equity at a later stage. The notes use a cap,
which is the maximum post­money valuation the equity will convert to in the case of raising capital
at a higher valuation. Additionally, a discount rate could be used in the case of not exceeding the
cap, e.g. at 20% discount. The notes often include an interest rate that most regularly accrues
to the principal invested when the note converts to equity. Convertible notes are much faster
for founders than equity investments and seldom give any board seats or political rights to the
investors [45].
SAFE notes: are even simpler forms of early investments and is used similarly to convertible
notes, i.e. to provide fast liquidity to early­stage startups. SAFE, short for Simple Agreement
for Future Equity, is a legally binding promise to allow the investor to purchase equity at a later
stage with either a discount rate, valuation cap, or both. It differs from convertible notes by not
being an official debt instrument, thus repayment is not required. It does not have an interest
rate and can be held in perpetuity if the company decides not to raise additional funds, where
the investor risks not getting paid back. SAFE notes are most common in pre­seed and early
seed funding rounds, but this differs depending on the investor preferences [51].
Venture Debt: venture debt is debt financing by non­bank lenders, e.g. VC investors or spe­
cialised banks. As debt financing requires positive cash flow, it is hard for most growth startups
to get. It requires that VC investors have already invested in the company, and the loan amount
is usually between 25% and 50% of the amount raised at the last equity round [52]. Venture
debt financing is thus a substitution for equity financing. It is less flexible and often allocated
to a specific business purpose configured to include financial covenants, repayment terms, and
other features to mitigate lender risk. For founders, it is non­diluting and based on the founders’
ability to raise additional equity to fund the company’s growth, so that the debt can eventually
be repaid. The repayment period is usually three to four years with a six to twelve­month I/O
(interest only) period. Sometimes the loans can include a warrant agreement [53] that lets the
lender purchase equity at the most recent valuation, e.g. a loan of $2M with a 10% loan amount
would allow the lender to purchase $200k worth of equity at warrant expiry.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
12
==PAGE:17==
IPO: Initial Public Offering is when a private company is offering equity to the public with a new
stock issuance [54]. The IPO enables the company to raise funds from the public and can be
an exit strategy for founders and early investors to sell some of their equity on the exchange
it is traded. There are several regulatory requirements associated with an IPO, e.g. quarterly
financial statements, disclosure of information that can impact the company financially, including
a prospectus and other material information, e.g. a SWOT15 analysis [55]
Crowdfunding
Crowdfunding was popularised after the 2008 financial crisis, as it had lower financial barriers to
participate and did not require being an accredited investor. It is defined as the process of raising
capital for a project, charity, or a new business through contributions of a large group of individ­
uals in a specific amount of time [56]. Four main types of crowdfunding exist: Crowdlending, a
debt­based model, where many lenders can help finance a project and receive interest on their
loans. Donation­based, where the funding is purely for philanthropic purposes. Reward­based,
where contributors receive a tangible reward, i.e. a product. And equity­based, where investors
receive equity in the company. This equity­based model can be difficult to execute, due to legal
implications as the company must comply with securities law regulations.
There are three main actors in crowdfunding: the creators, the investors, and the platforms. A
creator is incentivised to use crowdfunding due to a lower cost of capital and access to valu­
able customer insights [57]. As crowdfunding is inherently global, it attracts more investors
than if the investors were from the same geographical area, thus increasing the valuation of
the project as there is more competition between investors. The creators can get valuable in­
formation on customer demand, customer feedback, and leverage the group knowledge of the
investors to incorporate them into different design/product decisions. If done correctly, this can
create a network or ecosystem of loyal customers and advocates of the company and its prod­
ucts. Important for crowdfunding is managing and maintaining good communication with the
investors, which can be time­consuming and move focus away from other essential business
areas, nonetheless crucial for keeping investor trust in the project and includes updates on both
financials and development progress [56]. The consequence of transparency is that it has the
risk that competitors can steal and copy the product, which may harm the business.
The crowd is often motivated by non­monetary things, where the motivation to become an in­
vestor comes from values such as common ideals, being a part of something innovative, or sup­
porting sustainability­driven ventures [58]. Although these altruistic motivations carry greater
weight in investors’ decision­making, investors still look for projects with a higher probability of
success. Further, there is the risk of investing in fraudulent projects, as creators can provide
false information or lie in their marketing campaigns without investors being able to validate it.
2.5
Blockchain Financing
Most blockchain financial products are inspired by already­known financial products and funding
types. Exceptions exist, e.g. the previously mentioned flash loan, which allows anyone to take
a loan without collateral, e.g. to perform an arbitrage trade or liquidate a position, and then
return the loan in the same transaction. Blockchain and tokens can transform networks into
open markets, that are liquid, and transparent, without requiring intermediaries to exchange
digital goods. Public permission­less blockchains create transparency in transactions and make
it easier for analysts and regulators to uncover fraud and system­wide market risks. Settlement
times are nearly instant, transactions are immutable, and network resiliency are some of the
many advantages of financing on blockchain [21].
15Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/swot.asp
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
13
==PAGE:18==
As blockchain is inherently global, it does not limit investors to investment opportunities within
a relatively close geographic proximity. Instead, investors can invest in global teams, through
tokens or investment contracts, depending on the stage of a startup. Consequentially, this in­
creases the pool of investment­ready capital for startups leading to higher valuations and in­
creased investor participation. Additionally, it democratises access to financial capital, espe­
cially to founders in countries with less developed startup ecosystems [11].
2.5.1
SAFT Notes
SAFT, Simple Agreement for Future Tokens, is similar to a SAFE contract, but instead of a
promise of future equity, the investor is investing with a promise of future tokens. A blockchain­
specific investment contract that obligates investors to fund a company, who then will use the
funds to develop a blockchain service and deliver those tokens to investors [21] at some discount
[59]. Noticeably, the SAFT contract manifests that the tokens are utility tokens and not securities,
and thus do not come under securities law regulation, which could determine them illegal to issue
and trade [60]. The contract itself is considered a security, and the tokens are still regulated
under consumer protection laws [21]. The benefits of a SAFT contract compared to a SAFE
contract is that the tokens the investors receive are partly decoupled from the business entity
itself, are highly liquid, and their token will appreciate over time if the project becomes successful.
Further, the contract for tokens can be made with a smart contract, executed when both parties
sign, and require no intermediary legal assistance. Investors are, however, not guaranteed to
receive these tokens as they do not exist when the contract is made, thus there is an inherent risk
they never will [61]. The distinction of a token being a security or utility token is currently a grey
area, and the decision often comes down to a subjective view from financial authorities based
on the Howey test, at least in the USA. It is argued, that a token issued pre­functionality could
be viewed as a security if the token is tradable, and at the time of issuing does not provide utility,
whereas a functional token can be argued to not satisfy “an expectation of profits” and “from
the efforts of others” [21]. If the rationale for the majority of investors is to purchase the tokens
to use them for their utility compared to profit­seeking motives, they should not be considered
securities, and if most purchases are made with profit­seeking motives, it is unlikely that the
reasoning comes from the efforts of others, as market mechanics can have a greater influence
on token price than the development of the project itself [21].
2.5.2
ICOs
ICO (initial coin offering) is a powerful crowdfunding tool that enables blockchain startups to
build decentralised communities, kickstart network effects, incentivise participants, investors,
and users, provide fast liquidity, and financially support creators and contributors to their plat­
forms [21]. It is often a transparent process, where the token creators have published a whitepa­
per describing the project, the tokens, and their use case. It details the roadmap of the project,
estimations of required funds to reach their milestones, and a technical description of their pro­
posed solution [11]. Some token sales happen before the ICO through different investment
vehicles or pre­ICO sign­ups for early supporters and accredited investors, but the majority of
the tokens are usually sold at the ICO [21].
Ethereum was one of the first organisations to raise money through an ICO [62]. They raised
31,000 BTC, which was around $17,3M at the time. Here investors would deposit BTC and
receive ETH (Ethereum’s cryptocurrency) in return when the system went live. Controversially at
that time, ∼20% of ETH was split evenly between the founding team and the nonprofit Ethereum
Foundation. This has later been adopted by many other ICOs [63].
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
14
==PAGE:19==
Tokenomics
Tokenomics is the economic value and utility surrounding a token, including its supply and how
it is issued [64]. The tokenomics include a combined business model for the project and the
users. It should include how the project can generate revenue and how users are encouraged to
participate and investors stay invested. Business model and tokenomic complexity and creativity
differ from project to project. For example, Curve (Section 2.2.2) has a very complex model, and
others, such as Uniswap, currently only have governance associated with their token. Curve
encourages liquidity providers to lock up their tokens to boost fees in pursuit of increased ROI
for LPs. Uniswap on the other hand currently does not have a financial incentive for holders
of the token. However, their governance allows voting to turn on a fee switch, where a fixed
percentage (10­25%) of swapping fees will go to a community pool, shared by the UNI token
holders and taken from liquidity providers [65]. This would increase the community pool value
and the value of the UNI token, however, discourage LPs to provide liquidity.
Designing tokenomics that encourage holding the tokens is desirable to avoid the price of the
token to fall excessively. If the token has a long­term financial incentive, users will likely be loyal
to the project and recommend it to their network, encouraging use and network effects [66].
Advantages of Blockchain Financing
In equity investments, investors buy into a company eligible to share profits and participate in
voting. For tokens, these rights do not only sit with equity holders, but can also be given to
users of the service, who directly contribute to the growth and value creation of the network,
and without taking on any significant enterprise risk [21]. If, e.g. a company behind a dApp is
caught in illegal activity and is forced to shut down, the decentralised app is already immutably
written as a single or a collection of smart contracts on the blockchain, and often self­governed
by its users, such that it can continue to exist in the event the company is closed. As opposed to
conventional fundraising methods, token offerings can deliver much more value than just capital
to fund further development. If executed well, it can jump­start network effects early, onboard
users and other developers and talent, which will increase the total value of that platform [67].
Startups can introduce their technology and idea while reducing unknowns in their go­to­market
strategy with the token offering and the feedback from the community of investors [66].
In an open­source project, the founders can incentivise developers by offering tokens or funding
to pursue improvements that will increase the usability and value of the platform. A common ex­
ample is bug bounties, which are rewards given to developers who find vulnerabilities in deployed
smart contracts. Several software companies have bug bounty programmes to incentives hack­
ers to report bugs instead of abusing them. However, in the crypto markets the consequences
of bugs can lead to hundreds of millions in losses for users, so bug bounties must be significant
enough so that hackers are discouraged from exploiting them and instead report them to the
project owners. For example, the Wormhole protocol has after having $323M of users’ funds
stolen in early February, created a bug bounty program that later that month rewarded a bug
hunter with $10M in prize money for reporting a systemic threat to the ecosystem [68]. And
Uniswap Labs has to increase development around their ecosystem launched Uniswap Grants,
which provides grants to developers that build platforms and solutions around and on top of
Uniswaps own [69]. Hereby motivating and encouraging developers or users to help build out
the ecosystem around their dApp, increasing the ecosystem value for both users and investors.
Additional benefits of an ICO are that it lowers capital costs, compared to its non­blockchain
counterparts, as it circumvents typical financial intermediaries, e.g. banks and stock exchanges,
and requires less administrative legal work, speeding up the process [49]. It has a low technical
barrier to do as it is trivial to create an ERC­20 token on Ethereum, and anyone can use the
open­source smart contract and launch an ICO [70, 66]. The money being raised in crypto is
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
15
==PAGE:20==
much higher than other fintech models, e.g crowdfunding, and can even exceed traditional IPOs.
EOSIO blockchain, a proclaimed Ethereum competitor, currently has the record at $4.2B raised
at an ICO in 2018 [71].
Disadvantages of Blockchain Financing
A blockchain company raising capital through an ICO must develop sound tokenomics around
its tokens to ensure, that the project has sufficient capital for development and maintenance. As
the coin offering usually leaves around 20% of the tokens for the founders, they must ensure
that it sufficiently covers the current and future expenses of the project. The timing and success
of the ICO are important as entrepreneurs are raising capital at a low valuation, and selling
most of the tokens (80%). Founders get significantly diluted, as the public owns the majority of
tokens [11]. As tokens are generally not seen by authorities as securities, they are as most other
crowdfunding regarded as income, and thus a tax­inefficient way of raising capital. If investors
raise $1M according to Danish tax law, the profits generated, would reduce the available funding
by 22%, and without spending the cash, the project now only has $780k. Raising through equity
is exempt from tax, and therefore the startup can keep 100% of the investment.
For investors, an issue with ICOs is the significant information asymmetry that often exists when
there are no requirements for verifying information through audits or disclosure of material in­
formation, e.g. financial statements, cap tables, etc. as there is with IPOs [49]. Combined with
gold­rush market conditions that have happened both in 2017 in the ICO­boom [72] and in 2020­
2021 during the COVID­19 pandemic, Opportunists, i.e. scammers, can easily exploit investors
by publishing whitepapers and road maps, that looks real on the surface, but is not, and requires
technical knowledge and experience to understand. The rise of ICOs and their success has had
little to do with market fundamentals and due diligence into the project, but rather a combination
of investor euphoria and FOMO16 [73]. This has lead to a misallocation of capital towards frauds
and scams instead of productive projects.
Regulation on ICOs (MICA)
Previous literature indicates a regulatory risk and uncertainty of ICOs and crypto in general
[11, 43]. Today, the financial regulatory bodies have established clearer regulation on crypto­
assets17. The European Commission (EC) has, in September 2020, proposed MICA (Market in
Crypto­Assets), a new legislative proposal that aims to streamline blockchain and virtual asset
regulation in the EU while protecting users and investors, aimed to become effective in 2024
[75]. It covers how CASPs (Crypto­asset Service Providers) with significant market volume
should have more obligations, e.g. prospective­like obligations, such as providing a whitepaper
and following strict due diligence requirements. CASPs are similar to FATF’s definition of VASPs,
covered previously, but slightly broader [74]. In short, CASPs cover all crypto­asset providers
except fully decentralised ones, where no person or business provides these services. Thus the
decentralised stablecoin DAI and Uniswap’s DEX are not classified as CASPs.
EC claims in their report to be fair proportionate to the inherent risks for investors and users on
services provided on the blockchain. The regulation covers anyone conducting business in EU
countries, thus also affecting international companies conducting business in the EU. MICA has
four main proposals:
• Provide legal certainty for crypto­assets that are not covered under current financial ser­
vices legislation.
• Establish uniform rules for providers and issuers of crypto­assets
16Fear of missing out.
17all digital representations of value or rights that can be transferred and stored electronically on, e.g. blockchain [74]
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
16
==PAGE:21==
• Replace national frameworks with this new EU financial services legislation
• Establish specific rules for stablecoins.
EC argues that a common framework will enable crypto companies to easily manoeuvre be­
tween member­states, as within the traditional finance industry. Further, it should increase crypto
companies’ ability to scale by reducing their costs, legal complexity, and regulatory uncertainty.
It covers utility tokens, stablecoins, asset­referenced tokens ART, where assets include: fiat,
crypto, commodities, or a combination, and e­money tokens (EMT), where it is fiat­baked. Is­
suers are required to demonstrate a solid stabilisation mechanism, to ensure the price is stable
during market stress.
It is suggested that crypto­assets, including token offerings, are covered under similar regulatory
requirements as any other security sale to the public. This will include a requirement to publish
a whitepaper, that is shared with authorities 20 days before publication, and once published on
the issuer’s website, it can be marketed in EEA (European Economic Area). Investors should
have the right to regret a purchase of non­listed crypto­assets within 14 days. The issuers are
reliable for having strong cybersecurity in place to protect investors and risk getting their offering
suspended if they do not have it. Exceptions to these rules are if it is for small projects (<1M), if
less than 150 qualified investors participate, or if the crypto­assets are free (trough e.g. airdrops)
etc. [74].
Finanstilsynet in Denmark has deployed a task force of industry experts to help create healthy
regulations on the crypto markets. Currently, the focus is on CASPs, decentralised services,
and crypto­asset offerings, including a debate on the current MICA proposals to participate in
and influence the future negotiations with EC and other financial jurisdictions of the EEA [76,
77].
MICA is EC’s first step toward common regulation in the EU, and more proposals will come in the
future while the technology matures and the regulation is implemented. Another proposal: TFR18
(Transfer of Funds Regulation) has been passed through the parliament, and is proposing that
all in unhosted wallets, i.e. non­custodial wallets, must be identified and verified by CASPs for
them to provide their service to them [78]. Developed for preventing crypto services from being
used for money laundering and terrorist financing, however, the current proposal exposes user
privacy for owners of non­custodial wallets who participate in CASPs services. The proposal has
raised much criticism from the blockchain community [79, 80, 81], expressing it would impose
a wide financial surveillance regime on Europe that could be an existential threat to DeFi and
innovation, a violation of fundamental human privacy rights, and a de facto ban on non­custodian
wallets.
2.5.3
Reversible ICOs
Fabian Vogelsteller, the author of the ERC­20 standard and essentially the founder of ICOs,
developed a new type of ICO called the Reversable ICO or rICO, as he felt it was his responsibility
to come up with something better and fairer [82]. It is supposed to solve the trust between
investors and founders through a funding smart contract.
It works by allowing investors to deposit funds into smart contracts to reserve tokens that, at any
point, can be withdrawn by investors again within the duration of the rICO. The rICO follows a
concept of tap per second, which means that funds are distributed over time, and most impor­
tantly, anybody can send their (ICO­)tokens back and get their not­yet given deposits back. So,
18Voted for by the parliament on 31­03­2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
17
==PAGE:22==
it is completely up to the individual investors if they want to continue funding the project, or pull
their investment out.
The rICO is split into three phases:
1. The Allocation phase. People participate by committing funds and locking them into a
smart contract.
2. The Distribution phase. Funds flow over time to the project doing the rICO. New investors
can join.
(a) Here, it is possible to withdraw the investment by sending the tokens received from
the allocation phase to the smart contract. The smart contracts calculate how much
time has passed and thus how much of their investment they can redeem
3. The Swap phase. When the time runs out and the tokens can be swapped with the final
investment token.
Figure 2.3: rICO illustrated (source [83])
An illustration of how Vogelsteller’s project LUKSO’s rICO unfolded can be seen above (Figure
2.4). Over time the price of their LYXe tokens increases, such that earlier investors receive
a larger discount on their tokens than later ones. The distribution can set to as long as the
founders estimate it takes to build their solution, where LUKSO made their rICO run for eight
months. Furthermore, founders are not limited by this model and can alter the smart contracts
however they might see fit. Scams become less likely, and a project that fails naturally, due to
whatever the reasons, will let investors recoup some of their investment.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.4: LUKSO’s rICO over time (source [83])
As seen above, LUKSO raised 9.929 ETH, which at the time was worth 16M$, and as can be
seen on the graph, several investors withdrew, and others contributed more throughout the rICO,
showing the effectiveness of this model.
It also removes the need for expensive lawyers as everything is automated. According to Vogel­
steller, it even has greater investor­protection than prospectus regulation (proposed in MICA),
because “people don’t read it anyway” [82]. It thus increases trust between founders and in­
vestors, as founders must develop what they promise while staying open and honest about the
progress. For founders, it creates an easier gateway to investment as the investors are taking
less risk and is less diluting as the investors cannot charge the same risk­premium due to the
withdrawal mechanism. Further, by the end of the rICO, the group of investors left are those
who are most dedicated to the project [82].
2.5.4
DeFi Borrowing and Lending
DeFi borrowing and lending allow for fast, transparent, and inexpensive loans for anyone con­
nected to the blockchain. Anyone can become a lender by contributing to lending pools and
earning interest on their deposits. Smart contracts enable a trustless P2P lending service for
users, i.e. no intermediary acts as the gatekeeper for who is allowed to participate [84]. In
traditional borrowing and lending, the lender is typically a financial institution that requires infor­
mation on the borrower to minimise risk, which includes financial checks, KYC, AML, and credit
scores [85, 86]. The lender bears the risk of the borrower being insolvent, whereas in DeFi,
that risk is mitigated by smart contracts, over­collateralisation, and sharing lender risk between
a pool of lenders. Currently, only over­collateralised loans and under­collateralised flash loans
are available in DeFi [87]. Over­collateralisation is necessary as the protocol cannot leverage
its positions like banks are able to with fractional reserve banking. This means that the lend­
ing platforms are bank­run resistant, however, at the cost of having less capital deployed in the
ecosystem.
A crypto investor might be “paper­rich” in unrealised token gains but want to use some of this
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
19
==PAGE:24==
value for other investments without selling their token positions. DeFi borrowing enables such
people to deposit their tokens as a lender, use them to get an over­collateralised loan and ex­
change the loan for fiat currency for use outside of blockchain. For example, as a down pay­
ment for a house, purchase of a vehicle, paying rent, etc., without selling their crypto­assets and
keeping a long token position for the future [88]. Hereby, borrowers can somewhat speculatively
leverage their position, if they think their assets will appreciate in the future while avoiding paying
capital gains tax, however with risks of getting liquidated [86]. An example of a DeFi liquidation
can be found in the Appendix A.3.
With traditional debt financing, a startup takes on debt from venture capital or regular banks
mostly through under­collateralised loans, as it enables the startup to leverage its finances. In
DeFi, startups are limited to the collateral they provide. A startup or company who are bullish
on BTC or ETH long­term might allocate 10% of their cash to BTC and ETH. And if the startup
needs short­term financing, they can use this ETH and BTC to borrow cash, instead of selling
it, of course, at the risk of their position getting partly liquidated.
2.6
Pressure on Public Markets in 2022
As a background for the analysis, a high­level overview of the 2021­2022 macro­environment
for both the financial­ and crypto markets is presented. In the analysis, this will be referenced
and used to support the interviewees and their statements on how it affects them, and how it
affects the crypto space in general.
The crypto market has historically been volatile, and several issues have kept investors away,
including lack of regulation, technological risks, limited investor protection, and taxation issues.
Additionally, it has shown to follow “hype­cycles”, which historically has described how a (1) price
increase in crypto, increases (2) interest on social media, leading to (3) more people getting
involved with new ideas, that then leads to (4) foundation of projects or startups, who innovate
and create new use cases that eventually will culminate in a new cycle [89].
The current state of crypto is that the market is down ∼71% at 883B$ (July­2022) from all times
highs (November­2021), indicating that markets are in steps 3 to 4 of the hype­cycle (Appendix
A.2). In the last hype­cycle, the percentage loss in market cap for crypto was ∼90% from
top to bottom (Appendix A.1) and took from January 2018 to December 2018. If this cycle
is similar, the total crypto market cap must decline an additional 63%. However, the current
macroeconomic outlook is different from 2018. The FED, ECB, and other central banks used
quantitative easing to support the economy during nationwide lockdowns due to Covid­19, which
led to increased inflation, that many of the central banks underestimated [90, 91, 92]. In the USA,
in June, inflation was at 9,1%, the highest level in 41 years [93], and in Denmark it was at at
8,2%19 worsened by the war in Ukraine [92]. The central banks are globally raising interest
rates, where over 50 countries have raised rates with over 50 basis points in one go [91]. Some
developing countries, like Sri Lankaare suffering due to poor monetary policy, combined with
increased commodity prices partly due to the war in Ukraine. This has led Sri Lanka to default
on its debt payments and to a severe food and fuel crisis for its citizens. A preview of what
might be coming for other middle­income countries as debt distress is continuously growing
globally [94]. Major economies such as China have seen ongoing bank runs, mostly in the
Henan province, where depositors since April 2022, have not been able to withdraw their funds,
leading to the biggest protest in China since Covid­19 [95]. Supposedly due to embezzling and
stolen funds by bank officials and illegally raising money from depositors on online platforms
19From 7,2% the previous month https://tradingeconomics.com/denmark/inflation-cpi ­ 2022­07­13
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
20
==PAGE:25==
[95]. Similar to crypto services, many small lender banks in China offered higher interest rates
than the competition to attract customers, but due to a slowing economy, with China’s strict
zero­Covid policies, borrowers struggle to repay the banks [96]. Further problems are showing
in the Chinese real estate market, which accounts for 30% of the domestic GDP, where several
major Chinese developers are defaulting on offshore borrowings [97], and a sales decline for
real estate developers of 59% YoY in May 2022 [98]. In the western world, there have been
layoffs across industries, especially in technology, where many companies have had significant
growth during the pandemic but have been forced to adjust to the realities of the market in 2022,
where fears of recession have made companies take preventative measures to control costs
[99].
2.6.1
Contagion in Crypto Markets
With the developments in DeFi, protocols have become more connected, i.e. more dependant
on the stability of one another. On May 7th 2022, the problems in crypto markets began as UST,
an algorithmic stablecoin by Terraform Labs, began its collapse in a death spiral DeFi bank­run
scenario. The collapse of UST happened as the stablecoin was pegged algorithmically to the
dollar with support from Terraform Labs’ sister token LUNA. UST’s price was pegged to the dollar
by a burning20 and minting21 mechanism, including a mechanism that ensured one UST, was
always worth $1 of LUNA. If UST deviated from its peg to the dollar, it could be smoothed out
with UST and LUNA supply expansions and contractions enabled by arbitrageurs [100]. E.g. if
UST’s price was above the peg at $1.05, an arbitrageur purchases $1 worth of LUNA and burns
it to mint one UST, to then sell it on the market at a profit of 5 cents. Hereby, expanding the
supply of UST, which if done repeatedly, should reduce the price of UST back to $1. Inversely, if
UST sits at $0.95, the UST could be burned and minted to LUNA worth $1. The arbitrageur sells
LUNA on the market with a 5­cent profit, and as UST is burned, it results in a supply contraction
of UST, leading to an increase in the price of UST. As long as the price of UST would remain
pegged roughly to $1 this scheme would work. UST was used in several protocols in the Terra
ecosystem, however, the most common use case was Anchor, a lending/borrowing protocol,
providing lenders with a generous APY of 20% on their UST deposits. As this APY was hard to
beat, this resulted in that 75% of the total UST market cap being deposited in Anchor at its peak,
which was just prior to the collapse [100].
20The term used to describe the removal of the token from circulation. It usually is sent to a “burn” wallet, where no
on has access
21The term used to describe the creation of new tokens.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.5: UST price in USD from May 1st to June 1st (source https://www.coingecko.com/en/
coins/terraclassicusd)
The death spiral started with a withdrawal by Terraform Labs themselves of UST from the liq­
uidity pool, UST/3CRV on Curve, which was going to be allocated to another liquidity pool. This
decreased the liquidity in the UST/3CRV Curve pool, making it more prone to volatility. Two
traders then respectively withdrew $85M followed by $100M in $25M increments of UST for
USDC, creating a ­2% depeg for UST. Terraform Labs themselves withdrew $100M worth of
UST from the pool to rebalance it again, as there was now an excess of UST in the pool [101].
When UST began to deviate from its dollar peg, investors began to panic, withdrawing their UST
from Anchor, which depegged UST even further, creating fear in the market in general, leading
to other crypto­asset prices to tumble, starting the death spiral for UST [100].
Around $45B was wiped out of the combined market cap of UST and LUNA in already bearish
market conditions [102] led to a chain of events on over­leveraged hedge funds and CeFi service
providers. A large inflow of crypto people, both businesses and retail investors, began cashing
out their funds to pay back DeFi loans and avoid liquidations. Data from Chainalysis [101] shows
that the funds in lending protocols were increasingly becoming other yield­generating protocols,
which started in Q1 2022, as can be seen below on the graph:
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
22
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.6: Exposure of lending contracts (source [101])
This meant that DeFi lending relied on other forms of DeFi lending as collateral for generat­
ing yield, thus increasing the dependency for yield generating protocol stability on other yield
generating protocols’ stability. And as UST collapsed, it led to significant pressure on the crypto
markets. It consequently impacted the price stability of the stETH22/ETH pair, where stETH could
be used as collateral for minting UST. When the price of UST collapsed, the selling pressure on
stETH increased as large market participants were scrambling to liquidate their positions. The
biggest involved were Celsius and 3AC (Three Arrow Capital), who both had invested heavily
in UST and stETH, and were the largest wallets participating in the stETH selloff [103]. The
CeFi lending platform Celsius froze customer accounts on July 9th due to “extreme market con­
ditions” [104], which meant that users could not withdraw their funds from their platform. The
crypto hedge fund 3AC had AUM of over $10B in March [105], and was exposed to UST and
LUNA as well [106].
Celsius started paying back DeFi loans on Aave, where they withdrew $1B in ETH and WBTC
(wrapped BTC), which showed that they needed capital, paying down debt to stay solvent in case
of a customer bank run. The bank­run happened, and Celsius decided to freeze withdrawals for
their users, which temporarily prevented their insolvency [103], where a bankruptcy filing later
showed a $1,19B hole in their finances [107]. 3AC, on the other hand, was caught in the con­
tagion with improperly hedged positions while making several bad trades being over­leveraged
with several lenders in the space, started selling their stETH for ETH and other stable assets on
June 12th­13th [103]. Forced liquidation of 3AC was ordered on July 29th, filing for bankruptcy
two days later [108]. 3AC lenders included Voyager Digital, a CEX, with an over $650M unse­
cured loan to 3AC, which made Voyager file for bankruptcy on July 6th [109]. The CeFi lending
platforms BlockFi and Vauld, the CEX Genisis, and the options and futures exchange Deribit
were some of the other lenders caught by 3AC’s insolvency. The founders of 3AC have gone
missing, while the company owes $3,5B to 27 different lenders where $2,3B was to Genisis
Global Trading alone [110]. The collapse of UST and contagion on other crypto assets and CeFi
22Staked Ethereum from Lido’s protocol, where users can stake their ETH 1:1 and receive the derivative token stETH
while earning staking interest ­ which they will receive when Ethereum goes from PoW to PoS consensus
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
23
==PAGE:28==
lending platforms clearly show how over­leveraging and improper hedging can create issues for
market participants and lead to systemic risk in the crypto markets.
Many of the services caught in the contagion, have statements such as “Build Wealth Automat­
ically With Crypto”23, etc. promising interest on crypto holdings of up to 15%24. Crypto is an
asset­class, unlike stocks, that does not deliver dividends and can only generate yield if loaned
out, from swap fees by being an LP, through trading, or through staking on, e.g. DeFi platforms
such as Anchor for Terra [111].
Figure 2.7: Contagion events from UST collapse (source [112])
CoinGecko made an overview of the contagion effects of the UST collapse, which is depicted
above in Figure 2.7. It shows how the collapse of UST affected investors, protocols, and other
stablecoins and stETH. Where a combination of all that led to 3AC collapsing, defaulting on their
loans, and being liquidated by creditors.
2.6.2
Lower Valuations and M&A
The CEO of Binance25, Changpeng Zhao, has in an interview on Yahoo said: “We are seeing
that a number of firms are insolvent and a number of projects have gone under, but it is a small
number in the grand scheme of things (...) We see a lot of opportunity in the market, we are
increasing hiring and increasing our MA activity” [113]. And follows FTX and others in an rather
aggressive acquisition strategy: “we are looking at 50­100 deals” ­ C. Zhao [113]. Also, both
Binance and FTX saw significant market­share growth during 2022 (Appendix A.5). A potential
problem for decentralisation as large players such as Binance accumulate more wealth and
control, which puts more power on single centralised actors.
In market conditions like these, it does not only affect the publicly traded assets, like stock or
crypto but also entrepreneurs and venture capital. The growth mindset, where growth is priori­
23Vauld ­ https://www.vauld.com/home [10­07­2022]
24BlockFi: Your crypto can earn up to 15% APY with a BlockFi Interest Account ­ https://blockfi.com/ [10­07­2022]
25The largest crypto exchange in the world [as of July 10 ­ 2022] ­ https://coinmarketcap.com/rankings/exchanges/
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
24
==PAGE:29==
tised over profitability in the short­term, changes. Sequoia Capital, a Silicon Valley VC fund, is
still investing; however, their focus is shifting towards companies being profitable sooner [114].
The crypto markets show, similarly, that profitable companies that have cash on hand are in­
creasing trust with their customers, capturing market share, using the crisis as an opportunity.
YCombinator, has also issued a statement to its founders with warnings on the investment envi­
ronment during this economic downturn. Their main arguments include preparing for the worst,
cutting costs, and ensuring the company can survive for the next 24 months without raising
money. Further, VC competition decreases with poor­performing public markets due to a de­
crease in funding from LPs (limited partners), thus lowering valuations and round sizes. Planning
to raise money in the next 6­12 months will likely be at the peak of a downturn, which leads to
unnecessary dilution [115]. If public markets enter a recession, it could also mean worse things
to come for crypto markets as crypto only existed in bull markets (unless counting the Covid­19
recession that lasted two months) [116].
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
25
==PAGE:30==
3
Methodology
This chapter covers the methodological approach taken and the motivation for doing so. Due to
the rapid innovation and change in the permission­less public blockchains, e.g. Ethereum, Bit­
coin, Solana, etc. little research exists, especially within entrepreneurship, and research within
the space depreciates quickly. Most up­to­date research and innovation regarding the topic exist
on forums, blog posts by founders and developers, or news articles by blockchain newsletters.
As blockchain is transparent and public, so does it seem the organisations are behind them,
with their open­source approach, where many have Discord groups, Reddit forums, and Twitter
profiles for their community to interact with. So, even when blockchain technology is more than
a decade old, the rapid innovation in the industry is the reasoning behind adopting a qualitative
exploratory methodological approach.
3.1
Background and Literature Review
By adopting the qualitative exploratory methodological approach, the literature review includes
a mix of academic literature and web­based content, which includes: (news) articles, forum dis­
cussions, company/organisation websites, documentation, and courses. As the non­academic
content is generally more exposed to biases and subjectivity, several sources and critical as­
sessment is used [117]. The purpose of the background section is to provide a compilation of
relevant information currently available on the topic, and introduce the reader to the terminology
and technology concepts within blockchain.
3.2
Empirical Data
The empirical data is gathered by conducting interviews with experts and participants in the
blockchain sector including founders, investors and industry experts on tax and regulation.
These have been chosen as they represent the main spectrum of key stakeholders in the indus­
try and contributes to providing a holistic perspective into the current entrepreneurial landscape
in the blockchain industry.
3.2.1
Interviews
The interviewing approach is semi­structured interviewing. Semi­structured interviews (SSI)
are one­to­one interviews where the interviewer uses both open­ and closed­ended questions,
often followed by why or how follow up questions [118]. The closed­end questions are used
to have a quantitative point of reference that is then followed by probing the interviewee with
supplementary questions. An agenda has been created for each interview. The agenda is
loosely followed, which means that it is acceptable for the conversation to derail into unexpected
or unplanned areas. The interviews are conducted within a relaxed setting, both in­person and
online, if an in­person meetup is not possible. The interview duration is planned to last one hour
but can vary depending on the depth of the conversation and if new themes appear, that need
further elaboration. The interviewees are encouraged to speak their minds and continue on rants
that might seem off­topic to the given question but can lead to other interesting discussions.
According to [118] the downsides to SSIs are that they require a great deal of preparation, time,
labour, skill, and deep knowledge on the topic. They are unlikely to have a sufficient enough
sample size to yield a statistically significant result, why it can be superior to use focus groups and
structured interviews instead. However, SSIs are well suited for “examining uncharted territory
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
26
==PAGE:31==
with unknown but potential momentous issues and your interviewers need maximum latitude to
spot useful leads and pursue them” ([118], p. 494). Most innovations within blockchain happen
in the already thriving blockchain ecosystem and are public knowledge as soon as projects
launch, thus the stakeholders’, founders’, investors’, and regulators’ views will affect the future
of the industry. Making the SSI interviewing approach ideal for gathering empirical data in the
context of this thesis.
Interview Structure
The interviewees have different backgrounds, which requires different questions and prepara­
tions; however, the themes are overall the same. As interviews are conducted over several
weeks, the questions and interview technique are iteratively improved as both the author/inter­
viewer improves their interviewing skills and the questions become more focused and clear. An
agile researching approach is used, to exploit the insights of the early interviewees to refine the
interview guide and improve it [118].
The interview guides are structured with topics, questions, and follow­up questions, where the
most subjectively essential questions and topics are asked at the beginning of the interview, to
ensure they have been asked if the interview ends up taking longer than expected. The interview
always begins with breaking the ice and establishing rapport. This is done by using introductory
questions that are easy for the participants to answer, e.g. “can you tell me about your company
and what you are working on?”. The structure is relaxed and thus if the interviewee enters into
a topic that is planned to be addressed later, it is natural to continue the conversation on the
new topic and return to the outline of the interview structure afterward. The interview ends with
a question on their future outlook on their company, the investment environment, or regulations,
to return to short and easy questions for the participant to answer. The interview guides are
added as an attachment to the report when handing it in.
3.2.2
Interviewees
As mentioned the three main categories of interesting stakeholders are blockchain startup founders,
investors, and regulation experts. The selected stakeholders were chosen based on location,
expertise, and startup type. All interviewees represented a different market segment, which for
a small sample size of seven in total creates a wide representation of the industry. Because
Denmark is the most digitalised country in Europe 2021 [119] it is assumed that the Danish
blockchain ecosystem should be a good representation of (at least) Europe.
3.2.3
Transcription
All interviews, except for one, were conducted in Danish and translated into English. The mes­
sage of the quotes was, to the best of the author’s ability, kept intact during the translation. And
only the key parts of the interview, that were used for quoting, were transcribed. After the anal­
ysis, the quotes were sent to the interviewees to ensure that the author had the interviewees’
approval of using these quotes, and to avoid any confidential or non­public information being
published.
The feedback from the interviewees included removing certain names or information and gram­
matical adjustments. Some quotes are therefore not one­to­one with the transcription from the
interview but changed to more clearly represent the interviewees’ opinions on the different mat­
ters. The transcriptions and audio files will not be attached to the report as it includes confidential
and non­public information. Therefore, a special request must be made, with an agreement with
the interviewee to provide access to the source files.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
27
==PAGE:32==
4
Presentation of results
Various interviews pertaining to the investigation were carried out with suitable and prominent
people within or relevant to the blockchain industry. This includes four danish blockchain star­
tups, a blockchain VC, a tax expert, and a representative from the Danish financial regulative
authority Finanstilsynet. This chapter will cover the results from the interviews clustered into
the most relevant topics, with hereby appurtenant quotes from the interviewees. An analytical
framework is presented in a canvas­style fashion as a tool to aid startups and investors navi­
gate the findings and results. Further, a representation is done of how to conduct an ICO that is
compliant with future regulations, reducing investor risk, and increasing trust between parties.
4.1
Overview of Interviewees
Table 4.1:
The viewpoints made by the interviewees are strictly reflecting their personal per­
spectives and do not represent the companies they are associated with.
Name
Company
Role
Responibilities
Jakob
Mikkel
Han­
sen
Warburg Ser­
res
VC
Head of Research and Investments and Previ­
ous founder.
Louise
Blichfeldt
Fjord
CORIT
Advi­
sory
Director
International tax consulting and has Ph.d in
payments related to blockchain, cloud, and in­
termediary platforms in internation tax law.
Danny Dehghani
Finanstilynet
Jurist
Lead on blockchain affairs in Finanstilsynet.
Paco Puylaert
Soltype
Founder
CEO. Building an NFT platform for writers and
readers on Solana.
Henrik
Aasted
Sø­
rensen
e­Money
Founder
CTO. Providing fiat­backed stablecoins ­ that
are KYC/AML compliant and interest bearing.
Simon Ousager
Januar
Founder
CEO. Januar is a compliant payment gate for
crypto companies.
Claus Skaaning
DigiShares
Founder
CEO. DigiShares is a white­label platform for
issuance, management and trading tokenised
securities.
4.2
The Crypto Market and Trends
As described in Section 2.6 hype­cycles have historically moved the crypto markets, while ac­
cording to J.M. Hansen, VC Partner in Warburg Serres, it is not a phenomenon that is exclusive
to crypto markets. Explaining that other industries experience similar trends, e.g. fintech, insur­
ance tech, and circular economy:
“In these cycles what usually happens is that people underestimate how big the impact the
technology can have, but also underestimate how long it will take.” ­ J.M. Hansen
Expressing, that these technologies and areas of innovation will have a much larger impact than
people can imagine, but the time it takes to get there, is greater than most would assume. The
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
28
==PAGE:33==
euphoria, or the hype, must end at some point as the gradual technological improvements over
time grow slower than people’s expectations.
The events in crypto markets that led to the collapse of UST and several centralised entities,
showed systemic vulnerabilities in how the crypto markets currently function. The price pressure
during the bear market and increased volatility limit testing protocols and businesses, while
exposing investors in those projects to significant risk. The project by Terraform Labs was met
with both great optimism and great criticism in the crypto community. Those critical of UST were
often more tech­savvy and understood the risks of the algorithmic stabilising mechanism. H.A.
Sørensen, the founder of the stablecoin startup e­Money, had the following statement on UST
(May 5th, 2022 two days before the crash):
“UST is self­reflective. We are compared with them all the time. It is not sustainable, it will
crash at some point, but we cannot say that publicly without drawing attention from trolls etc.
(...) two thirds of all UST is locked in Anchor costing someone 20% a year (in interest). But
generating no real economic value with a 2 billion dollar burn rate per year.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
As expressed by H.A. Sørensen, the mechanism for keeping the price pegged to the USD was
flawed as it was self­reflective on their sister token LUNA. When investors began to burn UST
at a lower price than $1 it meant that investors would receive $1 worth of LUNA, creating a
large inflationary pressure on LUNA. However, while he knew their model was problematic and
seemed generally frustrated about their popularity, he did not feel as if he could risk getting the
bad exposure that would follow if he publicly raised his concerns about their protocol. Further,
he explained that their business model was unsustainable and that the 20% APY for staking on
Anchor, lured people in, but the revenue generated by Anchor themselves was insufficient to
pay that APY to depositors. J.M. Hansen had similar views on UST, and generally had no faith
in algorithmic stablecoins at all:
“UST, 20% APY, is obviously not sustainable. So, it is just about doing your analysis and due
diligence. Forget youtube, forget all these promotions and airdrops etc., sit down and read and
understand their whitepaper, understand what a stablecoin really is.” ­ J.M. Hansen
Insinuating that if investors did their due diligence and tried to understand the mechanism and
technology behind it, they would not want to invest. “Avoid scams and risky projects by fully
understanding what it is.” ­ J.M. Hansen. Demanding that individual investors need the technical
and financial literacy to understand and analyse these projects, in order to decrease their risk
of getting involved in projects like Terra. However, as described in Section 2.6.1, not only retail
was caught in the contagion, but several companies with a lot of resources got exposed to it as
well.
4.2.1
Bear Market Opportunities
As crypto is in bearish market conditions, investors are getting better prices while entrepreneurs
are required to cost­optimise and focus on positive cash flow and profitability. J.M. Hansen
describes how retail investors often are interested when prices are going up, however:
“(...) Smart investors are more interested when the market is bad.” ­ J.M. Hansen
Referring to that most VCs and wealthy individuals are looking to seize the opportunity at these
prices, and are the “smart” investors. Inversely, retail investors are more psychologically im­
pacted by movements in crypto prices according to J.M Hansen. Regarding retail participation
in the crypto markets and investing S. Ousager elaborates:
“You need to remember it is a free market ­ and there are some out there with bigger
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
29
==PAGE:34==
computers, and more PhD’s than you have back in your bedroom. That is just something you
need to remember: ‘you are swimming with the sharks’.” ­ S. Ousager
Again highlighting, that retail investors are at a disadvantage. And because crypto­markets
are mostly unregulated, retail investors are at a further disadvantage to companies that can
manipulate markets without significant legal repercussions.
While smart investors see the bear market as an opportunity, so does: P. Puylaert from Soltype:
“It is a bearish market right now, which I think is perfect for us, because it is giving us the time
to prepare our product. So that in a more bullish moment, where people are more inclined to
spend money, we are ready and set in a moment, where everyone is looking for projects to
invest in. We are ahead of people, who are just jumping in because the market is hot. So, I feel
confident, that it is actually playing to our advantage.” ­ P. Puylaert
Acknowledging the poor market conditions and how it removes the pressure from feeling a sense
of urgency to capitalise on market euphoria. Instead, they can work on developing the best
possible product, so that they are prepared for when the market turns around. An indication
that the hype­cycle phenomena described in Section 2.6 is believed by P. Puylaert to continue.
Where the hype from bullish market conditions creates startups such as Soltype, that innovate
and built new services to support different use cases, that will fuel another hype cycle in the
future.
Crypto and DeFi represent transparency, where all participants especially the large, well­
known players, can be tracked and followed in e.g. liquidation scenarios. However, as
there exists little regulation and enforcement in these markets, these large CeFi compa­
nies create risky stable­coin models e.g. UST and become financially exposed to one an­
other (off­chain) through loans, which creates hidden non­transparent risks that become
impossible to measure. The DeFi protocols continue to work as they were programmed
to do, but many CeFi companies who did not properly hedge their positions are therefore
in a predicament. Nevertheless, entrepreneurs and investors are seeing the positives in
these markets and believe in the future turn­around of sentiment and the opportunities
that follow.
4.2.2
Market Sentiment
The hype­cycle model is a simplified description of how the crypto markets have unfolded his­
torically. The interview participants describe how media coverage impacts the industry, while
often painting a bad picture:
“I have always hated what the media talks about. It is very ‘clickbaity’, and the topics the media
focuses on is two­folds: they have always been able to cover how much gains people have
made, but also about all the scams. They have essentially been able to promote, ‘hey you can
get crazy returns over here’ ­ they did this for a long time. And then went to: ‘hey look at all
these scams’ ­ and in my view they have been partly responsible for these (scams) by their
way of covering news around blockchain.” ­ J.M. Hansen
J.M Hansen experiences the media as portraying a bad picture of the industry through “click­
baiting” articles that contribute to either creating fear or hype in the crypto market. Adding that
perhaps the focus from the media on scams actually might speed up the regulation process even
though it is “annoying”. J. M. Hansen, through his involvement as a board member in Nordic
Blockchain, is educating organisations including the media. This tendency is seen in several
other interviewees as well, who are very open to talking with the media.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
30
==PAGE:35==
“The marketing of cryptocurrencies has not been great. If you ask everyday people, including
(some) people in the tax authorities you will hear this ‘wild west’­reputation around it due to the
fraud in the beginning, and some bad examples, which have overshadowed the field of
cryptocurrencies.” ­ L.B. Fjord
L.B. Fjord has similar experiences and highlights that the reputation of crypto for everyday people
and the authorities is negative and based around this “wild west”­ and anarchistic narrative.
H.A. Sørensen also describes his experience with the media and how he feels the reputation on
blockchain affects him:
“The public view on blockchain becomes more and more negative. It is almost like when
people ask what you do, you say you are a software engineer instead of (saying) you have a
blockchain startup.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
H.A. Sørensen highlights a societal adverse toward the industry, and personally feel ashamed
of being associated with it. He then continues:
“You get so tired of the industry sometimes, there are so many scams and ponzis. The
potential is there, but too many fraudsters and things getting marketed to the extreme. For
example those monkeys there, I think it’s the most braindead trash that exist.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
Referring to the Bored Ape Yacht Club, an NFT project by Yuga Labs that have had significant
social media coverage in 2021 and 2022 and made several headlines due to celebrity ownership
of the NFTs, where several of them were auctioning of for millions USD in 2021 [120]. J.M.
Hansen has a similar view on the current NFT market, also referring to the Yuga Labs project:
“(...) and then you have the NFT market right now, which is just a joke, a bit harsh, but what
NFTs can do, if you really understand it, then their current use is just a meme. It is a shitty
monkey, and has nothing to do, with what is possible with the technology. If you talk about
fractionalised ownership ­ which is why we are talking about decades ­ it will not happen as
soon as everyone wants, but everyone is also underestimating what it actually can do, and that
is our thesis: It will take a long time before the industry is there, and before you are able to built
things that really matters.” ­ J.M. Hansen
J.M Hansen has the belief that NFTs are a great innovation, but describes their current use case
negatively, as it is mostly being used for digital art. P. Puylaert, the CEO of Soltype, a startup
which is creating a platform for writers to publish their work through NFTs, embraces this sort of
hype culture. He argues that it is a part of the current crypto space:
“The marketing strategies are sometimes a bit annoying in the whole Web3 (space) of how to
get people to talk about the project and be involved. Of course you want the genuine investors,
but you also want the people who want to speculate like crazy too. That is the hype. And we
are following that.” ­ P. Puylaert
P. Puylaert argues that the hype culture around projects and getting exposure on social media
is part of the industry. Speculators will drive attention toward a project, which creates more
hype and exposes the project to more people, where some might become long­time users or
investors. D. Dehghani, blockchain lead in Finanstilsynet, recognises that lying and over­hyping
are a core part of the industry, as there are no repercussions for not delivering. This almost
encourages companies to over­hype themselves as it will enable them to raise more funds or
onboard more users:
“There are soo many promises in crypto (...) and when there are no requirements or any
authority coming after you if you lie, then there is no incentive to be the honest ones.” ­ D.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
31
==PAGE:36==
Dehghani
The media creates the narrative for people outside of the crypto industry but seems mostly
driven by clicks, and thus often will write about ridiculous gains or large losses for crypto
investors. Startups in blockchain use different marketing approaches to generate hype
for their projects, which attract speculators and investors leading to network effects. They
make promises to investors, that they may or may not keep, but nonetheless, the larger
the idea, the more hype, and speculation it will generate. When promises do not come
true, the founders face little to no consequences other than hurting the reputation of the
project and the relationship and trust with their investors.
4.3
Regulation and Compliance
Crypto markets have been mostly unregulated and companies have had to manoeuvre around
existing or similar regulatory requirements. Those requirements vary between different types
of blockchain companies. DigiShares, which are offering white­label tokenisation of securities,
are regulated under domestic securities laws and stay compliant through more than 40 legal
partnerships in the countries they operate in, mostly the USA.
“We have always been regulated, so nothing will really change with that. Some things will be
tightened such as white washing of crypto assets and KYC on wallets, which is something we
need to comply with.” ­ C. Skaaning
Further elaborating that the purpose and nature of blockchain have changed over the years:
“It is an area that was started by crypto anarchists, people who saw themselves as outcasts
from society, and who wanted to establish a parallel society in a way, and that is something we
have had to move on from, a sort of maturation process. We have been working a lot more
closely with the traditional financial ecosystem, and many are doing that, which makes
everything more tangled together and matured.” ­ C. Skaaning
C. Skaaning indicates that the crypto industry has been required to mature over time as the
technology has seen more mainstream adoption. Therefore it requires to become better inte­
grated into existing financial infrastructure including the compliance requirements that follow.
Regulations such as MICA and TFR are helping mature the market as it creates a regulatory
framework for market participants to operate within. Even though these regulation proposals
can have a significant impact on the industry, several interviewees had similar thoughts about
politicians and authorities’ lack of understanding and lack of interest in the crypto space:
“No one has been able to get politicians or authorities, in general, on board with this (red.
crypto) is a good idea, and therefore, to a great extent, I think that from a tax perspective –
including from the perspective of the tax authorities ­ you are looking much more into
compliance and exchange of information on the area, relative to making it easier and more
beneficial. In this respect, the different market participants should be ready to seize the
opportunity and do more serious lobbying and tech­splaining. Also, just to ensure that it
(regulation) will be based on correct understanding of the facts and circumstances, as it is
often the case, that they (the tax authorities and government) do not understand it.” ­ L.B. Fjord
L.B. Fjord expresses that the interest in crypto is generally low for politicians and authorities,
where their focus, especially within tax, has mostly been around compliance and ensuring that
they have the information and systems to collect tax from crypto investors. Here she highlights
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
32
==PAGE:37==
the importance of lobbying and ensuring that new regulation is based on correct information, as
authorities generally struggle to truly understand it. In Denmark the gains from crypto, including
NFTs, airdrops (gifts), swaps, etc. are seen as income and taxed up to 53% whereas the tax
deduction is only around 25­27%. “The government is not a great risk partner because they take
more of your capital gains than they take from your losses. Generally, it is argued that taxation
should strive at being neutral.” ­ L.B. Fjord. This consequently creates even poorer conditions
for retail investors, as a total break even on crypto trading during a year will result in paying more
taxes on gains than losses, thus taking a net loss. Companies are not under these requirements
and will be taxed 22% of profits, and a loss in a year can be deducted from next year’s profits,
even when trading crypto. A change in taxation is not likely to come soon, L.B. Fjord estimated
2­5 years, as it is a slow process, even though a task force has been established in SKAT to
make different taxation rules on crypto. J.M. Hansen also estimates that it will likely not be until
2025 that this tax committee will have implemented new taxation rules on crypto, keeping many
investors away from it.
“Politicians do not have sympathy for people losing money on crypto.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
A strong statement, where H.A. Sørensen is referring to non­existent investor protection and
asymmetric taxation on crypto gains/losses. D. Dehghani acknowledges that little investor pro­
tection exists, but that he prefers regulation to be slightly lacking behind, letting the market
mature, while not limiting innovation: “It is often a critique we get: ‘You are always so slow to
regulate these areas, and when you do it is incomplete, etc.’ but that is what enables the markets
to evolve and enables the regulation to adapt to reality (...) (if not) the innovation would adapt
to our rules, instead of letting the innovation unfold naturally”. But stressing that:
“Right now this (crypto) area is highly prioritised in Finanstilsynet (...) We are one of the few
financial authorities in Europe who have dedicated employees, who only work with crypto and
blockchain. Which earlier has put us in a good position during the negotiations compared to
other countries.” ­ D. Dehghani
According to D. Dehghani, Danish financial authorities are some of the most knowledgeable
authorities within the industry. He puts emphasis that regulation should not steer the direction
of innovation, and agrees with L.B. Fjord that legislation should stay as neutral as possible. But
it is not an easy task for regulators:
“It puts very strict requirements on us (authorities) ­ for the first time we need to understand the
technicalities behind all this. We need to understand the market ­ and it is hard, because if you
look at who the authorities are across Europe, it mostly consists of national banks and public
authorities. If you take the age average across these places, you would not initially think these
are tech people.” ­ D. Dehghani
Due to the complexity of blockchain technologies, D. Dehghani, explains that it is difficult for
regulators to fully understand. Further adding that talent is hard to come by:
“If you are young and newly educated (and) very interested in blockchain and crypto ­ then it is
not SKAT you want to work at. There are many other places you might want to work at. And
also here in Finanstilsynet, it is very difficult to find people with the needed competences.
There are so few, and those who are there, my impression is, that they are not lacking job
opportunities.” ­ D. Dehghani
Not only do regulators have difficulties understanding the crypto industry, but they also struggle
to find employees with expertise in the industry. An indication that the pool of talent is small
and authorities cannot compete with the salaries in the industry. Regulation is nonetheless
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
33
==PAGE:38==
coming, both with MICA and TFR in the EU. Generally, the participants were welcoming to more
regulation, and most of them are already KYC/AML compliant due to bridging traditional finance
and crypto.
“I think regulation helps us, because regulation ensures that the worst projects will be filtered
out or be too difficult to exist, plus it creates more consumer protection.” ­ C. Skaaning
H.A. Sørensen states that he misses regulation, and especially proper enforcement as there only
“have been (given) small fines for completely ridiculous things” ­ H.A. Sørensen. D. Dehghani
believes that MICA is a good first regulation, with only a few “weird” provisions, but that it is
natural, and that these will be adjusted as a part of the natural evolution of the regulation.
“We are used to looking at risk ­ what kind of risk are associated with this activity, and how we
can mitigate it with regulation. That is relatively easy when you have a market that has existed
for centuries and everyone knows what it is, the financial markets (...) Now these new (crypto)
markets have arrived, where things work differently and technology is not just something that
we use. For example, it is not a question of having an SQL or another type of database, it
(technology) is a part of the value creation, like the technology itself is a part of the intrinsic
value, and we are not used to that. So when taking all this into account, I am quite satisfied
(with MICA).” ­ D. Dehghani
Crypto markets are relatively new for regulators and are challenging to regulate according to
D. Dehghani. He expresses, that it mostly comes from the relationship between markets and
technology, which differs from traditional financial markets that have existed for centuries. In
crypto markets technology is not only a supporting mechanism to facilitate trading, it is instead
a core part of the intrinsic value of the economy.
As MICA was generally welcomed by the interviewees TFR was not. Several interviewees ex­
pressed that TFR was a significant risk to the space, as it would essentially be a ban on non­
custodial wallets. E.g. C. Skaaning described it as an unqualified proposal with seemingly very
little interest from lawmakers. D. Dehghani, who is in negotiations on the TFR regulation, could
not comment on it publicly as the negotiations are still ongoing however stating that: “I know it
says this in the Parliament’s proposal, but you must remember it is only one out of three propos­
als, and the parliament consists of politicians, not technicians, so there often comes some weird
things out with their proposals”. An indication that the TFR proposal might not manifest into law
in its current form.
Investor, J.M. Hansen, wants more regulation even though it could impact the market negatively
in the short term. Stating that: “And of course there might be companies who will struggle with
new regulations, but if you are sincere (...) and look a bit more holistic and long­term. Then I’m
fine with it (regulation).”. Adding that all their investments are KYC/AML compliant to mitigate risk
and e.g. do not invest in companies who purposely are located in countries to avoid regulation
or tax issues.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
34
==PAGE:39==
Regulation and enforcement are welcomed by the industry as it is believed to increase
investor and user protection. However, the regulators’ understanding of blockchain and
their proposed regulations, especially TFR, are alarming to the industry, as it shows a
fundamental misunderstanding of the technology. It builds on the argument that authori­
ties struggle to acquire blockchain competencies and to understand that technology is a
part of the intrinsic value. Current regulation, especially regarding taxation is non­neutral
and creates poor investment conditions for investors in crypto. Regulation should strive
toward neutrality, to avoid limiting the industry or pushing it in a certain direction.
4.3.1
Banks and Compliance
In Denmark, scandals in the banking sector for white­washing and money laundering have led
to an extremely risk­averse banking sector [121], that does not have the compliance capabili­
ties to control crypto­companies affairs on the blockchain: “With banks it dies with compliance”
­ H.A. Sørensen. This means that a bank account for some crypto­currency companies has
been impossible to get in Denmark. Januar provides a solution to this, where they do all KY­
C/AML compliance on the companies, who want a payment account with them to do business
on blockchain. e­Money was not able to get a bank in Denmark, which led to them being forced
to look overseas, finding a bank in Luxembourg for their business. Generally, banks are not
legally required to take someone in as a customer, so even when it is possible to register a
company and get authorisation from the financial authorities, banks are not obliged to onboard
the company. Unless using a solution similar to Januar, where banks through payment services
regulation, PS2D1, are legally obliged to provide a deposit account for payment institutes.
“Banks are still cautious/reluctant (to touch crypto). But it is also hard for them ­ one thing, it is
hard just to get a regular bank account in a bank (even) if you are not within crypto. They also
have a lot of regulatory obligations and do not have the competences and talent to
administrate crypto.” ­ S. Ousager
Further adding that banks, especially European banks, who have taken a stance against crypto,
will likely only start to react when crypto begins taking more traffic and business away from them,
and when they are unable to serve their own customers’ needs.
“We believe that in the future everyone will interact with crypto in some way or another (...) the
European banks have been slow, but New York Mellon, JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs, have
all begun offering different crypto products now.” ­ S. Ousager
According to S. Ousager, the trend is slowly beginning to change as more banks are getting
involved, especially in the USA. It is also no longer Web3 VC funds and retail investors, who
are investing in the industry: “We have in our company seen several big private equity funds
establishing crypto funds ­ who have large well­established institutional investors in their funds”
­ L.B. Fjord. An indication that larger institutions and investment funds are beginning to enter
the market as well.
Digishares had no issue getting a bank, however, C. Skaaning does not see DigiShares as a
crypto company:
“A bank was easy for us to get ­ (because) we are not a crypto company, it is important to
understand, we create blockchain infrastructure.” ­ C. Skaaning
1https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/payment-services-psd-2-directive-eu-2015-2366_en ­ 2022­07­13
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
35
==PAGE:40==
So it seems, that only startups that directly are generating revenue from on­chain activity are
struggling with bank accounts, as most banks currently have difficulties administrating the com­
pliance around blockchain transactions.
As more compliance and investor protection are implemented for the industry, it will re­
duce the regulatory risks for investors, while increasing the compliance pressure on en­
trepreneurs. This could likely lead to more institutional interest and thus a larger capital
inflow of capital to the markets. Bank accounts have previously been difficult for en­
trepreneurs to get in Denmark, but in 2022 startups have more options. Projects that
operate on the border of regulation are likely to struggle in the short term, and newer
projects must be aware of the increased compliance of doing business on blockchain.
4.4
DeFi
DeFi is fitting well into a broader trend in the current state of the world, where increased glob­
alisation and working remote challenges the idea of being tied to one place. Often an organi­
sation, person, or a company is with legal terminology referred to as a legal entity, but DAOs
are currently challenging that, since in essence the organisation itself, if fully decentralised, is
community owned with no one being directly responsible, and can often avoid being registered
as a corporation in any jurisdiction. This is also a new concept within law and tax and extremely
difficult if not impossible to control or regulate.
“Legal entities are based on history, I think in the Nordics (it is based on) English court. But that
is not how the world works, you work globally, you work decentralised, you might work a week
for a company, you are not working 30 years for a company that you might previously have
done. DAOs are the future companies if you believe in Web3. (...) Like what should I use a
Danish ApS for? I have one, but work with Americans, the tax­setup I have, the price they pay
me is based on the tax in the US, but there are just so many things that do not make sense,
and I 100% think that DAO is the future.” ­ J.M. Hansen
The current system is according to J.M. Hansen not built for the current world, and for how he
perceives the future will look. He believes that DAOs are the organisations of the future and that
they simplify organisations that operate globally. C. Skaaning, who is not that involved in DeFi,
expressed similar ideas:
“I strongly believe the tendency is more and more towards decentralisation because (...) it is
more effective and makes us free ourselves from some centralised actors, who are taking
disproportionate fees for a certain transaction and creates some friction in the process. So, the
more decentralised it is, and the more the parties in a given transaction can work directly
together, the better it becomes.” ­ C. Skaaning
As C. Skaaning describes, decentralisation also means a decoupling from 3rd parties, as any
transaction can be done through smart contracts, thereby reducing costs and friction. However,
many of the interviewees also highlighted the current challenges with DAOs and decentralisation:
“If you go and look at some DAOs wallet addresses, you find that maybe 80% of the tokens lie
in one wallet, and then they call it a decentralised version (...) Foundations also have these
non­profit approaches and build on decentralisation and then you have DAOs as the next
version of it. Where there are a lot of issues around voting power, and if it is even
decentralised. If you talk about token economy, then it is retail who have 10%, where it is like,
is this even decentralised?” ­ J.M. Hansen
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
36
==PAGE:41==
The distribution of tokens is a clear indicator of how decentralised DAOs are and according
to J.M. Hansen founders and early investors still have the ultimate control in most cases. An
indication that in reality, not much is different from regular organisations as the control still lies
with the core team and other stakeholders.
“Often you have a DAO but also a foundation in Switzerland, and a governance board, and
Uniswap also has a company with offices and a chief counsel. Right now it is a big spectrum,
some are more decentralised than others, others are DINOs (decentralised in name only) in
order to not be under regulation.” ­ S. Ousager
S. Ousager agrees with J.M. Hansen and questions the degree to which most DAOs are decen­
tralised or not, using the abbreviation DINO, to describe those who use DAOs to avoid regulation.
The majority of the startups from the interviews were operating in­between DeFi and CeFi and
emphasized the importance of connecting these two worlds:
“People who want full decentralisation have underestimated the value of banks. If you cannot
trade bitcoin for dollars it would not have the value it has today (...) I have seen some
interesting thoughts around decentralisation. We can go very far by going a little centralised
and with a little trust, we can go much further compared to if nobody trusts each other and go
fully decentralised.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
H.A. Sørensen believes that we need trust in the system and cannot solely rely on trustless
protocols. At least, the way markets work today, trust is required to access blockchain and
withdraw or exchange crypto to a currency that can be used in the real world. H.A. Sørensen
described the trust they provide with e­Money: by having an external auditing firm, audit the
assets that are backing their stablecoin value.
DeFi also enables non­custodial ownership of people’s own assets, giving users full control and
autonomy of their crypto. However, several interviewees had concerns about non­custody:
“That you have your own private keys, taking custody of your own assets, and can facilitate
transactions yourself and they are non­reversible. There is a complete absence of consumer
protection ­ and that is just how it is when you have your own passwords.” ­ S. Ousager
H.A. Aasted have a similar point­of­view:
“There is a usability issue: how to keep track of private keys. People get a seed phrase and
are told here is your entire savings. If you lose this it is gone ­ that does not seem to have
become significantly less of a problem these years. It is still quite hardcore to tell people the
money can just disappear, the same if you send it to the wrong account, it is a risk that scares
some and should scare them, especially if they are not good with tech.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
Both S. Ousager and H.A. Sørensen see a problem with non­custody. It lacks consumer protec­
tion and requires users to be reasonably tech­savvy. Several things were mentioned that could
go wrong: losing access to a wallet, sending the wrong transaction, remembering seed phrases
and storing them safely, etc.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
37
==PAGE:42==
DeFi is an exciting area of innovation, that fits the globalisation trends of the current
time. DAOs are Utopian organisations that conceptually should create democratically
governed organisations. In practice, however, that is not the case, as most DAOs have
token allocations that are concentrated among a small percentage of the token holders
who have majority voting power, so the DAO is more used to avoid regulatory obliga­
tions. Decentralisation and DeFi is in its early stages and problems with non­custodian
ownership where more consumer protection is needed.
4.4.1
Regulation in DeFi
MICA and TFR are not initially covering decentralised services except when these services claim
to be decentralised but are not. The definition of being decentralised is somewhat subjective
and is not yet defined by regulators. In some cases, it might be decentralised in ownership, but
then have a core team of developers that the protocol is largely dependent on:
“We are active on a DEX called Osmosis, which is if you remove 3 of the core developers the
whole project would fail.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
Which according to D. Dehghani from Finsanstilsynet is then difficult to define as decentralised
in regulators eyes: “The service must be operated decentralised. For us it means that you
use blockchain and smart contract technology (...) (and) no single person has control over the
service”. According to him, decentralisation depends on several additional factors that can be
summarised in two points:
1. The service must be operated decentralised using smart contracts using permission­less
blockchains. Smart contracts should be neutral and no one should profit from their use,
e.g. adding a layer of fees that benefit the creator in some way.
2. The governance of the decentralised service must be decentralised.
In D. Dehghani’s view applications on blockchains are split into two parts. One is the smart
contracts themselves that execute a certain code when a user calls the functions on the contract.
And two, the user interface that gives the user access to Web3. As smart contracts can be called
by anyone, anyone can provide an interface, or add layers of complexity on top of these smart
contracts. The infrastructure of smart contracts is generally decentralised, but the accessibility
service, i.e. the front­end, is according to D. Dehghani questionably a centralised segment, as
they are offering something to their users and should be accountable for the functionality and
information provided.
“You provide information to the user, but you also have customers there (...) so the customer
has an expectation that YOU offer this. That you are then using some open source technology
that exist on the blockchain ­ the user does not care about this.” ­ D. Dehghani
The front­end and back­end (infrastructure) differentiation works within a regulatory view, and
should also protect developers, as their immutably deployed smart contracts on the blockchain
should not in­criminalise them for eternity if exploits or bugs make users lose their funds. How­
ever, the front­end, which can easily be changed, should make developers accountable as it
could mislead users, provide wrongful information, etc. according to D. Dehghani. About ac­
countability D. Dehghani expressed:
“It seems disproportional for me, and disproportional to such an extend that I cannot see it can
be done under Danish criminal law. The reason is that if we go out and look how the financial
markets works in respect to regulations and oversight, if someone does something illegal, first
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
38
==PAGE:43==
they get an enforcement notice that says: ‘you cannot do this unless you have permission’. If it
is very severe they get a fine and a notice, and that way it can escalate, until they make it right.
So as a programmer, how can you make it right (on the blockchain)? Should you then forever
be paying for this? That makes no sense legally (...) That is why I think the front­end back­end
discussion has its right to be there, because the front­end can be changed for sure, and be
removed from one day to the other. You cannot always do this with the back­end when we talk
about smart contracts and the blockchain.” ­ D. Dehghani
The front­end and back­end definitions are summarised based on D. Dehghani’s definitions:
• Back­end: No legal repercussions for smart­contract developers if there is no malicious
intent. However, a scenario could play out where a protocol is not decentralised and an
exploit extracts customer funds, as general Tort Law says, if you suffered a loss due to
someone making a mistake, you can make a compensation claim on the lost funds.
• Front­end: Legal repercussions for developers as they are providing a centralised service
even though the back­end is open­source and decentralised. However, it can depend on
if there is a business incentive or not e.g. if the front­end is taking a cut on transactions
through a fee gateway. If the front­end is explicitly stating that they are not offering the ser­
vice, and exclusively provide the interface to connect to the blockchain, while not making
money off the site, they can likely circumvent responsibility.
As the immutability of blockchain has many positives e.g. no third party can censor you, full
transparency, and traceability, it is arguably also an issue in case of criminal activity or sharing
explicit content. Soltype, an NFT startup, allows anyone to publish NFTs to the blockchain, how­
ever, these NFTs can include child pornography, racism, hate crimes, etc. As Soltype cannot
delete the user content published on the blockchain, according to the back­end front­end defini­
tion, they would legally be required to filter it on their website. But in theory, anyone can access
it indefinitely on the blockchain, if they go search for it themselves.
“It puts on the question of okay so, if someone writes ‘Heil Hitler’ a million times on a soltype or
talks about rape, do we censor that? We cannot censor it on the blockchain, but we have an
influence on what can be displayed on the product, we do not have to own it. So when that
happens we will solve it, but we are not preventing it right now, as we do not have enough
traffic to prevent (this) stuff realistically.” ­ P. Puylaert
As P. Puylaert describes, he sees their project as decentralised, since they do not own the
content their users publish, however, in regulators’ eyes it could seem somewhat centralised, as
there is a business, Soltype, generating revenue from the marketplace activity and who facilitate
and in the future must censor certain posts.
Decentralised services will not be regulated by incoming regulations (MICA and TFR), as
first regulators must define what decentralised services are. It is likely that requirements,
such as decentralised governance and having a back­end supported by smart contracts
on the blockchain, are fulfilled. Developers should not be scared of legal repercussions
of publishing smart contracts or allowing users to freely post NFTs to the blockchain,
however, must be aware of their communication, user interface, and services they provide
that interacts with those smart contracts as it is changeable and can be fixed or adjusted
by developers, which could make them liable if they are not proactively taking action.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
39
==PAGE:44==
4.4.2
Taxes in DeFi
Tax in DeFi is different, and there does not exist a standard yet. A fully decentralised DAO with a
sound business model that generates a profit will not be taxed on the profit, as there is no single
person or group of people that can access these funds. The funds are paid out to contributors,
e.g. developers or other staff, who are contributing to the protocol. Here, it is only the personal
tax on income, that must be paid by employees working for the DAO.
“As long as there is no taxpayer who is receiving money or other economic benefit, there is no
one to tax. Accordingly, if no one has right to these (red. funds) in the pool, and there is no
entity who in some way controls it, then they can unlikely be taxed. Additionally, if no one made
an economic benefit from it yet, it is just something that exists, a pool that no one has the rights
to. Accordingly, it is only when the right to funds is obtained that an economic benefit will be
taxable. Similar to employees getting their salary.” ­ L.B. Fjord
It might be that regulators enforce different taxation schemes for DAOs, but as no one can be
held responsible directly it could be difficult if not impossible to enforce.
4.5
Opportunism in Venture Capital on Blockchain
The conducted interviews showed a clear distinction between different types of investors. This
section will provide an analysis of the statements around the investment environment presented
by the interviewees, and result in an overview of categorisation of investor types.
S. Ousager from Januar raised €6M in May 2022, but during talks with potential investors had
some interesting experiences:
“It was obvious how a lot of the junior people (...) who were out and sourcing these deals,
thought it was super awesome, and could really see it become something (with) large interest
(and) understood the case. But, when you then went higher up in the hierarchy, they did not
have the mandate to invest in crypto companies, even though we are in the conservative end
of crypto companies. And that is of course something these funds will have to pay for soon ­ as
they do not have any crypto or Web3 companies (in their portfolio). Like, they have not indexed
this part of the industry yet, and have no exposure to it.” ­ S. Ousager
The juniors at this VC company were interested and the seniors had the final say, indicating
that there exists some hesitation from senior investors around crypto.
Further, Januar is a
compliance­first company and a part of what the industry refers to as infrastructure, which are
indifferent from which blockchain technology that wins, and will grow as long as the market
grows.
P. Puylaert had a quite similar experience. He describes how they had 6 meetings with a partic­
ular Danish seed VC, that invest in all types of technology companies including software:
“(6 meetings were) completely crazy if you ask me, like very long, a lot of explanation trying to
get them up to speed with the whole potential, for then eventually receiving a ‘we really like you
but we want to stay on the sideline (...) to see how you do after you proceed.’” ­ P. Puylaert
This shows a conflicted VC world, that is either reluctant to invest or simply does not understand
the space enough to make a proper assessment of the potential of these startups. When asking
J.M. Hansen about his view of this particular VC he said: “If you have 6 meetings it is because
you have not understood the fundamentals behind it.”. P. Puylaert continues and describes how
they, at Soltype, were also having more success within the crypto industry:
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
40
==PAGE:45==
“We got an investment for 50k after they (crypto VC) saw a video presentation that we sent.
They called us and had a few questions, an they were like ‘yeah here’s the ticket ­ what is your
wallet address’. (...) They would have been keen on doing it in a quite direct way, like here is
the investment. We proposed of course to involve equity in the thing (and) have a longer
relationship. He wanted to get involved in investing in our token whenever that would come,
and to stay in the loop and wanted to be involved in our development. So, we did that and our
pre­money valuation is 5M$ and sold for 50k, 1% in the company (...) with a SAFE note.” ­ P.
Puylaert
Raising money at a $5M dollar valuation after less than a year, with no product on the market
is impressive for Soltype. However, the investor seemed extremely eager to invest and highly
interested in the tokens that Soltype will launch in the future. H.A. Sørensen describes a similar
experience: “We have had conversations with regular VCs, they have been curious and inter­
ested but did not want to pursue it (...) Been a bit luckier raising money in the crypto space,
raising more money and more risk­willing capital”.
Combining the experiences of P. Puylaert and H.A. Sørensen indicates that crypto investors
have a higher risk tolerance than regular VCs. Additionally, they understand the industry better,
however, it seems that from P. Puylaert’s experience, the investor was incredibly eager and did
not hesitate to offer the investment, while being very interested in the tokens. H.A. Sørensen
elaborated further:
“Well the thing about tokens is that they are very liquid. So, you quickly run into people who
want to buy early, and exit as soon as they can. We also experienced this without knowing
about it, where these people buy early, pressure you to get listed somewhere and as soon as
the listing is completed, they talk well about it on social media to then dump their (investment).
Quite predatory. Not long term whatsoever.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
An indication of an investment pattern for crypto investors, that seems to look for projects with
tokens and where they participate in a pre­sale of tokens before the public. H.A. Sørensen
elaborates and explains their strategy:
“Normal VCs are forced to be on the long term journey and can assist you in a lot of different
ways. The crypto investors are looking for a quick buck, which I think can destroy a project, but
now we were luckily able to survive it. We did not foresee that the group buying initially were so
quickly out again ­ a lot of them. It is an industry: find semi promising projects with trustworthy
people, they have a network of promoters, pump the price, and sell their position. They make a
lot of money but it is bad for the projects and the industry.” ­ H.A. Sørensen
According to H.A. Sørensen, the liquidity of tokens has created a group of investors, VCs, and
angels, who run their business by exploiting startups who need money, and dump their tokens
on other investors when it hits the tradable markets. It further seems, that they know, that only
some projects will win, and thus trying to get into as many projects as possible, without wasting
too much time, as in the case with Soltype, where their investor almost only needed a quick
phone call and a wallet address to send the money. J.M. Hansen had the following to say about
these types of investment strategies in crypto:
“There are a lot of opportunists and people with gambling addictions in this market because
your investment is liquid so fast. In traditional venture, when you do an IPO, then it is where
the VC gets their return. But Web3.0 is not the same as Web2.0 and liquidity comes much
earlier, however that does not mean that you should just use the old models, and trigger your
sales button as soon as the opportunity arrives. They are ruining it for themselves in the long
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
41
==PAGE:46==
term.” ­ J.M. Hansen
Further adding that it is something that he is “fundamentally against”:
“Because it is a completely different way (of investing). I come from a founder background so it
does not sit well with me. This is lotto/gambling. You make a spray and pray into 10­100
different companies and if just one of them does something crazy, you check out, and then you
have your ROI. It is gambling and not healthy for anything. Because what you need to
remember, every time you sell it is because someone else is purchasing it, period. So if you
get a really big return, then it is because other people pay for it, and it is often retail investors
(...) Same problem we are seeing on the First North2 for example. Where a lot of institutions
and VCs who buy pre­IPO and sell when it hits the market.” ­ J.M. Hansen
J.M. Hansen calls it the VC Daytrader and further explains how crypto is currently building an
ecosystem for innovation and that these market participants, with their short­term strategies, are
damaging it, both for entrepreneurs as well as other investors. “When you pump and dump it
is like pissing in your pants to stay warm ­ because everything can be tracked. It ruins your
reputation.” ­ J.M. Hansen. And as everything can be tracked on the blockchain indefinitely, in
the future, any activity a VC Daytrader has done on the blockchain could be analysed, so that
these types of investors could be labeled accordingly, and provide information to entrepreneurs
for them to better navigate around whom to trust.
J.M. Hansen acknowledges that they will need to sell their investment at some point, and explains
that this will happen when their VC fund closes. Further clarifying:
“We invest in a founder, as soon as the early investors are out, it is a signal that we do not
believe in the project anymore. When do we feel that we cannot add additional value as
investors? When is it okay to get out? It is an unwritten rule, they gave you a cheaper price,
and you have helped them and if you leave, it sends the wrong message.” ­ J.M. Hansen
The ethical investor operates within these unwritten rules of not leaving until they provide no fur­
ther value. According to J.M. Hansen, leaving early signals to the founders and other investors,
that you no longer believe in the company. “(We are) not out before everyone has made it big.”
­ J.M. Hansen. However, nothing is legally stopping J.M. Hansen or other early investors from
cashing out their investment earlier for a good ROI, even when it might be unethical or break
unwritten rules.
As interest in crypto has grown, and institutional and venture capital has found increased inter­
est in this market, another type of investor was described by S. Ousager, whom they were in
communication with when raising their last round:
“There are also some funds, who found out about this [that they were not exposed to the crypto
industry] and were like: ‘we need to invest in whatever’. And now they have three NFT
companies and some other stuff, and you can just hear that they do not really get the gist of it.
And for us it was they did not understand payments. But they almost had too much of an
investment mandate, and were eager to invest in crypto companies.” ­ S. Ousager
As previously covered in regards to regulation, regulators had to not only understand the financial
aspect of crypto but also possess a deeper technical understanding to regulate optimally. The
same seems to be the case for some investors, both in retail and venture capital. VCs with
zero to little experience in the field will not understand it and have not built any due diligence
2First North is a market for small­ and medium­sized growth companies https://www.nasdaq.com/solutions/nasdaq-
first-north-growth-market ­ June 2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
42
==PAGE:47==
or risk­management processes around blockchain startups. As described by S. Ousager, they
are too eager to invest, which their portfolio reflects, as he negatively describes their previous
investments into NFT companies, hinting at their incapability to assess risk in the industry.
The liquidity in crypto markets has created a group of investors, who are implementing ex­
ploitative investment strategies, where they invest pre­ICO and dump their tokens when
they become available on public markets. They have a larger risk tolerance, compared
to Web2 investors, and are only there for the short term. This behaviour is bad for the
industry and can destroy blockchain projects by damaging their token price. Generally,
Web2 investors are hesitant to enter into blockchain investment, due to its reputation and
their inexperience to assess the potential, or they are the complete opposite, seemingly
having FOMO and are almost too eager to invest in blockchain companies.
4.5.1
Due Diligence in Web3
Due diligence in Web3 could seem different from Web2, based on P. Puylaert’s experience with
a Web3 business angel, where a quick phone call and a few questions led to a relatively quick
and easy investment. However, J.M. Hansen who has been involved with a blockchain venture
capital firm since 2018 is investing more traditionally. He developed a due diligence process on
crypto­companies with around 200 questions to ensure that all the little details are covered, and
think the process is very similar to the procedure of due diligence in non­blockchain companies.
“It [investing] is completely the same, the market, the team, the product. But then it is just
some other questions you are asking in regards to the financial due diligence: there are token
release schemes, token economics ­ it is just a part of that. Within product and tech, it just
matters more (in Web3) because it is tech founders.” ­ J.M. Hansen
Here highlighting that investing in companies involved in this space requires a deep understand­
ing of the technology and asking the right questions, as the technology matters more in Web3.
200 questions sound like a lot, but J.M. Hansen is aware of the competitive nature of VCs in the
crypto space saying that they could, similarly to the investors in Soltype, take a quick call and
make an investment within a day or two:
“We can easily take a 10­minute call with a startup and say you have the money within 24­48
hours. I can promise you that me and my team will need to work fast, but then again it is
something we also offer. The product we have is not something that takes a month, we can
execute a due diligence, if we really get our act together ­ and we can also do legal due
diligence within 24 hours, so we can easily also offer these fast investments ­ because we
know it matters how fast you are. Because we know that time is of essence.” ­ J.M. Hansen
They use this due diligence process as an assessment of the company, to gather data­pointers
on their investments, and to justify to their investors that they have asked all the questions
and done preparatory work as to why they invested in a particular project. However, the most
determining factor according to J.M. Hansen when investing is: “an undefinable thing called the
gut feeling, which you cannot describe”. Adding that the gut feeling is also mostly based on what
is learned through the whole due diligence process and when talking with the founders.
Due diligence is thus dependant on the VC, where a more thorough VC seems to be preferred
especially in crypto, as tokens attract investors who are using a “spay and pray” strategy ­ and
fundamentally do not care about the success of the project as long as they get their ROI.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
43
==PAGE:48==
4.5.2
The VC Landscape
The VC and institutional interest in blockchain industry are fragmented. Both J.M. Hansen and
C. Skaaning see the same investor interest:
“There is a uncertainty around blockchain ­ 9/10 Nordic or European VC’s don’t understand it
and are scared to go in depth with it, but there is also a group of crypto and blockchain VCs
who are really active.” ­ C. Skaaning
“The market for investors is 100%, maybe 10% are interested in blockchain.” ­ J.M. Hansen.
A not unlikely ratio as there globally was found to be approximately 300M users in crypto, around
5% of the global population [122]. Additionally, within those 10% it is not a coherent type of
investor. The investment strategy for most VCs or angels is to get in early on a good deal,
support the founders to increase the market value of the startup, and exit their position when a
certain time has passed, when another buyer creates an exit opportunity, or when the company
IPOs. However, this strategy becomes predatory when replacing the IPO with an ICO as the ICO
usually comes early in a startup’s life compared to IPOs. This means that investors can have a
much shorter timeframe to get their ROI. From the interviews, four main types of investors were
found around the space of Web3 and crypto:
• The Web2 Investor: is an investor who has little to no experience with the Web3 space
but has significant venture capital experience. These investors might be interested in
blockchain startups but are hesitant to invest in the space as they require more work to
convince, or they simply do not understand it or do not see the potential. They do not know
how to risk­assess blockchain startups and have not developed due diligence processes
around crypto startups. These types of investors have the mandate to invest in technology
companies but are not investing in the crypto space, which puts them at risk of not having
exposure to this industry in the future. These are not ideal to onboard as an entrepreneur
either, as they cannot contribute with knowledge or networks in the industry.
• The Web3 Investor: is an investor who mainly invests in crypto startups. They have
experience in the space, understand technology in­depth, and are ideal for entrepreneurs
in the space, as they can guide and connect them to their industry network. If large enough,
they have dedicated due diligence teams with software engineers, who can analyse the
technical innovations and risks. They are in it for long­term growth and truly believe in the
future growth of the industry.
• The VC Daytrader: is an “investor” with high­risk tolerance and keen to invest in as many
companies as possible, prioritising pre­ICO startups, so that they can get access to tokens.
They exploit the liquidity of these tokens and are driven by quick returns rather than long­
term growth, putting their reputation in the space at risk. They do not really care about the
success of the project, but the price of the token, often pushing entrepreneurs to ICO as
soon as possible, and publicly speaking positively about the project on social media, while
dumping their position. Onboarding a VC Daytrader­type may provide needed funding in
the short­term, but bares increased risk in the long­term as it diminishes the initial return for
ICO investors, leading to lower retail investor confidence as the token sale could look like
a pump­and­dump scheme. Entrepreneurs should be aware of these types of investors,
and if they onboard them, they must ensure that they are protected through lock­ups or
vesting periods.
• The FOMO VC: is an investor in the Web2 category, that has realised, they have no port­
folio exposure to the crypto industry, and are almost too eager to invest. They have limited
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
44
==PAGE:49==
understanding of the technology stack, thus more exposed to entering into riskier invest­
ments with a lesser probability of survival. Entrepreneurs could leverage their interests to
secure funding but must ensure that they are not given too much control. And try to not
waste too much time educating them on the space.
The model below (Figure 4.1), shows a graph of the investor types. The green area represents
the type that entrepreneurs should prefer when taking on investors. The X­axis describes the
extent of experience the investor have within Web3, while the Y­axis describes the seriousness
of the investor, where being serious is associated with being calculated and doing deep due
diligence on the investment. The opposite is being rushed, where the DD is either insufficient
or shallow. It is a subjective assessment of the criteria for where to place the investor on the
model.
Figure 4.1: 2­dimensional graph displaying the four investor types. The x­axis describes the
Web3 experience and the Y­axis describes to which extend the VC seems calculated pr rushed
­ reflective of the depth of their DD.
In bear markets, fewer deals are being made and at lower valuations (Section 2.6.2). This might
push entrepreneurs towards more risk­willing capital, hereby risking exploitation by predatory
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
45
==PAGE:50==
VCs. To avoid these risks, founders can implement vesting schemes around selling their tokens
enforced by smart contracts or use the model above (Figure 4.1) to understand and filter out
the undesirable VCs based on their subjective interactions with them. Pattern matching using
the definitions by asking questions to the investor that could clarify their experience in Web3
and their comprehension of your business idea. A trivial but effective model for filtering out the
speculative, potentially harmful, or incompetent VCs.
4.6
ICOs and Possible Improvements
ICOs present a great opportunity for founders to raise capital through crowdfunding and investors
to get in early and contribute to the success of the project. However, several problems exist with
the way most ICOs are done today and will be highlighted in this section. For example pump­
and­dumps by founders or VCs:
“If there is no lockup period then we know what is going to happen (pump and dump).” ­ J.M.
Hansen
It might be that J.M. Hansen knows this, but new people in crypto likely do not, and are not
protected against their own ignorance.
“I am one of those who are most sceptical about ICOs and many of these blockchain protocols.
I usually say 99% is trash, and we can’t agree on the final 1% anyway. The last percentage
survived and is still used today, but then again it is very sparse what those protocols are being
used for that is actually innovative (...) We are still waiting to see: can it really get traction
outside of the crypto sphere itself and also can it survive the regulation that comes, and who
will be standing at the end. (...) Before there is any real economic activity on these blockchains
it essentially is just a science project with tokens.” ­ S. Ousager
According to S. Ousager the broader quality of ICOs is not good and argues that only 1% of
tokens are not “trash”. Further, he is questioning the utility their tokens provide, and the problems
these projects solve in the real world. He is quite sceptical about ICOs and uncertain about how
many of these protocols will exist in the future. Other comments from the interviewees indicate
that raising funds with an ICO is great for startups, but in most cases not beneficial for the
investors, as both selling pressure from VCs and founders with opportunistic motives destroy
the price: “Crypto attracts speculators.” ­ H.A. Sørensen. J.M. Hansen provided examples
of exactly this phenomenon with the projects: Concordium and Dfinity, which both have fallen
significantly after their ICO (see in Appendix A.3 and A.4).
4.6.1
Interviewees ICO Experiences
H.A. Sørensen raised money through an ICO, but only for institutions saying that he was happy
not selling to everyday people. Their token NGM, has been quite stable in its price, reflective
of how their underlying business has been doing, which is something H.A. Sørensen prefers,
as a 100x return on the token price would create expectations that would be difficult to live up
to, saying it is: “slow and steady but reliable”. Their tokonomic model is based on generating
interest on the fiat currency depositors’ deposit to mint their stablecoin, and they use this interest
to burn NGM tokens. This creates deflationary pressure on the price of the NGM token, which
should benefit NGM holders.
Soltype’s goal is also to do an ICO at some point, however, were at the time of the interview
(April 2022) only at the stage of designing their token and tokenomics.
“The focus right now is on the token, so we have plans to raise $1,5M via our token, (which) we
are doing in collaboration with Solana Prime.” ­ P. Puylaert
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
46
==PAGE:51==
P. Puylaert describes Solana Prime as an accelerator that helps projects design their tokenomics
and provide access to investors in their network for the private sale. He further described their
plans for their token, STYPE, and had, similar to NGM, designed a burning mechanism into the
token, that would be executed when their platform was used, which would create deflationary
pressure on the token, decreasing the total supply and increasing the price over time. The
process of their ICO, was then further described by P. Puylaert as:
1. The private sale. Selling tokens at a discount to accredited investors.
2. The secondary discounted sale. Another investment at a less steep discount.
3. The public sale. Selling to retail or other investors who did not get in earlier.
To find investors in the pre­ICO sales, P. Puylaert describes they intend to use launchpads:
“The process would be like this: contact many launchpads, people that would put our project
on their platform, and investors finding our platform and (who) want to get in on the early sale
of our token.” ­ P. Puylaert
Launchpads are platforms that assist crypto startups with financing and getting visibility to in­
vestors. They can further provide technical, mentorship or other types of assistance to teams,
and is similar to an accelerator.
“Our strategy is to get our project on as many launchpads as possible to get shown there in
order to raise as much money as possible.” ­ P. Puylaert
However, being fully aware of investors pumping and dumping token projects, as what H.A.
Sørensen experienced with their first investors (Section 4.5). Soltype’s model is to allow the
investor to sell a fraction of their holdings every month to ensure the stability of the token is
respectable. Adding that he is aware of the pump­and­dump scenarios, where there may or
may not be tokenomics or a solid foundation in place, which have resulted in pre­ICO investors
and founders becoming rich, by dumping their tokens on post­ICO investors: “and this is what
we do not want, of course, so we want to do it safely” ­ P. Puylaert.
ICOs are an ideal fundraising mechanism for blockchain entrepreneurs. Usually, a mix
of accredited investors and retail investors participate through different phases of the
ICO. The main problems with ICOs are lack of accountability, lackluster token utility, and
missing or bad lockup periods. This mostly affects the investors participating in the public
offerings or those who are holding the token as an investment long­term. Entrepreneurs
can freely choose between which direction they want to take and how they execute their
ICO. The interviews highlighted two models: a hype model involving launchpads to max­
imise the potential for successfully reaching the funding target or a private sale without
selling directly to retail at all. Both are dependent on the business needs of the startup
as well as who the end­customer will be, and if it is used to encourage them to interact
with the business.
4.6.2
ICOs and Regulation
ICOs are a great tool for fundraising due to feasibility and availability. However, the problems
around it are clear, and D. Dehghani from Finanstilsynet want more investor protection. He
expresses that the crypto markets are exactly the same as the stock market would be if it was
unregulated companies would promise way more than they could keep, “and you do that, of
course, because you want to pump the price” ­ D. Dehghani. The problem, according to him,
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
47
==PAGE:52==
has been lack of investor protection, the lack of understanding from authorities around EU, and
insufficient legislation.
“Normally when we look at IPOs it is relatively simple: it is shares. It is the only thing you are
allowed to offer the public and we know the rights that are associated with a share. And
associated with shares there are a lot of regulations: e.g prospectus regulation. And all these
rules, that they have the right knowledge, competences etc., is to protect the investors.” ­ D.
Dehghani
Further elaborating, that tokens issued from ICOs can have all sorts of attributes and can be
developed and shaped exactly how the creator see fit:
“ICOs are different, some (tokens) have associated voting rights and others do not ­ the voting
rights are different from those in a general meeting, because it can be voting rights on single
projects, single decisions, or the company. And usually there is no company associated with
the ICO, it can be, but also does not have to be. And further, the dividend right is significantly
different. It is not a right to dividends, but it is a right to a part of the general income, so the
dividend right is not something that is decided once a year, but you get it continuously as a part
of the profit of the company.” ­ D. Dehghani
The customisability of tokens makes it difficult for regulators to develop a standardised regulatory
framework for them. To decide what a token is, if it is a security and can be covered by securities
law or if it is something else, and how that “something else” should be regulated. D. Dehghani
also had some comments on the Howey test used in the USA:
“(The) benefit is that it is super easy to work with on a daily basis (...) because it is a
check­book. The problem is that it is too inflexible. If it was inexperienced people making these
assessments ­ it is my opinion that wayyy to many of these tokens would be classified as
securities. And it is too easy to game, to design your tokens exactly in a way that mitigates
securities law (...) Looking at the Howey test, you would see that almost anything you can find
on the blockchain is a security, so in that way you have to tread lightly. In the USA they are
really careful with using this model, because they do not want to call everything a security.” ­ D.
Dehghani
Due to the complexity and difference one token can have from another, it becomes a difficult task
for regulators to develop clear guidelines that independently from the caseworker analysing the
tokens, would result in the same conclusions as to if a token is a security or not. The Howey
test might be the best starting point, but according to D. Dehghani, almost all tokens should be
labelled as securities, which are not ideal.
ICOs are further not very tax­efficient in most countries:
“The issuer of tokens will by default realise an economic benefit which is normally taxable. This
implies, that if you are raising €20M in an ICO, you must pay tax on them, i.e. 22%, compared
to issuing shares, which are tax­exempt.” ­ L.B. Fjord
Raising €20M with an ICO, is viewed similarly to generating €20M in revenue. The profit that
comes from the ICO will at the end of the fiscal year be due for tax. E.g. if the startup burns
through €3M in the first fiscal year, they pay €3,74M3 of investors’ capital in taxes. This means
3
(20M −3M) ∗22% = 3, 74M
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
48
==PAGE:53==
that the invested capital has a maximum of 22% less value after the ICO (in Denmark). L.B.
Fjord continues and describes the complexity of regulating these things:
“Every time you make a rule targeting something specific, you create grey areas all around it,
which results in legal uncertainty, and you make the tax­system less and less neutral. Typically,
the fundamental philosophy is that a neutral tax system is preferred as it should not be the tax
treatment which decides whether we do one thing or another.” ­ L.B. Fjord
Raising money with an ICO is tax­ineffective compared to debt or equity investments. So, the
benefits of doing an ICO must exceed the benefit of raising capital more tax­efficient. L.B. Fjord
argues that the tax system should be neutral and not have be a significant factor in fundraising.
4.6.3
Reversible ICOs
As some investors are too quick to dump their tokens when their investments become liquid,
they are essentially dumping the project, which overall harms the industry. Further, the fact that
founders can promise things without repercussions or be held accountable for not living up to
their promises creates an issue of trust between investors and founders. After raising millions
with an ICO founders essentially have full control, and can do whatever they please with those
funds. The rICO model by Fabian Vogelsteller described in Section 2.5.3 has the potential to
solve many of these issues.
J.M. Hansen expressed the following regarding this type of rICO “If you have an escrow with
delayed payments ­ why would I pay 100k for something, which is a value that is just promised
to be generated, instead I pay for the value creation during the process”. He also invested in
several crowdfunding projects when it was popular, but has the experience, that they often could
not deliver on time, creating uncertainty around if he would ever receive the product he bought.
ICOs are similar to crowdfunding, where founders get money upfront to build what they promise
in their roadmap and whitepaper. The rICO is a solution to this trust issue according to J.M.
Hansen:
“Essentially, it increases the trust between startups and investors ­ the more trust, the more
transparency, the more rightful the valuation is for both parties, and the more capital will enter
the market, as it creates more assurance and transparency. And more of the serious players
would join the market, as there will be more investors, because they feel safer, and the
startups become more serious about it.” ­ J.M. Hansen
J.M. argues that rICOs are superior compared to normal ICOs for both investors and founders.
It creates some extra work for founders as there does not yet exist a standard for using this
methodology yet, so founders must be creative and get inspiration from LUKSO. LUKSO also
had to be KYC compliant, which adds extra work for founders.
4.7
Analytical Canvas Model
As a result of the analysis, the experience and knowledge of the industry experts are condensed
into two models for entrepreneurs and investors respectively.
4.7.1
Entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurs often rely on different analytical tools to assess their business. Such as brain­
storming and ensuring smart use of time on things that matter and provide value for their cus­
tomers. [123] developed one of the most accepted business model canvases, which helps en­
trepreneurs assess key aspects of their business, including their product, customers, infras­
tructure management, and finances. Its main purpose is to develop, improve or reshape value
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
49
==PAGE:54==
propositions. The tool is, however, a general tool for all types of startups. The analytical frame­
work that this report presents is inspired by the Business Model Canvas and is called Blockchain
Startup Canvas. It is mostly focused on startups, that intend to build a service on top of a
blockchain, but not limited to those.
Figure 4.2: Blockchain Startup Canvas ­ understanding key parts of your business to increase
your likelihood for success with customers and investors. (A zoomed­in version and a clear
canvas model can be found in the Appendix A.2)
The model is divided into eight sections: Tokens, technology, regulation, value proposition, com­
munication, customer segment, decentralisation, and token business model (tokenomics). Ex­
planations and perspectives are provided to some of the questions, to provide the users of this
tool to consider things they have not previously considered. Further, it is intended to inspire
users of the tool to research unfamiliar topics, nudging them towards making more calculated
business decisions, and prioritise their efforts towards where the value creation is largest.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
50
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.3: Blockchain Startup Canvas ­ Tokens, Technology and Regulation
Tokens. A startup that is considering creating a token must ask itself why and if it makes sense.
If the main motivation for issuing tokens is to raise funds, it will likely not attract long­term in­
vestors and be more likely to fall under security regulations when using the Howey test. It follows
that the token has to have utility. Here entrepreneurs must investigate what beneficial utility at­
tributes their token could have to add value to their business. Importantly, they must assess
how the growth of the underlying business is reflected in the token. Tokens can be designed
inflationary, deflationary, with dividends, or payout rewards for users with the highest protocol
activities; however, if it does not make economic sense to hold the token­long term, e.g. with a
very inflationary token, economically rational investors will not do that. Finally, the entrepreneur
must consider how their token is distributed, which depends on the founders and their needs.
Typically, founders want smart money, that can assist them early on and provide networks in
the industry. These investors will participate in a pre­sale, through some sort of investment con­
tract, e.g. a SAFT. It can be beneficial to consider an rICO as it encourages long­term holding,
increases trust, increasing valuations. However, it requires more work and preparation from
founders to design the smart contract that will safely facilitate the rICO, when comparing it to the
traditional ICO, which is trivial. Further, the startup should asses the marketing model of their
ICO. Using launchpads and aggressive marketing to increase the probability of reaching the
fundraising goal, or issue the tokens to a close network of investors with a more natural growth
model.
Technology. There must exist meaningful benefits of using blockchain as the back­end for the
business idea. E.g. ff it is a Layer1 startup, consider why there is a need for a new blockchain and
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
51
==PAGE:56==
what problems it is solving, that other chains cannot or will not solve in the future. Consider the
technological attributes necessary for the service to work: low gas fees, high security, privacy,
decentralisation, etc. and is there a blockchain, that includes all the required attributes? If not,
reconsider if the business idea should pivot into solving that problem. For example, there is
a need for under­collateralised loan services on the blockchain, which is a service that banks
provide in TradFi but is not possible on blockchain yet. The main barrier to this service is having
a way to assess a wallet’s credit score, i.e. build a way to assess trust on a trustless network first,
before building an under­collateralised loan service. Lastly, formulate and publish a technical
whitepapir on the solution, describing the technical details of how the service works.
Regulation. A startup must understand the regulatory requirements they face when building
its service. Does it, e.g. require registration with authorities or is it considered a CASP and
must be regulated under those requirements (KYC/AML)? As regulations are mostly not yet
implemented, how does the startup ensure to mitigate future regulatory risks? Further, if the
service is global, how can it be compliant in several jurisdictions?
Figure 4.4: Blockchain Startup Canvas ­ Value Proposition, Communication, Customer Segment
and Decentralisation
Value proposition. This topic is similar to the original Business Model Canvas model and has
been kept, as it is equally important for blockchain startups as for regular ones. Several com­
ments from interviewees indicated that many projects had no real­world utility. It also does not
have to, but solving someone’s problem either on­chain or off­chain increases the odds of long­
term success. Further, when building a service on blockchain utilising smart contracts, users will
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
52
==PAGE:57==
interact P2P without the startup as the direct intermediary; therefore, there must be both value
creation for buyers and sellers on the market. Financial incentives are popular on blockchain
as it increases user participation, however, in most cases, it is not sustainable. If the returns
provided are not supported by the platform’s revenue, as was the case for UST (Section 2.6.1),
a reduction in these returns would make users look elsewhere. A financial value proposition is
thus more short­term and might attract a more speculative user base.
Communication. To increase transparency and trust, startups must be active on their social
media channels. In the Web3 space, Discord and Twitter are popular channels for interacting
with the community. Further, building a community with high engagement and loyalty create loyal
customers who promote, help, guide, or participate in discussion with others on social media and
forums. Diffusion is a social process, and people often depend on subjective evaluations of like­
minded individuals to adopt a new innovation [124]. Therefore, startups should encourage these
trends, prioritise communication, and inspire network effects.
Customer Segment. Relates to the two topics above. Understanding the target groups within
the business and what value their service provides these groups. Identify which peer in the P2P
service model is most crucial for the business to work and ensure that good incentive exists for
those. In a creator vs. consumer scenario like OpenSea, without creator incentives, the platform
would not have any consumers.
Decentralisation. If the startup is building a decentralised service, it must consider if a DAO
is the end goal and how and why it should be. Doing it to avoid being labelled as a CASP and
become regulated is both risky and not attractive for smart investors who can see through it.
Further, in the future, fully Decentralised DAOs will likely only be labelled decentralised if they
clearly are. Meaning, that no one has direct access to the treasury, voting is decentralised, and
a small group of people cannot collude to have majority voting power. Further, entrepreneurs
must understand DAO risks including governance attacks, and how to mitigate those.
Figure 4.5: Blockchain Startup Canvas ­ Tokenomics
Tokenomics. The tokenomics are closely related to the token and its utility. Entrepreneurs
must develop a business plan around their tokens: understand their operational costs, revenue,
and profit margins. They can further consider if the revenue should be distributed among the
token holders or be kept in the treasury, which also correlates closely to the approach towards
decentralisation. A public cap­table of the token distribution shows investors how the token is
planned to be distributed. It transparently provides knowledge to investors about how it could
affect the future price appreciation of the token. When founders and investors own a large
percentage of the tokens, it becomes less attractive for new investors as the token distribution
is highly concentrated on a few stakeholders. The startup must also secure themselves against
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
53
==PAGE:58==
predatory VC behaviour, and create lockup schemes bound to smart contracts that ensures their
pre­ICO investors are long­term and do not crash the token price of the project.
4.7.2
Investors
Investors that are new to crypto can easily be overwhelmed by the complexity of the industry. As
the industry requires both deep financial literacy as well as deep technical understanding, while
also having a broad understanding of crypto­specific terminology and concepts. Investors are
thus required to not only have a great understanding of how to run a business, but to understand
the whole industry, for them, to determine a company’s value, what problems they are solving,
and how much they matter. Further, if a startup intends to raise money with an ICO, the investor
must assess how the economic model of their token works, including identifying the associated
risks, and how to model them: “If the incentivisation model is not based on anything providing
value, you could talk about staking and all those things ­ it is difficult (to assess) because of the
complexity of it. For example, if you look at LUNA and Terra’s way of burning LUNA to mint
UST... how much does it take to fail this mechanism?” ­ J.M. Hansen. Investors will need to do
these calculations themselves, or ask the startup to provide evidence hereof to reduce the risk.
When asked how to see through ponzi­like tokenomics vs. real ones, J.M. Hansen explained: “If
something is too good to be true, it is 100% too good to be true” adding that if it is too complex,
and there is no logical reason for it, and the founder cannot simplify it for the investors, investors
should be apprehensive.
As investors in crypto, there are often two options for investing: (1) getting equity in the company,
or (2) getting tokens. According to J.M. Hansen, investors in crypto companies will prefer tokens,
as they are easier to sell after a 5­10 year time horizon in OTC markets over a period of 6 months
to not impact the price. However, as early investors in a company, they often get equity, as that
is what the startup can offer at that stage in their life.
J.M. Hansen describes their investment strategy as follows:
“Our investment portfolio is based on our investment philosophy which we call ‘up­the­stack’ in
the first few years. And still, we are looking at the protocol level, Layer 1, and then we have
some middleware and a few in the top. So the composition of our portfolio is listed tokens
(and) a lot of equity investments (...) if you look at the composition of our investments then it is:
convertible loan notes, SAFE and SAFTs.” ­ J.M. Hansen
He further describes how some crypto companies are purely equity companies, e.g. Ledger,
and will not create a token. The up­the­stack investment strategy is similar to S. Ousagers
value proposition to investors in their company Januar. They are an infrastructure company and
arguably lower than Layer 1’s in the stack. Investing mostly in infrastructure and closer to the
bottom of the stack ensures that the portfolio of the fund is indifferent to which technology wins
and the direction in which the market will move in the future.
Below, the report presents a simple and quick investor guide for blockchain investments. Based
on the results of this chapter, nine areas of interest have been found around Web3 and blockchain
investments. It is a first­edition overview of the most important areas the investor must cover
based on the findings of this research. It is supposed to encourage the investor to engage in
more in­depth research of the nine topics and is not a complete guide in itself. The presented
topics are general but expected to be relevant in the future when the industry matures.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
54
==PAGE:59==
Investor Guide for Blockchain Investments
1. Learn. It is crucial that investors understand many, if not all, aspects of blockchain to some
degree. The time spent on learning will pay off as startups looking for smart money become
more interested, while investors avoid blindly investing ­ as they cannot fully assess the
startup’s potential. Alternatively, an approach is to hire specialists who can assist with
blockchain­specific due diligence.
2. Deep blockchain specific DD. Investing in blockchain startups is not that different from
other industries, and due diligence topics can change depending on where in the stack the
startup intends to operate. The blockchain­specific areas include tokens, tokenomics, the
blockchain technology used, regulatory risks, raising capital through an ICO, community,
open­source vs. IP, DAO, etc.
3. Promises. As there are no real consequences of over­promising in crypto, founders can
claim almost anything and have mostly been able to get away with it. If founders have
claims that are too good to be true, they often are. E.g. double digit APYs often either come
with significant risk or come from inflationary minting of tokens. It is necessary to remember
that the yield must come from some real economic activity, through fees, royalties, etc.
Startups that are suggesting token economy models, which are dependent on new user
activity (pyramid schemes) or where the economic model is self­reflective and has clear
attack vectors and scalability issues, like UST, should be avoided.
4. Utility is key. Protocols where the motivation for participation is money are often a bad
sign, as it only works as long as the majority of users are making money or until, users see
a better opportunity elsewhere. If the investment is long­term, there must be a clear utility
and value proposition. It might not exist at an ICO but should be implemented over time
as the protocol matures.
5. Act fast. Raising money on blockchain is different from other industries, where invest­
ments usually take between 3­6 months. For blockchain startups, depending on the stage
of the company, it can take less than 24h. Investors must be ready to support this type
of VC competition and ensure that they do not sacrifice their due diligence processes for
the sake of speed. Optimally, it would be to establish a due diligence process that can be
executed quickly if needed.
6. Encouragement of ICOs with investor protection.
Investors should encourage
founders to do an rICO or something similar, as it creates more trust between the investor
and the founder. It reduces the risk for investors, as they can easily pull their investment
out, and promotes a safer ecosystem in general, where the founder’s ability to execute is
valued over their ability to market and promote their ICO.
7. Long­term. ICOs are not IPOs, and early­stage investments can become liquid within a
year or two instead of 5­10 years. That does not mean that investors should follow the
known models from IPOs, where it is seen as an exit opportunity, even though it might be
tempting. Because, it is a short­term strategy that damages the projects and the industry
while staining the reputation of the investors in the long term.
8. Infrastructure investments. No one will know which blockchain will “win”, or if there will
be a winner, but the infrastructure to support the winners, will be needed. This includes
both infrastructures that bridge CeFi to DeFi, e.g. stable­coins or on­off ramps, infrastruc­
ture that bridges between blockchains, layer technologies that can improve transaction
throughput or reduce fees, or DeFi protocols that can exist cross­blockchain, etc.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
55
==PAGE:60==
9. Tokens are preferred. Tokens are much easier to sell when investors plan to exit. If
investors do not want to significantly impact the price, it might take over half a year by
selling on OTC markets through CEXs. If investors want to exit with equity, it can be
much more difficult, as it must be timed with a new investment round or by finding a buyer.
Further, if the startup is planning to become decentralised and controlled by a DAO, equity
will not increase in value long­term. As the value of the legal entity will diminish over
time, more of the value generation and decision­making is handled by the DAO. Usually,
investors will get equity early on, as that is what is offered in the pre­seed and seed stages
of the startup’s life.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
56
==PAGE:61==
5
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results and the analysis from the previous chapter. It elaborates on
the findings, with a discussion of their significance and their implications for this area of research,
comparing it to similar research findings of other scholars. Further, a reflection on the results
and improvement or adjustments to the methodology will be discussed, finding potential biases
and gaps in the empirical evidence. And lastly, it includes proposals for future research.
5.1
Key Findings
The following section elaborates and evaluates the key findings from the analysis and their
implications and significance for entrepreneurial and blockchain research.
5.1.1
Crypto Markets
The report addressed the economic downturn in financial and crypto markets in 2022 while un­
covering the details of the crypto collapse of UST and how contagion from the collapse led to
several CeFi bankruptcies and investors losing access to their assets. H.A. Sørensen interest­
ingly expressed his criticism of UST in the interview and said that it would inevitably collapse,
which coincidentally, was two days before the collapse began. H.A. Sørensen also mentioned
how he did not feel comfortable saying it publicly with fears of backlash from trolls. A problematic
scenario as his criticism could perhaps have influenced more people not to invest in the token.
And it goes to question if others with similar criticisms were not heard, or did not feel as if they
could be heard, with the risk of backlash on crypto social media. Echo chambers on social me­
dia, especially Twitter and Facebook, have shown to impose great influence on people where it
creates a shared narrative for a group of people around a specific topic [125]. A likely scenario
of the atmosphere around Terra, which was perceived by many as a safe, trustworthy platform
to store money and earn a great interest. But when criticism is met with hostility and trolls, pro­
viding critical counter­arguments to the Terra community becomes impossible. Investors must
be aware of community bias, which includes their own when investing and assessing different
protocols. Even when previously reputable investors such as 3AC and other institutions support
Terra, it does not necessarily mean, that they know what they are doing, or are implementing
proper risk­management strategies. J.M. Hansen said that UST, would not have passed their
due diligence process as their algorithmic stable coin solution is too risky and that generally, no
algorithmic design has ever survived. While suggesting to avoid “youtube” as an example, and
to try not to be influenced by airdrops or giveaways, and instead learn and read the technical
documentation. Had more investors done this, the damages could have been less, however
herd behaviour will influence investor rationality, and has also shown to be partly responsible for
previous asset price bubbles [126].
During bear markets, valuations for startups will go down, and companies with good balance
sheets can acquire the competition. Smart investors will look at the economic downturn as an
opportunity according to J.M. Hansen, while entrepreneurs should do the same. P. Puylaert
expressed how it was positive, that the market was down so that they had the time to build their
product, in order to get ready for the next market upswing. It seems to fit into the hype­cycle
theory [89], that an increase in price results in increased interest and new innovations. And
if that theory continues to hold, entrepreneurs should not hesitate to start a blockchain venture
during times of negative or neutral sentiment. The market events in 2022 around over­leveraging
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
57
==PAGE:62==
and algorithmic stablecoins can act as inspiration for new innovations and new entrepreneurial
ventures, e.g. the rICO (Section 4.6.3), which was an answer to the ICO­boom in 2018.
5.1.2
Hype Cycles
Interviewees indicated that the media’s portrayal of the crypto space was conflicted and driven
by clicks, either by publishing stories about scams and people losing money or about people
making unbelievable returns. This was argued to be contradicting as the positive news on in­
credible returns would push people in, and sometimes into risky projects, whereas the negative
news would push people away and create a negative sentiment and fear. Research has found
that the traditional media’s coverage of Bitcoin in particular, around crime, financial governance,
and economy and markets, has increased volatility in the asset. Negative or positive sentiment
has the corresponding effect and amplification on the asset price [127], which supports the in­
terviewees’ experiences. Other sources indicate a change in tune by mainstream media (MSM).
They correlate the change in news articles from MSM to larger financial institutions moving into
the crypto space and are focusing more on explaining basics about blockchain, e.g. DeFi and
tokens [128].
The interviewees generally agree that the hype and marketing culture of the crypto space is
“annoying”, however, there were split opinions around embracing it or not. Some startups em­
brace it as a part of the industry and see it as a way to build a community, whereas others felt
it was generally unhealthy for the ecosystem. As token prices exceed the inherent value of the
underlying project, it often comes crashing down sometime in the future. MIT technology review
in 2018 [129] described it as follows: “The blockchain skeptics have crowed gleefully as crypto­
token prices have tumbled from 2017’s dizzying highs, but they make the same mistake as the
crypto fanboys they mock, confusing price with inherent value”. The hype draws attention to the
market, both positive and negative, however, the prices of tokens must always come down to
the equilibrium and to what is perceived as fair value. Or perhaps even lower as researchers
have found that cryptocurrency prices are affected by sentiment and create herding behaviour,
where negative sentiment puts pressure on the price and makes it fall lower than fair value as
investors become more fearful [130].
Speculation and these hype­cycles will likely persist as speculative investors, who want to “get
rich quick” will not care much about the technology and why it matters. It is not something
new for crypto, and hype and speculation affect the valuation of any big new idea that comes
along, as there is no existing framework for estimating the value that the new technology will
create in the future [129]. The interviewees expressed similarly (Section 4.2) that building the
technology takes longer than investors think, while investors are underestimating the innovations
it will bring in the future. Diffusion of innovation theory describes how new innovations are
adopted over time [124]. The theory describes how it does not matter how advantageous an
innovation is: economically, socially, conveniently, satisfactory, etc., what matters is the relative
advantage and more specifically the perceived relative advantage. When prices in tokens are
going up, the perceived value increases, especially in retail (Section 4.2.1), however, when it
is the perceived value that determines the price, it is unlikely that technological innovation is
the underlying reason for this. Diffusion is described as a kind of social change, where social
structures and functions in a social system are altered [124], so diffusion of blockchain happens
both with adoption and rejection, as they both have consequences that will lead to social change.
The hype cycle is arguably part of the adoption and rejection process for the crypto industry, as
in times of crisis, the projects that are unsustainable or lose support, are not relevant for the next
cycle. It is unlikely that the diffusion of public permission­less blockchains will happen rapidly,
even though many technologists believe the advantages are obvious and proven, thus will sell
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
58
==PAGE:63==
itself, but the reality is that most innovations diffuse at a “disappointingly slow rate” (p. 7, [124]).
Until the majority of investors in crypto become fully rational and realise this, the hype cycles will
continue.
5.1.3
Regulation in Crypto
There was strong alignment in the interviewees’ views on regulation in crypto, which were gen­
erally positive. The most negative comments were regarding politicians and their lack of interest
in the crypto industry and lack of sympathy for victims that have lost money with crypto. In ad­
dition, a few expressed concerns about TFR regulations and concerns on over­regulation that
could impact the space negatively as it blocks innovation. The version of TFR proposed by
the Parliament [78] reflects the misunderstanding of the technology by politicians. A ban on
non­custodial wallets is both infeasible, destructive, and creates privacy concerns. The criticism
was expressed by the industry (Section 2.5.2) and described by interviewees as an unquali­
fied proposal (Section 4.3). Even though this exact proposal is unlikely to manifest into law,
it showed a strong response from the community and a desire to influence the legislators, by
raising their concerns [131, 81]. [132] found that regulations should not only focus on customer
protection (in fintech), but also ensure that new technologies and innovations are not created
as a response to a regulation but instead as a response to a need in the market. This was also
the argument from L.B. Fjord and D. Dehghani, who both were advocates of neutral regulation
and letting the industry evolve by itself and not push innovation in a certain direction through
regulation. Taxation law on privately owned crypto in Denmark was viewed negatively by the
interviewees, but for businesses, taxation was not an issue in Denmark, except when using
ICOs as a fundraising tool. Fairer taxation on crypto will increase investors’ participation as it
removes uncertainty. Regarding ICOs and regulation, researchers [133] have found that rigid
regulations can reduce the possibility of fraudulent projects, and high enforcement attracts more
investors, increasing the initial returns of ICOs, and recommending governments impose more
regulations to protect investors. Another positive indication of increased regulation and its ben­
efits for entrepreneurs is that the removal of fraudulent projects also creates fewer and more
serious companies, which decreases the pool of available investment opportunities, resulting in
raising valuations and funding opportunities for serious projects.
At the time of writing, MICA and TFR are still under negotiations, and MICA is only missing
the final approval by the Council of the European Parliament. The most significant rule that is
impacting the interviewed startups was the stablecoin regulations, which puts a €200M daily
volume cap on the stablecoin transactions as well as the ban on deposit interest for stablecoin
holders. e­Money can likely circumvent the interest payment part, as they are generating interest
from their bank reserves and providing “payments” to users through burning their NGM tokens.
However, the cap on daily volume is a limitation on their potential growth. Further, the EU are
exempt from MICA regulation with their CBDC (central bank digital currency). This means that
ECB or other central banks can give users interest on their stablecoins, and are not limited
by the €200M cap. They argue it is necessary to preserve the role of the central bank as a
stabilising force for payment systems and to safeguard monetary sovereignty [134]. However,
the consequence is an anti­competitive stablecoin market with a direct limitation for competitive
stablecoins, like e­Money, to the CBDC. The positive argument for CBDC is it will be a stablecoin,
with no interest in exploiting individual payment data, which wants to enhance confidence in
electronic payments, and reduce costs for digital payments [134]. However, in reality, it removes
the control from current stablecoin providers, who are already highly regulated, to the central
banks instead. A control that they likely want to keep, as they have decided to add a maximum
volume cap on privatised models. Ultimately MICA will create a safer environment for investors
and users of crypto, and companies who are not compliant will have to adjust.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
59
==PAGE:64==
D. Dehghani specifically highlighted some of the challenges with regulating the space. As reg­
ulators must not only understand the financial aspects, but also the technical aspects of the
industry. He elaborated that most authorities are not sufficiently equipped with the knowledge
and resources to regulate and enforce the industry. Research on the challenges of regulating
DeFi similarly found that regulators would need to acquire programming skills to be able to deter­
mine that protocols are compliant [39]. Several other interviewees highlighted the incompetence
of lawmakers and their general dissatisfaction with their approach. Future lawmakers and finan­
cial authorities will be required to acquire deep knowledge of blockchain technology. Otherwise,
the regulation will not be built on factual information and will continue to support the image of
general incompetency in governments and financial authorities regarding blockchain.
MICA and Contagion Risks
Will MICA solve contagion risks? Partly. MICA requires EMT stablecoins to have a 1:1 fiat
backing and provide transparency of the underlying assets backing the stablecoin, which makes
UST look more like an ART­type stablecoin, where the requirement is having a combination of
assets backing the token. Terra tried creating the LFG fund and using bitcoin as an asset to
back UST, but not nearly enough to support its market cap. UST would then be defined as an
algorithmic stablecoin, but those are not covered by MICA. This means UST would not have
been banned in the EU.
With MICA custodians and CASPs are liable for the safety of customers’ funds. In the case
of Celsius, Voyager, and others who have become insolvent and frozen user deposits (Section
2.6.1), these companies are legally liable in the EU to pay back those funds. The regulations [74]
describe how a crypto custodian must separate user wallet addresses from its own, file quarterly
reports on their crypto­asset positions, and customers can hold the CASP liable for losses. It
Sounds similar to the requirements of public companies. These regulations, however, might
not sufficiently protect investors as Voyager, for example, is a publicly­traded company with
publicly available information on its financials. However, having issued more than 50% of their
total loan liabilities to 3AC alone. The market downturn and fallout have shown the importance of
non­custodial ownership and decentralisation, as none of the most used decentralised platforms
such as UniSwap, Curve, MakerDAO, Aave, etc. have shown any significant protocol weakness
during these stressful market conditions [135]. It also highlights the few companies that have
healthy balance sheets and the potential dangers of those growing too large ­ by their (Binance,
FTX) ability to invest or acquire the competition at cheap prices in a vulture capitalist fashion.
It shows that further regulation and transparency requirements are needed for CASPs, where
nontransparent institutional and corporation activity has led to contagion risks in the crypto mar­
kets. So, even when blockchain creates more transparent markets, the hidden loans from crypto
lenders create invisible risks that on­chain analysis cannot measure. Retail customers have tem­
porarily lost access to their funds without certainty if they will get them back and without knowing
the risks they were taking, indirectly, by depositing their funds on these lending platforms. Fur­
ther transparency requirements and risk assessment or hedging requirements for lenders in the
crypto space are needed to increase investor protection. Research on the fintech industry [136]
found similarly that non­performing loans create systemic risks and could destabilise the fintech
ecosystem. Financial regulation has a strong relationship with mitigating these risks and should
encourage the industry to build stronger ecosystem­wide risk management systems.
5.1.4
DeFi
Decentralised finance that is built on smart contracts on public permission­less blockchains such
as Ethereum, has enabled new and disruptive business models and created alternatives to tradi­
tional finance. The interviewees were generally favourable towards decentralisation and DAOs:
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
60
==PAGE:65==
it conforms to the current globalisation trends, enables trustless services, and lead to libera­
tion from intermediaries, where users transact directly with each other through code and smart
contracts. Hereby, reducing the overall complexity of online interactions and the need for es­
tablishing trust. Some researchers [129] have argued that the inherent value of blockchain
technology mostly comes down to solving the problem of trust and that the societal cost of trust
is far­reaching and difficult to measure.
However, the arguments against the current state of DeFi are strong, as many projects are not
fully decentralised, and hacks and scams have led to billions of dollars in losses for different DeFi
protocols. In Q1 and Q2 in 2022 $2B has been lost in DeFi according to CertiK [20]. Making
2022 the most expensive year for Web3 so far, with increased phishing attacks and use of flash
loans to exploit protocols e.g Beanstalk Farms (Section 2.3). Highlighting, that technological
risks persists and is expected to rise 214% from 2021­2022 [20]. Securing software services on
the blockchain is critical as an attack on a protocol can completely wipe out a business. Investors
must be aware and entrepreneurs are required to think about security deeply in their services,
as bugs can lead to large financial losses. And as expressed by D. Dehghani, the company can
be liable to investors/customers for losing these funds as per general Tort law.
Aside from the risks of smart contract exploits and hacks, several interviewees expressed a lack
of consumer­ and investor protection. That the benefits of non­custodial ownership were con­
siderably outweighed by the risks involved, including sending funds to a wrong address, losing
access to the wallet by forgetting the seed phrase or password, clicking on malicious links, or in­
teracting with malicious smart contracts. So, to ensure that consumers are equally as protected
in Web2 as in Web3 different safety protocols are needed. Some solutions already exist. The
founder of Ethereum, Vitalik Buterin, has explained how social recovery wallets with dedicated
guardians provide better safety for users that loses their password and can be programmed to
protect against theft as well using delays on outgoing transactions [137]. Delays on outgoing
transactions can protect users’ funds if the wallet is compromised, and a social guardian can
be used to regain access to wallets, where users have lost access. Social recovery is solving
most of the dangers of non­custody, and is necessary for broader adoption, increasing safety
for consumers and consumer confidence.
S. Ousager describes the term DINO, decentralised in name only, as what he believes most
DAOs are when looking into governance token distributions. A report by the blockchain anal­
ysis firm, Chainalysis, shows that the power distribution within DAOs is highly concentrated,
and found across several major DAOs that less than 1% of all holders have 90% voting power
[101]. This aligns perfectly well with the results where the interviewees shared the impression
that token distribution was rarely decentrally distributed. So, currently, most major DAOs are
controlled by less than 1% of the token holders, which are mainly founders or early investors.
Projects with centralised token distributions that call themselves a DAO might have aspirations
to become fully decentralised in the future. S. Ousager expressed that it was a label they put on
their organisation to avoid regulation and taxation. Others could argue that is a big trend in DeFi
and therefore important to have in order to attract users, so used as a marketing tool. However,
as tokens are undesirable to have labeled as securities, it is likely the simplest and easiest utility
to give a token if a project wants to raise capital through an ICO. Similar research that analysed
token holders and voting participation for Compound, Uniswap, and ENS, found that Compound
and Uniswap were extremely centralised, and controlled by a small number of addresses. ENS
on the other hand uses delegated voting, which has more resemblance to a decentralised com­
munity. However, the larger delegates in ENS often do not use their voting power, or just vote
on the same as the majority of the community votes for [138]. Highlighting, that not only is many
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
61
==PAGE:66==
of these DAOs controlled by the top percentage of token holders, but getting eligible voters to
participate is difficult. Voter apathy is a large challenge for DAOs and DeFi governance and
active voters on, e.g. Uniswap and Aave are around 1­2% of eligible voters1. Alternative voting
mechanisms exist that could solve some of the unequal voting systems of many DAOs today.
A thesis [139] on improving voting for DAOs covered how a mix of Quadratic Voting and Coin
Age could increase democracy in voting. Quadratic Voting, is where participants reflect their
degree of preference towards a decision. Casting one vote costs one token, however, casting
additional votes towards a decision requires the squared number of tokens. E.g. voting one
time will require the voter to have one token, voting two times will require the voter to have four
tokens, and voting three times will require the voter to have nine tokens, etc. Hereby, the vote
from small token holders can sway the direction of the vote much further than a single large one.
However, a large voter can easily create a lot of smaller wallets and distributively vote through
those. The Coin Age principle limits these risks, as it provides voting power to tokens over time,
and tokens that are recently acquired will have zero voting power. As this is a fix in the short­
term, it is not a solution long­term, if a large token holder is distributing tokens to other wallets
they own, and simply waits until the coins are of sufficient age to vote with. But it gives the DAO
time to discover and blacklist these wallets from voting.
DAOs are still a relatively new organisation structure, however, J.M. Hansen argues that it will
fundamentally change how organisations work in the future. When DAOs become more de­
centralised, through a more fair voting mechanism, it can allow for broader participation in the
organisations that users interact with, limit corruption and increase transparency. Perhaps a
representative model that ENS uses, is best, as it allows for users to appoint their voting power
to whom they agree with, or deem qualified for ensuring the future of the project.
Decentralisation and DAOs are not represented in any regulatory framework, and developing this
framework require regulators to deeply understand DAOs and the different distinction in gover­
nance that exist. A global framework is needed, as DeFi does not exist within geographical bor­
ders. Sanctions on DeFi will require the gatekeepers (CEXs, on­/off­ramps, etc.) on blockchain
to comply, and without a global framework, enforcement of sanctions becomes complex. D.
Dehghani stated that first regulators must define what decentralised means, and then where the
responsibility lie. A non­neutral smart contract that creates revenue for a company, is not de­
centralised. If 1% of token holders have the majority voting power it can logically not be defined
as decentralised, but a certain boundary must be found. He proposed a distinction between
the front­end and the back­end. Where developers writing immutable code to the blockchain
should not be held liable indefinitely because of it. On the contrary, developers providing the
front­end and the access to the service should be. Related research [140] also expressed the
complexity and difficulties around regulation and DeFi, but similarly, expresses how the front­
end (service) can be separated and be held accountable. They use the yield aggregator service
Yearn Finance as an example, and describe that due to the service holding customers’ assets in
a point of centralisation, and that users access the service through their website, the operators
of the website could be liable if illegal activities were facilitated by the protocol. They [140] also
expand that voters, could be liable if they vote against what enforcement officials demand. As
enforcement is not global but based on the jurisdiction the company is located, a fully decen­
tralised DAO could be difficult if not infeasible to hold accountable. The future will be telling on
how authorities handle these matters, and if voters can incriminate themselves if they vote for
illegal proposals. However, when comparing these statements to what D. Dehghani expressed
around developer responsibility for deploying immutable contracts to the blockchain and being
legally liable, it seems unlikely.
1https://twitter.com/paddi_hansen/status/1554803342081200129 ­ August 2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
62
==PAGE:67==
5.1.5
Fundraising on ICOs
The hot market for ICOs, the VCs and founders exploiting them, and the speculative environment
around them are some of the challenges surrounding ICOs. In 2018, a report on ICOs found that
more than 80% of ICOs were scams. $7,8B was lost to scams in 2022 where $2,8B came from
rug pull scams [44]. It is not only, as previously covered, VCs who come in pre­ICO and dump
their tokens when they become liquid, it is also founders who intend to cash out on unsuspecting
investors. Further, in the bull run in 2020­ 2021, several influencers and celebrities, including
A­list celebrities (e.g. Kim. Kardashian [14]), YouTubers, streamers, etc., were promoting scam
projects to their fans and followers on social media, some facing lawsuits as almost all of these
tokens or NFT projects were scams or rug pulls [141, 142, 143, 144, 145]. However, no one
has, at the time of writing, faced any legal consequences of promoting pump and dump schemes
to their fans. With innovation diffusion, opinion leaders and change agents have the power to
influence individuals in a social system, and their attitude or behaviour [124]. If these famous
individuals are viewed by others as opinion leaders, they can increase the diffusion of blockchain
technology and increase adoption. However, as many of the promotions have turned out to
be scams, their credibility suffers, and their fans get financially hit, which ultimately decreases
diffusion as people’s subjective experience and evaluation of the technology become negative.
The answers from the interviews further indicated that many tokens do not have significant util­
ity. Authorities who use the Howey test to determine if the token is a security are likely to define
the tokens as such (Section 4.6.2). Pre­functionality tokens will, according to the Howey test,
certainly be labeled as securities, as there is an expectation of profits derived from the efforts
of others. However, as it has been a regulatory grey area with little to no enforcement, the
influencer’s pump­and­dumps and token promotions in 2021 are unlikely to have severe conse­
quences, unless they can be proven to intentionally have scammed their audience. And if tokens
in the future are given similar restrictions as securities (as seen with MICA), it could solve some
of these promotion tactics by scammers.
The consequence for a startup to have their tokens labeled as securities are that it requires
the same responsibilities to “investors” as an IPO would. That e.g. includes filing significant
information to the financial authorities, where investors can sue you for missing information or
failure to disclose. This requires significant legal help, which is expensive and not what a startup
should spend its money on in its early stage. Further, there are prospectus requirements with
quarterly or annual reports. The complexity of token issuance also increases as it requires
to be traded at a registered alternative trading system (ATS), which requires KYC/AML/CTF
compliance.
The main problems around ICOs were found to be:
1. Projects are not delivering on their promises.
2. No regulations, thus no investor protection in cases of scams or information asymmetry.
3. Pump and dump schemes or outright scams.
(1) Projects not delivering are not exclusive to crypto projects and are a general problem in
entrepreneurship. Investors can assess the founders’ professional history or the project’s his­
torical progress. However, sometimes there are no track records, which creates uncertainty
around the founder, where trust must be built over time. The lack of consequences if projects do
not deliver is one of the justifications for only letting accredited investors participate in investing
in early­stage companies, as they should have the knowledge to make an informed investment
decision. ICOs, and crowdfunding in general allow anyone to participate, however without any
requirements for founders to deliver on their promises or communicate their progress. (2) MICA
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
63
==PAGE:68==
is proposing prospectus­like enforcement with a whitepaper for startups doing ICOs and sub­
mitting it to the European authorities, which at least to some extent requires founders to be
more transparent in the process and register themselves with authorities (section 2.5.2) But,
until then investors have no protection other than their own ability to evaluate the potential of the
project, which in most cases require deep technical and industry wide knowledge. (3) ICOs can
both have predatory VCs and/ or founders, who at the ICO will dump their tokens on incoming
investors to turn a profit.
The benefits of ICOs are similar to crowdfunding described in Section 2.4.2. It requires low cap­
ital to enter, it increases valuations as the pool of investors becomes larger, and it creates pos­
sibilities to get direct customer feedback from users. Startups issuing tokens can leverage the
group knowledge and include investors in different product or design decisions. Thus increas­
ing customer loyalty, who become long­time advocates for the project. However, it requires
transparent communication, which is time­consuming and drives the focus away from building
out the core business. Interestingly crowdfunding research [58] has found that non­monetary
values carry more weight with investors, which compared to ICOs and blockchain investments
seems mostly driven by monetary values and an expectation of future profits. Arguably, this
could come from the lack of utility in many projects, where the incentive for buying and holding
is only for speculative purposes.
ICOs in their current state are fundamentally flawed, however, this research also presents rICO
as a solution to overcome these issues. The rICO by Fabian Vogelsteller was found to increase
trust between investors and founders, and if founders exploited this trust and showed incapability
of delivering on their promises, investors are able to withdraw their funds. It is arguably a better
investor protection than what MICA proposes. MICA only has prospectus requirements and
registration requirements with the authorities for token issuers. Further, scams become more
unlikely, as hiding the scam over the entire duration of the rICO (which could be several years)
is quite unlikely. The marketing tactics for rICOs compared to ICOs where founders e.g. use
launchpads, might not be necessary for raising the desired amount of funding. Instead, the
startup can communicate their progress throughout the rICO, and investors take less risk overall
compared to a regular ICO. The model also benefits founders, as the decreased uncertainty and
increased trust the rICO creates, has the potential to increase valuations. Further, as the funds
are invested over time, dilution decreases, and investors will invest at more accurate valuations.
Some could argue, that it has negative consequences for founders, as investors can pull out at
any time, but perhaps then, the idea or project is not worth pursuing. The success of LUKSO
also showed that the model works and that they were able to raise $16M in eight months for
an estimated 5,4% of the total future supply of tokens [83]. At the time of writing, the tokens
from the rICO represent approximately 33% of the circulating token supply with a market cap of
$102M and are expected to have a fully diluted market cap at $670M, i.e. when all tokens are
issued.
No one has at the time of writing copied the rICO­model, which is curious considering LUKSO’s
success, and it has been more than a year since they finished their rICO. When asking Fabian
Vogelsteller on Twitter, how come no one followed the success of LUKSO’s rICO an active mem­
ber of the LUKSO community answered: “I guess time will help and people will notice how it is
a good way to start a project”2. It creates some extra work for founders as there does not yet
exist a standard for using this methodology yet, so founders must be creative and get inspiration
from LUKSO. Further, LUKSO also had to be KYC compliant.
2Twitter post https://twitter.com/pogtonio/status/1549134577549168642
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
64
==PAGE:69==
5.1.6
Blockchain Investor Types
The report presents four types of investors that blockchain founders are likely to meet during
the search for funding. The types are generalised to some extend and practically the types are
likely more complex and exist on some sort of type­spectrum, where an investor can have a mix
of different traits. However, these types allow founders to classify potential investors and can
be used as a tool to find patterns of, e.g. predatory behaviour or incompetence. The Web3­
and Web2 investors are both experienced and have knowledge and competencies within the
field they are investing in. They have a traditional investment philosophy with thorough due dili­
gence and are investing in areas they understand. Due to the competitive VC environment in the
crypto industry, the Web3 investors are better prepared to provide investment products in less
than 48h, whereas generally in Web2 an investment round takes 3­6 months (Section 2.4.1) and
optimistically for early stage startups around 5 weeks [146]. The reluctance of some investors
(Web2) can be explained by diffusion theory, where ideas with (relatively) high complexity are
adopted more slowly than simpler ideas, as the requirement for the investor to learn something
new and acquire new skills or knowledge make them less likely to invest in blockchain technol­
ogy companies [124].
The interviews indicate that the other types, VC Daytrader and FOMO VC, are more exclusive
to blockchain investments. The VC Daytrader is broadly invested and targets early­stage star­
tups with future prospects of an ICO. They have built a strategy around pumping­and­dumping
projects to get a quick ROI by investing pre­ICO, then hyping the project on social media chan­
nels to then liquidating their tokens at the launch of the ICO or shortly after. Research [147]
has found that presale (pre­ICO) investors, which often are accredited investors, e.g. VCs, who
obtain tokens at a discounted price are more likely to sell them the instant they are listed, which
results in an increase in trading volume but decreases the overall ICO returns for other investors,
supporting the concept of a VC Daytrader type and shows how their behaviour adversely affect
ICOs in general. The FOMO VC is new to blockchain and is almost too eager to invest while
not fully understanding the space. They see VCs in the crypto space getting incredible returns
and feel the FOMO, making them too keen to invest in anything blockchain related. They do
not have the knowledge or experience to provide mentoring or networking in the space, so will
likely not be desirable for founders seeking industry expertise. Therefore, they will either invest
in startups that are too inexperienced to recognise that the investor is too or startups that are
exclusively looking for money.
Research on fintech venture capital explores similar topics around the fintech VC environment
[132]. They found that in some parts of the world without major financial centers, fintech startups
are likely to receive larger financing, but also more likely to fail. Their data shows, that since
the financial crisis, there has been an increase in investments from VCs into fintech however
with a higher probability of failure for these fintech startups. Suggesting, that most are forgetting
the boom and bust cycles in VC and puts further emphasis on, that VCs should be concerned
about being pushed into hot industries and that the push has been fuelled partly by media hype.
Elaborating that there is too much money compared to too few quality deals, creates an average
reduction of the quality of those deals [132]. This research correlates well with the findings from
this report, hot markets attract more investors, including venture capital, and the media seems to
play a significant role. It also supports the claims that hype­cycles are not crypto­exclusive, and
also exist in the fintech industry. Interestingly, the fintech industry also suffers from too much
money to too few quality deals, and how fintech VCs also have been rushing into these “likely
to fail”­deals, similarly to the FOMO VC presented in this report.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
65
==PAGE:70==
5.1.7
Analytical Framework
The results from the different areas of interest were summarised into two models. The analyt­
ical framework for startups Blockchain Startup Canvas (4.2) and a short investor guide (4.7.2)
that covers essential subjects, when investing in blockchain startups. The frameworks present
high­level tools for both new startups and new investors in the space. It clearly shows from the
interviews that there exist knowledge gaps on blockchains, both for different investor groups, but
also historically from the media’s portrayal of the industry. So entrepreneurial people, who only
have surface­level knowledge of blockchain and crypto, and who want to explore the opportuni­
ties on the blockchain, can use this analytical framework as a guide for their business idea, or
as a starting point for doing deeper research into specific topics (e.g. tokens, regulation, DAOs,
etc.). Investors, who are either new to blockchain investments or want to assess their current in­
vestment strategy, can use the investor guide as a base and a checklist for doing investments in
the space. Experienced investors can, e.g. ask themselves: if they are keeping up with current
innovations or need to do more research if they need to reassess their portfolio or adjust their
due diligence strategy moving forward. Generally, these models should encourage discussions
between founders and investors respectively and be an encouragement for further research on
the topics that are presented.
Other researchers have developed: a Decentralised Lean Business Model Canvas for Blockchain
[148] also based on the same Business Model Canvas used for inspiration in this report. How­
ever, the model they present is a generic business model canvas with two blockchain specific
topics: “Validator Incentive” and “Reaching Trust”. The validator incentive is about giving users
on the network incentives to behave in the network’s best interest, and reaching trust covers what
mechanism that creates trust. Validator incentives are similar to what the analytical framework
(Figure 4.2) is describing in the tokenomic section. About reaching trust they provide an exam­
ple of: “90% of the system is on­chain...” [148]. Trust is not directly referenced in Blockchain
Startup Canvas, but implicit in some of the categories. Trust is also more complex than hav­
ing 90% of a system on­chain ­ because how should users trust the last 10%. This requires
transparent communication, developing transparent incentive models (tokenomics), be compli­
ant with regulation and ensure the safety of investors, e.g. through an ICO (tokens). Perhaps
being more explicit with the Blockchain Model Canvas by adding categories such as reaching
trust or validator incentive could improve the model, however, a KISS (keep it simple stupid)
[149] approach, striving towards simplicity could be preferred to not over­complicate the model.
But perhaps, testing with different topics on the models could determine those that are most
imperative for entrepreneurs.
Additional research has tried to develop the DAO business model canvas [150]. This research
specifically targets the DAO organisation model and how the DAOs design patterns strengthen
value propositions, through a democratic, autonomous, transparent and value­based approach
towards legal, business, and community needs [150]. They specifically provide a business model
canvas, with DAO­specific considerations. It mostly covers the positive aspects of the DAO
business model, whereas negative side­effects of the DAO business model are not included.
E.g. if the DAO is fully decentralised around governance and control, governance participation,
and the managerial challenges surrounding flat organisation structures.
Other researchers have developed similar approaches to blockchain­specific business model
canvases. However, the current research is also preliminary and has not been tested on founders
or reviewed by people from the industry, which provides further empirical research opportunities,
e.g. real­world case studies.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
66
==PAGE:71==
5.2
Limitations of the Study
This study examined blockchain and the entrepreneurial and regulatory landscape around it
using a holistic methodological approach. Semi­structured interviews were chosen to gather
empirical data from experts within the Danish blockchain ecosystem. The research approach
enabled to generate preliminary insights into the topic, however, this section will uncover some
of the limitations of this methodology and discuss the significance of the results.
5.2.1
Methodology
The chosen methodology of semi­structured interviews worked as intended and helped uncover
topics that were unknown to the interviewer at the time. This enabled an iterative interview­
ing style, where newer topics were included in the interview that followed. An example was
the reversible ICOs, which J.M. Hansen made the author aware of during the interview. This
broadened the research area by reducing the bias of the author during the search for research
on ICOs, as rICOs were a niche and not trivial to find online while searching for research on
ICOs. The knowledge and insights gathered from the interviews created a broad representation
of the industry, both good and bad. However, as the results are qualitative and subjective, more
quantitative data is needed to back up the claims of the interviewees and support the analytical
models proposed. The broad methodological approach provides an underlying basis for further
research on entrepreneurship in Web3, where several topics covered in this study could have
entire research papers written about them, e.g. market contagion in crypto markets, tokenomic
design, regulation design, behavioural analysis of venture capital in blockchain, etc. Generally,
the entrepreneurial research field in this industry is still early but will evolve as the industry and
DeFi mature.
5.2.2
Sample Size and Interviewees
The study included seven interviews: four startups, a VC, a tax expert, and a blockchain jurist
from the financial authorities. The four startups operated in very different business areas, thus
representing a broad range of startups: tokenisation (DigiShares), payment accounts (Januar),
stablecoins (e­Money), and a literary NFT marketplace (Soltype). Providing the interviews with
a broad variety of perspectives and challenges contributed to less biased results. Only Soltype
was (on paper) located outside Denmark, while the others were located in Denmark. As this
research was conducted in Denmark, there is a geographical bias to the results, where a more
global geographical representation of interviewees would have decreased this bias. Potentially
a more global sample size would lead to different insights and results. However, within the EU,
the difference might be negligible.
Contrary to the relatively wide representation among founders, only one VC was interviewed.
A sample size of one is small, however arguably, the quality of that VC and the experience he
had both around entrepreneurship, with founder experience, venture capital in Web3, and the
foundation efforts in Nordic Blockchain made him a perfect candidate to be interviewed. How his
perspective correlated well with the other interviewees indicates an alignment in their ideas of the
industry, and was part of the decision to not conduct additional VC interviews. Interviewing more
types of investors would provide more validity to the arguments on the investor side, especially
in the categories presented in the interviews. The results are definitely biased against Web2,
and in favour of Web3 as the interviewees were, or had all been involved in the industry and
were positive towards its future.
The regulatory experts were quite neutral in their statements and stayed mostly to the facts
around taxes and regulation respectively. However, also providing insights into the direction
they see regulation move in, which was generally positive towards the industry, while arguing
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
67
==PAGE:72==
for regulation that does not prohibit innovation, but still protects investors and users of the tech­
nology. Finding authorities publicly against crypto and wanting more prohibiting regulations such
as TFR could have been interesting additions to the data. For example, getting a spokesperson
from the EU parliament to address the TFR regulation and the backlash it had from the crypto
community.
5.3
Future Research
The inductive exploratory research approach presented several recommendations for entrepreneurs
and investors. They present the advantages of blockchain technology and fundraising opportu­
nities that it has enabled while highlighting the challenges and problems that have followed. This
includes predatory investors and founders, limited investor protection and lack of regulation, mis­
information, over­promising, DAOs, and centralised token­distributions, smart­contract risk, cus­
todial risks, non­custodial risks, contagion issues in DeFi with over­leveraged centralised market
participants, rug­pulls and more. Research efforts are already exploring some of these areas,
however, currently, most of the innovation is happening in the industry and less in academia.
The presented findings are preliminary, and the models provided are first­in­kind. Further quali­
tative analysis of the presented models using a field of expert opinions, similar to this report, can
give new perspectives and contribute to improvements. An iterative next step would be to prac­
tically use the model on blockchain startups and quantifiably assess the practical implications
and long­term benefits. E.g. introducing the model in a blockchain accelerator. The quantita­
tive analysis requires a significantly larger data set and control groups, to assess the long­term
effects of using these tools, in order to deductively conclude, that it has theoretically beneficial
effects on the advancement of blockchain startups.
The VC investor types, presented in Section 4.5.2, were based on anecdotes and experiences
from the target group. There was sufficient evidence in the interviews to create these four cat­
egories, however, further research can be done to explore the consequences or benefits of
onboarding these types of investors, and if there are undiscovered nuances in the definitions
presented in this report. An additional research area could be to analyse on­chain data, to un­
derstand if reputable VCs in the crypto space are also exploiting the liquid markets and dumping
their positions early. This is good as it can increase the understanding of the broader implica­
tions of these investment behaviours, and if it is an integral part of the industry, or if it is exclusive
to a selected few. While also provide answers to if some of these investors have dumped to­
kens on retail while communicating publicly that they have a long­term view of the industry. To
support the presented type, the VC Daytrader, and how broadly these investment strategies are
implemented throughout the ecosystem, and how the consequences on the blockchain startup
ecosystem can be measured.
Similar to [150], who made a DAO­specific business model canvas, entrepreneurial researchers
could strive to develop more industry­specific tools around blockchain entrepreneurship. This
research should extensively uncover topics e.g. tokenomics: How to build long­term incentivi­
sation models with a peer­to­peer business model. Uncover the practicalities of de­risking a
blockchain business in regard to regulation and compliance. And how to de­risk the business
from different attack vectors, as the consequence can be devastating for all stakeholders. Com­
bined, it can constitute a maturation of entrepreneurial research on blockchain and provide a
complete framework for entrepreneurs, while promoting healthy entrepreneurship in the indus­
try. This will theoretically increase survival rates, and increase competence and trustworthiness
when approaching investors.
The implementation of blockchain concepts e.g. DAOs, or rICOs, and their applicability to other
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
68
==PAGE:73==
industries could be interesting research topics as well. The problem that e.g. rICO solves, is the
problem of trust between investors and founders. This exists across industries and is not exclu­
sive to crypto. Reducing the risk for investors and increasing valuations for entrepreneurs could
lead to a more lean venture capital industry, and create fairer opportunities for entrepreneurs,
but the applicability of these concepts to non­native blockchain startups must be explored.
Contagion effects from crypto markets and the consequence it has on the entire ecosystem must
be modeled and analysed. Further research should explore how to develop analysis tools, and
how these can be used to predict and prevent contagion in DeFi. Scholars must study how
leverage from CeFi companies can become more transparent, and how to design more robust
DeFi financial solutions. There exist a plethora of research opportunities for entrepreneurial and
technical scholars around blockchain. As the industry is mostly open­source, and the community
around it is very vocal online, it increases opportunities for academia to access data, people,
and knowledge on the industry.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
69
==PAGE:74==
6
Conclusion
This report presents qualitative exploratory research on blockchain and entrepreneurship. Semi­
structured interviews with experts, a VC, and entrepreneurs in the Danish blockchain startup
ecosystem uncovered how entrepreneurship in the blockchain industry operates and its diver­
gence from entrepreneurship in other industries. The blockchain industry is not only on its path
to disrupting finance, but Web3 and DeFi have the potential to disrupt any trust­based online
service with trusted intermediaries. Smart contracts enable decentralised alternatives to these
services to allow for trustless peer­to­peer transactions, promoting new types of token­based
business models that entrepreneurs can leverage. The ICO is the preferred fundraising tool
for blockchain entrepreneurs to raise funds from a crowd of investors by issuing tokens. But it
has inadequate investor protection and does not guarantee execution by founders. Further, this
study covered how many ICOs are exploited by certain founders and investors with personal
agendas and short­term thinking, who “dump” their tokens on new investors at launch or when it
gets listed on liquid markets. It damages the project, the ICO investors, which are mostly retail,
and the overall industry as a consequence of a misallocation of capital. This report uncovered
how specifically the EU is beginning to regulate the industry, where the MICA regulation includes
protective measures for investors in ICOs and other areas on blockchain. However, to further
improve investor protection, the reversible ICO was presented, which was found to allow a bet­
ter trust­relationship between founders and investors, which can lead to increased valuations
and better capital efficiency. By solving trust, rICOs also become attractive to startups across
other industries. Further, combining the model with security tokens could be explored in future
research.
Entrepreneurs building blockchain solutions can take advantage of the presented Blockchain
Startup Canvas model to asses or reassess their business model and areas where knowledge
gaps exist within their team. Several examples of rug­pulls or low­effort projects have reached
unimaginable valuations on blockchain, thereby making it look easy from the outside, and as a
way to get rich quick. The model pushes entrepreneurs towards building projects with real­world
utility and makes them reflect on decentralisation both in governance and around their business
model with tokenomics and different incentive models. Decentralised governance, enabled by
the DAO structure, was suggested as the future of organisations however, with several chal­
lenges in its current form. DAOs represent decentralisation in governance and control, but this
research illustrates that, in several instances, the degree of decentralisation of DAOs is small
or negligible. The token distribution is often concentrated with the top 1% to founders and early
investors, and the notion of a DAO is used mostly to avoid regulatory obligations or for marketing
purposes.
This research furthermore raises awareness around inconsistencies in the VC crypto space. In­
vestor behaviour and motives often showed a tendency for variation. These tendencies were
summarised and categorised into four types. The research presents the novel discovery of the
VC Daytrader type, which purposely exploits the liquidity of tokens on blockchains with elab­
orate marketing and promotion strategies on social media that end with an early realisation of
their investment. The discovery of the FOMO VC an investor type, also found in other research,
who invests based on sentiment, shallow due diligence, and general inexperience and lack of
industry­specific expertise. The findings do not only present a practical guide for entrepreneurs
around what types of investors to prefer, avoid or develop safety nets around, but present frag­
mentation in the VC space on blockchain, where some professional investors must reassess
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
70
==PAGE:75==
their approach to investments in crypto. The Investor Guide further presents nine areas of con­
sideration that investors can practically utilise and incorporate into their investment strategy
moving forward.
The crypto markets have historically been a free market without regulation or enforcement. The
image of the crypto industry has been tainted by frequent attacks, scams, and custodial ser­
vice incompetence with little consumer protection. This has contributed to the industry’s poor
reputation in mainstream media and with authorities and politicians. The contagion effects and
collapse of UST in the spring of 2022 further highlighted the need for better investor protec­
tion and transparency between centralised players. Regulatory measures, including MICA and
TFR are showing the regulatory direction the EU wants to pursue, but do not cover regulation
for decentralised services, and does not necessarily prevent algorithmic stablecoin models that
were at the center of the crypto market crash in 2022. This research presents a likely direction
for regulatory measures towards decentralised regulation, including definitions for DAOs and
fully decentralisation, and a need to define accountability for decentralised services. Further, an
general ideological viewpoint of committing to neutral regulation that protects investors while not
prohibiting innovation, or pushes innovation in a certain direction. Regulators will likely create
a distinction between front­end and back­end services and can only reasonably hold front­end
service providers accountable, as a back­ends built on smart contracts are immutable.
Blockchain technologies enable organisational and financial disruption with possible socioe­
conomic change that could significantly alter our current society. The DeFi services built on
blockchain are decentrally governed, removing the need for corporations and enabling creators,
developers, users, and investors to share the generated revenue while democratising access
globally. People, entrepreneurs, or investors, who subscribe to this belief, that blockchain will
fundamentally change the world must be rational when entering into the space, as it is still early
and include the aforementioned risks. This research provides practical tools for investors and
entrepreneurs to assess the challenges, complexity, opportunities, and disadvantages of inno­
vating and investing in this industry. It also highlights the need for further research and en­
trepreneurial exploration of various topics, including DAOs, tokenomics, ICOs, regulation and
enforcement, and decentralisation.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
71
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
Daren Matsuoka et al. Introducing the 2022 state of crypto report. May 2022. URL: https:
//a16zcrypto.com/state-of-crypto-report-a16z-2022/.
[2]
Sam Richards. Introduction to smart contracts. Apr. 2022. URL: https://ethereum.org/
en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/.
[3]
Cecilia Rikap and Bengt Åke Lundvall. “Big tech, knowledge predation and the implica­
tions for development”. eng. In: Innovation and Development (2020), pp. 1–28. ISSN:
21579318, 2157930x. DOI: 10.1080/2157930X.2020.1855825.
[4]
Carmen Reinicke. Bitcoin has lost more than 50% of its value this year. here’s what you
need to know. June 2022. URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2022/06/15/bitcoin-has-lost-
more-than-50percent-of-its-value-this-year-what-to-know.html.
[5]
Gartner Gartner. Gartner Hype Cycle Research Methodology. 2022. URL: https://www.
gartner.com/en/research/methodologies/gartner-hype-cycle.
[6]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer­to­peer electronic cash system. 2009. URL: http://
www.bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
[7]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin open source implementation of P2P currency: Satoshi Nakamoto
Institute. Feb. 9AD. URL: https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/posts/p2pfoundation/1/
#selection-45.1-45.539.
[8]
Xun Sun et al. “Short and Distort Manipulations in the Cryptocurrency Market: Case
Study, Patterns and Detection”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
13157 (2022), pp. 494–508. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 -
95391-1_31.
[9]
Daiane M. Pereira and Rodrigo S. Couto. “Using Degree Centrality to Identify Market Ma­
nipulation on Bitcoin”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 13140 (2022),
pp. 208–223. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-93944-1_14.
[10]
V Buterin. “A next generation smart contract & decentralized application platform (2013)
whitepaper”. In: Ethereum Foundation (2013).
[11]
Yan Chen. “Blockchain tokens and the potential democratization of entrepreneurship
and innovation”. eng. In: Business Horizons 61.4 (2018), pp. 567–575. ISSN: 18736068,
00076813. DOI: 10.1016/j.bushor.2018.03.006.
[12]
Khuram Shahzad. “Blockchain and organizational characteristics: Towards business model
innovation”. In: International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics.
Springer. 2020, pp. 80–86.
[13]
A. Jasińska­Biliczak. “Blockchain: New Possibility of Realization the Sustainable Devel­
opment Concept in Entrepreneurship”. und. In: Вестник Витебского Государственного
Технологического Университета (2019). ISSN: 23061774, 20797958. DOI: 10.24411/
2079-7958-2018-13516.
[14]
Ryan Browne. Trading in nfts spiked 21,000% to more than $17 billion in 2021, report
says. Mar. 2022. URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2022/03/10/trading- in- nfts- spiked-
21000percent-to-top-17-billion-in-2021-report.html.
[15]
Coinbase. Securities law framework ­ coinbase. Dec. 2016. URL: https://www.coinbase.
com/legal/securities-law-framework.pdf.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
72
==PAGE:77==
[16]
Jamie Redman. Average ethereum gas fee jumps to $20 per transfer, L2 fees follow
Rise. Apr. 2022. URL: https://news.bitcoin.com/average-ethereum-gas-fee-jumps-20-per-
transfer-l2-fees-follow-rise/.
[17]
Ethereum Org. Gas and fees. July 2022. URL: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/
gas/.
[18]
Dr. Sebastian Bürgel. Ethereum Smart Contracts: Hello 1970s :) Feb. 2018. URL: https:
//medium.com/validitylabs/ethereum-smart-contracts-hello-1970s-83c18e3d6398.
[19]
Ethererum.org. Introduction to blockchain bridges. 2022. URL: https://ethereum.org/en/
bridges/.
[20]
certik certik certik. Wormhole bridge exploit incident analysis ­ blog ­ certik security leader­
board. Aug. 2022. URL: https://www.certik.com/resources/blog/1kDYgyBcisoD2EqiBpHE5l-
wormhole-bridge-exploit-incident-analysis.
[21]
Juan Batiz­Benet, Jesse Clayburgh, and Marco Santori. The saft project: Toward a com­
pliant token sale framework. Oct. 2017. URL: https://saftproject.com/static/SAFT-
Project-Whitepaper.pdf.
[22]
DJ moreReese. What are governance tokens? how token owners shape a Dao’s direc­
tion. Mar. 2022. URL: https://decrypt.co/resources/what-are-governance-tokens-how-
token-owners-shape-dao.
[23]
Curve. Curvedao Whitepapir. URL: https://curve.fi/files/CurveDAO.pdf.
[24]
Nat Eliason. Field guide to the curve wars: Defi’s fight for liquidity. Feb. 2022. URL: https:
//every.to/almanack/curve-wars.
[25]
U.S. Securities SEC and Exchange Commission. Analysis of Digital Assets. Apr. 2019.
URL: https://www.sec.gov/corpfin/framework-investment-contract-analysis-digital-assets.
[26]
Rakesh Sharma. SEC chair says Bitcoin is not a security. May 2021. URL: https://www.
investopedia.com/news/sec-chair-says-bitcoin-not-security/.
[27]
Kate Rooney. SEC chief says agency won’t change securities laws to cater to cryptocur­
rencies. June 2018. URL: https://www.cnbc.com/amp/2018/06/06/sec-chairman-clayton-
says-agency-wont-change-definition-of-a-security.html.
[28]
Gary Gensler. Statement. Aug. 2021. URL: https://www.sec.gov/news/public-statement/
gensler-aspen-security-forum-2021-08-03.
[29]
Non­fungible tokens (NFT). URL: https://ethereum.org/en/nft/.
[30]
Dipanjan Das et al. “Understanding Security Issues in the NFT Ecosystem”. und. In:
(2022).
[31]
Siqi Feng et al. “StateSnap: A State­Aware P2P Storage Network for Blockchain NFT
Content Data”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 13157 (2022), pp. 3–
18. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-95391-1_1.
[32]
Kaihua Qin et al. “CeFi vs. DeFi – Comparing Centralized to Decentralized Finance”.
und. In: (2021).
[33]
Tim Copeland. 7 most­damaging bitcoin scams and hacks of all time. Apr. 2019. URL:
https://decrypt.co/6236/biggest-hacks-and-scams-in-bitcoin-history.
[34]
Developers Aave. Overview. July 2022. URL: https://docs.aave.com/developers/guides/
flash-loans.
[35]
Sam Kessler. Attacker drains $182M from Beanstalk Stablecoin Protocol. Apr. 2022.
URL: https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2022/04/17/attacker-drains-182m-from-beanstalk-
stablecoin-protocol/.
[36]
Barclay Palmer. Exploring the differences between a broker and a market maker. Mar.
2022. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/06/brokerandmarketmaker.asp.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
73
==PAGE:78==
[37]
Rune Christensen. Makerdao has come full circle. June 2021. URL: https://blog.makerdao.
com/makerdao-has-come-full-circle/.
[38]
Hayden Adams et al. UNISWAP v3 core. Mar. 2021. URL: https://uniswap.org/whitepaper-
v3.pdf.
[39]
Iwa Salami. “Challenges and approaches to regulating decentralized finance”. eng. In:
Ajil Unbound 115 (2021), pp. 425–429. ISSN: 23987723. DOI: 10.1017/aju.2021.66.
[40]
Sam M. Werner et al. “SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi)”. und. In: (2021).
[41]
Alex Obadia. Flashbots: Frontrunning the MeV crisis. Nov. 2020. URL: https://medium.
com/flashbots/frontrunning-the-mev-crisis-40629a613752.
[42]
Jj. What exactly is a virtual asset service provider (VASP)? Jan. 2021. URL: https://
ciphertrace.com/what- exactly- is- a- virtual- asset- service- provider- vasp/%5C#:%5C~:
text=When%5C%20a%5C%20digital%5C%20asset%5C%20entity,role%5C%20as%5C%
20a%5C%20money%5C%20transmitter..
[43]
Tadas Limba, Andrius Stankevičius, and Antanas Andrulevičius. “Cryptocurrency as Dis­
ruptive Technology: Theoretical Insighs”. In: (2019).
[44]
Chainalysis. The chainalysis 2022 crypto crime report. Feb. 2022. URL: https : / / go .
chainalysis.com/2022-crypto-crime-report.html.
[45]
Dolores Botella­Carrubi, Ana Maqueda­Llongo, and Alejandro Valero­Moya. “Financing
Rounds with Private Capital”. eng. In: Financing Startups (2022), pp. 3–20. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-030-94058-4_1.
[46]
Geoff Ralston. A guide to seed fundraising: Fundraising, seed round, investors: Y com­
binator. URL: https://www.ycombinator.com/library/4A-a-guide-to-seed-fundraising.
[47]
Sam Altman. Dilution : YC Startup Library: Y combinator. Jan. 2022. URL: https://www.
ycombinator.com/library/4o-dilution.
[48]
Adam Hayes. What to form an exit strategy. July 2022. URL: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/e/exitstrategy.asp.
[49]
European Commision. Crowdfunding. Jan. 2020. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/
fisma/items/667392/en.
[50]
Raj S. Dhankar. “Private Equity Investment”. eng. In: Capital Markets and Investment
Decision Making (2019), pp. 245–259. DOI: 10.1007/978-81-322-3748-8_15.
[51]
Anton Shardin. Safe note explained. safe vs convertible note. Dec. 2021. URL: https:
//medium.com/letavc/safe-note-explained-safe-vs-convertible-note-f4999983a0d2.
[52]
Vanessa Kuhlor et al. Venture debt: How it works. Nov. 2020. URL: https://www.svb.
com/startup-insights/venture-debt/how-does-venture-debt-work.
[53]
YCombinator YC. Venture debt:: Y combinator. Dec. 2021. URL: https://www.ycombinator.
com/library/2E-venture-debt.
[54]
Jason Fernando. Initial public offering (IPO). May 2022. URL: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/i/ipo.asp.
[55]
Troy Segal. Disclosure. Dec. 2021. URL: https : / / www . investopedia . com / terms / d /
disclosure.asp.
[56]
Luis René Vásquez­Ordóñez, Carlos Lassala, and Samuel Ribeiro­Navarrete. “Crowd­
funding: Another Way of Financing My Business”. eng. In: Financing Startups (2022),
pp. 31–47. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-94058-4_3.
[57]
Ajay Agrawal, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb. “Some simple economics of crowd­
funding”. eng. In: Innovation Policy and the Economy 14.1 (2014), pp. 63–97. ISSN:
15372618, 15313468. DOI: 10.1086/674021.
[58]
Nuno Bento, Gianfranco Gianfrate, and Marco Horst Thoni. “Crowdfunding for sustain­
ability ventures”. eng. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 237 (2019), p. 117751. ISSN:
18791786, 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.117751.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
74
==PAGE:79==
[59]
Bekhzod Nazarov. Safe as Saft?: Understanding simple agreements for future tokens.
May 2018. URL: https://medium.com/@bekhzod/safe- as- saft- understanding- simple-
agreements-for-future-tokens-3e7af6498878.
[60]
Katelyn Peters. Simple agreement for future tokens (SAFT). Sept. 2021. URL: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/s/simple-agreement-future-tokens-saft.asp.
[61]
SoFi Learn. What are simple agreement for future tokens (SAFT)? Jan. 2022. URL: https:
//www.sofi.com/learn/content/what-are-simple-agreement-for-future-tokens-saft/.
[62]
Ethereum Foundation. Ether Sale: A statistical overview. Aug. 2014. URL: https://blog.
ethereum.org/2014/08/08/ether-sale-a-statistical-overview/.
[63]
Cryptopedia Staff. Initial coin offerings: The ethereum ico boom. Mar. 2022. URL: https:
//www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/initial- coin- offering- explained- ethereum- ico#section-
ethereums-role-in-the-ico-boom.
[64]
Robert Stevens. What is tokenomics and why is it important? Apr. 2022. URL: https:
//www.coindesk.com/learn/what-is-tokenomics-and-why-is-it-important/.
[65]
Aishvar Radhakrishnan. Understanding token 1: Uniswap (UNI). May 2021. URL: https:
//tokeneconomics.substack.com/p/understanding-token-1-uniswap-uni?s=r.
[66]
Magnus Schückes and Tobias Gutmann. “Why do startups pursue initial coin offerings
(ICOs)? The role of economic drivers and social identity on funding choice”. eng. In:
Small Business Economics 57.2 (2021), pp. 1027–1052. ISSN: 15730913, 0921898x.
DOI: 10.1007/s11187-020-00337-9.
[67]
Geoffrey G Parker, Marshall W Van Alstyne, and Sangeet Paul Choudary. Platform rev­
olution: How networked markets are transforming the economy and how to make them
work for you. WW Norton & Company, 2016.
[68]
Catarina Moura. Wormhole announces $10 million bug bounty payout. May 2022. URL:
https://www.theblockcrypto.com/post/148085/wormhole- announces- 10- million- bug-
bounty-payout.
[69]
Uniswap Grants. The all­in­one workspace for your notes, tasks, wikis, and databases.
URL: https://www.notion.so/unigrants/Welcome-to-UNI-Grants-6e3e84967a984a5fb127ae749649ddc9.
[70]
ERC20. URL: https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/3.x/erc20.
[71]
Adriana Hamacher. The 10 biggest icos: Here’s where the money went. Jan. 2021. URL:
https://decrypt.co/53950/the-10-biggest-icos-heres-where-the-money-went.
[72]
Cryptopedia Staff. Initial coin offerings: The ethereum ico boom. Mar. 2022. URL: https:
//www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/initial-coin-offering-explained-ethereum-ico.
[73]
Dirk Zetzsche et al. “The ICO Gold Rush: It’s a Scam, It’s a Bubble, It’s a Super Challenge
for Regulators”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (Jan. 2017). DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.3072298.
[74]
Mica: A guide to the EU’s proposed markets in Crypto­Assets Regulation. May 2021.
URL: https://www.sygna.io/blog/what-is-mica-markets-in-crypto-assets-eu-regulation-
guide/.
[75]
European Commission. Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIA­
MENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on Markets in Crypto­assets, and amending Directive
(EU) 2019/1937. Sept. 2020. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
?uri=CELEX%5C%3A52020PC0593.
[76]
Finanstilsynet FT. Finanstilsynet udpeger medlemmer til ny arbejdsgruppe for Blockchain
og Decentral Finans. Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.finanstilsynet.dk/Nyheder-og-Presse/
Pressemeddelelser/2022/DeFimedlemmer_250222.
[77]
Finanstilsynet FT. Invitation til at deltage i Finanstilsynets nye arbejdsgruppe for Blockchain
og Decentral Finans. Dec. 2021. URL: https://www.finanstilsynet.dk/Nyheder-og-Presse/
Sektornyt/2021/blockchainarbejdsgruppe.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
75
==PAGE:80==
[78]
European Commission EC. Lex ­ 52021PC0422 ­ en ­ EUR­Lex. June 2021. URL: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%5C%3A52021PC0422.
[79]
Jinfa Jinfatax. The transfer of Funds Regulation (TFR) ­ the end for decentralized finance
(DEFI) for crypto currencies in Europe? Apr. 2022. URL: https://jinfa.tax/en/2022/04/
07/the-transfer-of-funds-regulation-tfr-the-end-for-decentralized-finance-defi-for-crypto-
currencies-in-europe/.
[80]
Philipp Sandner. Germany maintains its pro crypto attitude and opposes the EU pro­
posal on revealing and verifying... June 2022. URL: https://philippsandner.medium.com/
germany-maintains-its-pro-crypto-attitude-and-opposes-the-eu-proposal-on-revealing-and-
verifying-ca6ffa3fcc8c.
[81]
Ledger Ledger. Why the EU’s transfer of Funds Regulation (TFR) is a threat to financial
freedom? Mar. 2022. URL: https://www.ledger.com/blog-why-the-eus-transfer-of-funds-
tfr-regulation-is-a-threat-to-financial-freedom.
[82]
Ethereum Foundation. Rico ­ making Icos Fair, by making them reversible by Fabian Vo­
gelsteller (DEVCON4). Dec. 2018. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CA9kTX0Tb4&
amp;ab_channel=EthereumFoundation.
[83]
LUKSO Network. The blockchain for the new digital lifestyle. Feb. 2021. URL: https :
//rico.lukso.network/.
[84]
1inch 1inch Network. DEFI loans explained: Everything you need to know. Aug. 2021.
URL: https://blog.1inch.io/defi-loans-explained-everything-you-need-to-know-f106a475f934.
[85]
Neeraj Khandelwal. Defi transforming lending routes on the blockchain. May 2022. URL:
https://cointelegraph.com/news/defi-transforming-lending-routes-on-the-blockchain.
[86]
RMIT RMIT. Why borrow and lend in defi? 2021. URL: https://www.futurelearn.com/info/
courses/defi-exploring-decentralised-finance-with-blockchain-technologies/0/steps/256206.
[87]
Aave Aave. What is AAVE? 2022. URL: https://docs.aave.com/faq/.
[88]
Ledger Ledger. Defi borrowing: How to get liquidity without selling your crypto. May 2022.
URL: https://www.ledger.com/academy/defi-borrowing-or-how-to-get-liquidity-without-
selling-your-crypto.
[89]
Chris Dixon Lazzarin and Eddy. The crypto price­innovation cycle. June 2022. URL: https:
//a16z.com/2020/05/15/the-crypto-price-innovation-cycle/.
[90]
Mohammed Chahad et al. What explains recent errors in the inflation projections of Eu­
rosystem and ECB staff? Apr. 2022. URL: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-
bulletin/focus/2022/html/ecb.ebbox202203_05~6d1fb8f5b0.en.html.
[91]
Enda Curran. World’s central banks got it wrong on inflation and economies pay the price.
June 2022. URL: https://www.business-standard.com/article/international/world-s-central-
banks-got-it-wrong-on-inflation-and-economies-pay-the-price-122061500142_1.html.
[92]
Allison Schrager. Analysis | why the Federal Reserve keeps underestimating inflation.
May 2022. URL: https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/energy/why- the- federal-
reserve-keeps-underestimating-inflation/2022/05/02/03c055fe-ca0c-11ec-b7ee-74f09d827ca6_
story.html.
[93]
Wall Street Journal wsj. CPI report live updates: U.S. inflation rate reached 9.1% in June.
July 2022. URL: https://www.wsj.com/livecoverage/stock-market-news-inflation-consumer-
price-index-june-2022.
[94]
Avery Koop. News explainer: The Economic Crisis in Sri Lanka. June 2022. URL: https:
//www.visualcapitalist.com/explained-the-economic-crisis-in-sri-lanka/.
[95]
Laura He. Small banks in China are running into trouble. savers could lose everything.
June 2022. URL: https://edition.cnn.com/2022/06/23/economy/china-bank-runs-protests-
intl-mic-hnk/index.html.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
76
==PAGE:81==
[96]
Laura He. Covid has hit China’s economy harder than expected. May 2022. URL: https:
//edition.cnn.com/2022/05/16/economy/china- economic- toll- zero- covid- policy- intl-
hnk/index.html.
[97]
Karen Maley. What’s behind the Chinese Bank runs? July 2022. URL: https://www.afr.
com/companies/financial-services/what-s-behind-the-chinese-bank-runs-20220711-p5b0mj.
[98]
Laura He. China’s shoppers are still on strike and youth unemployment is rising. June
2022. URL: https://edition.cnn.com/2022/06/15/economy/china-economy-consumer-
spending-contraction-intl-hnk/index.html.
[99]
Sophia Kunthara. Analysis: Tech layoffs are accelerating. July 2022. URL: https://news.
crunchbase.com/job-market/tech-layoffs-analysis-h1-2022/.
[100]
Nihar Shah and Maher Latif. The depegging of UST. June 2022. URL: https://jumpcrypto.
com/the-depegging-of-ust/.
[101]
Kim Grauer et al. The Chainalysis State of Web3 report ­ June. June 2022. URL: https:
//go.chainalysis.com/2022-web3-report.html.
[102]
Daren Fonda. Bitcoin and other cryptos are in a ’bear market.’ the Fed might make it
worse. May 2022. URL: https://www.barrons.com/articles/bitcoin-price-ether-solana-
crypto-51651516253.
[103]
Samuel Wan et al. Nansen report reveals Terra caused the steth depeg and crippled
celsius, 3AC. June 2022. URL: https://cryptoslate.com/nansen- report- reveals- terra-
caused-the-steth-depeg-and-crippled-celsius-3ac/.
[104]
Arjun Kharpal. Crypto lending firm celsius asks users for more time to fix issues after
halting withdrawals. June 2022. URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2022/06/20/celsius-asks-
users-for-more-time-to-fix-issues-after-withdrawal-freeze.html.
[105]
Muyao Shen. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022­06­15/crypto­hedge­fund­
s­cryptic­tweet­fuels­speculation­over­lossesxj4y7vzkg. June 2022. URL: https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022- 06- 15/crypto- hedge- fund- s- cryptic- tweet- fuels-
speculation-over-losses#xj4y7vzkg.
[106]
Shaurya Malwa. Three arrows capital confirms heavy losses from Luna’s collapse, ex­
ploring potential options: Report. June 2022. URL: https://www.coindesk.com/business/
2022/06/17/three-arrows-capital-confirms-heavy-losses-from-lunas-collapse-exploring-
potential-options-report/.
[107]
Hannah Lang. Crypto lender celsius network reveals $1.19 BLN hole in bankruptcy filing.
July 2022. URL: https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/crypto-lender-celsius-network-
reveals- 119- billion- hole- bankruptcy- filing- 2022- 07- 14/?utm_source=Sailthru&amp;
utm_medium=newsletter&amp;utm_campaign=technology-roundup&amp;utm_term=
Technology+Roundup+-+2021+-+Master+List.
[108]
Martin J. Young. 3AC files for bankruptcy as Voyager digital suspends withdrawals. July
2022. URL: https : / / cryptopotato . com / 3ac - files - for - bankruptcy - as - voyager - digital -
suspends-withdrawals/.
[109]
Sinead Cruise Shivam Patel. Crypto lender Voyager Digital Files for bankruptcy. July
2022. URL: https://www.reuters.com/technology/crypto-lender-voyager-files-bankruptcy-
2022-07-06/.
[110]
Grady McGregor. 3AC bankruptcy filing reveals founders’ missteps and a $50M yacht.
July 2022. URL: https://fortune.com/2022/07/19/3ac-bankruptcy-filing-founders-missing-
yacht-debt-creditors-owed/.
[111]
Steven Ehrlich. Bankman­fried warns: Some crypto exchanges already ”secretly insol­
vent”. July 2022. URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevenehrlich/2022/06/28/bankman-
fried-some-crypto-exchanges-already-secretly-insolvent/.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
77
==PAGE:82==
[112]
Win Win et al. 2022 Q2 Quarterly Report ­ assets.coingecko.com. July 2022. URL: https:
//assets.coingecko.com/reports/2022-Q2-Report/CoinGecko-2022-Q2-Report.pdf?0=.
[113]
David Hollerith. Binance CEO eyes ’50 to 100 deals’ as crypto slump shakes industry.
June 2022. URL: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/binance-ceo-says-company-eyes-50-to-
100-deals-130807491.html.
[114]
Natasha Mascarenhas. Footnotes on Sequoia’s startup memo. May 2022. URL: https:
//techcrunch.com/2022/05/28/footnotes-on-sequoias-startup-memo/.
[115]
Manish Singh. YC advises founders to ’plan for the worst’. May 2022. URL: https://
techcrunch.com/2022/05/19/yc-advises-founders-to-plan-for-the-worst/.
[116]
The Investopedia Team. A review of past recessions. June 2022. URL: https://www.
investopedia.com/articles/economics/08/past-recessions.asp.
[117]
Jill Jesson and Fiona Lacey. “How to do (or not to do) a critical literature review”. eng. In:
(2016).
[118]
William C. Adams. “Conducting Semi­Structured Interviews”. eng. In: Handbook of Practi­
cal Program Evaluation: Fourth Edition (2015), pp. 492–505. DOI: 10.1002/9781119171386.
ch19.
[119]
Denmark is the EU’s Digital Champion in new survey. URL: https://en.digst.dk/news/
news-archive/2021/november/denmark-is-the-eu-s-digital-champion-in-new-survey/.
[120]
Renuka Tahelyani. Top 11 most expensive bored Ape Yacht Club nfts. July 2022. URL:
https://www.cryptotimes.io/most-expensive-bored-ape-yacht-club-nfts/.
[121]
Alexander Hecklen, Jakob Ussing, and Mathias Sommer. ’Beskidte Milliarder’: Sådan
Blev Hvidvask­sag til Danske Banks Største Krise. Sept. 2020. URL: https://www.dr.
dk/nyheder/penge/beskidte-milliarder-saadan-blev-hvidvask-sag-til-danske-banks-stoerste-
krise.
[122]
Henry Hon et al. Crypto market sizing report 2021 and 2022 forecast. Jan. 2022. URL:
https://crypto.com/research/2021-crypto-market-sizing-report-2022-forecast.
[123]
Alexander Osterwalder Yves et al. “Business Model Generation A Handbook for Vision­
aries, Game Changers, and Challengers”. eng. In: (2014).
[124]
Everett M. Rogers. Diffusion of innovations. eng. Free Press, 1995, XVII, 519 S (un­
known). ISBN: 0029266718, 1451602472, 9780029266717, 9781451602470, 0028740742,
9780028740744.
[125]
Matteo Cinelli et al. “Echo Chambers on Social Media: A comparative analysis”. und. In:
(2020).
[126]
Zhiyong Dong, Qingyang Gu, and Xu Han. “Ambiguity aversion and rational herd be­
haviour”. eng. In: Applied Financial Economics 20.4 (2010), pp. 331–343. ISSN: 14664305,
09603107. DOI: 10.1080/09603100903299675.
[127]
Kelly Ann Coulter. “The impact of news media on Bitcoin prices: Modelling data driven
discourses in the crypto­economy with natural language processing”. eng. In: Royal So­
ciety Open Science 9.4 (2022), p. 220276. ISSN: 20545703. DOI: 10.1098/rsos.220276.
[128]
Andrew Singer. Crypto baffles mainstream media, but should blockchain advocates care?
Sept. 2021. URL: https://cointelegraph.com/news/crypto-baffles-mainstream-media-but-
should-blockchain-advocates-care.
[129]
Michael J. Casey and Paul Vigna. “How we got here”. eng. In: Technology Review 121.3
(2018), pp. 9–16. ISSN: 1099274x.
[130]
Constantin Gurdgiev and Daniel O’Loughlin. “Herding and anchoring in cryptocurrency
markets: Investor reaction to fear and uncertainty”. eng. In: Journal of Behavioral and
Experimental Finance 25 (2020), p. 100271. ISSN: 22146369, 22146350. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jbef.2020.100271.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
78
==PAGE:83==
[131]
IOTA Foundation. A response to the transfer of funds regulation. June 2022. URL: https:
//blog.iota.org/a-response-to-the-transfer-of-funds-regulation/.
[132]
Douglas J. Cumming and Armin Schwienbacher. “Fintech venture capital”. eng. In: Cor­
porate Governance: an International Review 26.5 (2018), pp. 374–389. ISSN: 14678683,
09648410. DOI: 10.1111/corg.12256.
[133]
Hui­Ching Hsieh and Jonas Oppermann. “Initial coin offerings and their initial returns”. In:
Asia Pacific Management Review 26.1 (2021), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 1029­3132. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apmrv.2020.05.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1029313220300312.
[134]
European Central Bank ECB. Central Bank Digital Currencies: Defining the problems,
designing the solutions. Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/
2022/html/ecb.sp220218_1~938e881b13.en.html.
[135]
PANTERA CAPITAL. Defi worked great. July 2022. URL: https://panteracapital.com/
blockchain-letter/defi-worked-great/.
[136]
Mohammad Fahmi Arkanuddin, Ferdinand D. Saragih, and Bernardus Yuliarto Nugroho.
“The key role of the financial regulation in fintech ecosystem: A model validation”. eng.
In: Estudios De Economia Aplicada 39.12 (2021). ISSN: 11333197, 16975731. DOI: 10.
25115/eea.v39i12.6239.
[137]
Vitalik Buterin. Why we need wide adoption of Social Recovery Wallets. Jan. 2021. URL:
https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/01/11/recovery.html.
[138]
Robin Fritsch, Marino Müller, and Roger Wattenhofer. “Analyzing Voting Power in De­
centralized Governance: Who controls DAOs?” und. In: (2022).
[139]
Erik Hellström. Fair Voting System for Permissionless Decentralized Autonomous Orga­
nizations. 2022.
[140]
Ryosuke Ushida and James Angel. “Regulatory Considerations on Centralized Aspects
of DeFi Managed by DAOs”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Sub­
series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 12676
(2021), pp. 21–36. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-63958-0_2.
[141]
Andrew R. Chow and Sam McPeak. How the crypto influencer scam has evolved over
the years (Save The Kids). Apr. 2022. URL: https://time.com/6171307/influencer-scams-
crypto/.
[142]
Isaiah Poritz. SafeMoon crypto investors bring another class action fraud suit. May 2022.
URL: https://news.bloomberglaw.com/class- action/safemoon- crypto- investors- bring-
another-class-action-fraud-suit.
[143]
Jeffrey Gogo. Porn star Lana Rhoades makes off with $1.5m in apparent NFT scam.
Feb. 2022. URL: https://beincrypto.com/porn-star-lana-rhoades-makes-off-with-1-5m-in-
apparent-nft-scam/.
[144]
Robert D Knight. Jake Paul exposed as $2.2m serial crypto scammer. July 2022. URL:
https://beincrypto.com/jake-paul-exposed-as-2-2m-serial-crypto-scammer/.
[145]
Joseph Henry. Crypto scam: YouTuber Ice Poseidon reportedly steals $500,000 from
fans by convincing them to invest in CxCoin. Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.techtimes.
com/articles/271303/20220202/crypto-scam-youtuber-ice-poseidon-reportedly-steals-500-
000-fans.htm.
[146]
Gytenis Galkis. How long does it really take to get your startup funded
by 70ventures.
Sept. 2020. URL: https://www.vestbee.com/blog/articles/how-long-does-it-really-take-to-
get-your-startup-funded.
[147]
Sabrina T Howell, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack. “Initial coin offerings: Financing
growth with cryptocurrency token sales”. In: The Review of Financial Studies 33.9 (2020),
pp. 3925–3974.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
79
==PAGE:84==
[148]
Eashwar Sivakumar and Paras Chawla. “Decentralized Lean Business Model Canvas
for Blockchain­Based Enterprises”. eng. In: Journal of Computer Science 18.5 (2022),
pp. 426–440. ISSN: 15526607, 15493636. DOI: 10.3844/jcssp.2022.426.440.
[149]
Hanke Wolfe. “KISS ­ Keep it simple stupid”. eng. In: Computer Fraud and Security
2004.5 (2004), p. 11. ISSN: 18737056, 13613723. DOI: 10.1016/S1361-3723(04)00065-X.
[150]
Kumar Saurabh, Neelam Rani, and Parijat Upadhyay. “Towards blockchain led decen­
tralized autonomous organization (DAO) business model innovations”. eng. In: Bench­
marking (2022). ISSN: 17584094, 14635771. DOI: 10.1108/BIJ-10-2021-0606.
[151]
Aave. AAVE ­ open source liquidity protocol ­ ETH Reserve status and configuaration.
June 2022. URL: https://app.aave.com/reserve-overview/?underlyingAsset=0xc02aaa39b223fe8d0a0e5c4f27ead90
amp;marketName=proto_mainnet.
[152]
Kaihua Qin et al. “An empirical study of DeFi liquidations: Incentives, risks, and instabili­
ties”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigcomm Internet Measurement Conference, Imc
(2021), pp. 336–350. DOI: 10.1145/3487552.3487811.
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
80
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix
A.1
Crypto Market
Figure A.1: Crypto market size % loss from top to bottom in hype­cycle around 2017­2019 ­
INDEX: Crypto Total Market Cap, $ from CRYPTOCAP (tradingview.com)
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
81
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.2: Crypto market size % loss from top to current market value in current hype­cycle
from 2020­2022 ­ INDEX: Crypto Total Market Cap, $ from CRYPTOCAP (tradingview.com)
A.2
Blockchain Model Canvas
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
82
==PAGE:87==
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
A.3
Aave Liquidation Example
On Aave, a popular lending platform with ∼$10B1 in assets, the liquidation works with a fixed
spread liquidation. An example of the liquidation can look as follows:
1. Collateral deposit of 10 ETH to Aave lending pool at value of 1000 USD/ETH. This will
provide a LTV (Liquidation Threshold Value) of 82,5% 2, which allows the lender to borrow
up to 82,5% of the 10 ETH, resulting in a borrow capacity of 8,25 ETH = 8250 USD.
2. Borrowing at the LTV risk liquidation if ETH falls below 1000 USD/ETH. So the user bor­
rows 7500 USDC.
3. ETH price decline 10% in value to 900 USD/ETH, which means that the collateral value
declines to 9000 USD with LTV at 9000USD ∗0, 825 = 7425USD, and with the loan still at
7500 USD the health factor of the loan drops below 1 7425USD
7500USD = 0, 99 < 1, and thus the
collateral is up for liquidation.
4. Liquidation on Aave is a competitive market [152] and liquidations happen atomically,
where on Aave up to 50% of the borrowed amount can be repaid by a liquidator allowing
them to collect a liquidation penalty for ETH of 5%3, which is taken from the collateral of
the party getting liquidated. So in our example a liquidator repays 7.500USDC ∗0, 5 =
3.750USDC, claim 5% of the ETH, 3.500USD ∗0, 05 = 187, 5USDC worth of ETH, ∼0,21
ETH. Claiming a total of 3750USDC+187,5USD
900ET H/USD
= 4, 375ETH ETH with a profit of 187,5 USD
without gas fees. This leaves the borrower with 10ETH −4, 375ETH = 5, 625ETH +
7500USDC and a loan of 3250USDC still outstanding with a new LTV at 5, 625ETH ∗
900USD = 5062, 5USD ∗0, 825 = 4176, 5USD and health factor of
4176USD
3750USDC = 1, 11.
Not all liquidations are similar in DeFi and research suggest that several optimisation to these
liquidation mechanism could be improved to remove some of the profitability of the liquidators.
E.g. dYdX has 100% can be liquidated and DAI uses auction­based liquidations, however often
debt can be repaid with lower than 50% liquidation threshhold however consequently leading to
more liquidations, and more network congestion during market stress [152].
1at 18/06­2020
2Current LTV of ETH [151] ­ 19­06­2022
3Current Liquidation penalty on Aave [151] ­ 19­06­2022
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
85
==PAGE:90==
A.4
ICOs that have tumbled
Figure A.3: Concordium (ICP) has lost around 81% of its value from its ICO in February 2022 ­
July 2022 (source https://coinmarketcap.com/da/currencies/concordium/)
Figure A.4: Dfinity (ICP) has lost around 99% of its value from its ICO in June 2021 ­ July 2022
(source https://coinmarketcap.com/da/currencies/internet-computer/))
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
86
==PAGE:91==
A.5
Market share growth
Figure A.5: CEX market share from Jan­June 2022 (source [112])
As seen on Figure A.5 above the both FTX and Binance have been able to grow in CEX mar­
ket share during Q2 2022, and especially from May­June, where the UST collapse happened.
Binance grew almost 50% in 2022, and almost have half of the entire CEX market. An addi­
tional indication of investor confidence in these platforms. Evolution of the crypto space, that
has largely been allowed to fight its own evolution, with little to no intervention from regulators
and authorities. H. Aasted said that:
Blockchain and Entrepreneurship
87
