==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Masters Thesis
Prediction and Visualization of Ship’s Collision and
Grounding for Decision Support
András Ármin Csikós
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Prediction and Visualization of Ship’s Collision and Grounding for Decision Support
Author András Ármin Csikós
StudentID s202444
Supervisor Roberto Galeazzi, Associate Professor @ DTU Electrical Engineering
DTU Automation & Control
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej building 326
2800, Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Project Period 1 February 2022 - 5 August 2022
ECTS 30
Class Public
Edition 1st
Remarks This report is submitted as a fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master
of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
©2022
András Ármin Csikós
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis is the creation of an application that is capable of simulating and
visualizing maritime vessels and predict their paths, collisions or possible groundings. Data
generated by the application should be easily extractable, and transferable.
To achieve these goals, a vessel dynamics’ simulation model was implemented in c# based on
the existing program created by Thor I. Fossen in Python [1], and a path prediction algorithm
was constructed.
The application was created in Unity, utilizing the game engine for the
visualization of the vessels and their paths. The engine was also used for the creation of the
User Interface, and its Physics engine for the prediction of groundings. The path prediction was
constructed in such a way, that that the acceleration, the turn rate and the torque of the vessel
is also taken into account, making the predicted follow the turning and the acceleration of the
vessel. The algorithm has a two layered noise reduction system, utilizing data aggregation and
Bézier curves to eliminate measurement noise, while using Catmull-Rom splines to repopulate
data points along the path. To achieve collision prediction, a super ellipse based exclusion zone
is used around the own ship, where any target vessel that is inside this zone is considered to be
collided with. The collision prediction algorithm iterates through the generated paths to predict
collisions with the exclusion zone. To achieve grounding prediction, an environment mesh must
be added to the application. The grounding prediction algorithm iterates through the generated
paths, and using the Physics engine, it checks for collision between the environment mesh and
the vessel to predict grounding. For visualization, a vessel model and a water level shader were
created. The User Interface was built by using built-in Unity assets.
By testing it was shown, that the new implementation of the vessel dynamics’ simulation
model is within a small margin of error of the original Python version, while being more than a
magnitude faster. It was also shown, that the path prediction algorithm works better then the
usual simple algorithm of projecting the heading of the target vessel forward with its measured
speed, especially in cases where the target vessel is turning.
The collision and grounding
prediction algorithms were also shown to predict their events correctly. The application was
shown to be low requirement, as it can run on simulated device from 2010. Furthermore, the
application is also cross-platform, and can be built for Windows, MAC or Linux systems, or
even for browsers, thanks to Unity.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I am extremely grateful for my supervisor Roberto Galeazzi for his guidance and feedback
throughout this project, his invaluable insights on maritime vessels, his literature suggestions,
and his seemingly endless patience.
I am also grateful for Dimitrios Papageorgiou for his help with vessel automation, and Peter
Nicholas Hansen for his help in understanding the vessel dynamics’ simulation model.
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Scope and Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Vessel Simulators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Path Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Research and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Used Technologies
9
3.1
Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Blender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Unity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Vessel Simulator
13
4.1
Reference Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Simulation Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Running The simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Important Simulation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Mat3x3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Implementation
17
5.1
Domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Data Collection Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Simulation Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Path Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.6
Collision Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.7
Grounding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.8
Data Exports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.9
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.10 Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Results
59
6.1
Vessel Simulator Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Path Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3
Collision Prediction and Grounding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.4
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.5
Ease of Use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7
Discussion and Conclusion
73
7.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.2
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
v
==PAGE:7==
Bibliography
77
A Unity Lifecycle [29]
79
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The purpose of this thesis is to create a user friendly Unity based application capable of
simulating maritime equipment and vessels of given types and sizes, that is also able to predict
the path of vessels and potential collisions and groundings. In section 1.1 the Background and
motivation is presented, in section 1.2 the problem statement is presented, in section 1.3 the
projects scope and the contribution are presented, and in section 1.4 an outline of the thesis
is given.
1.1
Background and Motivation
Collision and grounding account for about 50% of the yearly incidents [2], and human error
plays an important role in the occurrence and unfolding of such events. Several factors con-
tribute to this, including the harsh operational conditions and the limited awareness about own
ship’s surroundings. The integration of advanced sensor technologies within computational
algorithms for situation understanding and action anticipation may lead to the development
of novel decision support systems that should provide better operational insight to the ship
navigator.
The development of such decision support system requires a high fidelity simulation environ-
ment, that can be quickly iterated and tested, gives feedback that is easy to understand and
can be easily customized. A system like this also requires some input data from its environ-
ment, such as other vessels path, or terrain in the vessel’s path. With these data, a well made
algorithm can predict collisions, on which the decision support system can act.
As it can be seen in Chapter 2 such a simulation environment is not that easy to come by,
as some have really low level simulations, others are too specialized in other areas such as
equipment integrity.
One of the problems this thesis aims to solve is this, by creating an
application that is both flexible to be easily adapted to custom scenarios, and has an accurate
vessel simulation.
The decision support systems currently used by researchers at DTU on the Shipping Lab project
[3] uses a linear path prediction, where the speed of the target vessel is predicted forward along
its heading. This is usually enough if on open waters with large vessels, but is problematic
if the space is more confined, as in restricted waters, fjords and like. The other problem this
thesis aims to solve is a better path prediction based solely on noisy position data that can be
acquired from radars or lidars.
1.2
Problem statement
One of the problem that this thesis deals with is the lack of high fidelity easy to use and
customize vessel simulators. In an ideal simulation environment the user should be able to
set up and simulate several vessels simultaneously, run it real time, or at custom speed. The
simulation should be easily modifiable and iterable from an external program. To develop this
simulator, Unity was chosen as the development environment. It is free, easy to use and cross-
platform. It has a physics engine that can be exploited for some functions, such as environment
collision detection. It also has a simple rendering pipeline for 3D simulation and has an easy
to create UI system, all of which are required for such a simulator. The other problem that
the thesis deals with is a better path prediction algorithm for collision prediction. The path
prediction needs to eliminate as much of the noise from the data as possible, calculate linear
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3. SCOPE AND CONTRIBUTION
acceleration, heading, turning acceleration, and generate the predicted path of the vessel based
on this data. The collision prediction based on the predicted path and the path of the own
ship is cross checking the position of the vessel with the own ship’s exclusion zone along the
predicted path, projecting the own ship’s position into the future as well.
1.3
Scope and Contribution
In this thesis a Unity application is developed that can simulate maritime vessels, and predict
vessel paths and collisions. A user of this program will be able to create an arbitrary number
of vessels, that are separately simulated in a common environment. These vessels are highly
customizable, as the user can set its dimensions, thrust force, draft, controller type and base
model. The path can be set by setting waypoints that the vessel will follow using an Line Of
Sight or LOS path follower algorithm [4].
The path prediction is based on the current path of a vessel, using its average linear speed,
average acceleration, average turn rate and average torque of the vessel in a given time frame.
This is highly customizable as well.
The following is a brief summary of the contribution of this thesis.
The application uses a vessel dynamics’ simulation model created by Thor I. Fossen [1], that
is re-implemented in C# to be used inside Unity. It uses a six degree of freedom model, and
can be used to implement different vessel models into the application. This is later referenced
as the vessel dynamics simulation.
The program uses two levels of simulation, where after all the data is given by the user it runs
the vessel dynamics simulation to generate all paths for the vessels, then a second level, where
the user can observe the simulation, and see predicted paths, and predicted collisions. The
simulator can be paused, reset, and sped-up. The user can choose between several options,
such as camera angles, paths rendered in the 3D environment, and the own ship’s exclusion
zone for which the algorithm can predict collisions.
The vessels’ setup values can be exported including or excluding the generated simulation by
the vessel dynamics simulation. These exported values then can be imported again to replay an
earlier simulation. This data is easily transferable with basic networking protocols for example
with REST API, as the data is stored in Json format.
Testing shows that the application works as intended, all of the above listed functions are
implemented successfully.
Testing also shows, that the created path prediction algorithm
creates a better estimation for the vessel’s path than just a linear projection. Collision prediction
based on this prediction are correctly shown to the user each time.
1.4
Thesis Overview
This section presents a brief overview of the thesis chapters.
Literature Review
In this chapter the relevant literature that is used in this thesis is presented along with
the research and development during the writing of the thesis. Most of the literature
used in this thesis are either the existing algorithms used for the vessel simulation and
control, or the basis for the path prediction algorithm. This chapter also presents the
trial and error phase of the development.
Used Technologies
In this chapter the used technologies are summarised, and the basic workings of the
Unity engine is presented.
2
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.4. THESIS OVERVIEW
Vessel Simulator
In this chapter a brief explanation of the vessel dynamics simulation model is presented.
It also describes the coordinate systems used in the application.
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the Unity code including the vessel dynamics
simulation’s Unity implementation, the path prediction algorithm, the simulation engine
that runs the unity simulation, the collision prediction, the grounding prediction and the
creation of the User Interface. It also explains how data is passed through the system,
and how the algorithms work.
Results
This chapter presents the simulation tests’ results of the application. Compares the Unity
implementation of the Vessel Simulator to the python implementation, and provides ex-
amples for the path and collision prediction.
Discussion and Conclusion
This chapter presents the discussion of the results and draws some conclusions. In the
discussion recommendations for the future use of the application is presented. In the
conclusions the goals set in the start of the thesis and results are evaluated.
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.4. THESIS OVERVIEW
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
In this chapter the used literature and the used technologies are presented. Section 2.1 in-
troduces some of the reviewed vessel simulators and their properties, section 2.2 shows some
ideas and algorithms that are used as the basis of the path prediction algorithm, and section
2.3 elaborates on the used technologies, in particular Python, the inner works of Unity and the
used libraries.
2.1
Vessel Simulators
Before starting with the creation of the application, several already existing maritime simulation
engine were examined. These vary from games such as Ship Simulator [5] or their newest to-be
released simulator NAUTIS Home [6] that promises to have much more realistic models for
simulation, to industry cooperative projects such as the Open Simulation Platform [7], which
is more of a project for creating maritime equipment and vessels, as it states that it ”...can
be used to solve challenges with designing, building, integrating, commissioning and operating
complex, integrated systems.” [8].
However these projects are either too complicated, and are hard to use for decision testing,
or too simple in their level of simulation, as there is no meaningful use in creating a decision
control algorithm around them. The ideally, a simulator is easy to set up and use, and can be
rapidly iterated. For This purpose, there is a Python project by Thor I. Fossen, that is based
on his book ”Handbook of Marine Craft Hydrodynamics and Motion Control” [9]. This book
proved useful in helping to understand how both marine crafts and the Python project works.
The Python code was re-implemented in C# for this thesis, as it was both simple and well
defined.
2.2
Path Prediction
Path prediction of a vessel requires a way to receive the already run path of the vessel, noise
reduction of this measured path, velocity, acceleration, and turn rate calculation, then the
prediction of the future positions based on this data.
The algorithm assumes a noisy, but already processed data, that connects positions and time
stamps with vessels.
Noise Reduction
During the development of the path prediction algorithm it was known to the author that noise
reduction in the path can be done with the use of Bézier curves. The noise reduction capability
of the Bézier curve was proved several times before [10], and is due to the fact, that Bézier
curve is approximating the points an not interpolating them, meaning it will curve towards the
point with an associated weight value as shown in figure 2.1.
Given this information, the study on the problem by Andrej Blejec [10], and the testing of such
implementation in the application, Bézier curve was chosen as the basis for noise reduction.
5
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.3. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Figure 2.1: Bézier Approximation in a quadratic example [11]
Generating Predictions
When dealing with path prediction, the main concern is the subject of the prediction in the
sense, that a pedestrian will likely have a different type of expected path, than a 70000 tonne
maritime vessel. This means that choosing a right prediction model is key in generating a
correct prediction.
To be able to create such a model, one must lay down some assumptions.
• All non-recreational or large vessels have a destination where they are headed
• These vessels will choose the best available path towards their destination, that is optimal
in travel time and fuel consumption
• All vessels obey the COLREGs rules [12]
Based only on these three assumptions, one can safely assume that these vessels will move in
a straight line most of the time and take only the most necessary turns. With this information,
building a path prediction algorithm is straightforward, one must observe the past path and
the changes in direction or acceleration and apply it forward, where saying that linear accel-
eration and turn rate acceleration approaches zero at all times, reflects these vessels closely.
Additionally but not necessarily one can define a TurnRateAcceleration that steers a turning
vessel onto a straight course.
2.3
Research and Development
During the start of the development, three different possible solutions were proposed for the
application. These were tried and tested, then a decision was made to follow one of them:
• Creating a Unity Physics based simulation, exploiting the already existing Physics engine,
• Running the python code of the vessel dynamics’ simulation model from Unity,
• Re-implementing the vessel dynamics’ simulation model in C# in Unity.
The first try was the Unity Physics engine based solution, then a Unity based Python Code
Runner. Finally, the third option proved to be the best overall, thus it made into the final
version of the application. Some of the scripts of the first try was left in the project so they
can be shown, but are not used in the final version.
2.3.1
Unity Based Simulation
Based on Thor I. Fossen’s book [9] the pressure carrying a marine vessel can be divided into
two forces:
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.3. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
• The buoyancy force due to the hydrostatic pressure, that is proportional to the fluid
displacement of the vessel
• And the hydrodynamic force due to the hydrodynamic pressure, that is approximately
proportional to the square of the relative speed to the water.
This suggests that two different scripts should be created to handle these forces.
Buoyancy Script
The first test idea was to create a script that works like buoyancy and easy to implement for
testing. The actual physically sound model of buoyancy would have been made at a later
stage.
The buoyancy scripts works by applying a force on the vessel’s rigid body at predefined points
on it, based on the depth of these points in the surrounding liquid. This version of the script
was created to test these effects in the physics engine, and it worked surprisingly well, and
looked visually correct, even though, the applied physics here is not perfect, as the buoyancy
force is normally calculated as
B = ρ ∗V ∗g
(2.1)
Where ρ is the fluid density, V is the volume of the displaced fluid and g is gravity.
The script however gives a good approximation to this equation, as the force applied to the body
is proportional volume of the displaced fluid, which is given a cube-like body is approximately
proportional to the body’s depth in said fluid.
Figure 2.2: Buoyancy Script logic
Figure 2.2 gives an idea on how this script behaves in two dimensions. The points A and B in
red are body frame fixed buoyancy points, where the script calculates the buoyancy, and the
green point C is the center of mass of the vessel. The center of mass can be moved relative
to the body frame, and it impacts how much the vessel is tilted in any direction. There is a
dynamic amount of drag applied to the rigid body through its Physics script component where
the deeper the vessel is in the water the larger the drag is. This is required by the Physics
Engine.
An important note to add to this script idea, that it only works correctly as if there is a positive
reserve buoyancy left in the vessel.
Hydrodynamic Drag Script
The main idea with this script was to create a simulation that can be effected by forces at any
desired points on the vessel’s body, creating a model that can be more accurate than models
that use a point mass and a singular hydrodynamic coeﬀicient.
The first idea was to create a vessel from predefined shapes, for which the hydrodynamic
coeﬀicient is known [13]. It was known to the author, that this approach will have problems,
the calculated coeﬀicients will only approximate the actual coeﬀicient, but in the first phase
the creation of a baseline for the simulation was the primary goal. Here the script uses the
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.3. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
quadratic drag formula:
Fdrag = −1
2Cfρv2A
Where first, the the area of the vessel’s body that faces the water flow direction is calculated,
then the Fdrag based on the building blocks’ hydrodynamic coeﬀicient. Finally the drag can
be applied to the thrust vector. The thrust vector’s size and direction can be set by the user
through basic Unity input.
This method however has too many problems, and the oversimplification of the calculation of
the drag led to some interesting and quite unrealistic effects on the vessel. The main problem
of the simulator at this point is the high number unknown hydrodynamic coeﬀicients to create
a more accurate drag calculation. The only way to solve this without over-complicating the
model, is to use a point mass and a singular hydrodynamic coeﬀicient - but then there is no
point in using the Physics Engine to create this, utilizing vessel dynamics’ simulation model
[1] is much simpler.
2.3.2
Python Code Runner
After settling on using the vessel dynamics’ simulation model [1], the first idea was to use it as
a service by calling the python scripts from Unity. There is an API to do exactly this in unity,
with two different implementations:
• The In Process API [14] - it works with the Python version that the Vessel Simulator
code uses, however such libraries as Numpy that the code utilizes does not work with
this version.
• The Out of Process API [15] - it can use Numpy and other libraries, but does not
support the Python version that the vessel dynamics simulation was written in.
In conclusion, running this particular code from Unity in Python is not possible without chang-
ing a lot of things in it, but then it is better to rewrite it in C# as it will be faster that way
anyway.
8
==PAGE:16==
3
Used Technologies
The thesis program is based on a Python application, that is re-implemented in Unity. The
Unity application then uses other technologies like shader graph with the Unity Universal
Render Pipeline [16] for creating water effects, or Simple Json[17] to generate json files from
data easily.
3.1
Python
Python [18] is an interpreted, high-level object oriented language, that has dynamic semantics.
This means, that development with python is rather straightforward, and with the use of some
pre-built libraries, one can create complex programs easily. This also means, that while python
is easier to get into and deploy code, it runs much slower than C or C# (see section 6.1.1).
Python in this project is used by the original vessel dynamics’ simulation model [1]. The C#
version is re-implemented based on this code, than used to test the new implementation, and
compare the results.
3.2
Blender
Blender [19] is an open-source 3D modelling application, that was used to create the very
simple ship model for the thesis. The ship was created from a cube with a series of simple
face extrusion, edge splitting, and subdivision. Blender can be used for much more than that,
but as it was not in the scope of this thesis to create artistic vessels, the base vessel was left
in this low-poly state.
3.3
Unity
Unity [20] is a real time 3D development platform created by Unity. It is widely used by a
lot of people, from artists through game developers to engineers. Solutions using Unity range
from games to Industry 4.0 applications. It is easy to learn, cross platform, meaning that
development for Windows\MAC\Linux can be done with only changing the build target, and
real time - testing written code can be done instantly if there are no errors.
Unity also offers optimization and performance improvement tools, although that was not used
in this thesis, as they are more specialized in rendering optimization, and in this project that
was not an issue, as most of the loading times came from the sheer amount of calculations
needed by simulator.
3.3.1
Universal Render Pipeline [16]
Universal Render Pipeline is a plugin for Unity, that allows for custom shader creation in Using
Shader Graph [21], and optimizes the rendering, so the application can smoothly run on al-
most any platform. Shader Graph is a visual graph-based shader creation tool, that simplifies
creating shades to connecting nodes in a graph. In this project the shader for the water was
created using this tool.
3.3.2
Unity Basics
A basic Unity application contains at least one Scene, where visual elements of the application
are arranged. The scene can contain several Game Objects, that are the basic building blocks
of a scene, and the game objects can contain several scripts that inherit the Mono Behaviour
class. A game object will always have a Transform component, that describes the transform
values of the object, such as position, rotation and scale in the scene.
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3. USED TECHNOLOGIES
3.3. UNITY
Game objects can have child game objects, that have their transform linked to their parents in
such a way, that their coordinate system is transformed by their parent’s transform component,
meaning if the parent is changed, then their children will also change relative to the parent.
At the top of figure 3.1 there are three buttons, of which the first is important, the ”Play”
button. After the scene is created, this can be used to try the application, and also later to
stop it. Any changes that are made while in ”Play mode” are reverted after exiting it.
When creating a new game object, one can build it from scratch in the code, or it can be
created using Prefabs. A prefab is a game object that works as a template that can have
other game objects, models and script components serialized to a single file. After instantiating
a prefab, one can search for specific components on them, and call their public methods. This
is used, when creating new menu items on user input.
3.3.3
Unity Editor
While scripts are written in Visual Studio, the scene setup - from the User Interface to the
linking of the scripts with game objects - takes place in the Unity Editor.
The default layout of the editor can be split into 4 main segments that can be seen on figure
3.1:
• The Hierarchy view, where the game objects in the scene are arranged (1),
• The Project view, where the local file system can be found and the Console where the
Debug messages are printed (2),
• The Inspector view, where the properties of game objects and the properties of their
attached scripts can be manipulated (3),
• The scene view contains a preview of the scene, where it is possible to modify game
objects’ transforms. It also contains the Game view, where the application can be tested
(4).
Figure 3.1: Screenshot of the Unity Editor
This is not an absolute arrangement as it can be customized, but a recommended one. It helps
10
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. USED TECHNOLOGIES
3.3. UNITY
to understand how certain elements work in the editor in the later chapters.
3.3.4
Mono Behaviour Lifecycle
The Unity engine comes with a lot of built in features, from which one of the most important is
the Mono Behaviour lifecycle that can be seen in appendix A. All scripts that can be added as
a component to a Game Object, has to inherit from the MonoBehaviour class in Unity. These
scripts have a number of functions that are called by the game engine in different events.
These can be split into three main categories:
• Application startup, this includes the Start, OnEnable and Awake functions which are
only called once, and before any update happens,
• Application running, including the frame and the physics updates that are called regularly,
• Application\script quitting, destroyed.
As the application does not generate anything that has to be memory managed outside Unity,
it does not use any of the functions in the third, quitting\destroyed category. What it does use
is the startup functions and the update functions. Startup functions are used for setting up
scripts and environment before it does anything else, like linking local script objects. Update
functions are used in two cases:
• Frame render update - The Update function is called in every frame, meaning updating
the positions of rendered objects should be done inside this function. If not limited, this
function is called as frequently as possible, based on the capabilities of the hardware.
• Physics simulation update - The FixedUpdate function is called 50 times a every sec-
ond, but this can be adjusted. All the physics related updates are called right after this
function, including all collider based functions, such as OnTriggerEnter\Exit\Stay, and
the OnCollision functions. Although this gives a limit to the simulation accuracy if the
simulation is based on the Physics engine, it also offers a lot of utility as well, that can
be exploited.
3.3.5
Text Mesh Pro
Text Mesh Pro or TMP is a unity package for creating better looking texts. In the project it
is used in every UI element that has a text component, and can be acquired from the Unity
Package Manager.
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. USED TECHNOLOGIES
3.3. UNITY
12
==PAGE:20==
4
Vessel Simulator
This chapter presents the reference frames for the vessel dynamics simulation model [1] by Thor
I. Fossen, and how the re-implemented C# code works. The script responsible for handling
this simulation is the ThorFossenSimulationHandler. Other than some smaller changes
to readability and some that were required by C# the code is identical to the one written in
python. The only original code here is the Mat3x3 class.
Creating a simulation can be divided up into two steps, creating and setting up the vessel
data, then running the simulation using said data. The class responsible for handling all data
regarding the simulation is the DataLogger class, which is a singleton, meaning there is at
most one instance of the class at all times, and this instance can be reached by a static instance
defined and maintained in the class.
4.1
Reference Frames
The simulator uses NED and body coordinates for referencing its positions and speed vectors.
Figure 4.1: NED Coordinate System
The NED or North-East-Down coordinate system {n} = (xn, yn, zn) is used in everyday life by
satellite navigation like GPS and is based on the the World Geodetic System. in this coordinate
system the x axis points towards true North the y axis towards East and the z axis points
down normal to the Earth’s surface.
”For marine craft operating in a local area, approximately constant longitude and latitude, an
Earth-fixed tangent plane on the surface is used for navigation. This is usually referred to as
flat Earth navigation and it will for simplicity be denoted by {n}. For flat Earth navigation
one can assume that {n} is inertial such that Newton’s laws still apply.” [9, P. 17]
This is important, as the Unity application can only use this local reference frame as the world
inside the unity engine is flat and based on a Right−Up−Forward Coordinate system. The
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4. VESSEL SIMULATOR
4.2. SIMULATION SETUP
application has to convert all the calculations done by the vessel dynamics’ simulator (that
works in the flat Earth navigation system), to Unity coordinates. This means, that for a NED
position of {n} = (xn, yn, zn) is {un} = (yn, −zn, xn) or East −Up −North in Unity. The
thesis references this coordinate system as the Global Position of a game object.
Figure 4.2: Body-fixed reference frame
The Body-fixed frame is a moving coordinate frame that has its origin point fixed to the
vessel, and used by the simulator to define other body-fixed coordinate systems to perform
hydrodynamic calculations. In Unity, every game object has its own body-fixed coordinate
system that is used to place other game objects relative to the original game object. The
difference between the body-fixed reference frame shown in figure 4.2.
The one used in
Unity is a simple transformation, where a point in the body-fixed frame {b} = (xb, yb, zb) is
represented in Unity like {ub} = (yb, −zb, xb) similarly to the NED coordinates. The thesis
references this coordinate system as the Local Position of a game object.
The rotations in figure 4.2 are similarly transformed and referenced as the Rotation or the
Local Rotation of a game object in Unity.
4.2
Simulation Setup
The setup requires a list of vessels with their vessel type, starting position, direction, and speed
set, and their path points (if any) set. It also requires the simulation StepTime and SimTime
set, which are the time steps the simulation will take, and the total time of the simulation
respectively. The final object it requires, is the Environment which includes the water density
the water depth and the environment mesh (if any).
All vessels inherit from the BaseV essel class, meaning, it is possible to store them in a
heterogen collection inside the DataLogger class.
This BaseV essel class is an abstract
class, meaning it cannot be instanced, and by creating abstract functions, a common interface
for all vessel types is created.
These functions will be called during initialization or when
14
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 4. VESSEL SIMULATOR
4.3. RUNNING THE SIMULATION
stepping the simulator, to update positions, waypoints and controller commands. The class
also contains the static matrix transformations required by the AttitudeEuler function that
updates the ETA of the vessels.
4.3
Running The simulation
Running the simulation happens Async, so freezing the User Interface can be avoided. The
RunSimulation Task is responsible to generate the simulation data. The main loop of the
function iterates from zero up to timeToSimulate stepping with simulationTimeStep and
iterating through all vessels in each loop updating their waypoints, autopilot step and simulation
step, also logging the new data out using the DataLogger class. The loop hands back be
execution to the main thread for one frame every 10000 iteration, so the application does not
freeze. This means that the minimum execution time of the simulation in seconds is
timeToSimulate
simulationTimeStep ∗10000 ∗frameRate
which for 60 frame
second or 60 FPS and 5 minutes or 300 seconds simulation with the simulation
step time of 0.02 seconds is
300
0.02 ∗10000 ∗601
s
= 0.025s
0.25 seconds to wait for all the frames. This however during testing came out to be a good
measure, eliminating freezing the UI, and finishing the simulation quick enough. This of course
only used when dealing with longer simulations, as 10000 iterations with a stepTime of 0.02
only happens every 200 seconds of the simulation. Later during testing it will be clear that
the original python code without such waiting times runs at least a magnitude slower.
4.4
Important Simulation Functions
A simulation step has three main functions, first one called UpdateWaypoints is for the Au-
topilot, it updates the current waypoint that the vessel must follow. The second is a command
to receive from the autopilot or the controller, called AutoPilotStep that recieves the time
step and returns a command with the rudder command and the forward thrust (currently not
used by any implemented vessel or controller). The third function called UpdateSimulation
updates the ETA and the speed Vectors of the vessel. These functions are all implemented in
the derived classes.
Update Waypoints
Each vessel can have a list of waypoints that they should follow. The simulator uses a Line-of-
sight path following algorithm [4] to calculate the the next waypoint to follow, and the heading
required to reach the desired line segment.
Autopilot Step
The Autopilot Step function is responsible for stepping the controller input. In step input
mode, the algorithm waits for the network response, in other autopilot methods the rudder
and/or thrust command should be created, to reach a desired heading and speed.
Update Simulation
This function is responsible for calculating the hydrodynamics of the vessel. The inputs are
the autopilot command, and the simulation step time. The vessel stores it’s ETA, it’s speed
vectors, and the vessel’s properties such as length, beam, draft, block coeﬀicient, approximate
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4. VESSEL SIMULATOR
4.5. MAT3X3
gyration in yaw (R66), rudder angle, rudder angle change rate maximum, and rudder angle
maximum. All these values are set during initialization. The following brief explanation follows
the implemented Clarke83 vessel’s model.
The first step for the function is determining the current velocities of the vessel. These are
the current speed vectors (both linear and angular) modified by present ocean currents. The
starting speed of the vessel is given by the user as input. Next the rudder forces and moment
is calculated based on the coeﬀicients of the vessel, the rudder angle and size, the relative
speed just calculated, and the water density. After, the control forces and the moment are
computed based on the rudder data created and the surge force, then the 3-DOF (degree of
freedom) system matrices M and N can be created [9, p. 134]. This can be used to expand
to a 6-DOF model by assuming that roll pitch and heave are zero. Next the rudder is moved
based on the rudder command and the speed vectors are stepped by forward Euler integrating
[9, p. 545] them. Finally the vessel’s ETA is updated with the AttitudeEuler function, that
calculates the vessels next position and rotation based on its speed vectors and the step time.
And with that done, the update of the vessel’s data is done.
4.5
Mat3x3
During the re-implementation of the Python code [1] a problem occurred, where some of the
Matrix functions were missing in C# that are present in the Python Numpy [22] package,
mainly the matrix manipulation functions. As such, these functions had to be recreated into a
”package” for dealing with them in C#. A static class called Mat3x3 was created, to recreate
the following functions for float based matrices:
• Matmul - matrix multiplication between two 3 by 3 matrices or a 3 by 3 matrix and a
Vector3
• Add3x3 - addition of two 3 by 3 matrices, or adding a float value to all elements of a 3
by 3 matrix
• Multiply3x3 - multiplying each element of a 3 by 3 matrix with a float
• Det3x3 - returns the determinant of a 3 by 3 matrix
• Det2x2 - returns the determinant of a 2 by 2 matrix
• Cofactor - returns the cofactor matrix of a 3 by 3 matrix
• MultInverse - returns the multiplicative inverse of a 3 by 3 matrix
• Print3x3 - prints a formatted version of a 3 by 3 matrix
As these functions are for floats, they will have a 7.2-7.5 digit precision by definition. The
functions use two dimensional float arrays for representing the matrices, and all functions are
based on their corresponding mathematical definitions. These functions are not computation-
ally optimized, but still run at least a magnitude faster then their python equivalents.
16
==PAGE:24==
5
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the program. The section 5.1 describes the domain
of the application, while section 5.2 elaborates on the classes used, and the behaviour design.
Then follows the introduction of the otherwise unusual data classes in section 5.3, then in
section 5.4 the simulation engine and its supporting classes are introduced. The simulation en-
gine is responsible to set up and run the collision prediction simulation, handling the previously
presented Vessel Simulator as a built-in module, with the ThorFossenSimulationHandler
class being its top level interface. Section 5.5 presents the path prediction algorithm, and its
implementation. Section 5.6 presents the algorithm to check for collisions based on the pre-
dicted paths and exclusion zones, while section 5.7 explains how vessel grounding is detected.
The section 5.8 explains the code on data exporting, and the way the application tries to stay
universally usable. The section 5.9 presents the User Interface or UI implementation from
colors to through events and shaders to the handler scripts. Finally the section 5.10 present
sequence diagrams, and some of the main sequences of the application.
5.1
Domain
This section describes the use-cases in the application.
Figure 5.1: Use-Case Diagram of the System
5.1.1
Exit
Name Exit
Description Close The Application
Actor User
Main scenario
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.1. DOMAIN
1. User clicks on the ”exit” button
2. The application closes
Postcondition Application is not running
5.1.2
Import Simulation Data
Name Import Simulation Data
Description The user imports the simulation data from a json file
Actor User
Precondition An appropriate json file exists at the save location
Main scenario
1. User loads the file by clicking on the ”Load File” button
2. File is loaded
3. Button description changes to ”File Loaded”
4. Button becomes inactive
5. File added to the list of selectable files
6. ”Start Simulation” Button becomes active
Alternative Scenario
1. User loads a file by clicking on the ”Load File” button of an unloadable json file
2. Button description changes to ”File Loading failed”
3. Button becomes inactive
Postcondition User loaded the file, starting the simulation will start the simulation described
int the file
5.1.3
Import Setup Data
Name Import Setup Data
Description The user imports the setup data from a json file
Actor User
Precondition An appropriate json file exists at the save location
Main scenario
1. User loads the file by clicking on the ”Load File” button
2. File is loaded
3. Button description changes to ”File Loaded”
4. Button becomes inactive
5. File added to the list of selectable files
6. ”Edit File” Button becomes active
Alternative Scenario
1. User loads a file by clicking on the ”Load File” button of an unloadable json file
2. Button description changes to ”File Loading failed”
3. Button becomes inactive
18
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.1. DOMAIN
Postcondition User loaded the file, clicking on ”Edit File” will bring up the setup menu with
the files data already set up
5.1.4
Delete File
Name Delete Save File
Description The user deletes an existing json file from the save path
Actor User
Precondition There exists a file at the save path
Main scenario
1. User clicks on the ”delete file” button
2. File removed from the list
3. File deleted from the path
Postcondition File deleted from path and list
5.1.5
Create New Simulation
Name Create New Simulation
Description The user creates a new simulation using the setup menu
Actor User
Precondition User in setup menu
Main scenario
1. User chooses a new vessel type
2. User adds new vessel
3. user clicks ”DONE”
Postcondition User can export the setup, or start the simulation
5.1.6
Setup Values
Name Setup Values
Description User sets up the values of a vessel in the setup menu
Actor User
Precondition User in setup menu, editing a vessel data
Main scenario
1. User edits the values of the vessel
2. User adds new waypoints
3. User edits the waypoints’ data
4. User clicks on ”DONE”
Postcondition Values of the vessel changed
5.1.7
Setup Environment
Name Setup Environment
Description User changes the environment values
Actor User
Precondition User in setup menu, editing a vessel data
Main scenario
1. User clicks on the ”Other Settings” button
2. User edits the environment data
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.1. DOMAIN
3. User clicks on the ”Back” button
Postcondition Environment values changed and saved
5.1.8
Export Setup Data
Name Export Setup Data
Description The user saves the setup data and exports it to file
Actor User
Precondition User in setup menu, at least one vessel is added
Main scenario
1. User clicks on export settings button
2. A window with a button and a text field is shown
3. User adds a valid file name
4. User clicks on the ”OK” button
5. File is saved
6. A popup is shown to the user about the save location
7. User clicks on ”OK”
Alternative scenario
1. User clicks on export settings button
2. A window with a button and a text field is shown
3. User adds an invalid file name
4. User clicks on the ”OK” button
5. File is not saved
6. A popup is shown to the user with the error
7. User clicks on ”OK”
Alternative scenario
1. User clicks on export settings button
2. A window with a button and a text field is shown
3. User clicks on the ”OK” button
4. File is saved, a new unique filename is created
5. A popup is shown to the user about the save location
6. User clicks on ”OK”
Postcondition File saved at the shown location
5.1.9
Export Simulation Data
Name Export Simulation Data
Description The user saves the Simulation data and exports it to file
Actor User
Precondition User in simulation menu
Main scenario
20
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.1. DOMAIN
1. User clicks on export simulation button
2. A window with a button and a text field is shown
3. User adds a valid file name
4. User clicks on the ”OK” button
5. File is saved
6. A popup is shown to the user about the save location
7. User clicks on ”OK”
Alternative scenario
1. User clicks on export simulation button
2. A window with a button and a text field is shown
3. User adds an invalid file name
4. User clicks on the ”OK” button
5. File is not saved
6. A popup is shown to the user with the error
7. User clicks on ”OK”
Alternative scenario
1. User clicks on export simulation button
2. A window with a button and a text field is shown
3. User clicks on the ”OK” button
4. File is saved, a new unique filename is created
5. A popup is shown to the user about the save location
6. User clicks on ”OK”
Postcondition File saved at the shown location
5.1.10
Run Simulation
Name Run Simulation
Description The User Runs the simulation
Actor User
Precondition User In Setup Menu
Main scenario
1. User clicks on the ”Run Simulation” button
Alternative Scenario
1. User is in import simulation menu and clicks on the ”Run Simulation” button
Postcondition The Simulation Menu is shown, the user can interact with the menu, and the
simulation is shown.
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.2. DESIGN
5.2
Design
This section presents the coding design choices made in the application, and the structure of
the classes and behaviours.
5.2.1
Class Diagram
To have a good understanding of the class structure, in figure 5.2 an abstraction of the class
diagram is presented. It only includes the public interface of these classes, does not include
the MonoBehaviour methods, and does not include parameters, as they are not important
in this context.
Figure 5.2: Simplified Class Diagram
At first glance one might find the class diagram in 5.2 quite confusing, as it seems like not all
objects are stored correctly, but this is due to the nature of how Unity works. As discussed in
3.3.2, the engine has a scene with game objects inside them, these can be created, rearranged
and destroyed from the code. This means, that the Engine is the one that stores everything,
and accessing these objects can be done multiple was, from finding them on specific objects,
to finding them in the scene. Methods that are on objects created from prefabs can be called
instantly after creating the instance, and accessing the object on it.
One of the not represented classes that is used by the application is the SimpleJson [17] that
is used to conveniently convert simple types to json string and parse them back from json.
22
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.2. DESIGN
5.2.2
Behaviour Design
The following figures will describe the behaviour design of the application using state machines.
Figure 5.3 describes how the main menu of the application works, figure 5.4 and figure 5.5
shows the simple state machine for importing files. Figure 5.6 shows how the setup works,
notice that starting a simulation or exporting a setup cannot be done without having at least
one saved vessel, also while editing a vessel, the button ”OtherSettings” is inactive. Exporting
a file saves the currently edited vessel if any, as well as adding a new vessel while editing.
Exporting a vessel disables all other UI elements. Finally figure 5.7 presents the state machine
for the simulation. Here notice that even though the user interface has several buttons, there
are only a few states. Also notice, that in case of a collision, there a re two possible state
changes, one leads back to the main state, while the other shows a popup window to the user.
Main Menu
Figure 5.3: Main States of the Application
Import Menus
Figure 5.4: Import Setup State Diagram
Figure 5.5: Import Simulation State Diagram
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.3. DATA COLLECTION CLASSES
Setup Menu
Figure 5.6: Setup Menu State Diagram
Simulation Menu
Figure 5.7: Simulation Menu State Diagram
5.3
Data Collection Classes
Given that the simulation requires and generates a lot of data, the application uses five different
data collection classes, that bundles data together. This is also required, because a lot of data
is put in by the user, that needs to be read from the user interface, and in unity pulling data
from the UI can look terrible, which is the reason to use these data classes that paired with a
UI handler class, can deal with this task more cleanly.
24
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.3. DATA COLLECTION CLASSES
5.3.1
Simulator Data Bundle
One of these classes is inside the the Vessel Simulator module called BaseV essel.DataBundle
and stores the data that is generated by the simulator. These are
• ETA - position and direction in NED coordinates
• linearSpeed - the 3 dimensional speed vector of the vessel in NED coordinates
• angularSpeed - 3 dimensional rotation speed of the vessel along NED axes
• rudderAngle - current angle of the rudder in radians
• rudderCommand - autopilot input, current desired rudder angle in radians
• timeStamp - times stamp of the simulation step in seconds
This class also overrides the ToString() function so logging is easier, has a ToJsonNode()
function to convert the data into a JsonNode and a constructor that takes a JsonNode.
5.3.2
Vessel Meta Data Package
The Second data class is the V esselMetaDataPackage that contains the setup data of a
vessel. it has the following fields:
• vesselType - string type of the vessel, serialized from one of the derived classes of the
BaseV essel class
• vesselName - string unique name of the vessel
• lenght - float lenght of the vessel in meters
• beam - float beam of the vessel in meters
• draft - float draft of the vessel in meters
• rudMax - float maximum rudder angle of the vessel in angles
• rudRateMax - float maximum rate of change for the rudder in
angle
second
• tau_X - the surge force of the vessel in Newton
• eta - starting position of the vessel in NED coordinates
• linearSpeed - starting 3 dimensional linear speed vector of the vessel
• angularSpeed - starting 3 dimensional rotation speed of the vessel along NED axes
• controlSystem - enumeration of the autopilot or controller type of the vessel
• NEWaypoints - list of 2 dimensional vectors that store north-east positions as the way-
points of the vessel
This class also has a ToJsonNode() function to convert the data into a JsonNode and a
constructor that takes a JsonNode.
5.3.3
Setup Values Data
The setup requires environmental values too, these are stored in the SetupV aluesData class,
that stores
• stepTime - float step time of the Vessel Simulator in seconds
• simTime - float total time of the simulation is seconds
• enviromentalRho - float density of the surrounding liquid
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.4. SIMULATION ENGINE
• enviromentalDepth - float depth of the surrounding liquid
• radarScanDistance - float range of the radar in meters
• radarScanTime - float time in-between each radar scan in seconds
• radarScanNoisePercent - float percent of the noise applied to the actual distance in any
circular direction to the observed object, meaning that the recorded position will be in
range of the actual position with a maximum distance of actual distance times this value
• pathUpdateTime - float frequency of the paths being updated in seconds, should be
a larger or equal value to the radar scan time otherwise it just wastes computation
resources
• pathTimeLenght - float length of the predicted path measured in the time predicted
• pathDataTimeLenght - float length of maximum time in seconds, that the path prediction
algorithm will use from the observed path to create a prediction
• pathTurnRateAcceleration - float percent value, that suggests to the path prediction
algorithm that a turning vessel should navigate onto a linear course at what rate - where
0 means that the vessel keeps its current turning rate and 1 means that the vessel turns
onto a linear course immediately in the prediction
• exclusionZoneFront - float value that stores how much vessel length should be left clear
in front of the bow
• exclusionZoneBack - float value that stores how much vessel length should be left clear
behind the stern
• exclusionZoneSides - float value that stores how much vessel length should be left clear
next both sides of the vessel
5.3.4
Data Log and Measurement
The last two data classes are paired, as one of them is the data field for the V esselDatabase
class, and the other is a data unit for the first.
The class V esselDataLog contains the observed path of a vessel, its path predictor, and the
current predicted path. Both paths are using the V esselMeasurementData to store positions
paired with a time stamp. The V esselMeasurementData class:
• timeStamp - float time stamp of the measurement
• EUN - 3 dimensional Vector of the measurements position in Unity coordinates, or
East −Up −North coordinates
The class contains a static function to convert NED coordinates to Unity coordinates.
The V esselDataLog class:
• pathData - list of V esselMeasurementData, the observed path of the vessel
• pathPrediction - an instance of the PathPrediction class. Can be customized
• predictedPath - list of V esselMeasurementData, the predicted path generated by the
path prediction algorithm based on the pathData
5.4
Simulation Engine
Simulation engine is responsible for creating and handling the simulation based on incom-
ing data.
It is the core of the application in the sense, that it stores and initiates the
26
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.4. SIMULATION ENGINE
V esselSimulator, the HUDController, and the DataPlayer, adds the Radar and the
CollsionPredictor components to the own ship, and also updates the radar, and the path
and collision prediction in the correct time intervals.
5.4.1
Setting Up
Setting up the simulation engine can be done in two ways:
• Setting up by creating a new simulation or importing a simulation setup or
• Importing a simulation log.
The main difference between these two methods, is that in the second case the application
does not run the Vessel Simulator module, as the log already contains the simulation data.
If the first case, the setup function async void StartSimulationFromSetup will be called, that
needs three parameters:
• a list of V esselData, that are the set up vessels
• a SetupV aluesData object containing the values put in by the user
• a string containing the unique name of the own ship in the simulation
The function copies over the values it needs, then iterating through the vessel data it creates
the vessel objects that the Vessel Simulator will use. It then calls the Vessel Simulator’s setup
function, then runs it async, and waits for it to finish generating the simulation paths. After
the simulator finished, the engine must set up the DataPlayer as well, by calling and awaiting
its SetupDataReplayAsync() function.
The SetupDataReplayAsync() async task takes no parameters, but returns a dictionary
containing the unique vessel names mapped to vessel game object instances. The function
assumes that the DataLogger class has been given the simulation data either from running
the simulation or importing it, as the class uses the DataLogger as a communication step
between the Vessel Simulator module and the application.
The functions pulls in the data from the database, and for each vessel:
• creates an Instance from its vessel Prefab
• sets the instance’s position and rotation to the starting position and rotation - rotation
is calculated from the heading
• sets the scale to match the input size of the vessel
• creates two additional game objects named CamTrailing and CamTop, positions them
based on the vessel’s size, so the CamTrailing is behind the vessel and looks at it, while
the CamTop is above the vessel and look at it. This position is calculated in a way,
that if a camera is placed there, the vessel will be visible in the frame
• generates a pin point for each waypoint of the vessel, and places them accordingly
• adds them to the dictionary.
After all vessels are placed, an animationDelta vector3 value is calculated, placing the scene’s
middle point in unity’s zero point. This is required, because the Unity engine starts running
into calculation problems if the position values exceed 5000.
With that, the setup is complete, and the data player can initialize the HUDController that
handles the user interface for the playback scene. It gives it the game object dictionary, and
the animation delta, as the HUD will have to set up a UI for each vessel, and calculate an
overlooking camera position.
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.4. SIMULATION ENGINE
The engine uses the dictionary returned by the DataPlayer to set up the main vessel by
adding the Radar and the CollisionPrediction components to it, sets them up by calling
their initialization functions, generates the exclusion zone around the vessel by calling the
CollisionPrediction object’s GenerateExclusionZone() function, hands over the
LineRenderer game object of the exclusion zone to the HUDController, and resets the
main camera. Following this, the grounding detection is run, if its set up.
With that, the simulation setup is complete, and the animation can be started by calling the
data player’s StartAnimation() function.
5.4.2
Running The Simulation
The main responsibility for running the simulation is given to the DataPlayer class. The
animation can be started after the setup by calling the StartAnimation() function. This
will set the simulator into replaying mode, and the data player starts going through the
simulation data it pulled from the log. The replay itself can be paused, sped up or reset, using
the MonoBehaviour function Update().
the Update function is called once before every frame is rendered, as seen in appendix A.
The main controller is a float value called Time, that is updated every frame by adding
Time.deltaTime ∗replaySpeed to it. The Time.deltaTime is a built in float value, that
returns the time delta between the last and the current frame in seconds. The replaySpeed
is set by the user, to a positive float. The main animation replay cycle goes as follows:
1
if (!replaying) return;
2
int currentTimeIndex = (int)Mathf.Clamp(Mathf.Floor(Time / stepTime), 0f,
numberOfSteps - 2);
3
float lerp = (Time - ((float)currentTimeIndex * stepTime)) / stepTime;
4
foreach (var vessel in localDataDictionary)
5
{
6
Vector3 currentPos = new Vector3(vessel.Value[currentTimeIndex].eta ...
7
Vector3 nextPos = new Vector3(vessel.Value[currentTimeIndex + 1].eta ...
8
Quaternion currRot = Quaternion.Euler(vessel.Value[currentTimeIndex].eta
...
9
Quaternion nextRot = Quaternion.Euler(vessel.Value[currentTimeIndex + 1].
eta ...
10
position = Vector3.Lerp(currentPos , nextPos , lerp) - AnimationDelta;
11
localRotation = Quaternion.Lerp(currRot , nextRot , lerp);
12
}
13
if (Time / stepTime > numberOfSteps)
14
replaying = false;
15
Time += UnityEngine.Time.deltaTime * ReplaySpeed;
The main takeaway of this code snippet, is that no matter the frame rate and no matter the
step time of the simulation, the animation itself will always be as smooth as possible. What
helps in achieving this, is the fact, if the FPS is larger than the number of simulation steps
in a second, then there are more Update() function calls in a single simulation step and the
animation will Lerp between the same two steps multiple times, based on how much time
is passed between the two. This is achieved by using the integer index value of
j
Time
stepTime
k
which is the current index of the animation in the dictionary, then multiplying it with the
stepTime again, to get the exact time that the current index was calculated at. Now Time−
currentTimeIndex ∗stepTime is the amount of time the simulation point is ahead of the
indexed position, and closer to the next, so dividing it with the stepTime gives its a range
between 0 and 1. This value then used by the Vector3 Lerp(a, b, t) function, that interpolates
between a and b, and gives back a + (b −a) ∗t. The Quaternion Lerp(a, b, t) works similarly.
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.5. PATH PREDICTION
The Simulation Engine also uses the data player’s running state to scan with the radar, update
the path prediction, and check for collisions. This is done with three different timers, one for
the Radar, one for the path prediction, and one for the collisions. The timers are iterated based
on the data player’s current time, and each time they reach their threshold, their function is
called. It is important to note, that the path prediction receives its path points from the
radar, and the collision prediction uses the predicted paths to predict collisions, meaning that
radarTimer ≤pathPredictionTimer ≤collisionPredictionTimer. In practice, there are
only two timers, one for the Radar, and one for the other two. The trick is to call the collision
prediction when the pathPredictionTimer has been reset.
5.5
Path Prediction
Path prediction implementation is inside the PathPrediction script and class. It has several
important setup fields, with the path prediction can be influenced. These are the following:
• timeThreshold float time bound in seconds of the measured path to generate predic-
tion from, should be large enough to get at least 12-20 measurements. Minimum is 9
measurements, but it assumes a non-noisy data, otherwise the prediction can be erratic
• minTime float minimum time in seconds between two measurements. 0 value ignores
this. If too large, ships will be marked as stationary with invalid amount of data.
• anchoredShipTravelTreshold float minimum distance in meters a ship has to travel
in timeThershold time to be considered traveling and non stationary. Setting to 0 will
default to 180 degree turn around path distance.
• timeBetweenPredictionV alues float step time of the prediction algorithm in seconds,
the smaller the more number of steps calculated at the cost of increased time. Must be
larger than 0, default is 1. It also should be larger than the time step of the simulation,
but this is not enforced, and not a technical requirement.
• predictionPathLenghtInTime float time of the length of the prediction in seconds.
• turnRateAcceleration float turning acceleration of a vessel that has a turnRateDelta
of 0. Steers the vessel onto a linear course. Must be between 0 and 1, where 0 will keep
the current turn rate and 1 will put the vessel on a linear course immediately. Defaults
to 0.
• linearAcceleration float linear acceleration of a vessel that has an accelerationDelta
of 0. Accelerates the vessel to a constant speed. Must be between 0 and 1, where 0 will
keep the current acceleration and 1 will put the vessel on a constant speed immediately.
Defaults to 0.1 .
5.5.1
Helper Functions
While the path prediction algorithm is inside the GeneratePathPrediction function, there
are some helper functions introduced.
CubicBezierPoint
This function takes four V ector3 points and a float value between 0 and 1 to generate one
point that is determined by the input and the quadratic Bézier formula. Given the points
p0, p1, p2, p3 and the float t the function returns
p = (1 −t)3p0 + 3(1 −t)2tp1 + 3(1 −t)t2p2 + t3p3
that is a point on the curve discussed in section 2.2.
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.5. PATH PREDICTION
CatmullRomPoint
This function returns a point similarly to the Bézier function, but with a really different concept.
While the Bézier Curve is an approximation, the Catmull-Rom Spline creates an interpolating
curve. It uses an interpolating technique where the control points have a speed vector and an
acceleration vector, and between the pieces of the curve at the control points the speed should
be the same, and the acceleration should be similar as well. Figure 5.8 shows how it works in
practice.
Figure 5.8: Catmull-Rom Spline [11]
The parameters for the function are four V ector3 points, and a float.
Given the points
p0, p1, p2, p3 and the float t the function returns
p = p1 + (0.5(p2 −p0)t) + 0.5(2p0 −5p1 + 4p2 −p3)t2 + 0.5(−p0 + 3p1 −3p2 + p3)t3
that is a point on the curve between p1 and p2.
FilterData
This function takes a list of V esselMeasurementData and filters it down based on the input
values of the timeThreshold and the minTime. If minTime is zero, the algorithm only
filters for the timeThreshold. This will iterate from the end of the data list, pushing the
values down a stack, to return a list that is in-order, and contains only the data that is allowed
by the threshold.
If minTime is not zero, a Linked List is created, and iterate the data similarly, with the
only difference, that all data that is within minTime of the previously accepted data point is
averaged, and once an accepted point is reached, all points in time and space with the new
accepted point are aggregated into a single point as seen in figure 5.9. This is done as to not
lose data, but reduce the number of data points, and filter large noise.
30
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.5. PATH PREDICTION
Figure 5.9: Data Filter
after filtering, the data is returned. If there are less then 9 data points in the list, filtering does
not happen, all data is returned.
GenerateCatmulRomShipData
This function creates a new ship data from the previously filtered data. First it filters using
the Bézier filtering method discussed in section 2.2, then creates an interpolating path using
the Catmull-Rom Spline. As the Catmull-Rom creates a path where by definition the speed
and acceleration in the points are as linear as possible, it will be a good representation of the
path. The algorithm only creates two points between each generated Bézier point, as its more
than enough for the path prediction.
The Bézier curve is used to generate a a single middle point from 4 points of p0, p1, p2, p3 and
place it between p1 and p2 by choosing the t value of 0.5 . This is done for all points, meaning
the start and end points are left out - the generated point set has 3 less points than the original,
but it has its noise reduced significantly. Figure 5.10 shows four different examples of noise in
the data, and how the Bézier curve reduces it, and the chosen middle point at t = 0.5.
Figure 5.10: Bezier curve 0.5 point examples
To repopulate the data, but to not lose the actual path of the vessel, a final list is generated,
that adds an extra data point between each pair of Bézier point just created using the Catmull-
Rom Spline. Given points p0, p1, p2, p3 it generates a point between p1 and p2 at the time
value of t = 0.5. This is done for all point pairs, meaning that the final data will have 2(n−6)
points, if the original data had n data points. Figure 5.11 shows P = 0.5 between points 2
and 3.
31
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.5. PATH PREDICTION
Figure 5.11: Catmull-Rom 0.5 example
With that done, the function returns a noise filtered and rich data set, that can be used by
the prediction algorithm.
GenerateStaticPointPrediction
In case the path prediction algorithm at any point decides that the vessel in question is
considered static or not moving, then this function is called. It returns a list of points in the
timeThreshold that has the same position value. This is important, as the collision prediction
algorithm does not differentiate between moving and non moving objects, it only checks their
predicted path, and in this case the algorithm says that this vessel has a predicted path in
which only the time dimension is changing.
5.5.2
GeneratePathPrediction
The function receives a list of raw MeasurementData and returns a path prediction.
First step is filtering. The function FilterData is called, then with the returned value the
function either GenerateCatmulRomShipData is called, that will return the data that can
be used for the prediction, or the GenerateStaticPointPrediction function, in case there are
less then 9 data points available, or the distance is below the anchoredShipTravelTreshold
value.
Getting more Information
The next step is collecting information from the filtered data. The prediction algorithm needs
the following information:
• last known heading - important to know which direction to start generating the path
• average speed - important to know how far in each step the algorithm should put the
next point
• average turn rate - important to know how much the heading is changing from step to
step
• average linear acceleration - important to know how much the step distance is changing
from step to step
• average torque, or turn rate acceleration - important to know if the rate of the turn has
been changing or is constant, as coming out of a turn, or going into a turn the algorithm
picks up on the change of heading much quicker.
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.5. PATH PREDICTION
The last known heading is calculated by averaging the last two pairs of points into two points
and reading their direction value. This is done this way, so excessive noise on the last few
points does not radically change the predicted path.
Average values are calculated by looping though the data. Average speed is the float value
that is calculated by measuring the distance between two consecutive measurement points, and
dividing them by their time difference to normalized them to m
s . In the following code snippet
some names are changed to shorten them and make it more readable, P is the measurement
points list, t is the time stamp, i is the iterator and the EUN is the East −Up −North
coordinate system’s 3D point.
1
averageSpeed += (p[i + 1].EUN - p[i].EUN).magnitude / (p[i + 1].t - p[i].t);
To calculate the average turn rate and average linear acceleration two directional vectors are
required, to measure their directional change, and their magnitude change. The following
code snippet shows, how the algorithm deals with this. The code changes previously intro-
duced apply here as well with some extensions: chv is short for currentHeadingV ector and
nhv is short for nextHeadingV ector. Both values are normalized to angle
s
and m
s2 respectively.
1
Vector3 chv = p[i + 1].EUN - p[i].EUN;
2
Vector3 nhv = p[i + 2].EUN - p[i + 1].EUN;
3
averageTurnRate += Vector3.SignedAngle(chv, nhv, Vector3.up) / (p[i + 2].t - p
[i].t);
4
averageAcceleration += (nhv.magnitude / (p[i + 2].t - p[i + 1].t)) -
5
(chv.magnitude / (p[i + 1].t - p[i].t));
Finally, the average torque or turn rate acceleration is calculated as it needs at least 3 directional
vector, or 4 points.
Here the algorithm measures the angle change between two pairs of
consecutive vectors. The code changes previously introduced apply here as well with some
extensions: shv is short for secondHeadingV ector and thv is short for thirdHeadingV ector.
As all values are normalized to angle
s
the averageTorque is normalized to angle
s2 .
1
Vector3 shv = p[i + 3].EUN - p[i + 2].EUN;
2
Vector3 thv = p[i + 4].EUN - p[i + 3].EUN;
3
float firstAngle = Vector3.SignedAngle(chv, nhv, Vector3.up) / (p[i + 2].t - p
[i].t);
4
float secondAngle = Vector3.SignedAngle(shv, thv, Vector3.up) / (p[i + 4].t -
p[i + 2].t);
5
averageTorque += secondAngle - firstAngle;
With these calculated, the algortihm has all the data it needs to generate a prediction.
Generating Path Predictions
Before the data starts looking into the path, it checks again if the ship is considered static. If
the anchor threshold is zero, and the distance falls below the value of the ships turn around rate,
meaning that given the time and its average speed, the total traveled distance is smaller then
what it would take to make a half turn exactly in that time as seen in figure 5.12, then it is con-
sidered stationary, and marked as an obstacle by calling the GenerateStaticPointPrediction
function.
33
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.5. PATH PREDICTION
distane < timeDelta ∗averageSpeed
π
2
Figure 5.12: Turn around rate threshold
If this check is passed, then a prediction must be made.
The function creates a new list
for the predicted values, and puts the first two values into this new list, as it can be seen
in the code snippet. All the previous code changes apply, with the extension that V MD is
V esselMeasurementPoint.
1
VMD firstPredictionPoint = new VMD(
2
(p[p.Count - 3].t + p[p.Count - 4].t)/ 2f,
3
(p[p.Count - 3].EUN + p[p.Count - 4].EUN) / 2f);
4
VMD secondPredictionPoint = new VMD(
5
(p[p.Count - 1].t + p[p.Count - 2].t) / 2f,
6
(p[p.Count - 1].EUN + p[p.Count - 2].EUN) / 2f);
7
pathPrediction.Add(firstPredictionPoint);
8
pathPrediction.Add(secondPredictionPoint);
Here notice, that these two values are not an actual prediction, but rather a a modification
of the last four points that were made into two predicted points.
This happens because
the prediction loop relies on the fact that there are previous points in the prediction. These
two points will be removed after the prediction loop is done. This fact can also be seen at
the start of the prediction loop, where the counter is set to two. The loop initializes with
the timeBetweenPredictionV alues float, and runs until predictionPathLenghtInTime is
reached with the same stepsize as the init value. The normalizedTurnRateAcceleration
will take care of turning the ship onto a straight course. In the following code snippets the
pathPrediction value is shortened to pp and timeBetweenPredictionV alues is shortened
to timeBPV to make the snippets more readable.
1
int counter = 2;
2
float normalizedTurnRateAcceleration = 1f - turnRateAcceleration;
3
for(float f = timeBPV; f < predictionPathLenghtInTime; f += timeBPV)
4
{ ...
The loop starts by retrieving the last direction vector and the turn rate from the predicted data.
Here it is important to note, that any Vector3 operation that are enclosed in parenthesis can
be considered as a simple Vector3 object, and their methods can be called, or their properties
can be reached. The property normalized gives back the normalized vector of the original
vector.
1
Vector3 lastMovementDirectionNormalized = (pp[counter - 1].EUN - pp[counter -
2].EUN).normalized;
2
float acceleratedTurnRate = (averageTurnRate * timeBPV) + (averageTorque *
timeBPV);
3
float scaledTurnRate = acceleratedTurnRate * normalizedTurnRateAcceleration;
Then comes the calculation of the direction of the next movement vector with the magnitude
from the turn rate and the speed/acceleration values. The funiction AngleAxis(angle, axis)
34
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.6. COLLISION PREDICTION
of the class Quaternion returns a rotation quaternion that rotates angle degrees around the
Vector3 axis. Multiplying a Vector3 with a quaternion from the left hand side, rotates the
Vector3 by the quaternion. It is also important to note, that if the rotation of the vessel falls
below 0.05
s
in degrees, the rotation is ignored, and considered zero.
The linear acceleration of the vessel is only considered if its larger than 0.01 m
s , and its added to
the current speed of the vessel. It is also directly scaled from the input of the user, normalized
to m
s2 .
Finally the prediction in the movement is made, the normalized direction vector is scaled with
the speed and time step.
As the Unity coordinates are in meters, this vector is the final
movement vector of the vessel in this time frame.
1
Vector3 predictedMovement = Vector3.zero;
2
if (Mathf.Abs(scaledTurnRate) / timeBPV >= 0.05f)
3
{
4
lastMovementDirectionNormalized = Quaternion.AngleAxis(scaledTurnRate ,
Vector3.up) * lastMovementDirectionNormalized;
5
normalizedTurnRateAcceleration *= Mathf.Pow((1f - turnRateAcceleration),
timeBPV);
6
}
7
8
if(averageAcceleration >= 0.01f)
9
{
10
averageSpeed += averageAcceleration;
11
averageAcceleration *= Mathf.Pow(0.9f*(1f - linearAcceleration),timeBPV);
12
}
13
predictedMovement = lastMovementDirectionNormalized * averageSpeed * timeBPV;
Finally the creation of the new data point by transforming the point forward with the calculated
movement relative to the last predicted position, adding it to the list, increasing the counter,
and downscaling the torque by 10% every second.
1
var newDataPoint = new VesselMeasurementData(lastPathPoint.timeStamp + f,
pathPrediction[counter - 1].EUN + predictedMovement);
2
pathPrediction.Add(newDataPoint);
3
4
averageTorque *= Mathf.Pow(0.9f, timeBPV);
5
counter++;
With that the prediction loop is finished. The only thing left to do, is to remove the previously
added two positions that overlap with the current position at the front of the list, and return
the value.
1
pathPrediction.RemoveAt(0);
2
pathPrediction.RemoveAt(0);
3
4
return pathPrediction;
5.6
Collision Prediction
Collision prediction happens in the script with the same name. This script is instantiated dur-
ing runtime, placed on the main vessel as a component and stored by the Simulation Engine.
The algorithm uses a Lamé Curve to check for collisions with other vessels around the main
35
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.6. COLLISION PREDICTION
vessel. It iterates through the predictions and the path of the main vessel, and searches for
collisions.
5.6.1
Defining a Collision
A scenario is defined as colliding if a vessel breaches the safety area virtually defined around
the main vessel by the COLREGs [12] rules. This safety zone, or exclusion zone is explained in
detail in the paper [23, p. 6-7]. The paper describes a super ellipse, that surrounds the vessel,
with 5 ship lengths of clearance in front of the vessel, 2 on the sides and 2 behind if the vessel
is moving. Any object that is closer than this, is considered to be collided with.
The parametric function of the curve is:
x
a

r
+
y
b

r
= 1
The parametric function in this default scenario has 3 parameters, a, b and r. The value a
and b defines how ”far” the curve stretches on the x and y axes respectively, while r defines
how much the super ellipse ”curves”. Depending on the r value there are 5 different shapes if
a, b ̸= 0:
• 0 < r < 1 the shape looks like a four armed star, and is concave, with corners ±a and
±b
• r = 1 the shape is a rhombus, with corners ±a and ±b
• 1 < r < 2 the shape looks like an outward curved rhombus with the same edges
• r = 2 the shape is a simple ellipse, or a circle if a = b
• r > 2 the shape looks like a rectangle with rounded corners
The examples in the paper [23], and in the application the exponent used is r = 5 as it has a
suﬀiciently large area, and is still fast to compute.
There are however still two things left to do with this super ellipse, it needs to have a different
size in one direction that can be done by having different a and b values, and it needs to be
re-positioned, so the origin is not in the middle of the curve, but moved back to to its relative
position, so the application can have different clearance sizes in front and behind the vessel,
with the vessel’s size in mind. For this the modified parametric function of the curve introduces
some new variables and removed the variables a and b. l is the length of the ship, s is the
clearance multiplier on the sides, f is the front clearance multiplier and b is the behind of the
vessel multiplier. The parametric function now looks as follows:

x
l(0.5 + s)

r
+

y −l f−b
2
l(0.5 + f+b
2 )

r
= 1
However this only works, if the vessel faces north, or along the y axis. to compensate for the
rotation of the vessel, the curve has to be rotated as well. For this the algorithm needs to
know the current heading of the vessel, this will be called h. As the rotation on the plane is
counter clockwise, while heading is clockwise, this value will have to be multiplied by -1. The
expanded parametric function looks as follows:

cos(−h)x + sin(−h)y
l(0.5 + s)

r
+

cos(−h)y −sin(−h)x −l f−b
2
l(0.5 + f+b
2 )

r
= 1
Of course in this case, the question is what are the values x and y if the goal is to test for
collision.
The answer is simple, the function receives two points, one is the main vessel’s
36
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.6. COLLISION PREDICTION
middle point, and the other is a predicted path point of an other vessel. In this case, the point
p0 can be defined as the other vessel’s position p1 transformed by the main vessel’s position
p2.
p0 = p1 −p2
And with that cleared, the parametric curve is ready to be used.
5.6.2
Predicting Collision
The predictor script has the non-data based variables of the Lamé curve as fields that can be
defined by the user. This includes the Length, clearanceOnSides, clearanceBackShip and
clearanceFrontShip variables, that are initialized with the vessel’s name in the
InitCollisionPredictionData function.
As already discussed in section 5.4.2, the function UpdateCollisionData is called frequently
by the Simulation Engine, with the parameters of the currentTime and the list containing
the ownPathData that is the main vessels path. The function iterates through all vessels in
the database, and creates a collision point if there is one, and if one is present, then raises
collision to the collisionHandler through the interface function of RaiseCollision.
The
collision includes the collided vessel’s name, poisition at the time of the collision, the time of
the collision, and the collided vessel’s heading.
1
foreach (var vessel in VesselDatabase.Instance.vesselDataMap)
2
{
3
if (vessel.Key.Equals(vesselName)) continue;
4
Vector3 heading;
5
VesselMeasurementData collision = PredictCollision(ownPathData , vessel.
Value.predictedPath , out heading);
6
if(collision != null)
7
{
8
colissionHandler.RaiseCollision(vessel.Key, collision.EUN, heading ,
collision.timeStamp);
9
}
10
}
The PredictCollision function receives the path data for the main vessel and one other vessel,
with an out parameter of the other vessel’s heading. In the first few iterations of the radar,
it is possible that a path has not yet been generated, in that case the algorithm returns with
null.
Otherwise the maximum distance that the other ship can be mathematically to be considered
as colliding is calculated, this is faster then checking the Lamé curve. As the following code
snippet shows, the largest distance on any of the two axes from the origin is the maximum of
the clearance multipliers, multiplied by the length of the vessel, the added half of the vessel
length, as the middle point of the vessel is in the geometric middle of it. but since
lim
r→∞
x
a

r
+
y
b

r
= 1

will create a square, with the corners at ±a and ±b on x and y respectively, choosing max(a, b)
and multiplying with
√
2 will create a radius that contains the furthest point of the square.
Measuring this in Unity is easy and fast:
1
maxDistance = (Mathf.Max(length * clearanceOnSides , length *
clearanceFrontShip , length * clearanceBackShip) + length / 2f) * Mathf.
Sqrt(2f);
37
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.6. COLLISION PREDICTION
If any vessel is inside this radious, then the algorithm checks with the Lamé curve test as well.
Figure 5.13 an edge case can be seen, where all three multipliers are the same, ship length is
1, and the r component of the Lamé curve is 100, illustrated by the red square-like object. In
this case, the maxDistance variable matches the ”corners” of the curve, that is illustrated by
the black circle. Figure 5.14 describes a more common scenario, where the curve is rotated,
and the sides and back values are 2, while the front value is 5 and the r component of the
curve is 5. The black circle describes the same distance calculation, but in this case it is visible
that it more than overshoots, however, this is still a good estimate, as in most cases when the
vessels are far away from each other, the calculation of the Lamé curve can be ignored. The
drawings were created using the Desmos Calculator [24].
Figure 5.13: Edge Case of a super ellipse
Figure 5.14: Usual Case of a super ellipse
After the maxDistance is set, the algorithm needs to synchronize the time of the two vessels,
first the main vessel’s data is syncronized to the first data of the predicted path, in a way, that
the main vessel’s time should be behind the other vessel’s time before starting the main loop.
In the main loop, every time the algorithm steps forward on the predicted path of the other
vessel, the main vessel’s time will be synchronized in a way, that it is in front of the current
predicted path data. If the algorithm reaches the end of any of the data set of the two it
returns null.
1
while(ownPathData[i].timeStamp > predictedPath[j + 1].timeStamp)
2
{
3
j++;
4
}
5
for(; j < predictedPath.Count; j++)
6
{
7
while(i < ownPathData.Count && ownPathData[i].timeStamp < predictedPath[j
].timeStamp)
8
{
9
i++;
10
}
11
if (i >= ownPathData.Count) return null;
Now that the timestamp of the main vessel is after the current timestamp of the prediction,
38
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.7. GROUNDING
and its likely smaller than the next one (this is not requirement, but preferred) the calculation
of the position of the main vessel can be lerped to the position of the predicted value.
1
float lerp = (predictedPath[j].timeStamp - ownPathData[i].timeStamp) / (
ownPathData[i].timeStamp - ownPathData[i - 1].timeStamp);
2
Vector2 currentEN = new Vector2(ownPathData[i].eta.east, ownPathData[i].eta.
north);
3
Vector2 previousEN = new Vector2(ownPathData[i - 1].eta.east, ownPathData[i -
1].eta.north);
4
Vector2 lerpedEN = Vector2.Lerp(previousEN , currentEN , lerp);
5
Vector2 mesuredEN = new Vector2(predictedPath[j].EUN.x, predictedPath[j].EUN.z
);
Now the main vessel’s timestamp is synchronized with the other vessel’s timestamp regarding
their positions.
The algorithm now tests if the other vessels distance is smaller than the
maxDistance just calculated, and if true returns the collision point, the timestamp, and the
calculated heading of the other vessel - that is only required for the visual effect later.
1
if (Vector2.Distance(lerpedEN , mesuredEN) <= maxDistance)
2
{
3
if (LameCurveTest(lerpedEN , mesuredEN , ownPathData[i].eta.yaw))
4
{
5
if(j < predictedPath.Count - 1)
6
{
7
heading = predictedPath[j + 1].EUN - predictedPath[j].EUN;
8
}
9
else if(j > 0)
10
{
11
heading = predictedPath[j].EUN - predictedPath[j - 1].EUN;
12
}
13
return predictedPath[j];
14
}
15
}
And with that done, the collision prediction algorithm finished.
5.7
Grounding
Grounding support implementation in the application is the only algorithm that actively uses
the built in physics, and meshes.
It is however required to run the application using the
Unity editor to be able to utilize this feature, as importing and setting up meshes into a built
application is tedious, and usually requires a Unity editor to export the imported models. The
way it can be done includes using the Unity made AssetBundle component, that can be
imported runtime. However creating an asset bundle requires one to create it inside Unity.
Because of this reason, this feature is not included in the built version of the application. It
can however be used, if the application is run using the Unity Editor.
The way this feature can be used in the editor, is by importing an environment mesh, positioning
it inside the scene, and adding a MeshCollider component to it. Now, after generating the
path for the vessel, the algorithm checks the generated path at every point if there is a collision
with the environment. This is done by using the built-in Physics.OverlapBox() function, that
returns the colliders that overlap the box in any way, as seen in figure 5.15 in green.
39
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.8. DATA EXPORTS
Figure 5.15: Colliders Overlapping Example
If the overlap returns a collider at any point, it will be raised to the user, by creating a showcase
of the grounding. The showcase includes a copy of the grounded vessel, at the position and
orientation the grounding happened. After this, it is possible to play back the simulation as if
there was no ground, and the simulation will ignore the ground after this test.
5.8
Data Exports
Data serialization happens in two ways, either only the simulation setup data is serialized, or the
setup data and the simulation data. For handling the prior, the script V esselDataSerializer
is responsible. For simulation data serialization, the responsibility is on the DataLogger class.
When serializing all data, the logger asks the serializer for the setup data, and writes it out to
file along with the simulation data.
5.8.1
Vessel Data Serialization
The serialization functions are called from the UI classes, that deals with setting up, or the
handling of simulation data. Vessel data serialization includes all the environmental variables,
all the properties of the vessels and all their waypoints. The data classes used for this serializa-
tion are the V esselMetaDataPackage or V MDP that was introduced in section 5.3.2 and
the SetupV aluesData that from section 5.3.3. As these classes have functions that returns
their stored values in a JsonNode, all that the serialization classes have to do, is generate a
string from the appropriately built JsonNode, and write it out to file.
The function is an IEnumerator type, that means it can run as a Co-Routine, and can give
back the execution to the main thread, waiting for an amount of time or for an event. This
is required, because the function needs a file name input from the user, so the function waits
until the file name is given.
1
private IEnumerator SerializeAndSaveVesselDataCO(List<VesselData > vessels ,
SetupValuesData setupValuesData , string ownVessel)
40
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.8. DATA EXPORTS
2
{
3
JSONNode root = SerializeSetupData(vessels , setupValuesData , ownVessel);
4
string json = root.ToString();
5
6
fileNameSet = false;
7
fileNameSetter.SetActive(true);
8
yield return new WaitUntil(() => fileNameSet);
After the file name is set, it checks if it is a valid name, if not generates a unique name using
the Guid class. The files are stored at the Unity’s persistent data path, inside a predefined
folder. The function checks if the folder exists or not, it creates it if not, then writes the file
out as text and generates a popup window with the saved file’s path to the user.
1
var fileName = fileNameInputField.text.Length > 0 ? fileNameInputField.text :
Guid.NewGuid().ToString();
2
if(!Directory.Exists(Path.Combine(Application.persistentDataPath ,
vesselDataFolder)))
3
{
4
Directory.CreateDirectory(Path.Combine(Application.persistentDataPath ,
vesselDataFolder));
5
}
6
var path = Path.Combine(Application.persistentDataPath , vesselDataFolder ,
fileName) + ".json";
7
File.WriteAllText(path, json);
8
fileNameSet = false;
9
fileNameSetter.SetActive(false);
10
PopUpWithButton.Instance.PopupText("File saved at:\n" + path);
The function SerializeSetupData is responsible for generating the JsonNode for the file.
This function stores a V MDP for all vessels in a list. The V ector3 fields are stored as seen
in figure 5.16, waypoints are stored as a list of V ector2 as in figure 5.17.
Figure 5.16: Json format of Vector3
Figure 5.17: Json Format of waypoints
The vessel data list is stored in an object called allV esselData. The format of the json can
be seen in figure 5.18. The final data format of the json with the environmental data stored
as well can bee seen in figure 5.19, including the own ship’s name in the field ownV essel.
41
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.8. DATA EXPORTS
Figure 5.18: Json format of the vessel data list
Figure 5.19: Final json file format
5.8.2
Simulation Data Serialization
Serialization of the simulation data happens in the DataLogger class. First it pulls in the json
that is output by the V esselDataSerializer, then it adds its own data.
The data includes all vessels’ simulated paths, and is stored in a unique way, as normally
storing dictionaries is not trivial in json, but the function GetDataAsJson uses the fact, that
the SimpleJson class stores these values as a dictionary itself. This means, that there is a
JsonNode type assigned to a string, and the data structure used by the application also has
unique string values as the key for the dictionary, so using the parameter name as the key, and
the assigned value as the value works perfectly, as seen in the following code snippet.
1
JSONNode root = simSetupDataHandler.GetSetupDataAsJson();
2
var simD = new JSONObject();
3
root["SimData"] = simD;
4
foreach (var data in SimData)
5
{
6
simD[data.Key] = new JSONArray();
7
foreach (var bundleData in data.Value)
8
{
9
simD[data.Key].Add(bundleData.ToJsonNode());
10
}
11
}
12
return root.ToString();
The added json object has the structure shown in figure 5.20. Saving the json file happens
similarly to the previous json file, but to a different final folder.
42
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Figure 5.20: Simulation json data
5.8.3
Reading Files
Reading files in both cases start by first reading the file system at the location where the files
should be, searching for json files. After a file is read, the values are copied back to the logger
class or the serializer, then the operation is done, the rest of the loading/unloading will be
handled by the user on the interface, as only metadata is loaded and saved.
5.9
User Interface
The user interface or the UI, is built upon the behaviour designs introduced in section 5.2.2,
using the basic Unity UI elements. Everything that is used in this section, is either one of
these elements, or made by author. There are only two things that are external, these are the
normal maps used in the water shader, downloaded from 3Dtextures [25] and the color theme
of the app, that was generated using the Coolors [26] website.
5.9.1
Environment
The environment of in the application is quite simple, as its only contains a directional light
source, a shaded water level, and the vessels’ models. The light source is built in and the
shader was created for the project, as well as the vessel model.
The model was created in Blender [19] from a cube. The material for the vessel was created
in Unity using a template material with a gray color. The model was scaled down to a 1 by
1 cube, this way when creating a vessel with a custom size, it can be properly resized. The
model can be seen in figure 4.2.
Water Shading
The water shader was created using the Universal Render Pipeline’s or URP’s Lit Shader Graph
[21]. The Shader Graph is a tool inside Unity, that lets the developer create shaders using
visual tool, where the shading components are represented as a graph.
Creating a simple shader can be divided into two main components, the V ertex shader, that
is responsible for the position, the normal and the tangent of the vertices, and the Fragment
shader, that is responsible for how the light is reflected of from the material, from light normals,
through colors, to alpha values. To put it simply, the Vertex shader tells where the vertices
are, while the fragment shader tells how they should look like.
Vertex Shader The vertex shader component of the water shader is responsible for generating
”waves” by displacing the vertices along the object’s y axis using a static noise, that is offset
by a time value. The amount of ”displacement” can be adjusted by the variable of the same
name. The part of the shader can be seen in figure 5.21 in shader graph view.
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Figure 5.21: Vertex Shading in Shader Graph
As it can be seen in the figure 5.21, the vertex shading uses a scaled down gradient noise
that is scaled down by the variable displacement and is tiled by a time
100 constant, tiling it
ever so slowly along the y and x axis simultaneously. This noise then combined with the
object’s position vector’s y component, that is represented as the G or ”green” value of the
combine function. This is then directly connected into into the vertex position, meaning that
the vertices’ positions will be offset with this value.
Fragment Shader The fragment Shading will adjust the base color, the alpha, the smoothness
and the normal of the fragments. These individual values are used for:
• Smoothness is used for specular highlights and reflections. Its influenced by a single float
value between zero and one.
• Alpha value is used to make the water transparent. It is adjusted by the two colors
defined by the developer.
• Base Color is the main color of the fragment. The shader uses a depth property, to
make the water a lighter color vessels, representing a very simple ”foam” or ”break” in
the water.
• Normal value is used to create the look of waves using two different normal maps, and
a time offset, similar to the one used in the vertex shader. The normal will influence the
way light reflects of the surface.
Figure 5.22: Color, Smoothness and Alpha shading in Shader Graph
44
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
The figure 5.22 shows the color, smoothness and alpha shaders in Shader Graph. The important
point here is the function Clamp, as it has the input of the depth shader, and outputs its
value to two Lerp functions, one is the color shader, the other is the normal shader’s strength,
meaning that at larger depth values (more object behind the water plane) the normals will
be stronger. Everything left of the Clamp function is a depth shader, that was created for
testing, but stayed in the application, as it gave the vessels a better in-water position view.
Based on the depth value, that is influenced by the Depth variable, the shader lerps between
two colors given by the developer as seen in figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23: Depth Shading effect on the color of the plane
The alpha value is set by setting the colors’ alpha value, and the smoothness can be set
individually.
Figure 5.24: Normal Shading in Shader Graph
Finally the normal shading is done by offsetting the two different normal maps with two different
directions and two different speed that are based on time, lerping it between a custom set lerp
45
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
value with the lerp t of the depth shader, and applying it to the normal of the fragment as
seen in figure 5.24. This will create the illusion of moving water.
5.9.2
UI Colors
The UI colors were generated randomly on coolors [26], then picked by the author. There are
five colors in total, from which four is used on buttons, and one is on the background. The
colors can be seen in figure 5.25.
Figure 5.25: Colors used in the application
5.9.3
Menu Layout
All major menus have a help function, that shows an overlay on how to use the given menu.
Only the import menus do not have this function, as they seem too straightforward to create
a meaningful help overlay. The following figures will showcase all menus.
Figure 5.26: Main Menu
Figure 5.27: Main Menu with Help Overlay
46
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Figure 5.28: Import Setup Data Menu
Figure 5.29: Import Simulation Data Menu
Figure 5.30: Setup Simulation Menu
47
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Figure 5.31: Setup Simulation Menu with Help Overlay
Figure 5.32: Setup Environment Menu
Figure 5.33: Setup Environment Menu with Help Overlay
48
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Figure 5.34: Simulation View and Menu
Figure 5.35: Simulation View and Menu with Help Overlay
All the menus above comply with the requirements from section 5.2.2, and their state machine
diagrams. It should be mentioned, that the list containers from figure 5.28, 5.29, 5.30 and
5.35 are scrollable if the elements in the list would not fit on the screen.
Pressing the help button marked by the question mark, disables all other UI elements, and if
pressed during the simulation the simulation pauses.
5.9.4
UI Handling Classes
In Unity the common way to connect the UI with the scripts that handle data, is a middle
layer of scripts, that handle the UI, so it is not required to change the underlying code if the
UI changes. In this project the following scripts handle the UI:
• MenuHandler simple menu handler script, used several times for sub-menus
• DelayedPopUp singleton script, creates a pop up window that disappears in the amount
of seconds given by the caller
• PopUpWithButton singleton script, creates a pop up window that disappears when the
user clicks on the button
49
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
• SimSetupDataHandler handles the setup menu, pulling in all its data from the dropdown
menus, to all the data input fields that the user can modify
• HudController handles the UI during the simulation.
Menu Handler
The easiest way to handle menu button clicks that show/hide components, to call the menu
holder GameObject’s SetActive(bool) function, that enables/disables the MonoBehaviour
components, meaning that none of their functions that are inherited from the MonoBehaviour
class is called. This causes the renderers to disable as well, meaning that the disabled game
object’s UI components will not be rendered and thus visible. The problem with this approach,
that if a new menu is added, then all buttons have to be updated to disable that component
as well. The solution is a simple script, that holds all the game objects that are part of the
menu, and clicking on a button a single function is called with the menu item that needs to
be enabled. The handler function looks as follows:
1
public void SetMenu(GameObject menuItem)
2
{
3
foreach (var m in menu)
4
{
5
if (m == menuItem) m.SetActive(true);
6
else m.SetActive(false);
7
}
8
}
As can be seen, this function is really simple, and it only needs an list updated in the editor,
as it can be seen in figure 5.36. Calling the function can be done with the button’s OnClick
function as seen in 5.37.
Figure 5.36: Menu Handler List in Unity
Figure 5.37: Menu Handler on click handling
50
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Pop Up Windows
The handling of pop up windows is really simple, the component inherits the Singleton tem-
plate, meaning it can be reached from any scripts, and the script only have a text field a main
game object field, a Log(string) and a Hide() function. The difference between the two, that
is how the Hide() function is called, as in the delayed one it is called by a timer, and in the
other the button calls it.
Sim Setup Data Handler
This class is responsible for handling all data setup UI functions. It has a massive internal class
called V esselDataUI that has no methods, but holds all the UI links. This is made this way,
for the simple fact that in the editor it can be hidden. These links must be made and there is
no simple way around it. The script is a collection of all the Text Mesh Pro input fields in the
setup menu, that looks like this in code:
1
public class VesselDataUI
2
{
3
public TMP_InputField vesselName;
4
public TMP_InputField length;
5
public TMP_InputField beam;
6
public TMP_InputField draft;
7
public TMP_InputField rudAngMax;
8
.
9
.
10
.
Figure 5.38 shows how the first few look like in the editor as there are more then 20 of these
fields. A link between an object and a script can be made by dragging the object into the
scripts appropriate field.
Figure 5.38: Vessel Data UI instance and its fields
Other than the large UI class, the script handles the buttons and the vessel data edit view
enabling/disabling, as well as the instantiation of new list elements for both the vessels and
the waypoints. For this, the script holds the reference to all the buttons it edits, the editMain
object that contains the edit menu, and the ScrollV iew classes’ Content objects, that is the
parent of the list elements. It also has references to the two prefabs used, one for the vessel
list element and one for the waypoint list element. Overall the script looks like as in figure
5.39 in the editor.
51
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
Figure 5.39: Sim Setup Data Handler with the UI fields hidden
It also holds a reference to the simulation engine, as it has to initialize it, and the vessel data
serializer, as that is the script that serializes the data created in the menu this script handles.
The prefabs can be seen in figure 5.40, and 5.41.
Figure 5.40: The Vessel List Element Prefab
Figure 5.41: The Waypoint List Element Prefab
Some of the main functions are listed below, to understand how certain components work.
Adding a new vessel is creating an instance of the prefab, parenting it under the content in the
hierarchy, adding it to the vessels list, resetting the UI, setting its data handler, and setting
the menu into edit mode:
52
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.9. USER INTERFACE
1
public void AddNewShip()
2
{
3
ResetUI();
4
var instance = Instantiate(vesselDataPrefab , vesselsParent);
5
var vesselData = instance.GetComponent <VesselData >();
6
vessels.Add(vesselData);
7
vesselData.SetDataHandler(this);
8
vesselData.SetEditMode();
9
}
The function SaveDataChanges will be called in case the editing of the vessel is done for any
of the following reasons: user pressed done, exporting the data, adding new vessel or starting
the simulation. This function is responsible to pull all data from the text fields and add it to
the data classes. It also generates a list of V ector2 points from the instances of waypoints in
the list, and deletes all the instances from there.
In this class, and in fact in this project all the other classes implementing an interface are doing
so, to create a Dependency Inversion. As the UI list elements have to call an OnEditClicked()
or an OnDoneClicked() function on this handler, they need to have a reference to it, mean-
ing that they depend on the handler, and the handler must depend on them. However, if an
interface is introduced that have these functions, that is implemented by the handler, and the
instances have a field of it, then the handler can be passed as the interface field, meaning that
the instances will only see the handler’s functions that are also in the interface and they will
not know the handler - they do not depend on it, only the handler depends on them.
This is exactly what happens here, as the figure 5.2 shows, the handler implements the
IDataHandler interface, and the class V esselData has a field of said interface.
In the
above code, the handler of the V esselData instance is set, by passing this, the Sim Setup
Data Handler.
The other button functions mostly just save, clean up the scene, and call their external func-
tions, such as the StartSimulation(), SerializeDataAndSave() and AddNewWaypoint().
HUD Controller
The name HUD Controller can be confusing, as there is no heads up display, but its easier
to differentiate between this UI script and other simulator or simulation scripts this way. The
HUD Controller’s responsibility is handling the UI instantiation, and the UI in general, while
the simulation is running. Its main tasks are:
• Creating an overlooking camera in the scene
• Creating the instances of the vessel objects in the UI list
• Handling of the enabling/disabling of path rendering
• Handling the camera placements
The first two tasks are handled inside its largest function, the InitHudController() that takes
the vessel dictionary containing the string −GameObject pairs, and a V ector3 that is the
animation delta. First, for each vessel it creates an instance of the scroll element 5.42 that
holds the vessel’s name and two camera settings for the vessel, one overlooking, and following
it, and calls its HUDListElementFunctions class’s Init() function. This will set up the
camera on clicks and the vessel’s name. Next it generates the paths for the expected and the
actual paths, and finally creates the overlooking camera, by calculating its y position based on
53
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.10. SEQUENCES
the field of view, and the size of the required area by the moving vessels, and creates a game
object for the collision camera.
The third and fourth item on the list is handled by on click functions, enabling/disabling game
objects, that are needed to be shown/hidden, or placing the cameras on the appropriate game
object’s transform.
Figure 5.42: The HUD List Element Prefab
5.9.5
The Hierarchy
The Hierarchy defines how the scene is built up. It contains all game object that are in the
scene, including the camera, the light, the environment and the developer created scripts. The
hierarchy can be seen in figure 3.1, with the red number 1. Unity renders UI elements in
the order they are parented in the hierarchy, meaning that in case a game object go has a
lower sibling and a child all three with Renderer components, then the render order will be
go −→child −→sibling. This causes the the child to be rendered on top of the parent, and
the sibling to be rendered on top of both of them. It is important when building a UI, as the
UI elements will be a children of the background, so the background is rendered before the
UI elements, also when creating an overlay, it must be a lower sibling or a child of the of the
game object it overlays. An example for this can be seen in figure 5.43.
Figure 5.43: Hierarchy in the UI
5.10
Sequences
This section presents the main sequences of the application. It helps to understand, how the
data moves through the application, and how the simulation runs. Only main functions that
contribute to this and are somewhat complicated are represented here.
5.10.1
Setting Up a New Simulation
The Simulation setup only interacts with the UI elements, that are not modelled here, and
some scripts, from which the vessel data creation, and removal is modelled, along with the
starting of the simulation.
54
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.10. SEQUENCES
Figure 5.44: Adding a New vessel in The Setup
Figure 5.45: Removing a Vessel from the Setup List
Figure 5.46: Starting the Simulation from the Setup Menu
55
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.10. SEQUENCES
5.10.2
Running a Simulation
Running the simulation is already discussed in section 5.4.2, the following figures might help
in connecting the dots on how the data items are created, stored and updated.
Figure 5.47: Starting the Simulation from the Setup Menu
Figure 5.48: Starting the Simulation from the Import Menu
56
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.10. SEQUENCES
Figure 5.49: Simulation Engine Update Function
Figure 5.50: Updating the Predicted Paths
Figure 5.51: Updating the Collision Prediction
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
5.10. SEQUENCES
58
==PAGE:66==
6
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained during the verification of the developed application.
The testing of different algorithms is discussed, and aspects of visualization, precision and
performance are addressed.
6.1
Vessel Simulator Implementation
After the Simulator was finished in C#, several tests were run to determine its accuracy. While
the simulator seemed to perform well, there was a small error, between 6.2E-09% and 1.3E-06%
in each iteration, inconsistently while heading north. After looking through the implementation
of numpy and testing floating point error results, the source of the problem was thought to
be that in C# the floats only have 7 digits of accuracy (the documentation suggests 7.2-7.5
digits), while the python float has almost 54 bits of precision (IEEE-754), and prints 9 digits
normally. This meant being around 0.03 centimeters off after 3000 iterations. To test if the
problem was with the floats, the whole project was converted to use doubles instead, meaning
all unique functions such as the whole Mat3x3 class and the functions of Mathf had to be
redone with doubles. This made the error smaller and more consistent, increasing in every
iteration with about 8.9E-10 meters, going from 8.9E-10 meters to 2.9E-06 meters in 3000
iterations. This suggests, that there are still some rounding issues, as it seems like python
sacrifices speed to gain a few more digits of accuracy. After these tests, the float version of
the program was decided to be used, as it means there are no type conversions making the
code run faster, and the accuracy does not suffer significantly, as the error was considered to
be acceptable.
The figures 6.1-6.4 show the difference between the float and the double error values with a
vessel moving straight northbound. The horizontal axis represents the iterations in all four
diagrams, it goes from 1 to 3000 in all cases. The vertical axis in figure 6.1 and 6.3 represents
the distance between the python simulation values and the C# simulation values in meters.
The vertical axis in figure 6.2 and 6.4 represents the error percent, or how significant the error
is regarding to the covered distance. This is created by taking the python calculated value p
and the C# calculated value c, then the ”percent” value of v is calculated: v = p−c
p .
Figure 6.1: deviation in meters relative to the python simulation in 3000 iterations of the
double version of the simulator
59
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.1. VESSEL SIMULATOR IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 6.2: deviation value relative to total distance traveled through 3000 iterations of float
version of the simulator
Figure 6.3: deviation in meters relative to the python simulation in 3000 iterations of the
double version of the simulator
Figure 6.4: deviation value relative to total distance traveled through 3000 iterations of double
version of the simulator
60
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.1. VESSEL SIMULATOR IMPLEMENTATION
The figures 6.5-6.6 show a vessel turning from a northbound heading towards east. Turning
the vessel has a lot more calculations, thus there will be a larger accumulated error in the
float values. After the vessel turned right, and its position eastbound is 35.4286967 meters
according to the python simulator and 35.33681 according to the C# implementation. Given
a vessel of this type, the average error is still below 4.28E-5% of the length of such vessel ( 70
meters) for each iteration, and does not noticeably effect the outcome of the simulation. The
position can be seen in figure 6.5 while the error can be seen in figure 6.6.
Figure 6.5: North-East positions of the vessel
Figure 6.6: Deviation values of the vessel in meters relative to previous values during 3000
iterations while turning east
Given these tests, the average deviation of the float based C# implementation from the python
one is 5.1166E-5% in each iteration, in any direction.
6.1.1
Performance
As it is known, python is not the best performing language, as it is interpreted during runtime,
rather than being compiled to native code. To evaluate how much faster the C# implemen-
tation runs, several test were conducted, where the runtime difference was measured on the
same device, running the same simulation. To achieve this, the time was logged with both
the python and the Unity versions of the simulator. As discussed in section 4.3, the Unity
implementation waits on purpose as to not disturb the UI thread. Of course a new thread can
be launched as well, if necessary. To create a stress test that is measurable, a simulation with
a right turn was created with a StepTime of 0.01 seconds, and a SimTime of 3000 seconds,
meaning 300000 iterations. In both simulators the time was logged right before and right after
executing the simulate function.
All the following tests were conducted on the same computer, with an Intel i7-9750H CPU
with 6 cores and 12 logical processors, on a base clock speed of 2.6GHz. The clock speed
during the simulators were running was usually around 155% speed of 4GHz, as most of these
61
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.1. VESSEL SIMULATOR IMPLEMENTATION
processes only utilized one core. The system has 32GB of ram. The following diagrams in
figure 6.7-6.10 represent 100 runs of the simulation, where a dot represents a single run of the
simulation. The vertical axis represents the time it took the simulation to finish in milliseconds.
Figure 6.7: Python simulation times in milliseconds after running 100 simulations with 300000
steps each
Figure 6.8: Unity simulation times in milliseconds after running 100 simulations with 300000
steps each, while stopping for the UI to update every 10000 steps
As seen in figure 6.7 it took the simulator 66075.6887 milliseconds on average to finish the
simulation with the standard deviation of 1553.4315 milliseconds. The unity C# version in
figure 6.8 took on average only 3839.2418 milliseconds to finish the same simulation with the
standard deviation of 67.8640, while stopping 300000
10000 = 30 times, that costed at most 500
milliseconds. This means, that the C# implementation is more than 17 times faster than the
python version. For reference an other measurement was taken without such waiting times
that can be seen in figure 6.9, where the average total time is 3651.6025 milliseconds with the
standard deviation of 199.1673.
62
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.2. PATH PREDICTION
Figure 6.9: Unity simulation times in milliseconds after running 100 simulations with 300000
steps each, without stopping for the UI to update
Running on a different thread eliminates the freezing UI, but is not faster, as starting a new
thread costs a lot of resources. This is seen in the example in figure 6.10 where the average
runtime was 4533.3604 milliseconds, with the standard deviation of 270.3788.
Figure 6.10: Unity simulation times in milliseconds after running 100 simulations with 300000
steps each on their own threads, not disturbing the UI at all
6.2
Path Prediction
Path prediction tests of the vessel compares the predicted values with the actual path of the
vessel, by taking the half point of the path, and predicting the next 60 seconds. Several of
these tests were conducted, they can be seen in the following figures, the actual paths of the
vessels in green, the data used for the prediction in red, and the predicted path in blue.
Figure 6.11: Prediction when going straight. Sample time: 30 seconds
63
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.2. PATH PREDICTION
Figure 6.12: Prediction without considering turn rate. Sample time: 30 seconds
Figure 6.13: Prediction while turning. Sample time: 30 seconds, turn rate acceleration: 0
64
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.2. PATH PREDICTION
Figure 6.14: Prediction while turning. Sample time: 10 seconds, turn rate acceleration: 0
Figure 6.15: Prediction while turning. Sample time: 60 seconds, turn rate acceleration: 0.02
65
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.2. PATH PREDICTION
Figure 6.16: Prediction while going into a turn-back. Sample time: 40 seconds, turn rate
acceleration: 0
As seen from figures 6.11-6.16, the prediction, follows the path closely in all cases, except of
course in 6.12, as this figure represents the path that is usually used when predicting paths
for vessel in simulation scenarios, and what this algorithm tries to outperform. Going straight
with the vessel is of course not a challenge, as seen in figure 6.11. Several edge case scenarios
where tested where the turn rate is almost the maximum of what the vessel can do, and
the prediction could still correctly create a good approximation of the path, without knowing
anything about the vessel other than its positions at some given times. The best example for
this is seen in 6.16, where the vessel turns back, and the prediction algorithm only sees the
start of the turn, but as it keeps track of the angular acceleration, it will create a turn that is
reasonable with the observed accelerations. This also means, that the algorithm will pick up
on a vessel going into a turn as soon as it starts turning, as the average angular acceleration
will highlight the turn as soon as it started.
6.2.1
Noise
As seen in figure 6.14 a small threshold time for the data measurements seems good, as the
predicted path will use the latest path available. However, if the noise level of the measurements
reach the critical point, where the measurement noise uniformly randomly displaces a measured
point from its true position by at least the half distance from its neighboring points’ true
positions, then the observed points can overlap, or a later position can come before an earlier
position. This causes the prediction to get chaotic, as the Bézier curve will not be able to
mitigate such noise, as seen in figure 6.17. In these cases the variable MinTime should be set,
that aggregates measurements within the given time window, as described section 5.5.1. This
will mitigate the problem of overlapping measured positions, and multiple extreme outliers in
a row, but it needs a larger pool of data, so the variable TimeThreshold should be large
enough to make a prediction. The prediction needs at least 9 data points to make a healthy
prediction, meaning
TimeThreshold
MinTime
> 9
where MinTime > 0, and the time between the observed data points is smaller than
MinTime. The figure 6.18 shows the prediction of a really noise data, where the observed
66
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.2. PATH PREDICTION
path points are overlapping, and only filtered by TimeThreshold, as MinTime is set to 0.
In the figure the black dots represent the filtered data, and the red dots the data after running
both Bézier and Catmull-Rom. Green is the actual path, blue is the prediction. As it can be
seen, the filtering did not alter the data, and even though the Bézier curve did reduce it, its
still too noisy for the algorithm to generate a good prediction, as the red dots are far off the
actual path of the vessel.
Figure 6.17: Bézier curve with overlapping values. The create points are in order of their
numbering
Figure 6.18: Noisy data without MinTime filtering in black, Bézier + Catmull-Rom in red
and prediction in blue
In figure 6.19 the same noisy data can be seen, but the black dots are now showing the
aggregated data from the MinTime filter, for which the Bézier can create a good reduction,
while the Catmull-Rom repopulates the data, so enough data points are present. The prediction
in the blue, now follows almost the same path as in figure 6.13.
67
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.3. COLLISION PREDICTION AND GROUNDING
Figure 6.19: Noisy data with MinTime filtering in black, Bézier + Catmull-Rom in red and
prediction in blue
6.3
Collision Prediction and Grounding
The collision prediction builds in a solid path prediction algorithm, meaning it can be quite
simple, as all that is needed is to cross check positions at given times. Grounding does a similar
feat, but only checks once, before running the simulation. As both of these algorithms are
quite simple, testing is not diﬀicult. The following figures shows examples of collisions, and
grounding.
Figure 6.20: Collision Detected Pop-Up window
68
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.3. COLLISION PREDICTION AND GROUNDING
Figure 6.21: Collision Overview Camera showing the ghost ships of a predicted collision
Figure 6.22: Small Pop-Up window on top of the screen if pause on collision is false
As seen in figure 6.21, when a collision is detected, and the stop on collision is enabled, a
collision scene is displayed, with the collided ships predicted positions. As it can be seen, the
own ship on the left is on the path generated by the Vessel Simulator, while the vessel on the
right is on its predicted path. The red line is the exclusion zone of the own ship, which the
other vessel just crossed. The collision scene disappears if the user presses the play button.
If the user does not want the application to stop on every collision, the pause on collision
checkbox can be unchecked. In this case only a small pop-up window will appear on the top
of the screen, as seen in figure 6.22.
If grounding is set up, the test is run, and if grounding is detected, a pop-up is shown as in
figure 6.23, and the grounding scene is presented as in figure 6.24. Pressing play will delete
the scene, playing the simulation normally, without considering grounding effects.
Figure 6.23: Pop-Up in case a grounding event is detected
69
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.4. USER INTERFACE
Figure 6.24: Camera Scene showing a detected grounding
6.4
User Interface
The User interface is usable, and after testing it by going through all possible menu input
configurations, there were no crashes and no bugs were found, although user input is not
checked in the input fields other than being the correct format (float, int, string), so for
example inputting numbers that would make no sense in the real world could cause problems
with the simulation. The interface complies with the use-cases presented in figure 5.1, and
follows the states described in section 5.2.2.
The main aspects of the simulation interface was to create a set of switchable paths, these
are:
• The expected paths - the paths that one get when connecting the waypoints
• The actual paths - the actual path that the vessels make
• The predicted paths - the predicted paths of the vessels
• The exclusion zone - the area border around the own ship that should be empty of other
vessels
These are displayed successfully, and all of them can be turned on or off individually. These
can be seen in figure 6.25 with all paths enabled, figure 6.26 with some disabled paths, and
figure 6.27 where the scene can be seen from a follower camera.
6.5
Ease of Use
The application does not require a particularly strong computer to run, it does not require an
installation, and it can be run on any windows machine, or if needed a Linux or MAC build
can be made in a few minutes, thanks to the universality of Unity. The application was tested
on a 4 CPU virtual machine without a graphics card, and only 4GB of ram. The application
worked, and it produced 15 FPS, which is not desirable, but usable, and the specs for such
computer is mid-high range from 2010. Testing the application on laptop from 2019, it runs
with constant 60 FPS capped. If one desires, the application can be even built for mobile
platforms.
Thanks to the low amount of textures and meshes used, the built size of the application with
all its data is about 70 MB.
70
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.5. EASE OF USE
Figure 6.25: All paths and the exclusion zone seen from above
Figure 6.26: Turning off some paths in the settings
Figure 6.27: Follower Camera setting with path renderings
71
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS
6.5. EASE OF USE
72
==PAGE:80==
7
Discussion and Conclusion
In this chapter the discussion of the results, and methods used in the thesis is presented along
with the possible future expansions, and the conclusion of the thesis.
7.1
Discussion
The aim of this thesis was to develop an application that is capable of simulating maritime ves-
sels, predicting their paths, and predicting possible collisions with other vessels, or groundings.
This section summarises the methods used, and their results, also talking about the possible
future expansions of the application, and proposal of an external iterator implementation.
7.1.1
Vessel Simulator
In order to develop an application that is capable of simulating vessels to predict collisions,
an appropriate simulation model had to be created or found. A modelling framework by Thor
I. Fossen was adopted, and recreated in C#. Using this method of re-implementation, the
difference between the two simulation models was measured. It was found, that the increment
in error as the difference between the two simulations was 7.5E-7% on average for a vessel
going straight. A turning vessel had an average error of 5.1166E-5% in each iteration. This
error is caused by the different precision in floats used. The other finding of the differences
in implementation was the difference in speed of execution. The calculated average time of a
single simulation cycle was 66075.6887 milliseconds using the original python implementation,
while using the C# implementation it was 3839.2418 milliseconds. This means that the C#
implementation was more than 17 times faster. This is mostly due to the fact, that python is
interpreted during runtime, while C# is translated to native code, meaning it can run much
faster.
7.1.2
Path and Collision Prediction
To achieve a reliable collision prediction, a good path prediction algorithm is required. This
algorithm must be able to handle noise, and should be at least as good as the current standard,
where the heading of a vessel is projected forward based on its speed. Such a path prediction
algorithm was created, that handles noise filtering, and generates a path based on a vessel’s
speed, acceleration, angular speed and angular acceleration.
To handle noise, two algorithms were proposed.
The first algorithm would aggregate the
measured signals based on a time input, and filter out the outliers. The second algorithm is
based on the Bézier curve, and is used to generate an approximating curve using the quadratic
Bézier formula.
These noise handling algorithms however greatly reduces the number of data points available
for the path prediction algorithm. Using the Catmull-Rom spline to interpolate the Bézier
points, the data can be repopulated along the path of the vessel.
The path prediction algorithm proposed calculates the average speed, acceleration, angular
speed and angular acceleration of the target vessel in a given time frame, and creates a
prediction where both linear and angular acceleration is geometrically goes to zero. This is a
good assumption, as most larger non-recreational maritime vessels tend to have a destination,
which the vessel tries to reach while minimizing cost and time. In simple words, the vessels
tend to go straight, with minimal changes to speed and heading. The reason why acceleration
is still considered, as in case a vessel starts turning, the average turn rate will only pick up on
this fact rather slowly, while the average angular acceleration will pick up on the turn instantly.
This is true for linear acceleration as well.
73
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
7.2. CONCLUSION
Building on the previously proposed path prediction algorithm, a simple collision prediction
algorithm was proposed, that iterates through the predicted path, and crosschecks the target
vessel’s position with the own ship’s exclusion zone, that had been projected forward in time
as well. A scenario is considered as colliding, if the target vessel is inside the exclusion zone
of the own ship.
7.1.3
Grounding
To predict grounding a simple algorithm was proposed, similar to the one used in the collision
prediction. As the environment is highly unique in each situation, the algorithm requires a
mesh to be created or imported into the application as the environment. This mesh is then
used to predict grounding, by projecting forward the own ship along its generated or predicted
path, and in each iteration the vessels collision box is matched against the environment mesh.
If at any point the two intersects, a grounding is assumed.
Given that importing a mesh into Unity during runtime is quite diﬀicult, and the best solution
requires a Unity editor to build a package that the application can import, this feature is only
available in editor view.
7.1.4
Application and UI
The application plan from the use-cases was successfully executed.
The menu states are
correctly described by the state machine diagrams in section 5.2.2, and the application was
created in a way, that it follows the SOLID [27] principles of object oriented code design
wherever possible. This is harder to achieve in Unity, as it has a unique way of storing objects,
where data classes are sometimes unavoidable in order to preserve performance.
7.1.5
Future Expansions
The application is well prepared for future expansions by code design. Both the UI and the
code is easily expandable. A proposal for future work would be the implementation of an
external application that can step the Unity program, and the implementation of the capability
for this in the simulator as well. This expansion would include a web server that the simulator
can connect to through Socket IO, meaning that the communication between the application
and the server would be bidirectional. This way the Unity application could work as a web
service for decision algorithms, simplifying the current method of exporting simulation data to
use for decision support.
This way, the web server could even run a WebGL build of the application, meaning that the
user would only need browser to set up and use both the application and the server. The
estimated effort to develop and test these solutions on top of the existing architecture would
be around 6 months, that sadly goes beyond the scope of this thesis.
7.2
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to design and create an application capable of simulating maritime
vessels, predict their paths based on noisy data, and predict collisions and groundings.
To achieve this a vessel dynamics’ simulation model by Thor I. Fossen was re-implemented in
C#. It was shown, that the C# implementation works like the original code within a given
error rate. It was also shown, that the C# version of the application is at least 17 times faster
than the original python version.
To generate path predictions, and algorithm was developed, that reduces measurement noise
effectively, and preserves the original path of the vessel. It was shown, that this noise reduction
works well with large random noise as well. The path prediction algorithm developed was shown
to generate a prediction that follows the actual path of the vessel closely, creating a much better
prediction than a simple heading and speed based path.
74
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
7.2. CONCLUSION
The collision prediction developed is based on the path prediction mentioned above and is
capable of reliably predict collisions with the target vessel.
The application is capable of
showcasing such collisions in the simulation environment as soon as it is predicted to happen.
The grounding support of the application developed can predict grounding with high precision,
thanks to the mesh based method used.
The developed grounding was shown to predict
grounding correctly based on Unity physics.
In summary the application developed is capable of simulating maritime vessels, predict and
visualize their paths, and predict and visualize collisions and groundings. The simulated data
can be exported, and used by other programs. Therefore all goals set at the start of this thesis
has been met. The project is public, and can be accessed on github [28].
75
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
7.2. CONCLUSION
76
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
Thor I. Fossen. Python Vehicle Simulator. url: https://github.com/cybergalactic/Pyt
honVehicleSimulator (visited on 07/25/2022).
[2]
European Maritime Safety Agency. EMSA, Annual Overview of Marine Casualties and
Incidents 2021. url: http://www.emsa.europa.eu/publications/reports/item/4266-ann
ual-overview-of-marine-casualties-and-incidents-2020.html (visited on 07/25/2022).
[3]
DTU. Shipping Lab. url: https://ccas.dtu.dk/Research/ShippingLab (visited on
07/25/2022).
[4]
Thor I. Fossen. Line-of-sight path following of underactuated marine craft. url: htt
ps : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1474667017378096 (visited on
07/25/2022).
[5]
ShipSim.com. Ship Simulator Extremes. url: http://www.shipsim.com/products/ships
imulatorextremes (visited on 07/25/2022).
[6]
NAUTIS Home. NAUTIS Home. url: https://www.vstepsimulation.com/nautis-simula
tor/nautis-home/ (visited on 07/25/2022).
[7]
Open Simulation Platform. Open Simulation Platform. url: https://github.com/orgs
/open-simulation-platform (visited on 07/25/2022).
[8]
Open Simulation Platform. Open Simulation Platform. url: https://open-simulation-p
latform.github.io/ (visited on 07/25/2022).
[9]
Thor I. Fossen. Handbook of Marine Craft Hydrodynamics and Motion Control. Wiley,
2021. isbn: 1119575052.
[10]
Andrej Blejec. Bezier Curves : Simple Smoothers of Noisy Data. url: http://dk.fdv.un
i-lj.si/MetodoloskiZvezki/Pdfs/Mz_9Blejec.pdf (visited on 07/25/2022).
[11]
Dr. Szirmay-Kalos László. Geometric Modelling, points and classic curves. url: http:
//cg.iit.bme.hu/portal/oktatott-targyak/szamitogepes-grafika-es-kepfeldolgozas/geom
etriai-modellezes (visited on 07/25/2022).
[12]
IMO. Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972
(COLREGs). url: https://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/COLREG.aspx
(visited on 07/25/2022).
[13]
Sighard F. Hoerner. Fluid-Dynamic Drag. url: https://archive.org/details/FluidDyna
micDragHoerner1965 (visited on 07/25/2022).
[14]
Unity. Unity Python In Process API. url: https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.un
ity.scripting.python@2.0/manual/inProcessAPI.html (visited on 07/25/2022).
[15]
Unity. Unity Python Out of Process API. url: https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/co
m.unity.scripting.python@2.0/manual/outOfProcessAPI.html (visited on 07/25/2022).
[16]
Unity. Unity URP. url: https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.render-pipeline
s.universal@12.1/manual/index.html (visited on 07/25/2022).
[17]
github.com/Bunny83. Simple Json. url: https://github.com/Bunny83/SimpleJSON
(visited on 07/25/2022).
[18]
https://www.python.org/. Python. url: https://www.python.org/ (visited on 07/25/2022).
[19]
Blender. Blender. url: https://www.blender.org/ (visited on 07/25/2022).
[20]
Unity. Unity. url: https://unity.com/ (visited on 07/25/2022).
[21]
Unity. Unity Shader Graph. url: https://unity.com/features/shader-graph (visited on
07/25/2022).
[22]
NumPy. NumPy. url: https://numpy.org/doc/stable/index.html (visited on 07/25/2022).
[23]
Thomas T Enevoldsen, Mogens Blanke, and Roberto Galeazzi. “Sampling-based Collision
and Grounding Avoidance for Marine Crafts”. In: Ocean Engineering (2022).
77
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[24]
Desmos. Desmos | Graphic Calculator. url: https://www.desmos.com/calculator
(visited on 07/25/2022).
[25]
3Dtextures. 3Dtextures. url: https://3dtextures.me (visited on 07/25/2022).
[26]
coolors. coolors. url: https://coolors.co (visited on 07/25/2022).
[27]
Uncle Bob. SOLID. url: https://sites.google.com/site/unclebobconsultingllc/getting-a
-solid-start (visited on 07/25/2022).
[28]
András Ármin Csikós. The thesis project on github. url: https://github.com/HerrKatz
en/Msc-Thesis (visited on 07/25/2022).
[29]
Unity. MonoBehaviour Lifecycle. url: https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/ExecutionOr
der.html (visited on 07/25/2022).
78
==PAGE:86==
A
Unity Lifecycle [29]
79
==PAGE:87==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like at
this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a
difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text
like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an impression of
the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original
language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
