==PAGE:1==
Eﬀective natural ventilation in renovated
apartments
Master Thesis
2022 
DTU Civil Engineering
Andreas Egholm Nielsen, s173826
Oliver Hvidtfeldt Jakobsen, s165586
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Effective natural ventilation in renovated apartments
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Andreas Egholm Nielsen
Oliver Hvidtfeldt Jakobsen
Supervisors:
Jakub Kolarik
Kevin Michael Smith
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover background:
DTU Design Guide
Graphical illustration:
Oliver Hvidtfeldt Jakobsen
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, ventilation,
building energy and indoor climate.
Andreas Egholm Nielsen
s173826
Signature
Date
Oliver Hvidtfeldt Jakobsen
s165586
Signature
Date
ii
10-07-2022
10-07-2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In Europe 75 % of buildings are considered energy inefficient, and renovation of the exist­
ing building stock to reduce the energy consumption of buildings is necessary. The first
step when renovating is often to replace the windows as a cost­effective measure, but this
can drastically increase the mould risk in an apartment if not adequately ventilated. Some
install adjustable air inlets (trickle vents) and keep the exhaust ventilation, while others in­
stall balanced mechanical ventilation with heat recovery. The effectiveness of adjustable
air inlets in a renovated apartment building in Denmark was investigated to evaluate how
the air inlets should be used during the heating season under the stack effect. Simulations
assessed the performance of natural and mechanical ventilation solutions with air inlets
adjusted according to control strategies based on literature. Furthermore, a local sensi­
tivity analysis was performed to assess the sensitivity of the ventilation solutions when
changing one input parameter at a time. The investigated parameters included wind con­
ditions (wind profile and pressure coefficients), the building envelope airtightness, building
orientation and occupant behaviour concerning doors.
The consequences of not installing air inlets include an increased condensation risk pro­
moting mould growth and a higher percentage of occupied time above 1000 ppm CO2­
concentration. Therefore, trickle vents should be installed at the cost of higher energy
consumption. The study concluded that the CO2­controlled air inlet was the most effec­
tive when considering IAQ performance indicators while reducing energy consumption.
However, the occupancy­control proved to perform similarly and may provide simple pre­
liminary guidance on use to maintain IAQ and minimise heat loss for occupants. Neverthe­
less, all baseline solution cases showed periods of not upholding prescriptive ventilation
rates. Furthermore, an emphasis should be placed on the sizing of vents in future re­
search. The study found that the performance of installing an average air inlet from the
Danish market on the ground floor may suffice due to flows driven by the stack effect, but
the same can not be concluded for higher floor levels. A solution could be to install more
air inlets in rooms with higher expected occupancy, particularly in the bedrooms. The sen­
sitivity analysis concluded that the passive stack solutions performed best concerning the
IAQ indicators at lower wind speeds, effectively reducing the amount of airflow ingress in
the exhaust chimney. All system cases were highly sensitive to closing doors across every
KPI, and all cases were sensitive when changing any parameters concerning ventilation
rate (AAh). The mechanical exhaust cases were less sensitive to airtightness changes;
however, the ground floor passive stack cases performed better with an increased air­
tightness when considering the lower wind conditions. Under the same wind conditions,
the 4th floor performed better at reduced airtightness. Generally, the mechanical cases
were more robust and less sensitive than the passive stack counterparts, proving more
favourable.
A survey conducted on natural ventilation in renovated apartments concluded that Danish
stakeholders implement natural ventilation. However, follow­up interviews are needed for
specific solutions. The primary challenges faced are due to spacial restrictions for instal­
lations and a limited project budget affirming existing knowledge. Furthermore, the results
confirmed that air inlets are commonly installed when replacing windows to reduce heat
loss. The survey likewise concluded that the respondents believe that the goal of reno­
vation is to reduce energy consumption, increase the indoor climate quality, and prevent
building damage.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our deepest appreciation to our supervisors Jakub Kolarik, As­
sociate professor, DTU CONSTRUCT, and Kevin Michael Smith, Associate professor,
DTU CONSTRUCT. We could not have undertaken this journey and completed our the­
sis without your generous guidance, expertise and support.
Thanks to
Vasileios Filis, Building Engineer, Centre national de la recherche scientifique.
For imparting valuable insights on parametric runs and advanced level simulations in IDA­
ICE.
Christian Grønborg Nicolaisen, Section leader, Danish Technological Institute.
For sharing your expert knowledge on ventilation and renovation with respect to apartment
buildings.
Ilia Kravchenko, Doctoral Candidate, Aalto University.
For providing practical knowledge on modelling in IDA­ICE to two Danish students from
across the globe.
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to the respondents that participated in the
survey on natural ventilation in renovated apartment buildings. Likewise, many thanks
should go to everyone involved with the distribution of the survey. This includes, but is
not limited to, the DTU administration, our supervisors, and the Danish Technological
Institute.
Thanks should also go to EQUA’s support team who improved our knowledge on how to
simulate natural ventilation in IDA­ICE and aided with technical solutions.
Lastly, we would be remiss in not mentioning our family and friends who offered unwaver­
ing moral support and encouragement throughout the process.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the art
4
2.1
Ventilation in existing apartment buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Trickle ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Survey of applied solutions for natural ventilation when renovating apartments 10
3.2
Building description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Simulation tool IDA­ICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
The building model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Performance indicators and criteria for comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results
32
4.1
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Baseline cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4
Impact analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Discussion
53
5.1
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.3
Baseline case analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.4
Pressure­controlled air inlet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.5
Sensitivity and impact analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.6
Exploring the parameter output space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.7
Robustness of Parametric Runs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.8
Further investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.9
Final thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.10 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
Appendices
A IDA­ICE
73
A.1 Graphical Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.2 Schematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
v
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
B Performance documentation
76
C Questionnaire flowchart
77
D Baseline results
86
E
Optimal parameter results
87
F
Solution space for simulation cases
88
G Graphs
93
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Energy targets
In Europe 75 % of buildings are considered energy inefficient, and over 97 % of the building
stock in the EU must be upgraded to achieve climate goals by 2050 [1]. In Denmark, it
is estimated that 30 % of the total CO2­emissions stem from the building sector. The
goal of the Danish Climate Law, passed in 2014, is to transform the Danish economy
into a low­emission society by 2050 [2]. Therefore, Denmark seeks to reduce net energy
consumption for heating and hot water by 35 % in the building stock and reduce GHG
emissions by 70 % by 2030 [3].
To reach these energy targets, a reduction in the energy consumption of buildings is nec­
essary. Renovation of the existing building stock proves a viable solution, mainly since
most buildings will continue to be used until 2050 [1]. Ramboll found that renovation,
compared to demolishing and building anew, would generally be the optimal solution to
reduce CO2­emissions when also considering cost­effectiveness [4].
Renovation
The first step when renovating is often to replace the windows as a cost­effective mea­
sure, but this can drastically increase the mould risk in an apartment if not adequately
ventilated. Some install adjustable air inlets (trickle vents) and keep the exhaust ventila­
tion, while others install balanced mechanical ventilation with heat recovery. Some install
nothing and must open windows to avoid mould risk and dilute pollutants from indoor
sources. Moreover, an increased airtightness of the building envelope may reduce heat
loss from uncontrolled ventilation due to infiltration and exfiltration. However, negative
impacts on Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) may be incurred if purpose­driven ventilation is not
facilitated, emphasizing the need for adequate natural ventilation in renovated dwellings.
When renovating existing apartment buildings using natural or mechanical exhaust venti­
lation, installing a mechanical system with heat recovery (MVHR) may not be feasible as
required by the Danish Building Regulations [5].
A standard solution to these cases is installing a decentralized ventilation system with high
energy savings, if possible. However, when the implementation of a central or decentral­
ized system proves too arduous due to spacial limitations or technical difficulties, then
dispensation may be given at the municipal level. In practice, this could be a relaxation
of provision §447 subsec. 2, that requires heat recovery to retain heat and condition the
supply air. In such a case, the building regulations present an example where the needed
ventilation rates must be achieved by exhausting the bathroom and kitchen and supply­
ing fresh air through air inlets, the facade or windows. It is emphasized that the minimum
required ventilation rate of 0.3 L(s · Pan) must be upheld regardless. Therefore, buildings
may have natural ventilation after renovation. It should be noted that compliance with the
ventilation requirements relies on the degree of renovation. For lesser renovations, the
profitability of the measures has to be calculated, e.g. exchanging only parts of a roof.
Thus, full compliance with the provisions may not be needed [6].
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Natural ventilation
Over 70% of the current building stock in Denmark was built before 1979, during a time
with no energy requirements for buildings. Therefore, most of the existing apartment
buildings to be renovated employ natural ventilation and passive stack systems [3]. To
achieve adequate performance, natural ventilation systems are highly dependent on the
environmental driving forces from wind pressure induced on facades and the tempera­
ture difference between indoor and outdoor (stack effect). However, the unpredictable
nature of these forces may produce unreliable performance, necessitating an emphasis
on; building orientation, geometry and sizing of openings during the design phase for ef­
fective use [7]. A common strategy is cross­ventilation, where the air is forced through the
building by positive pressure on the windward side and negative pressure on the leeward
side [8]. The strategy’s effectiveness is determined by occupant behaviour regarding the
use of doors, airtightness and the placement of openings.
When renovating apartments, the indoor air quality and fresh air supply must not be com­
promised by measures intended to reduce heat loss. Therefore, purpose­driven openings
such as adjustable air inlets (trickle vents) can be installed to compensate for the lost in­
filtration [9]. The ventilation system should ensure the IAQ and health of occupants by
diluting emitted pollutants from indoor sources, maintaining the thermal comfort of occu­
pants, and controlling the relative humidity to avoid the growth of mould and dust mites.
Ventilation has to be controlled, since excessive ventilation may cause discomfort and
heat loss, while low ventilation may lead to overheating and insufficient IAQ [10]. Hence,
ventilation aims to ensure a good indoor climate and relative humidity, in which the system
operation and maintenance considers fire safety, occupant comfort and energy efficiency
[11].
1.1
Scope
The scope of the study was limited to the performance of adjustable air inlets and their
usage in a renovated apartment in Denmark with different ventilation systems. The study
used one apartment with an occupancy schedule for a family of two adults and one child.
Building simulations were done in IDA­ICE to evaluate the IAQ and heating of the apart­
ment zones.
1.1.1
Goal and objectives
The work presented in this study aimed to investigate effective natural ventilation in reno­
vated apartment buildings. Mechanical exhaust ventilation was introduced as a measure
of comparison alongside balanced mechanical ventilation with heat recovery assumed to
have optimal performance.
The following objectives were defined to fulfil the goal:
1. Perform a literature review to improve understanding of these systems.
2. Conduct a survey and subsequent interviews with Danish architects, consultants,
and GI members (private landlords) to identify their challenges and preferred solu­
tions regarding natural ventilation in renovated apartments.
3. Construct apartment simulations in IDA­ICE with various solutions for natural venti­
lation as deduced from interviews and the literature review.
4. Develop IDA­ICE simulation cases that investigate research questions for represen­
tative apartments.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.1. SCOPE
5. Perform a sensitivity analysis using parametric runs in IDA­ICE to test the impact
of varying air tightness, properties of the ventilation stack, window size and type,
occupancy etc.
6. Document the research in a thesis.
Disclaimer. The survey did not pan out as intended. The objective of conducting
interviews before the study to establish natural ventilation solutions was impossible due
to a longer development process and time restrictions. The authors investigated natural
ventilation solutions from a literature review and an expert interview. The survey was
completed and included in the report. However, the results are used in the discussion
and summarised.
1.1.2
Research questions
The following research questions were investigated:
• How should adjustable air inlets be used when installed in a renovated apartment,
and how effective are they during the heating season under the influence of the
stack effect?
• What are the consequences of not installing adjustable air inlets?
• How do varying parameters relevant to natural ventilation and renovation impact
the effectiveness of systems with adjustable air inlets? And how sensitive are the
systems to parameter change?
• How is natural ventilation considered when renovating apartment buildings in Den­
mark, and what are the in­practice implementation experiences?
3
==PAGE:11==
2
State of the art
This chapter seeks to present state­of­the­art by summarising publications relevant to
ventilation in existing apartments, control strategies for trickle vents, performance­based
IAQ indicators and sensitivity analysis in building performance analysis.
2.1
Ventilation in existing apartment buildings
Afshari et al. published a white book on ventilation systems in existing Danish apartment
buildings and the practical experiences of stakeholders [12]. The white book aimed to pro­
vide an overview of the current knowledge on ventilation systems in existing apartment
buildings. The white book also sought to promote knowledge sharing that may improve
the indoor climate at a minimal cost when implementing ventilation systems. Addition­
ally, the white book sought to divulge the challenges faced by stakeholders to present
recommendations that may better the renovation process.
Apartment buildings erected before 1977 typically have natural ventilation, housing ex­
haust chimneys in the bathroom/kitchen and facilitating fresh air supply through air inlets
in the occupied spaces. As established in the introduction, the driving forces of such sys­
tems are pressure differences due to buoyancy and the wind pressure induced on the fa­
cades of the building. The Danish Building Regulations from 1977 subsequently required
the use of mechanical exhaust in apartment buildings with embedded wet rooms, and in
1982 all apartment buildings were required to operate using mechanical exhaust ventila­
tion. The current requirement was stipulated in 2010 and necessitates using mechanical
ventilation with heat recovery in apartment buildings. The ventilation requirements in the
acting Danish Building Regulations apply to new buildings and when deeply renovating
or changing the use of existing buildings. Lesser renovations, such as replacing windows
and doors, must maintain the ventilation performance as when first established. The pro­
visions in the building code must be upheld when retrofitting a new ventilation system or
refurbishing an existing system in apartment buildings.
The white book included stakeholder information from dialogue meetings. A report pre­
ceding the white book reviewed the current literature on ventilation in existing apartment
buildings and conducted interviews to contrive relevant questions for said dialogue meet­
ings in which natural ventilation was considered [5]. The question about natural ventilation
posed for the first dialogue meeting was; Is natural ventilation sufficient when renovating
apartment buildings, and which natural ventilation solutions are most suited? However,
the white book fails to mention any findings related to natural ventilation solutions from
stakeholders and places a primary emphasis on mechanical solutions as required by the
provisions in the Danish Building Regulations. Therefore, it is of interest to further eluci­
date the natural ventilation solutions found in practice using surveys and/or expert inter­
views.
2.2
Trickle ventilation
Ventilation strategies in the UK still allow the use of trickle ventilators in dwellings for
background ventilation, as stipulated by the Building Regulations in the UK with Approved
Document F [13]. A survey by Sharpe et al. investigated the effectiveness of trickle ven­
tilators installed in newly constructed dwellings in Scotland [14]. An interview­based sur­
vey gathered data on occupant interactions with ventilation provisions such as windows,
4
==PAGE:12==
2.2. TRICKLE VENTILATION
doors and trickle vents in 200 dwellings. Performance measurements were made on 40
of said dwellings, with CO2­concentration is mainly focused on estimating ventilation and
air change rates. The survey found that 1000 ppm was a reasonable absolute threshold
for ’adequate’ ventilation and that little interaction with trickle ventilators occurred, e.g.
63 % were permanently closed in bedrooms, 26 % were always open, and only 9 % of
cases reported occasional adjustments by occupants. Examples showed that the com­
bination of doors and trickle ventilators open improved ventilation and slowed the rate of
CO2 increase; however, all bedroom occupants were subjected to periods where CO2
levels were above 1000 ppm. The study concluded that trickle ventilation, as used and
installed in the studied dwellings, was ineffective at meeting desired ventilation rates.
Biler et al. reviewed studies of trickle vents from the perspective of essential performance
parameters, specifications and control strategies to provide an overview of the technol­
ogy [15]. One of the featured conclusions was that most of the reviewed studies did not
consider annual wind direction and wind speed profile, which may have a significant ef­
fect on the performance of trickle vents and their parameters. Furthermore, the study
mentions that the most critical influences on ventilation performance come from the wind
velocity, airtightness level of the building, number of occupants and occupancy schedule,
and other wind­related parameters.
Trickle vents are air transfer devices usually incorporated into the frame of a window to
facilitate fresh air supply. Two trickle vents are considered in the literature differentiated by
the control method; they can either be manually adjusted or automatic. In some literature,
the manually adjustable trickle vent is also called slot­controlled and can typically only be
open or closed, with some products including intermediate positions. Automatic trickle
vents are controlled according to a measure, where the common types include pressure,
humidity or pollutants such as CO2­concentration. The control types are also classified in
CIBSE Guide B2­ Ventilation and Ductwork, in which trickle vents are essential for floor
heights between 2.5m and 3.1m in various heat gain cases under winter conditions [16].
Pressure­controlled trickle vents adjust the air intake by altering the opening area depend­
ing on the pressure difference between indoors and outdoors to minimise draught risk and
reduce the need for occupant interaction. The devices have a fixed opening area and an
exterior flap that moves to control the amount of air passing through the ventilator.
Laverge et al. studied different demand control strategies for trickle vents in a statisti­
cally average Belgian dwelling with mechanical exhaust ventilation to evaluate how such
systems may influence indoor air quality [17]. The paper focused on the energy­saving
potential of the demand control strategies at a system level and their repercussions on the
IAQ. The performance robustness of the control strategies was assessed using a Monte­
Carlo sensitivity analysis. The study tested 10 parameters, including terrain roughness,
wind pressure coefficients, facade orientation, number of occupants and moisture pro­
duction, to name a few. The strategies included; relative humidity with a set point of 70 %
in wet rooms, occupant presence triggering a fan in the wet rooms, CO2­controlled trickle
vent with a set point at 1000 ppm, and the last combined all the prior strategies. The study
concluded that there is a more significant saving potential when using a CO2­controlled
strategy compared to the other investigated control strategies when using trickle vents.
Guyot et al. mention that there are substantial energy savings of up to 60 % from the use
of demand­controlled ventilation (DCV) with the right strategy [18].
Southall evaluated the performance of trickle vents in a passive stack ventilation system
and a demand­controlled passive ventilation system using EnergyPlus [10]. The trickle
vents were sized according to UK Building Regulations, and the study considered 4 differ­
5
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. STATE OF THE ART
ent airtightness levels and 3 different locations with varying weather and wind conditions.
The trickle vents in the demand­controlled system were CO2­controlled and opened above
800 ppm, and closed below. Additionally, they opened if the temperature exceeds 24 °C
or 70 % RH, regardless of CO2­concentration. The trickle vents only closed below 300
ppm for the passive stack system, effectively keeping them fixed open. The study’s results
indicate that the average air flow on the ground floor was considerably higher than on the
first floor due to the influence of the stack effect. The demand­controlled system showed
more consistent results, contrary to the passive stack system. The CO2­controlled trickle
vents were assumed to electronically sense the indoor ventilation demand and change
the opening area accordingly. Such a device may not be readily available and used in
Denmark. A simplified control opening trickle vents according to the occupancy schedule
during periods with an expected increase in demand could be of interest.
Ridley et al. used EnergyPlus to study the possible benefits of automatic trickle vents in
dwellings [19]. A theoretical pressure­controlled and humidity­controlled trickle vent was
examined, alongside field tests of real products. Ridley et al. assessed the performance
of the trickle vents from simulations which concluded that the given pressure­controlled
trickle vent might reduce over ventilation and provide a 9 % reduction in heat loss com­
pared to a fixed vent of similar size. The humidity­controlled trickle reduced the incidence
of humidity values above 70 % by 19 % with a penalty of a 2 % increase in heat loss from
ventilation. The models were idealised and simplified to allow implementation in Ener­
gyPlus. Karava et al. investigated the air leakage characteristics of pressure­controlled
and manually­controlled trickle vents using experimental methods [20]. The study found
that climates with low outside temperatures would benefit from pressure­controlled trickle
vents since airflow control would be more straightforward at higher pressure differences,
meaning superior performance in the heating season compared to manually­controlled
trickle vents. The study concluded that pressure­controlled trickle vents have a high po­
tential to reduce energy consumption.
Trickle vents have also been investigated in the domain of school buildings. Adequate
natural ventilation using trickle vents in schools was investigated by Cornaro et al [21].
The study mentions that the best method to evaluate ventilation is CO2­concentration
since the level of CO2 may affect students’ learning ability and attention span. However,
the review paper by Biler et al. concludes that trickle vents alone are not adequate at
satisfying the ventilation needs in school buildings [15].
Laverge and Janssens studied systematic differences in the performance of natural ven­
tilation, mechanical exhaust ventilation and balanced mechanical ventilation with heat
recovery [22]. The paper aimed at providing benchmarks for achievable performance for
the different systems and possible sizing strategies for trickle vents in future standards.
The study sized the ventilation system and components according to sizing rules put for­
ward by a Belgian standard for natural ventilation in residential buildings [23]. The study
investigated two building geometries, a detached house and a flat in a 6­story apartment
building, and did not include the influence of the stack effect on the apartment. However,
the study found that the higher stack for the apartment, compared to the detached house,
decreased the flow rate variability in the cases with natural ventilation. The study con­
cluded that the mechanical and exhaust ventilation systems provided better performance
and that increasing the building tightness improved the performance of all systems con­
sidered. Lastly, they argued that occupants tend to open windows during the summer
in moderate climates and thus only studied the performance of the ventilation systems
during the heating season.
6
==PAGE:14==
2.3. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Sakiyama et al. reviewed the perspectives of naturally ventilated buildings in literature
and summarised issues and prospects related to naturally ventilated buildings that re­
search may explore [24]. The study mentions that standards and guidelines are needed
to assist the design of natural ventilation in buildings by relating solutions with expected
performance. Furthermore, the review showed that the use of Building Energy Programs
was frequently used to predict ventilation performance. EnergyPlus had the highest use
share, whereas IDA­ICE, TRYNSYS and IES VE had an equal share. CFD appeared
to be the preferred tool of choice, with Ansys­Fluent being the most used CFD software
among the researchers under review. These findings correspond with Biler et al., who
found studies that used EnergyPlus and CONTAM using CFD to investigate ventilation
systems with trickle vents.
Kravchenko et al. analysed the performance of a retrofitted apartment building with pas­
sive stack ventilation in Nordic conditions [25]. The simulation study was conducted in
IDA­ICE and considered two different apartment sizes on both the 2nd and 5th floor to
include the influence of the stack effect. Additionally, a novel self­regulating air inlet de­
vice with filters was installed as a renovation measure. The system’s performance was
evaluated by Kravchenko et al. under various case scenarios, which altered the degree of
maintenance, airtightness, and occupant behaviour concerning windows and doors. The
apartments on the 5th floor had high CO2­levels and were more sensitive to poor main­
tenance. Furthermore, an increase in envelope airtightness proved detrimental to the
IAQ. Mikola et al. also studied several floor levels when investigating the performance
of single­room ventilation units in multi­story buildings [26]. Lastly, Wong and Heryanto
studied the potential of using an active stack to enhance natural ventilation in residential
apartments [wong]. The studies highlighted that several floor levels should be consid­
ered and modelled when investigating the stack effect’s influence in apartment buildings.
Wood A and Ruba Salib found that occupants use trickle vents instead of windows to pre­
vent cold draughts in the winter in high­rise buildings [27]. Trickle vents were also used
in building automation systems where improved performance was observed [15].
2.3
Performance evaluation
Poirer et al. suggest using performance­based approaches when designing ventilation
systems for residential buildings, contrary to prescriptive requirements currently in stan­
dards and regulations [28]. The approaches must ensure that the ventilation system saves
energy and mitigates occupant health risks. The study identified five IAQ indicators rele­
vant when assessing performance in residential buildings; the maximum cumulative ex­
posure of CO2 above 1000 ppm, percentage of time with RH higher than a threshold in all
rooms (e.g. 70% for condensation risk), percentage of time with RH outside a given range
(e.g. 30­70% for health risk), and others considering formaldehyde and fine particulate
matter. The study mentions that regulations and standards throughout the world are pri­
marily based on prescriptive approaches, using airflows or air change rate requirements
as measures for effectiveness ­ as is the case in Denmark. However, ventilation rates
in regulations are generally set based on comfort and not health criteria, as suggested
in the HealthVent project [29]. Moreover, standards assume that the airflows diluting hu­
man bio­effluents are sufficient for controlling other contaminants. However, the airflow
cannot guarantee control. Thus, performance­based approaches seek to address this by
evaluating the ventilation system using IAQ performance indicators. DS/EN 16798­1 rec­
ommends a method that similarly calculates the cumulative exposure above a threshold
limit, as identified for CO2 in this study.
Pang et al. reviewed the role of sensitivity analysis (SA) in building performance analysis
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. STATE OF THE ART
(BPA) by visualising the typical selection of input and output parameters and elaborating
on the benefits and drawbacks of different sensitivity methods [30]. Furthermore, the
paper summarised critical information regarding the implementation of SA and applicable
simulation tools. The use of sensitivity analysis in BPA is evergrowing with applications
in building envelope evaluation, indoor ventilation control and building layout design, to
name a few. The paper identified the three major applications of SA in BPA related to;
building design, occupant behaviour and building ventilation/infiltration.
Sensitivity analysis applied to building analysis can be divided into global and local ap­
proaches. The global sensitivity analysis is focused on mapping the influence of uncer­
tain input parameters over the whole input space. Furthermore, the main focal point of
the global method is to map the correlation between the input parameters and trace the
variability in the output to specific inputs. A local sensitivity analysis is focused on the
effects of uncertain inputs around a baseline case by changing one factor at a time while
keeping all other factors fixed [31]. Several global sensitivity methods exist, including; re­
gression, variance­based methods (e.g. Sobol), screening­based methods (e.g. Morris),
and meta­modelling approaches. Sampling methods (e.g. Monte Carlo) are frequently
used to define the probability distribution functions needed to perform a global sensitivity
analysis. The local method is sufficient for identifying the sensitivity of a linear model.
However, non­linear models require more complex sensitivity methods. Additionally, the
local method cannot assess the quantification of correlated parameter effects. A simple
local method for determining the parameter sensitivity is the sensitivity index [32]. The
methodology for sensitivity analysis in building performance analysis is the same regard­
less of application. The steps are to; define the input parameters, build simulation models,
run simulations, collect data, run sensitivity analysis and present the results.
Kristensen and Petersen investigated how two different levels of a­priori information, ap­
plied to the SA methods, Local, Morris or Sobol, influenced the identification and ranking
of input parameters [33]. The conclusions were based on simulations for a residential
building in Denmark with a significant heating and limited cooling demand. The study
demonstrated that the three methods identified the same cluster of most sensitive input
parameters. However, the ranking varied with the applied SA method. Therefore, the
choice of the SA method depends on the purpose of the SA analysis. The local method
provides a simple application on smaller clusters of input parameters. In contrast, global
analysis methods prove more suitable for filtering larger clusters of input parameters using
probability functions to narrow down the most relevant parameters e.g. when optimising
performance during early design phases. Several studies have investigated performance
optimisation with respect to office [34, 35] or high­rise buildings [36, 37] using sensitivity
analysis.
Murray and O’Sullivan investigated influential parameters of existing building retrofits us­
ing sensitivity analysis to develop a retrofit decision­making tool. The study found that
the most significant parameter was the U­value of the building components, with the in­
filtration rate placing second­most influential [38]. Milner et al. examined the trade­offs
for health and sustainability objectives of typical retrofit refurbishments in UK dwellings
[39]. The results demonstrated that high degrees of airtightness without installing addi­
tional purpose­driven ventilation devices may lead to an increase in pollutants from indoor
sources. The optimal level of airtightness for a given dwelling will vary based on local cir­
cumstances. The airtightness parameter is therefore often included when using sensitivity
analysis to investigate the building performance of retrofitted buildings. Haase and Amato
analysed the climatic conditions concerning thermal comfort in buildings by investigating
the impact of building location, climate and orientation [40]. The study concluded that
8
==PAGE:16==
2.3. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
the environment influences the energy used for heating and cooling and determines the
amount of solar radiation exposed upon a building. The building orientation substantially
impacts the solar heat gains in the building and thermal comfort. However, in the study
context, an emphasis was placed on changing the orientation of openings in relation to
the boundary wind conditions ­ a parameter known to impact natural ventilation design
[7].
Therefore, the study’s novelty stems from (1) comparing control strategies of adjustable
air inlets when installed in a renovated apartment with either natural or mechanical ven­
tilation to determine their effectiveness and (2) investigating the impact of changing the
boundary conditions of said systems using sensitivity analysis. The following is consid­
ered concerning the research questions.
• The use of adjustable air inlets is based on trickle vent control strategies installed
on the ground floor and top floor to include the influence of the stack effect. The
controls include: fixed open, CO2­control, pressure­control and occupancy­control.
• The relevant input parameters for boundary conditions include wind profile, wind
pressure coefficients, building airtightness and door opening occupant behaviour.
• The review found that performance­based indicators can be used to evaluate solu­
tion effectiveness regarding IAQ.
• The local approach was deemed sufficient for the sensitivity analysis since a small
cluster of relevant parameters will be analysed for the system solutions. Thus, the
number of parameters warranted the limit in complexity.
• The lack of information on natural ventilation solutions in the reviewed white book
established the need for a stakeholder survey on the subject.
• The review also found that IDA­ICE is used to study the performance of naturally
ventilated buildings in contemporary research, albeit minimally.
The term air inlet is used in the report and may be considered synonymous with trickle
ventilators as used in literature.
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
This chapter will elaborate on the initial boundary conditions of the simulation and how the
project was approached. The method of the survey will be explained, followed by the sys­
tem modelling of the simulation cases in IDA­ICE. Then, the performance­based methods
used to evaluate the cases will be described, including the local sensitivity analysis.
3.1
Survey of applied solutions for natural ventilation when
renovating apartments
The goal of the survey was to map the measures and solutions applied by industry stake­
holders, such as consultants, private owners or architects, when renovating apartments
for natural or hybrid ventilation. The survey underwent some unforeseen complications,
which in turn meant that the survey results could not be used to deduce simulation cases.
Due to this, the simulation cases were based on literature and an interview with Christian
Grønborg Nicolaisen of the Danish Technological Institute. The survey responses were
analysed with respect to the simulation results and helped to provide greater knowledge
on the challenges faced and solutions used when renovating.
3.1.1
Applied tool
The survey was conducted as an online questionnaire to collect information from respon­
dents. The flow of the questionnaire was designed with LucidChart to structure the net­
work of questions, choice of answers and relevant information. SurveyXact was selected
as the development tool to facilitate distribution, respondent analysis, and design. The
tool was developed by Ramboll and is considered the leading tool in Scandinavia to de­
velop questionnaire­based surveys [41].
3.1.2
Target audience
The survey was aimed at Danish stakeholders in the building sector with relevant knowl­
edge on natural and/or hybrid ventilation in renovated apartments. The following stake­
holders were considered:
• Private owners of apartment buildings
• Board members of social housing
• Consultants
• Architects
It should be noted that the survey questions were formulated in Danish, as will be evident
in the following figures. Question text pertinent for comprehension will be translated, as
seen in the results Section 4.
3.1.3
Questionnaire paths and sorting
The questionnaire was designed to branch stakeholders to relevant questions based on
previous answers. Three main paths were developed; one for private owners and board
members of apartment buildings, one for consultants and one for architects. Each path
had specific questions tailored to acquire relevant data and to ensure the qualifications of
the respondents. See Figure 3.1 showing the question on occupation.
10
==PAGE:18==
3.1. SURVEY OF APPLIED SOLUTIONS FOR NATURAL VENTILATION WHEN
RENOVATING APARTMENTS
Figure 3.1: Question on respondent occupation.
The questionnaire was designed to sort respondents with non­relevant experience into a
shorter path whilst still accruing their base perceptions on renovation. The sorting ques­
tions were strategically placed in order to accomplish this, see Appendix C.
3.1.4
Design of questions
A limited amount of question types was used to not overwhelm the respondent and pro­
vide structure in the survey. A frequent question type was the Likert scaling, one of the
most fundamental and widely used scaling methods in psychometric research [42]. The
question types included:
• Multiple choice
• Likert scale
• Yes or No
• Battery with scale
Multiple choice questions were used to allow both one choice from a selection or multiple
when several choices could be applicable. The questions would often include an optional
text field allowing additional comments worthy of note, see Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Example of a multiple­choice question.
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Yes or No questions were used for general questions, see Figure 3.3. This was only used
twice; when inquiring about the respondent experience and follow­up interview participa­
tion.
Figure 3.3: Example of the Yes or No question on respondent experience.
Battery with scale questions were used when the Likert scale was applied to several
questions simultaneously. Figure 3.4 shows an example of how the Likert scale was used
in a battery.
Figure 3.4: Example of a battery scale question with an optional text field.
3.1.5
Distribution
The questionnaire was distributed through channels which ensured that the target au­
dience would be reached. The following two means of distribution were utilized; online
media and direct contact through E­mail.
The online media outlets used were LinkedIn and the DTU website in which DTU posted
the questionnaire. Additionally, the Danish Technological Institute aided distribution.
Direct contact through E­mail was handled by our supervisors.
12
==PAGE:20==
3.2. BUILDING DESCRIPTION
3.1.6
Further investigation (Qualitative)
The questionnaire concluded with an option to provide contact information if the respon­
dent desired to participate in follow­up interviews. As of July 2022, the questionnaire is
still accessible to new respondents.
3.2
Building description
The study was based on a renovated apartment building located in the centre of Copen­
hagen at Rygesgade 25. Thus, the apartment building was ideal with respect to investi­
gating natural ventilation in renovated apartments. The building was constructed in 1906
and deeply renovated in 2018. It is a 5­story building housing non­residential spaces on
the ground floor, and apartments on the 4 stories above. Figure 3.5 shows the apartment
building in question.
Figure 3.5: Aerial photo of Rygesgade 25. Sourced from the municipality of Copenhagen
[43].
The building renovation involved insulating the building envelope, refurbishing the heating
system and installing a new decentralized ventilation system. It acquired the energy label
A2010, a DGNB Silver certificate, and met the criteria for Renovation Class 1 according
to the Danish Building Regulation BR15 [44]. The external walls were insulated on the
interior with 50 mm Phenolic Foam Insulation, and the facade gables were fitted with 150
mm mineral wool. New 3­layer coupled windows and 3­layer balcony doors were also
installed to reduce heat loss through the windows.
The ventilation system was implemented and mounted above the ceiling in the bathroom,
lowering the ceiling height. The new ventilation system extracts from the kitchen hood
and bathroom, whilst supplying air to the rest of the occupied zones.
The investigated apartment consists of a living room, 2 bedrooms (adult bedroom and
child bedroom), a kitchen and a bathroom connected by a corridor. Figure 3.6 shows
the floor plan marked with room areas and the location of the exhaust chimneys and air
inlets in the ventilation system to be described in section 3.4.6. The floor area is 61.2
m2 in total with a room height of 2.6 m. The apartment has two exterior facades; one
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
facing southwest and another northeast, with internal walls adjacent to a staircase and
neighbouring apartments.
Figure 3.6: Floor plan of the simulated apartment with room areas. The investigated air
inlets are placed in the two bedrooms and living room, with exhaust chimneys in the wet
rooms. The grey areas indicate adjacent zones not included in the simulations.
3.3
Simulation tool IDA­ICE
The study used EQUA’s simulation software; IDA Indoor Climate and Energy version 5.0
beta 23 (IDA­ICE) to accurately model multiple thermal zones, and compute the indoor
climate and energy consumption. It provides a dynamic simulation of airflows and heat
transfer ­ in the simplest case three paths are considered for airflows; through the sup­
ply and exhaust terminals and via. leakage in the envelope. Furthermore, it allows the
implementation of advanced HVAC systems, heating or cooling units, and plants with hy­
dronic components such as chillers and boilers. Weather data is supplied from climate
files containing actual or synthetic information on temperature, relative humidity and wind
etc. IDA­ICE is validated according to ASHRAE 140 (2004), CEN Standard EN 15255
and 15265 (2007) and CEN Standard EN 13791, amongst others, to ensure quality [45].
IDA­ICE contains several modelling environments depending on the complexity of the
posed problem. The model was first built at the Standard level which covers most com­
mon tasks, after which the model was converted to a mathematical model with compo­
nents containing equations, variables, parameters and smaller subsystems (macros) at
the Advanced level.
3.4
The building model
The building model was provided to the authors and had been previously used by Kolarik
and Smith to investigate a novel demand­controlled room­based ventilation system for
renovated apartments [46]. Therefore, the model had predefined values for the boundary
14
==PAGE:22==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
conditions including airtightness, construction layers and glazing properties. The apart­
ment was modelled on both the ground floor and fourth floor to investigate the influence
of the stack effect.
3.4.1
Building site
Figure 3.7 shows the building body with a roof height of 16 m and various shading objects
to adjust the potential solar radiation by depicting the neighbouring buildings on site.
Figure 3.7: Site showing the building body with the investigated apartments on the ground
floor and fourth floor. Neighbouring shading objects have been marked with height.
3.4.2
Building envelope
The building body in IDA­ICE was simplified to have four surfaces which limited the sets
of wind pressure coefficients needed. Heat loss through internal walls was assumed neg­
ligible and solely considered through the facades facing northeast, and southwest. The
construction layers of the external walls are shown in Table 3.1.
Material
Thickness [m]
Thermal conductivity [λ]
Gypsum
0.01
0.22
Phenolic insulation
0.05
0.02
Brick
0.37
0.58
Total U­value
0.2982 W/m2K
Table 3.1: Properties of the exterior wall construction.
The envelope area was calculated as seen from the outside and included the cross­
sectional area of the external floor slab in the area of external walls. The envelope area
measures in IDA­ICE are defined according to ISO 13789 [47]. All thermal bridges were
assumed to be of typical size and are automatically calculated based on geometry, see
Figure 3.8.
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.8: Loss coefficients for thermal bridges are given per meter of element.
3.4.3
Windows
Table 3.2 shows an overview of the input properties for the windows including window
area, effective opening area, control and shading.
Bathroom
Kitchen
Living room
Adult
bedroom
Child
bedroom
Window area
[m2]
0.56
2.07
3.8
3.8
1.38
Effective opening area
[m2]
0.34
1.24
2.28
2.28
0.83
Orientation
NE
NE
NE
SW
SW
Opening control
Ctrl Macro
Ctrl Macro
Ctrl Macro
Ctrl Macro
Ctrl Macro
Occupancy
schedule
WD: 7­8:30
WE: 8­9:30
7:30­8, 12­12:30,
18­19:30
WD: 7­8:30, 16­22
WE: 10­22
22­7
22­7
Shading
Internal blinds
Internal blinds
Internal blinds
Internal blinds
Internal blinds
Shading control
Never drawn
Sun, schedule
Sun, schedule
Sun, schedule
Sun, schedule
Shading schedule
WD and WE
Never drawn
WD: 7­8:30, 16­22
WE: 10­22
WD: 7­8:30, 16­22
WE: 10­22
22­7
22­7
Table 3.2: Window properties. WD = Weekdays, WE = Weekends.
16
==PAGE:24==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
The glazing properties of the windows are shown in Table 3.3. The frame fraction of the
windows was 0.25 and the U­value was set to 1.8 W/m2K.
Pilkington OptiTherm S3
Total solar transmittance
0.49
Direct solar transmittance
0.41
Light transmittance
0.71
U­value of glazing
0.6 W/m2K
Table 3.3: Glazing properties.
The effective opening area of the windows equates to 60% of the total window area, as
specified for side­hung windows in guidelines by the Danish Enterprise and Construction
Authority [48]. Modelling window opening behaviour calls for stochastic models to include
the probability of occupant interaction as concluded by Andersen et al. [49]. However, a
deterministic model based on indoor temperature was used in the study to limit simulation
complexity. There appears to be no consensus in research on whether to use indoor
or outdoor temperature or both when simulating window use. Herkel et al. found that
the percentage of open windows correlated less with indoor temperature when compared
to the outdoor temperature [50]. Furthermore, the study found that the percentage of
open windows was lowest during the winter. However, Haldi and Robinson argued that
the indoor temperature would be the better predictor [51]. It should be noted that purge
ventilation, by opening windows to dilute pollutants or odours e.g. after cooking, may
occur in reality [15], but was not included in the model.
The window opening schedule was modelled with Proportional Integral controllers (PI)
that determined the opening based on; (1) the cooling potential by comparing the zone
air temperature with the outdoor ambient temperature; and (2) whether the indoor opera­
tive temperature exceeded a set point of 23°C during occupancy, inspired by the Danish
building energy program, BE15.
Figure 3.9 shows the control macro for the window opening in IDA­ICE.
Figure 3.9: Window opening control macro.
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.4.4
Heating system
The heating system of the renovated apartment was modelled with an ideal heater in the
kitchen, living room, bathroom and two bedrooms. Compared to simulating with radiators,
which would have been more realistic, using an ideal heater provided a means to relatively
compare the performance of each system with respect to the energy consumed for zone
heating. Therefore, an increased amount of detail was unmotivated. The ideal heaters
were designed with a maximum output of 1000 Watt, which ensured a capacity well above
the heat required. The ideal heater was PI­controlled to keep the room air (or operative)
temperature at a heating set point of 21 °C.
3.4.5
Occupants and internal gains
Occupants release heat and moisture as internal gains. The amount of heat released,
latent and sensible, and emitted CO2 depends on the activity level (metabolic rate) and
clothing worn by the occupants. Metabolic rate is measured in met, where 1 met = 58.2
W per m2 body surface, assumed for one sitting inactive person defined as by DS/EN
7730 [52]. In IDA­ICE the body surface is selected to be 1.8 m2, corresponding to an
average adult. Occupants were considered to be sleeping in the bedrooms in which an
average of 0.9 met was used and were considered to be slightly active in the bathroom,
and sedentary in the living room. The occupancy included 2 adults and 1 child ­ the child
was considered equivalent to 0.6 adults. The moisture gains were based on a typical load
case for cooking and showering as estimated by Smith [53]. Table 3.4 lists the internal
loads and schedules for occupancy, lighting, appliances and vapour release.
Bathroom
Kitchen
Living room
Adult
bedroom
Child
bedroom
Corridor
Floor area [m2]
3.8
8.6
13.3
16.5
13.0
6.0
Occupancy (Occ.)
Average nr. of adults
1.0
­
1.6
2.0
0.6
­
Metabolic rate [MET]
1.2
­
1.0
0.9
0.9
­
Weekdays
7­8:30
­
7­8:30, 16­22
22­7
22­7
­
Weekends
8­9:30
­
10­22
22­7
22­7
­
Appliances (App.)
Weekdays
­
7:30­8, 12­12:30,
18­19:30
50% at 9­16,
100% at 16­22
22­7
22­7
­
Weekends
­
7:30­8, 12­12:30,
18­19:30
100% at 10­22
22­7
22­7
­
Heat gain [W]
­
220 (scheduled)
50 (constant)
40
30
20
­
Light
Weekdays
7­8:30
7­10,
18­22
7­10,
18­22
7­8:30,
21­23
7­8:30,
21­23
7­10,
18­22
Weekends
8­9:30
7­10,
18­22
7­10,
18­22
7­8:30,
21­23
7­8:30,
21­23
7­10,
18­22
Heat gain [W]
10
11.25
15
20
10
3.75
Vapour
Schedule
Occ.
App.
Occ.
Occ.
Occ.
­
Moisture gain [kg/s]
2.6E­4
1.1E­4
Occ.
Occ.
Occ.
­
Table 3.4: Occupancy and internal load schedules for simulations.
18
==PAGE:26==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
3.4.6
Ventilation systems
The study investigated the following ventilation systems with air inlets for comparison
of performance; passive stack ventilation, mechanical exhaust ventilation and balanced
mechanical ventilation with heat recovery. The apartment on the selected floor levels had
an exhaust chimney to egress air in the bathroom and kitchen, and adjustable air inlets
installed in the two bedrooms and living room to supply fresh air and facilitate background
ventilation. Figure 3.10 shows the three different investigated ventilation systems.
Figure 3.10: Diagram of the studied ventilation systems; passive stack and mechanical
exhaust ventilation next to the reference system; balanced mechanical ventilation with
heat recovery.
Passive stack ventilation
Natural ventilation was modelled as a passive stack system influenced by variable forces
such as stack effect and wind to create under pressure. In IDA­ICE the chimney compo­
nent was used at the Standard level to simulate this. At the Advanced level, the chimney
appears as three components in series; an inlet terminal, a duct section and an outlet
grille ­ each inheriting their respective input values from the base chimney component.
The input values are shown in Table 3.5. At the Advanced level, the two duct sections
were joined to an air gap component that merges the air flows into one direction. Figure
3.11 shows the schematics in IDA­ICE.
Inlet air terminal ­ Pressure loss
1.0
Outlet air terminal ­ Pressure loss
0.6
Roughness
1.6E­4
Inlet and outlet height difference
2.2 m or 13.4 m
Shaft cross section (rectangular)
0.1 m x 0.25 m (0.025 m2)
Table 3.5: Parameters of the chimney component. The height difference between the
inlet and outlet is shown for the 4th floor and ground floor, respectively.
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
(a) Zone schematic for wet rooms. (1) Window
opening control macro (2) Inner duct (length
13.3 and 2.1 m) (3) Inlet terminal
(b) Schematic of merging ducts. (1) Outgoing
duct connections from wet room zones (2) Air
gap merging the ducts (3) Outer duct (length
0.1m) (4) Outlet grille.
Figure 3.11: IDA­ICE schematics at the Advanced level.
Mechanical exhaust ventilation
The mechanical exhaust system was modelled by placing an axial fan component be­
tween the outer duct and outlet grille to obtain the exhaust capacities of 15 L/s in the
bathroom, and 20 L/s in the kitchen as stipulated in the Danish Building Regulations [6].
Adjusting the airtightness of the building envelope affects the exhaust air flow capacities.
Therefore, dampers were implemented between the inlet terminals and duct sections in
the wet rooms to maintain the exhaust capacities accordingly. Furthermore, the system
was assumed to have been commissioned to obtain the required exhaust air flows both
with air inlets and without.
Balanced mechanical system with heat recovery
The balanced mechanical system with heat recovery was modelled as a standard AHU
as shown in Figure3.12 with a constant air volume (CAV). The fan had a specific fan
power (SFP) of 1200 J/m3, as required by the Danish Building Regulations for apartment
buildings [6]. Also, the heat exchanger utilized the return air stream to heat the supply air
with a set point of 20 °C, in which the given efficiency was 85%, and the minimum exhaust
temperature was 1°C to avoid freezing.
Figure 3.12: Air handling unit schematic.
20
==PAGE:28==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
The supply and return airflows for each room are shown in Table 3.6 for the balanced
system.
Room
Supply air
[L/s]
Return air
[L/s]
Living room
14
0
Adult bedroom
14
0
Child bedroom
7
0
Bathroom
0
15
Kitchen
0
20
Total
35
35
Table 3.6: Supply and return air flows for the balanced system with heat recovery.
3.4.7
Adjustable air inlets
The study sought to investigate the performance of adjustable air inlets controlled ac­
cording to pressure, CO2­concentration or occupancy. The flow characteristic of the air
inlets was defined using performance documentation from real products with measured
values for pressure difference and volume flow rate. Two manually adjustable air inlets
and one automatic pressure­controlled air inlet were selected from the product data, see
Appendix B. The adjustable air inlets are denoted AI.1, and AI.2 with the highest and low­
est power­law coefficient, respectively. Furthermore, the adjustable air inlets can be set
to half­open. See Figure 3.13 for an image of the AI.1 and AI.2 product type.
Figure 3.13: Adjustable air inlet installed in the window frame. Left: closed, right: open.
AI.1 and AI.2 are designed similarly to the pictured inlet. Sourced from Rational [54].
DS/EN 13141 specifies the performance testing of components/products for residential
ventilation in which Part 1 is targeted externally and internally mounted air transfer devices
and states that it must be checked whether the volume airflow rate for fixed or manually
adjustable air inlets follows the power law equation given by Eq. 3.1 [55].
qv,m = C(∆pm)n
(3.1)
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
where C is the airflow coefficient in L(s · Pan), ∆pm is the measured pressure difference
in Pa, n is the airflow exponent and qv, m is the measured airflow rate in L/s. For Eq. 3.1
to be valid in terms of the standard, n must be in the range of 0.5 to 1 with a coefficient of
determination, r2, greater than or equal to 0.98. The power­law coefficient c and exponent
n of AI.1 and AI.2 were obtained by fitting a power trendline to their performance data.
The coefficients found are c = 0.0029 and 0.0019 for AI.1 and AI.2 respectively, where
both have n = 0.516, meaning the inlets are valid according to DS/EN 13141­1.
IDA­ICE calculates airflow similarly to Eq.3.1, however, the mass flow rate is calculated
instead, as given by Eq 3.2.
˙m = c∆pn
(3.2)
where c is the power­law coefficient in kg/s · Pan, ∆p is the pressure difference across the
component in Pa, n is the power­law exponent (0.6 for infiltration leaks), and ˙m is mass
flow rate in kg/s. The pressure difference across the leak model is calculated from Eq.
3.3.
∆p = (Pin −ρingzin) −(Pout −ρoutgzout) −ρgdz
(3.3)
where Pin is the zone pressure in Pa, Pout is the ambient pressure at ground level in Pa,
ρin is the zone air density in kg/m3, ρout is the outside air density, zin is the leak height
from the zone floor, zout is the leak height from ground level, dz is the height rise from
zin to zout, and g is the gravitational force at 9.81 m/s2. A similar equation calculates the
pressure difference across the damper component used to model the air inlet in IDA­ICE.
The damper component grants control of the opening position which varies from 0 = closed
to 1 = open. The positional value was used as a factor to alter the power­law coefficient
and resulting mass flows. However, n = 0.5 is hard­coded for the damper when calculating
mass flow. Therefore, as an approximation, the power­law coefficient of the modelled air
inlet (AI.T) was set to c = 0.0025 and n = 0.5 ­ an assumed median between AI.1 and
AI.2. See Figure 3.14 for the flow characteristic curves.
(a) Flow characteristic curves of AI.T, AI.1 and
AI.2.
(b) Flow characteristic curve of AI.T fully open
and half­open against AI.T pressure­controlled.
Figure 3.14: Flow characteristic curves of the air inlets show volume flow rate and pres­
sure difference.
22
==PAGE:30==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
Figure 3.14 (b) shows the approximated performance of the pressure­controlled air inlet
with a power­law coefficient of 0.0025 from 0­10 Pa, whereafter the opening was reduced
at higher pressure differences using the linear segment controller in Figure 3.15 (b).
(a) Linear segment controller adjusting the
damper position based on the CO2 level mea­
sured in the zone.
(b) Linear segment controller adjusting the
damper position based on the pressure differ­
ence across the leak.
Figure 3.15: Linear segment controllers applied to macro in Figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: IDA­ICE macro to switch the air inlet control strategy between pressure­
control, occupancy­control and CO2­control.
Figure 3.16 shows the control macro used to switch strategies. The documentation for
AI.2 showed that the mass flow rate at half­open was reduced by 33% from fully open ­
this was assumed for AI.T also. A linear segment controller was implemented for the CO2­
controlled air inlet to adjust according to the CO2 level in the zone and was configured to
open halfway at 850 ppm and fully at 950 ppm ­ 50 ppm below the threshold of 1000 ppm,
see Figure 3.15 (a). The occupancy­controlled air inlet simply followed the occupancy
schedule. The air inlets were placed 1.2 m above floor height regardless of control strategy
for comparative purposes. However, in reality, pressure­controlled air inlets are typically
installed in the top window frame and may differ geometrically from Figure 3.13.
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.4.8
Simulation period
The simulation period was determined according to the degree days method in order to
define the heating season [56]. The heating season was chosen as the simulation period
in order to determine the energy impact of ventilation, and account for the stack effect
prevalent during the winter. The heating season starts when the outdoor air temperature
has dropped below 12 °C for three days in a row and ends when the air temperature has
risen above 10 °C for three days consecutively. Figure 3.7 illustrates the methodology as
applied to the air temperature to define the heating season.
Start of heating season
End of heating season
Date
Air
Temperature [°C]
Heating
season
Date
Air
Temperature [°C]
Heating
season
30. Sep
9.7
No
29. May
9.4
Yes
01. Oct
12.1
No
30. May
14.8
Yes
02. Oct
13.7
No
31. May
14.3
Yes
03. Oct
12.8
No
. . .
01. Jun
9.0
Yes
04. Oct
10.4
Yes
02. Jun
10.7
No
05. Oct
6.4
Yes
03. Jun
14.1
No
06. Oct
9.2
Yes
04. Jun
12.4
No
07. Oct
9.2
Yes
05. Jun
13.4
No
Table 3.7: Definition of the heating season start and end.
Thus, the simulation period lasts from the 4th of October until the 1st of June. The average
daily air temperature between the start and end of the heating season can be seen in
Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Daily average air temperature during a year.
3.4.9
Weather file
The simulations used a custom climate file including the weather data from the Danish
Test Reference Year (TRY) from EQUA’s database, and the Danish Design Reference
Year (DRY) 2001­2010 [57]. TRY files lack wind direction data, and thus the data had to
be supplied from the DRY file. The TRY and DRY files are based on different lengths of
24
==PAGE:32==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
observed meteorological data, 30 and 10 years respectively, however, it was assumed
that the prevailing wind directions would mostly overlap and prove sufficient. The TRY file
was chosen as the primary climate source because the data portrays an average climate,
as compared to the DRY file, which includes extreme data points more suited for building
design. In summation, the custom climate file included air temperature, relative humidity,
wind speeds, direct normal and diffuse horizontal solar radiation from the TRY file, and
the wind directions from the DRY file.
Table 3.8 shows the quartiles of hourly values for temperature and relative humidity for
the months of January, April, May and October.
Temperature
Relative Humidity
Month
Min.
25%
50%
75%
Max.
Min.
25%
50%
75%
Max.
January
­12
­2
0
1
5
77
91
94
98
100
April
­1
5
6
8
21
34
72
84
92
100
May
3
9
11
13
25
37
66
80
90
100
October
­3
7
9
11
19
34
82
90
95
100
Table 3.8: The minimum, 1st quartile, median, 3rd quartile, and maximum hourly temper­
ature and relative humidity values in the test reference year for the months of January,
April, May and October.
Figure 3.18 shows the wind data from the custom climate file for a whole year and the
simulated period depicted as wind roses. The wind was slightly less prevalent from the
west during the simulated period, however, the overall wind directions remained the same
for both wind roses.
(a) Yearly wind rose
(b) Simulation period wind rose
Figure 3.18: TRY wind speeds and DRY wind directions binned in 16 directions for a year
and the simulated heating season. Visualised in Rstudio with openair [58].
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.4.10
Wind conditions
The boundary wind conditions included both wind profile and wind pressure coefficients
on the building facades. A horizontal wind speed profile was assumed, varying vertically
without vertical air flows. The wind speeds at roof height were corrected by terrain and
height values, according to the power­law equation in Eq. 3.4.
UH = Uref α0
! H
Href
"α
(3.4)
where UH is the wind speed in m/s at roof height H (m), Uref is the climate file wind speeds
measured at the reference height 10 m above ground Href (m) and α and α0 are terrain
coefficients of the wind profile defined as used by Filis et al. [59], see Table 3.9.
Figure 3.19: Wind speeds at roof height for
each wind profile with Uref = 6 m/s.
Profile
α0
α
City center
0.47
0.35
Urban
0.67
0.25
Open terrain
0.85
0.20
Table 3.9: Terrain coefficients.
The static pressures on the building surfaces were proportional to the wind velocity in the
model, see Eq. 3.5.
ps = Cp ρ UH2
2
(3.5)
where ps is the wind pressure on the facade in Pa, ρ is the outdoor air density, UH is
the wind speed at roof level in m/s, and Cp is the local wind pressure coefficient [60],
which was used to calculate the wind pressure on the different surfaces on the building
relative to the pressure of the wind speed at roof height. The wind pressure coefficients
are assumed to be constant over the entire facade in IDA­ICE. Furthermore, the Cp values
are based on handbook data sets from the Air Infiltration and Ventilation Centre (AIVC)
generated in IDA­ICE [61]. A summary of the values for sheltered, semi­sheltered and
exposed conditions can be seen in Table 3.10.
Condition
Face Angle
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
Sheltered
All orientations
0.18
0.15
­0.3
­0.32
­0.2
­0.32
­0.3
0.15
Semi­sheltered
All orientations
0.4
0.2
­0.6
­0.5
­0.3
­0.5
­0.6
0.2
Exposed
All orientations
0.6
0.2
­0.9
­0.6
­0.35
­0.6
­0.9
0.2
All
Roof
­0.1
­0.1
­0.1
­0.1
­0.1
­0.1
­0.1
­0.1
Table 3.10: Wind pressure coefficients based on AIVC handbook data.
26
==PAGE:34==
3.4. THE BUILDING MODEL
3.4.11
Simulation cases
The study simulated 22 different cases configured according to floor level, ventilation ex­
haust (passive or mechanical) and air inlet control. A case with balanced mechanical
ventilation with heat recovery was included for each floor as expected best case refer­
ences. All cases are shown in Table 3.11.
Case
Floor
Exhaust
Inlets
GFP0
Ground
Passive stack chimney
None
GFP1
Ground
Passive stack chimney
Fixed open
GFP2
Ground
Passive stack chimney
CO2­controlled
GFP3
Ground
Passive stack chimney
Pressure­controlled
GFP4
Ground
Passive stack chimney
Occupancy controlled
GFM0
Ground
Mechanical exhaust
None
GFM1
Ground
Mechanical exhaust
Fixed open
GFM2
Ground
Mechanical exhaust
CO2­controlled
GFM3
Ground
Mechanical exhaust
Pressure­controlled
GFM4
Ground
Mechanical exhaust
Occupancy controlled
4FP0
4th floor
Passive stack chimney
None
4FP1
4th floor
Passive stack chimney
Fixed open
4FP2
4th floor
Passive stack chimney
CO2­controlled
4FP3
4th floor
Passive stack chimney
Pressure­controlled
4FP4
4th floor
Passive stack chimney
Occupancy controlled
4FM0
4th floor
Mechanical exhaust
None
4FM1
4th floor
Mechanical exhaust
Fixed open
4FM2
4th floor
Mechanical exhaust
CO2­controlled
4FM3
4th floor
Mechanical exhaust
Pressure­controlled
4FM4
4th floor
Mechanical exhaust
Occupancy controlled
GFB
Ground
Balanced Mechanical w. HR
None
4FB
4th floor
Balanced Mechanical w. HR
None
Table 3.11: Simulation cases.
The case abbreviations in Table 3.11 should be read as the following; GF = Ground Floor,
4F = 4th Floor, P = Passive stack exhaust, M = Mechanical exhaust, 0 = no air inlet, [1­4]
= air inlet with specific control type and B = Balanced mechanical. For example, GFM1
abbreviates the simulation case on the ground floor with a mechanical exhaust and fixed
open air inlets.
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.5
Performance indicators and criteria for comparison
The performance of each case was evaluated by key performance indicators (KPI) for
CO2­concentration, relative humidity, age of air and energy consumption. The indicator
methodology was chosen based on the literature study. The IAQ performance indicators
were calculated using Method B proposed in Annex D of DS/EN 16798­2, which specifies
the cumulative exposure above a target limit [62]. To elaborate, it calculates the time
during which the measured indicator exceeds a specified limit during the simulated hours
weighted by a factor determined by how much the limit was exceeded. In Annex D, the
method was used to describe degree hours from operative temperature. However, the
method can be applied to e.g. CO2­concentration as done by Poirer et al.[28]. The study
applies the methodology to CO2­concentration, relative humidity (RH) and age of air (AA).
CO2­hours is the number of hours where the CO2­concentration is above 1000 ppm dur­
ing occupancy ­ 600 ppm above an ambient CO2 level of 400 ppm set in IDA­ICE. The
choice of 1000ppm as the threshold value was justified in the literature review.
The CO2­hours were calculated using Eq. 3.6.
CO2h
# t2
t1
CO2(t) −CO2 limit dt
[ppm · h]
(3.6)
where t1 is the time when 1000 ppm is exceeded, t2 is the time when the CO2­concentration
returns below 1000 ppm, CO2(t) is the CO2­concentration at time t, and CO2 limit is 1000
ppm.
Equation 3.6 was calculated for the living room, adult bedroom and child bedroom and
aggregated into a single score. Figure 3.20 shows the IDA­ICE macro configured for
each dry room. DS/EN 16798­2 also specifies Method A as another measure to evaluate
comfort conditions in which the percentage outside a range is calculated ­ this was also
included in the macro.
Figure 3.20: IDA­ICE macro to calculate CO2h (ppmh) and % of occupied time with a
CO2­concentration above 1000 ppm in a dry room.
RH­hours was calculated as a measure of when the relative humidity was above a thresh­
old regardless of room occupancy. The threshold varied depending on room type (wet
or dry) and was determined from knowledge of the growth of mould and dust mite pro­
liferation. Dust mites proliferation is avoided below 50% RH, however, the study set a
threshold for dry rooms at 60%, since the supplied air may have high relative humidity
influencing the results ­ the limit also corresponds with DS/EN 16798­1 [63]. A relative
28
==PAGE:36==
3.5. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND CRITERIA FOR COMPARISON
humidity threshold of 70% was set for wet rooms to limit fungal growth as estimated by
Smith [53].
The RH­hours were calculated according to Eq. 3.7.
RHh
# t2
t1
RH(t) −RHlimit dt
[% · h]
(3.7)
where t1 is the time when 60% or 70% RH is exceeded, t2 is the time when RH returns
below the limit, RH(t) is RH at time t, and RHlimit is 60% or 70% RH. The entire simulation
period was investigated since mould risks are not limited to occupants only.
AA­hours was calculated similarly to Eq.3.6 and Eq.3.7. The threshold for the age of
air was defined according to the required ventilation rate of min. 0.3 L/(s · m2) during
occupied hours as stipulated in the Danish building code [6]. Eq. 3.8 calculates the age
of air limit as a measure of ventilation rate.
AAlimit = Q
V
−1
=
!0.3 L/(s · m2) · 3.6 · 1 m2
2.6 m · 1 m2
"−1
= 2.4 h
(3.8)
where Q is the volume flow rate given in m3/h, 3.6 is the conversion factor (L/s →m3/h),
V is the volume (area set to 1 m2). The AA­hours were calculated according to Eq. 3.9.
AAh
# t2
t1
AA(t) −AA limit dt
[h2]
(3.9)
Some results in the study have been normalized according to the min­max normalization
formula shown in Eq. 3.10.
x′ =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(3.10)
In addition, the Mean Age of Air (MAA) was calculated because it is a well­used air quality
assessment method in naturally ventilated buildings [24]. MAA was calculated according
to Eq. 3.11.
MAA =
$ t2
t1 AA(t) dt
∆t
[h]
(3.11)
where t1 is the time when occupants are present, t2 is the time when no occupants are
present, AA(t) is the age of air at time t, and ∆t is the total duration length. Peak Age of
Air (PAA) was also logged to determine the maximum value of AA during the simulated
period. The calculation of AAh, MAA and PAA in IDA­ICE is shown in Figure 3.21.
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.21: IDA­ICE script to calculate AAh, MAA and PAA.
Zone Heating is the energy consumed to heat the apartment. The energy was measured
in kWh with the zone heating output in IDA­ICE, hence the naming convention. The mea­
sure was used to relatively compare the energy consumption between simulation cases.
In the following sections, it may be noted as zone heating or energy consumption ­ they
are considered synonymous.
3.6
Sensitivity analysis
The study applied a local sensitivity analysis approach with input parameters as deduced
from the literature review. The local sensitivity analysis applies a one­factor­at­a­time
method, where one parameter varies from the baseline, while every other parameter is
held constant. A limited input space around the baseline is explored, indicating the im­
portance of selecting appropriate baseline values. For existing buildings a baseline value
may refer to the real boundary conditions, however, the baseline could also be chosen
as the median of an input range. The parameter input ranges of the study are shown in
table 3.12.
Parameter
Values
Door position
Open
Closed
Air tightness of envelope
1 L/(s · m2)
2 L/(s · m2)
3 L/(s · m2)
Wind profile and
wind pressure coefficients
City center
& sheltered
Urban &
semi­sheltered
Open terrain
& exposed
Orientation
52°(*)
142°
232°
322°
Table 3.12: Parameters and input values. The colored values shows the baseline inputs.
(*) indicates True North.
The door position was changed to investigate the influence of having the internal doors
open or closed during the simulation, impacting the airflow resistance in the apartment.
The airtightness of the building envelope was changed to range from an airtight build­
ing envelope, 1 L/(s · m2) at 50 Pa as required for new buildings in the Danish Build­
ing Regulations [6]. The baseline airtightness value for the renovated apartment was 2
L/(s · m2) (ACH50 = 2.77), therefore a maximum of 3 L/(s · m2) seemed fitting to keep in­
30
==PAGE:38==
3.6. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
crements. It should be noted that the baseline airtightness value was higher than current
building practice.
The wind profiles and wind pressure coefficients were paired in the following way to
account for both: city center and sheltered, urban and semi­sheltered, and open terrain
and exposed.
The orientation was changed in increments of 90° from True North starting at 52°to limit
the range.
The parameter sensitivity can be determined by the sensitivity index (SI) which calculates
the output percentage difference when varying one input parameter from its minimum to
the maximum value [32]. The sensitivity index was calculated according to Eq. 3.12.
SI = Dmax −Dmin
Dmax
(3.12)
where Dmax and Dmin represent the maximum and minimum output values, respectively,
when changing the input over its range.
The impact analysis was performed using the percentage relative change when varying
one parameter from baseline, in order to evaluate whether the performance was positively
or negatively impacted. The impact was calculated according to Eq.3.13.
% relativechange = KPIsensitivity case −KPIbaseline case
KPIbaseline case
· 100%
(3.13)
The IDA­ICE feature Parametric Runs was used to compute the parameter combinations
around each simulation case of Table 3.11. Another feature called Graphical Scripts facil­
itated changes to the mathematical model at the Advanced level. Figure 3.22 shows the
graphical script controlling changes to the boundary wind conditions. The selected input
value in the scripts was automated using Parametric Runs when running combinations ­
see Appendix A for all scripts. Parametric Runs can also be used as an interactive tool to
explore the entire output space for optimal solutions.
Figure 3.22: IDA­ICE graphical script changing wind profile and wind pressure coefficients
simultaneously.
31
==PAGE:39==
4
Results
The following chapter will describe the results of the conducted survey, the baseline sim­
ulation cases, the sensitivity analysis and the impact analysis.
4.1
Survey
This section will present the results from the questionnaire and showcase only the re­
spondents’ answers of most relevance. Results from the survey not included here can be
found in Appendix C.
4.1.1
The respondents
Table 4.1 shows a summary of the gathered respondent information to provide insight into
their background.
Occupation
Board member (BM)
Private owner (PO)
Architect (A)
Consultant (C)
2
5
1
15
Experience with renovation of apartment buildings
BM and PO
A and C
Yes
No
Yes
No
5
1
16
0
Area of expertise ­ A and C
Project manager
PHS and energy design
Sustainability
­
8
5
2
­
Number of renovation projects ­ BM and PO
Years of experience ­ A and C
1 to 2 projects
1
Less than 2 years
4
3 to 5 projects
2
2 to 5 years
2
More than 5 projects
2
5 to 10 years
4
More than 10 years
4
Which ventilation principle do you have experience with? ­ C
Mechanical
Mechanical and Natural
Natural
­
2
6
3
­
Table 4.1: Background information on the respondents of the questionnaire. PHS plumb­
ing, heating and sanitation.
32
==PAGE:40==
4.1. SURVEY
4.1.2
The importance of different elements when renovating apartment
buildings
Figure 4.1 shows the answers from the consultants when asked, ”How important are the
following elements in the design process when renovating apartment buildings?”. Most of
the respondents answered that the prevention of future damages and/or reparation of the
building is of the highest importance when renovating. Both improving the indoor climate
and reducing the energy consumption of the building was also found to be important by
all respondents. Half of the respondents answered that the value of the building and the
aesthetics had little to no importance in the design process.
Figure 4.1: Consultants ­ How important are the following elements in the design process
of a renovation?
Figure 4.2 shows the answers from the private owners when asked, ”How important were
the following elements in the decisions made for the renovation project you were involved
in?”. The private owners appeared to consider the same elements when renovating their
apartments as the consultants. Indoor climate, energy consumption, building damage
prevention, and reparation were of the highest importance when deciding on a renovation.
Likewise, increasing the value of the building and the aesthetics had little importance,
except for one respondent valuing the aesthetic of the building highly.
Figure 4.2: Private owners ­ How important were the following elements when deciding
on the renovation?
33
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1.3
The challenges faced when renovating apartment buildings
Figure 4.3 shows the answers from consultants when asked, ”Which of the following is
the biggest challenge when renovating apartment buildings?”. It appears that the spacial
limitations in existing apartment buildings may prove a challenge when seeking to fit new
installations. Likewise, an emphasis was placed on the renovation budget as a challenge.
One respondent added, ”Also the lack of space and the possibility for upgrading existing
installations without having to replace all parts of the system”.
Figure 4.3: Consultants ­ Which of the following is the biggest challenge when renovating
apartment buildings?
4.1.4
The frequency of building elements when renovating apartment
buildings
Figure 4.4 shows the answers from consultants when asked, ”How often were the fol­
lowing building elements a part of the renovation?”. 45 % of the respondents answered
that they always replace windows when renovating, while 45 % do it often. Therefore,
windows are highly probable to be replaced with respect to the survey. Adding facade
insulation is the only building element which is rarely or never done, as answered by 50 %
of the respondents.
Figure 4.4: Consultants ­ How often were the following building elements a part of the
renovation?
34
==PAGE:42==
4.1. SURVEY
The same question was posed to the private owners of apartment buildings. Figure 4.5
shows the answers from private owners when asked, ”How often were the following build­
ing elements a part of the renovation?”. The private owners were slightly more concerned
with renovating the roof and insulating the facade. Granted the number of respondents
was different.
Figure 4.5: Private owners ­ How often were the following building elements a part of the
renovation?
4.1.5
The problems reported after the renovation of apartment buildings
Figure 4.6 shows the answers of the private owners when asked, ”How often do the follow­
ing problems occur after the renovation had been done?”. None of the listed complaints
was noted as always occurring. Additional comments emphasised the need for better
occupant guidance on how to use e.g. the system installations.
Figure 4.6: Private owners ­ How often do the following problems occur after the renova­
tion has been done?
35
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1.6
The applicability of natural ventilation in renovated apartment
buildings
Figure 4.7 shows the answers from consultants when asked, ”How was natural ventilation
used in of the renovation projects you have been involved in?”. The consultants were
quite equally distributed when considering the use of; only natural ventilation, fan­assisted
natural ventilation and natural ventilation as an addition to mechanical ventilation. Some
of the respondents answered that they never use only natural ventilation.
Figure 4.7: Consultants ­ How was natural ventilation used in most of the renovation
projects you have been involved in?
Figure 4.8 shows the answers from private owners when asked, ”How was natural ven­
tilation used in most of the renovation projects you have experience with?”. Only one of
the respondents used natural ventilation for their renovation project. Two respondents an­
swered that only mechanical ventilation was used, and one respondent elaborated, ”We
have to use balanced mechanical ventilation by law”. Therefore, 3 of 5 respondents used
mechanical ventilation, one used only natural ventilation and the last was not involved in
the selection process of the ventilation system.
Figure 4.8: Private owners ­ How was natural ventilation used in most of the renovation
projects you have experience with?
36
==PAGE:44==
4.1. SURVEY
4.1.7
The advantages and challenges of natural or hybrid ventilation in
renovated apartment buildings
The private owners were asked three questions in order to elaborate on their experience
with natural or hybrid ventilation in their renovation projects. The first question asked,
”What was the reason for using natural ventilation or fan­assisted natural ventilation?”.
Two respondents answered, ”The building was born with natural ventilation” and ”Usu­
ally the ventilation system is a part of our full renovations”. The second question asked,
”What was in your opinion the biggest advantage of using natural ventilation in renovated
apartments?”. Two respondents answered ”The building was born with it” and ”Natu­
ral ventilation just runs and does rarely need maintenance. Mechanical ventilation is for
experts and requires operational personnel and residents who do not adjust the system
themselves and such residents do not exist”. The last question with one response asked,
”What was in your opinion the biggest challenge of using natural ventilation in renovated
apartments?” to which the respondent answered ”Low air change rate”.
4.1.8
The frequency of natural supply air solutions
Figure 4.9 shows the answers from consultants when asked, ”How often is the solution
used for fresh air supply in your renovation projects?”. The Danish consultants have
a clear preference for air inlets (trickle vents) with 88 % of the consultants using them
always or often when consulting on renovated apartments. Ventilation windows were
also mentioned as a renovation measure used by one of the respondents.
Figure 4.9: Consultants ­ How often is the following solution used for fresh air supply in
your renovation projects?
4.1.9
The challenges of natural ventilation in renovated apartment
buildings
The consultants were asked which challenges they face when renovating for natural ven­
tilation. Most of the consultants agreed that it can be challenging to meet energy re­
quirements and estimate the performance of the system due to occupant behaviour and
variable weather conditions. Some of the respondents also agreed that it is challenging
to project natural ventilation when the Danish Building Regulation does not support it for
apartment buildings. None of the consultants experienced no challenges when designing
for natural ventilation.
37
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.2
Baseline cases
The following section will present the results from the 22 baseline simulation cases and
highlight the most relevant findings. Results which are not presented can be found in
Annex D, the data set can be found there too. The baseline case with mechanical exhaust
and occupancy­controlled air inlets on the ground floor (GFM4) failed to simulate and thus
no data is shown for the given case in the following results.
Normalized performance for all KPIs
Figure 4.10 shows an overview of the performance of the baseline cases based on the four
Key Performance Indicators (KPI) established in Section 3.5. The performance was nor­
malized internally within each KPI. The chart groups the cases according to floor level and
ventilation system. Mechanical and Passive refer to mechanical exhaust ventilation and
passive stack ventilation, respectively. The 4th floor is straightforward, and the ground
floor is denoted Gr. floor. The performance of the balanced system with heat recovery is
included for comparison.
Figure 4.10 shows the general tendency that the 4th floor cases with a passive stack
perform substantially worse regarding the IAQ indicators; CO2h, RHh and AAh. These
baseline cases do however indicate a trade­off by having lower energy consumption. This
was further cemented by Table 4.2 showing the minimum and maximum value of each
KPI and the corresponding baseline case. Additionally, the table shows that the highest
energy consumption was reached by the ground floor passive stack case with fixed open
air inlets (GFP1). The results of the 4th floor simulation cases towered above the other
case results and therefore said cases have been removed from the normalized chart in
Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.10: Normalized Key Performance Indicators of baseline cases.
38
==PAGE:46==
4.2. BASELINE CASES
KPI
Minimum
Maximum
Total CO2
Case
4FB, GFB, GFP1, GFP3
4FP0
[ppmh]
Value
0
244870
Total RH
Case
4FB
4FP0
[%h]
Value
538
7182
Zone heating
Case
4FB
GFP1
[kWh]
Value
1725
6448
Total AA
Case
4FB, GFB, 4FM0
4FP0
[h2]
Value
0
386
Table 4.2: Minimum and maximum value for each KPI and corresponding case.
When comparing the performance of the baseline cases with each other, the ground floor
passive cases had varying performance between the control of air inlets. The pressure­
controlled and fixed open performed better for RHh but worse for Zone Heating and AAh.
The cases with CO2­controlled and occupancy­controlled air inlets performed better for
CO2h but worse at RHh. The same tendency can be seen for the mechanical cases on
both floor levels. The IAQ performance of the baseline mechanical cases was significantly
better on the 4th floor in comparison to the ground floor. Figure 4.11 shows that the ground
floor mechanical case with no air inlets had the most substantial CO2h result when the
4th floor passive cases were not taken into account.
Figure 4.11: Normalized key performance indicators of baseline cases without 4th floor
passive stack cases.
39
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Table 4.3 highlights the consequences of installing different air inlet control strategies us­
ing relative percentage change from baseline cases with no air inlets, and respective floor
and ventilation systems. The baseline cases with no air inlets are shown with total KPI
values, whereas the control strategies show the relative percentage change; a positive
percentage means an improvement in performance for the given KPI e.g. GFM1 (fixed
open) performs 73% better than GFM0 by reducing the Total CO2h. The Table highlights
that the CO2­controlled and occupancy­controlled air inlets improved the CO2h and RHh
KPI’s the least, but they performed better with respect to energy and AAh. However, it
should be noted that all cases except the 4th floor passive stack cases were shown to
have more time without the required ventilation rate when implementing any of the control
strategies, as depicted by the negative Total AAh results.
Baseline Case
Total CO2h
Total RHh
Total AAh
Zone heating
GFM0
26210
1312
4.213
4664.1
GFM1
73%
9%
­404%
­4%
GFM2
65%
0%
­16%
1%
GFM3
72%
8%
­392%
­3%
GFM4
GFP0
14353
2038
7.281
5202.2
GFP1
96%
45%
­333%
­24%
GFP2
81%
11%
­55%
­2%
GFP3
96%
44%
­341%
­23%
GFP4
79%
19%
­89%
­10%
4FM0
9919
897.4
1.291
4888.3
4FM1
69%
9%
­818%
­4%
4FM2
43%
­7%
­109%
2%
4FM3
66%
8%
­802%
­3%
4FM4
21%
­3%
­166%
0%
4FP0
244870
7182
385.5
2973.3
4FP1
74%
48%
24%
­30%
4FP2
68%
23%
15%
­5%
4FP3
75%
48%
23%
­29%
4FP4
59%
17%
8%
­13%
Table 4.3: KPI percentage change from baseline case with no air inlets, represented with
the exact value, to each air inlet control type for the respective floor and ventilation system.
A positive percentage change is an increase in performance and a negative percentage
change is a decrease in performance compared to the case with no air inlets on the given
floor and system.
40
==PAGE:48==
4.2. BASELINE CASES
Case performance on CO2
A more in­depth investigation of CO2­concentrations reveals that the contribution to CO2h
mainly has its origin in the adult bedroom, as shown in Figure 4.12. In 17 out of 22 baseline
cases the percentage of occupied time exceeding the CO2 threshold of 1000 ppm is only
present in the adult bedroom. Only the baseline cases from the 4th floor with a passive
stack have contributions from the living room and child bedroom. The worst case is the
4th floor passive stack with no air inlets, reaching 66 % of the occupied time with CO2­
concentrations above 1000 ppm.
Figure 4.12: Percentage of occupied time above 1000 ppm CO2­concentration.
Figure 4.13 shows an overview of the maximum CO2­concentration reached for each
baseline case and the occupied dry rooms.
Most cases reached between 800 pmm
and 1200 pmm which is apparent in Table 4.4 showing the mean of the maximum CO2­
concentration for each case group and the occupied rooms. The adult bedroom reached
the highest CO2­concentration in all cases.
Figure 4.13: Maximum CO2­concentration for each occupied zone of the baseline cases.
41
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Baseline case Group
Living room
Adult bedroom
Child bedroom
4th floor mechanical exhaust
896
1181
1035
4th floor passive stack
1623
1679
1521
Gr. floor mechanical exhaust
895
1181
1101
Gr. floor passive stack
1121
1184
984
Table 4.4: Mean of maximum CO2­concentration for occupied zones in each baseline
case groups.
Humidity
The percentage of time above 60 % and 70 % for dry rooms and wet rooms respectively,
is shown in Figure 4.14 for the whole simulation period. For all cases, the bathroom
had the highest percentage of time above the threshold and the kitchen had the lowest
percentage. Cases with CO2­controlled and occupancy­controlled inlets performed worse
than when the inlets were controlled by pressure or left fixed open. This is also apparent
in Figure 4.11. Furthermore, the balanced mechanical cases with heat recovery had a
slightly higher RHh result than the ground floor passive stack case with fixed open air
inlets.
Figure 4.14: Time above 60% or 70% relative humidity for each case and the respective
rooms.
42
==PAGE:50==
4.2. BASELINE CASES
Age of air
The normalized results of the KPIs in Figure 4.10 showed much higher Age of Air hours for
the 4th floor baseline cases with passive stack, which is also apparent when comparing the
Mean Age of Air (MAA) in Figure 4.15. When comparing the MAA of the baseline cases
with mechanical exhaust and passive stack to the balanced systems, some cases are
rather close to performing equally or even outperforming the balanced case as seen in the
child bedroom. The best performing baseline cases were the ground floor passive stack
cases with fixed open, pressure­controlled and occupancy­controlled air inlets, however,
most of the cases performed similarly when excluding the 4th floor passive stack cases.
Figure 4.15: Mean Age of Air for each baseline case and apartment room.
Figure 4.16 shows the Peak Age of Air (PAA) for each room of the different baseline cases.
Although the PAA reached above 5 hours in some cases and around 4 hours in most
cases, the MAA was much lower. The cases with mechanical exhaust performed much
better than the passive stack cases for the living room and some mechanical exhaust
cases on the 4th floor reached significantly lower PAA compared to other baseline cases.
The balanced systems performed the best when considering PAA.
The p
Figure 4.16: Peak age of air for each baseline case and apartment room.
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Opening of air inlets
Figure 4.17 shows the percentage of time in which the air inlets of a given case were
open by any grade. The cases with no air inlets are naturally not shown and the fixed
open position would constitute a horizontal line at 1 on the y­axis. The cases with CO2­
controlled air inlets are shown in sub­figure (a). The air inlets were primarily open in the
adult bedroom due to higher demand, and all occupied rooms in the 4th floor passive
stack case are shown to have air inlets open for a longer duration when compared to
other cases. Sub figure (b) emphasises the similarity in performance between the fixed
open and the pressure­controlled air inlet. The occupancy­controlled opening is likewise
shown to be open for roughly 40% of the simulation period reflecting occupied hours.
(a) Duration curve showing the opening posi­
tion of the CO2­controlled air inlet.
(b) Duration curve showing opening position
for the pressure­controlled and occupancy­
controlled air inlet.
Figure 4.17: Opening position of air inlets based on control strategy in occupied rooms
during the simulation period. AB = Adult bedroom. CB = Child bedroom. LR = Living
room. Occ. = Occupancy­controlled air inlet.
44
==PAGE:52==
4.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
4.3
Sensitivity analysis
This section will describe the sensitivity index results, and expand upon the impact of
changing baseline input parameters using local sensitivity analysis. It should be noted
that several of the following visualisation plots have grey areas which indicate missing
simulation data.
4.3.1
Sensitivity Index
As elaborated in Section 3.6 the study applied the local sensitivity approach to assessing
the extent to which the KPIs were affected by changes to the model input parameters
one at a time. Table 4.5 shows the parameter changes for each of the sensitivity cases
presented in the study.
Parameters
Sensitivty case
Wind conditions
Airtightness
Orientation
Door
W1
City center & sheltered
2 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
W3
Open terrain & exposed
2 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
A1
Urban & semi­exposed
1 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
A3
Urban & semi­exposed
3 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
O2
Urban & semi­exposed
2 L/(s · m2)
142°
Open
O3
Urban & semi­exposed
2 L/(s · m2)
232°
Open
O4
Urban & semi­exposed
2 L/(s · m2)
322°
Open
D0
Urban & semi­exposed
2 L/(s · m2)
52°
Closed
Baseline
Urban & semi­exposed
2 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
Table 4.5: Parameter values changed from baseline for analysed sensitivity cases.
The letter in the sensitivity case indicates the parameter changed from baseline, whereas
the integer references the column number found in Table 3.12 for the new value. The
door parameter is an exception; D0 expresses closed doors as the change to baseline.
Figure 4.18 shows the sensitivity indexes of the simulation cases. The input parameters
with a significant influence on the key performance indicators were identified and eluci­
dated in the following.
All cases were sensitive to a change in door opening regardless of control strategy or
ventilation system when considering CO2h, RHh and AAh ­ energy consumption was
not sensitive. The cases with passive stack ventilation appeared to be more sensitive
in CO2h and RHh when varying the wind conditions and level of airtightness compared
to the mechanical cases ­ the ground floor passive cases had the highest sensitivity in
this regard. Likewise, the 4th floor passive stack cases were slightly more sensitive in
energy consumption compared to the remaining cases with respect to boundary wind.
The passive stack cases regardless of floor level were most sensitive to a change in
airtightness when considering energy consumption whereas the mechanical cases were
less sensitive. The relative humidity was not influenced by varying orientations across all
cases. However, the RH was sensitive to a change in wind conditions and airtightness for
the passive stack cases. The mechanical cases were sensitive to a change in orientation
when considering AAh, however all cases were sensitive to parameter changes in AAh
regardless of floor level and system.
45
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) CO2h
(b) RHh
(c) AAh
(d) Zone Heating
Figure 4.18: Sensitivity indexes for simulation cases with respect to KPI. Abbreviations:
W = Wind conditions, A = Airtightness, O = Orientation, D = Door opening.
46
==PAGE:54==
4.4. IMPACT ANALYSIS
4.4
Impact analysis
The following heat maps are coloured according to a percentage relative change limit of
­100 % and 100 % for positive (green) and negative (red) impacts respectively, with no
impact at 0 %. Focus should be placed on the values also which may differ substantially.
Ground floor with passive stack
Figure 4.19 shows the impact analysis of the cases on the ground floor with a passive
stack exhaust. Each heat map shows the impact on the simulation cases with air in­
lets when changing the parameters. A clear pattern can be seen across the five cases,
where a similar degree of impact was found across the parameters for the investigated
KPIs ­ when strictly taking a positive or negative change into account. All cases have a
high degree of impact from the position of doors (D0) and the IAQ indicators performed
significantly worse when closing the doors, especially for the fixed open and pressure­
controlled air inlet. The same applied to the cases that were simulated successfully when
increasing the envelope airtightness (A1). Changing the wind conditions to City Center
and Sheltered also had a significantly positive impact on the IAQ indicators. However,
the change increased energy consumption. Zone heating was primarily impacted by the
change in airtightness, where a positive impact was found with a more airtight envelope
(A1) and a negative impact with more infiltration (A3). The case with no air inlets was
shown to be the most prone to a high degree of impact when changing the airtightness
parameter. All cases with installed air inlets on the ground floor have similar parameter
impacts.
(a) No air inlets.
(b) Fixed open.
(c) CO2­controlled.
(d) Pressure­controlled.
(e) Occupancy­controlled.
Figure 4.19: Percentage relative change to baseline for the ground floor passive stack
sensitivity cases.
47
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Ground floor with mechanical exhaust
Figure 4.20 shows the impact analysis of the cases on the ground floor with a mechanical
exhaust. The simulation for the sensitivity cases of occupancy­controlled air inlets failed
to compute and is thus omitted. A clear pattern, similar to the impact indices previously
seen for the passive stack cases is apparent. All cases were susceptible to the opening
of doors, which affected the IAQ significantly. As seen for the passive stack cases, the
zone heating was highly impacted by the airtightness of the envelope. The RHh were,
in all cases, impacted significantly by the change of airtightness and orientation. For the
cases with fixed open and pressure­controlled air inlets, a change of wind profile and wind
pressure impacted the RHh. The AAh had positive impact indices for almost all sensitivity
cases when altering the baseline parameters except for orientation 4 (O4) and closing of
doors (D0).
(a) No air inlets.
(b) Fixed open.
(c) CO2­controlled.
(d) Pressure­controlled.
Figure 4.20: Percentage relative change to baseline for the ground floor mechanical ex­
haust sensitivity cases. The occupancy case failed to compute and is omitted.
48
==PAGE:56==
4.4. IMPACT ANALYSIS
4th floor with passive stack
The impact analysis results for the 4th floor with a passive stack are shown in Figure4.21.
As with the previous cases, a clear pattern can be seen across the five cases, when
strictly taking a positive or negative impact into account. The IAQ performance indica­
tors were highly impacted by the closing of doors and when changing the airtightness of
the envelope. Moreover, altering airtightness has a high impact on energy consumption.
Changing the wind conditions to either W1 or W3 will improve the IAQ indicators with re­
spect to CO2h where a more significant change was found for W3, however, RHh and
AAh were most impacted for W1. Fixed open and pressure­controlled cases are again
very similar when regarding the actual percentage values.
(a) No air inlets.
(b) Fixed open.
(c) CO2­controlled.
(d) Pressure­controlled.
(e) Occupancy­controlled.
Figure 4.21: Percentage relative change to baseline for the 4th floor passive stack sensi­
tivity cases.
49
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4th floor with mechanical exhaust
Figure 4.22 shows the impact analysis of the cases on the 4th floor with a mechanical
exhaust. The simulations of W3 failed to compute for all sensitivity cases and likewise for
O4 in the sensitivity case with occupancy­controlled air inlets. A clear pattern can once
more be seen across the five cases when strictly taking a positive or negative impact into
account. D0 was a parameter with high impact, influencing all KPIs negatively. AAh was
once more mainly impacted positively by lowering the wind speeds and reducing wind
pressure coefficients and changing the airtightness from baseline. O2 and O3 had some
positive impact on AAh, whereas O4 had a negative impact. RHh was in general not
impacted much by changes to the parameters, except for door opening. The cases with
fixed open and pressure­controlled air inlets once more had similar results. The case
energy consumption was the least impacted by changing parameters when compared to
the other baseline cases shown in Figures 4.19, 4.20 and 4.21.
(a) No air inlets.
(b) Fixed open.
(c) CO2­controlled.
(d) Pressure­controlled.
(e) Occupancy­controlled.
Figure 4.22: Percentage relative change to baseline for the 4th floor mechanical exhaust
sensitivity cases.
50
==PAGE:58==
4.4. IMPACT ANALYSIS
Impact analysis for each KPI
New tendencies are revealed when comparing the impact of the sensitivity parameters
across all cases for each KPI. Figure 4.23 shows four heat maps with impact scores
normalised across each respective parameter, where 1 is the maximum negative impact
score and ­1 is the maximum positive impact score. In the CO2­concentration impact anal­
ysis the ground floor passive stack cases had the highest degree of impact, specifically
the cases with fixed open and pressure­controlled air inlets. Compared to the other cases,
the 4th floor passive stack cases were not affected much by W1, A1, each orientation and
the opening of doors. The impact scores across the different air inlets were almost the
same too. The passive stack cases had the highest impact score when increasing the
envelope airtightness (A3).
Sub figure (b) showing the RHh impact analysis across all cases indicates a clear correla­
tion between the ventilation system and the degree of impact by the sensitivity parameters.
Most cases with mechanical exhaust have very low impact scores for wind conditions and
airtightness but are highly impacted by orientation and the opening of doors. For the pas­
sive stack cases, the impact of wind conditions and airtightness was much higher. The
passive stack cases on the ground floor were highly impacted by orientation and door
opening, however less so on the 4th floor. There is a clear pattern in the impact scores
when regarding the air inlet control strategies and sensitivity cases.
Figure 4.23 (c) shows the degree of impact for AAh. The mechanical cases were positively
impacted consistently in almost all sensitivity cases, except for O4 and closing the door
(DO). All cases had positive impact scores for the sensitivity case with high air permeability
(A3) and for lower wind speeds and pressures (W1).
For Zone Heating in Figure 4.23 (d), a quick overview of the impact analysis shows that
the sensitivity parameters, in general, had the highest degree of impact on the 4th floor
passive stack cases, whereas the ground floor passive stack cases were impacted the
most by the wind condition sensitivity case W1. Contrary to the three other KPIs, Zone
Heating was affected positively by closing the doors, and negatively in simulation cases
with high air permeability (A3).
51
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) CO2h
(b) RHh
(c) AAh
(d) Zone Heating
Figure 4.23: Percentage relative change normalised per parameter across all cases. Grey
areas indicate a lack of data due to failed simulations.
52
==PAGE:60==
5
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results concerning the survey, study limitations, baseline
case performance, control strategy effectiveness, the influence of stack effect, solution
case optimality and robustness, and future work.
5.1
Survey
The survey aiming to investigate how natural ventilation is considered when renovating
apartment buildings in Denmark, including stakeholder experience with implementation,
did not yield a satisfying number of responses. However, the results may provide some
insight into the Danish market for apartment renovations, thus supporting the overall aim
of the study.
The survey results emphasize findings in three main areas: the background for renova­
tion, the challenges and problems, and the applicability of natural ventilation in renovated
apartment buildings.
The background for renovation is mostly the same for consultants and private owners
or board members. Respondents from both professions agree that the most important
elements in the renovation of apartments are to prevent and/or repair building damage,
improve indoor air quality and reduce the energy consumption of the current apartment
building. These findings support the general need for renovation of existing buildings and
the goal of improving the energy efficiency of buildings.
The challenges and problems associated with the renovation of apartment buildings
proved to be primarily due to spacial restrictions for installations and a limited project
budget. These findings support the reasoning for using natural ventilation instead of a
mechanical system with heat recovery. A natural ventilation system would not require
space for larger installations and the installation cost would be low [64]. However, the
fully mechanical system can be considered the best solution when considering its ability
to provide a consistent good indoor climate. The results show that consultants agree with
the notion that natural ventilation system can prove challenging when seeking to meet the
energy requirements and estimate performance.
The applicability of natural ventilation in renovated apartment buildings provides ev­
idence that natural ventilation is a common solution when renovating among the respon­
dents. All the consultants emphasized fan­assisted systems, and most of them answered
that they use only natural ventilation for some of their projects. When asking the con­
sultants, air inlets (trickle vents) are the predominant choice for air supply devices. This
supports the importance of investigating the performance of air inlets as formulated in the
study’s research questions. Follow­up interviews would be needed to establish specific
solution cases.
Due to a distribution delay of the questionnaire, an interview with an expert from Den­
mark’s Technological Institute provided insight into some of the most common system
types used by stakeholders when renovating apartment buildings. The delayed survey
results support the expert source.
53
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.2
Limitations
This section describes the uncertainty and limitations found in the choice of methodology
and assumptions.
The IDA­ICE air gap component is tied to some uncertainty since it was not designed to
be used as in the model, however, the provided function of merging airflows is applicable
to the stack and is assumed to provide a good result. The stack configuration without the
air gap had a low­pressure drop in the exhaust chimneys compared to other leakages
through the envelope, this meant that air would more easily egress through one of the
chimneys. Other solutions were explored to increase the pressure drop, however, they
involved altering the boundary conditions to unrealistic measures not corresponding to
the actual stack chimney.
The window opening behaviour is modelled with deterministic assumptions using the in­
door operative temperature. It should be noted that occupant interactions with building
systems, such as windows, can greatly impact building performance and prove a source
of uncertainty. The driving forces and stochastic nature behind occupants’ windows open­
ing and closing is an ongoing research topic in which more realistic behaviour models are
needed to simulate the phenomena.
The local sensitivity analysis may be insufficient in identifying the sensitivity of a non­
linear model, which suggests a source of uncertainty and therefore poses the assumption
that the model is linear. Furthermore, the local method does not quantify the correla­
tion between input parameters ­ all values within the input range are considered equally
probable.
The energy consumption was limited to the zone heating as a comparative measure and
did not include the fan energy for the mechanical system cases. The primary energy
would be ideal for true comparability between the ventilation systems. However, this will
be further addressed in the discussion.
The wind pressure coefficients are dependent on the buildings’ shape and surrounding
aerodynamic conditions. Good precision may be achieved using CFD or wind tunnel
measurements, however, the study employs simple handbook data from the Air Infiltration
and Ventilation Centre from IDA­ICE limiting precision. It is impossible to take the full
complexity of coefficient variation into account, and therefore uncertainty would persist
regardless [65]. Furthermore, IDA­ICE assumes that the wind contribution to pressure is
uniformly distributed across the building surface, which is not the case in reality.
Pang et al. suggested that the sensitivity ranking may differ depending on the choice of the
SA method [30]. Therefore, it is recommended to use more than one method to achieve
a comprehensive understanding of the investigated system. This may be considered a
limitation, and the use of one method may prove a source of uncertainty.
54
==PAGE:62==
5.3. BASELINE CASE ANALYSIS
5.3
Baseline case analysis
The results of the baseline case analysis highlight the difference in performance between
the cases but also their similarities and tendencies. Comparing the performance of the
22 simulation cases as evaluated by results for CO2h, RHh, AAh and energy consump­
tion, significantly worse performance can be seen for the baseline 4th floor passive stack
cases, strongly supporting the lack of driving forces from the stack effect. The superior
IAQ performance of the corresponding mechanical exhaust cases appears to be caused
by the consistent under­pressure induced. Therefore, the difference in performance be­
tween the passive stack cases on the ground floor and the 4th floor originates from the
variable influence of the stack effect. Figure 5.1 (b) verifies this with the exhaust capacities
between the ground floor and 4th floor cases. The exhaust capacities of the mechanical
exhaust cases are almost constant regardless of floor level as shown in Figure 5.1(a).
(a) Duration curve showing the exhaust capac­
ities in the bathroom of the mechanical system
cases on the ground floor and 4th floor
(b) Duration curve showing the exhaust capac­
ities of the passive stack system cases on the
ground floor and 4th floor.
Figure 5.1: Graphs of the volume flow rate and the pressure difference across the com­
ponent for the air inlets.
Table 4.3 demonstrates the performance gap between having no air inlets and having
adjustable air inlets to four different control strategies in a renovated apartment. The rel­
ative performance increase is significant when considering CO2h for all cases and RHh
for the passive system cases. The latter could be rooted in the fact that the mechan­
ical exhaust cases have better RHh performance, thus installing air inlets has less im­
pact. The performance gap between the control strategies appeared to be dictated by
the time in which they were open. The time above the RH thresholds was reduced more
when adding the fixed open and pressure­controlled air inlet than the CO2­controlled air
inlet, suggesting that the relative humidity should be included as an opening measure
in the control strategy. Leaving the air inlet open shortly after occupancy may improve
the occupancy­controlled air inlet in this regard. While the performance of the CO2­ and
occupancy­controlled air inlets pale slightly in comparison to the fixed open and pressure­
controlled air inlet for CO2h and RHh, they excel at reducing the energy demand and heat
loss. A clear trade­off between energy and IAQ is shown, as established by previous stud­
ies [10]. Therefore, the most effective control type depends on whether IAQ, energy or
both is considered of the highest importance. The results suggest that CO2­controlled air
inlets may maintain IAQ and reduce heat loss. Opening air inlets during occupancy may
prove as viable preliminary guidance for occupants, since air inlets controlled according
55
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
to CO2 seems an unlikely solution when renovating windows and implementing air inlets
in Denmark. However, the use of CO2 monitors may help occupants identify periods of
poor IAQ and stimulate adaptive behaviour as recommended by Sharpe et al. [14]. More
active interaction with ventilation devices would be needed. The impact of the added air
inlets on AAh does not meet the expectations of improvement from having no air inlets.
The significant decrease in relative performance stems from AAh being a small value in
most of the baseline cases with no inlets, easily allowing a high percentage change. This
raises the question of what the cause of the high performance decrease for AAh is. The
results of mean age of air (MAA) in Figure 4.15 shows, in most cases, a reduced MAA
when adding adjustable air inlets, suggesting that the increase in AAh could be caused by
more frequent periods of high AA, meaning a reduced ventilation rate. However, Figure
4.16 shows that the Peak Age of Air (PAA) varied only slightly between the cases with
no air inlets and the cases with air inlets. The results for MAA and PAA demonstrate that
the balanced system cases performed similarly to, or a bit better than, the other cases for
MAA, however, the PAA was much lower emphasizing a more stable system.
The results of the CO2­concentration in the baseline case analysis showed that the contri­
bution to CO2h almost solely originates from the adult bedroom where a larger occupancy
load is tied with a long period of use. This implies that the ventilation supplied by adjustable
air inlets might not be sufficient for long periods of time with high occupancy. However,
the maximum CO2­concentration of the baseline cases does not show any means of con­
cern, since the CO2concentrations peak at 1200 ppm for all cases except for the 4th floor
passive stack cases.
Results on the normalized RHh performance in Figure 4.10 suggests that mechanical
exhaust cases do outperform their passive counterpart. However, upon comparing the
percentage of time above the respective thresholds for each room in Figure 4.14, there
should be no concerns for the growth of mould and proliferation of dust mites, since the
worst cases reached just above 5 % of the time examined. Most other cases have the
bathroom reach ca. 2 % of the time, with all other rooms being below 1 % of the time
above the threshold. The balanced systems with heat recovery do achieve zero hours
above the threshold in the adult bedroom where the supply is 14 L/s compared to 7 L/s in
the other dry rooms. This suggests that an increase in the supply of air for the rooms with
high occupancy load might increase the performance for both RH and CO2­concentration.
The bathroom of the balanced system does however not deliver much better results than
for the other baseline cases, which calls for a boost of exhaust flow during periods of high
humidity loads.
Figure 4.10 suggests that worse IAQ performance brings about a reduced energy demand
for zone heating. Comparing the energy required on the ground floor for the passive
stack and mechanical exhaust cases, a decrease is apparent for the mechanical cases,
however, this comparison does not take the fan power into account. The approximate fan
power required can however be calculated for the mechanical exhaust cases considering
the whole simulation period of 5764 hours. A Specific Fan Power (SFP) of 1.5 kJ/m3 is
assumed with the required flow of 0.035 m3/s and the energy factor of 1.9 included in Eq.
5.1.
1.5 kJ
m3 · 0.035 m3
s · 5764 h · 1.9 = 575 kWh
(5.1)
The added energy consumed by the fan is shown in Figure 5.2 where the results of the
zone heating are adjusted with the energy factor of 0.85.
56
==PAGE:64==
5.4. PRESSURE­CONTROLLED AIR INLET
Figure 5.2: The total energy consumed across cases with energy for heating and the
exhaust fan included.
The new analysis of the energy consumption for the baseline cases illustrates that the
advantage of the mechanical systems is, in most cases, not found in what first appeared
to be a reduction in energy consumption, but in the stability and increase in IAQ perfor­
mance. Despite the added fan power, the energy consumption of the ground floor passive
stack cases with fixed open, pressure­controlled or occupancy­controlled air inlets is still
higher in comparison to the mechanical cases ­ the CO2­controlled air inlet case performs
similarly to its mechanical counterpart.
5.4
Pressure­controlled air inlet
The simulation results showed that the pressure­controlled air inlet was fully open for a
majority of the time, and therefore performed similarly to the fixed open air inlet. The
reason for this can be deduced from Figure 5.3 which shows that the pressure difference
(∆P) across the building envelope in the living room was below ­10 Pa (a negative sign
for ingress airflow) for 20% of the time for GFP3, and lower for the remaining cases.
Therefore, the pressure­controlled air inlet rarely acted to reduce air flows. A reduction in
energy consumption could be expected if the inlet, as modelled in the study, was installed
in a colder climate with larger pressure differentials. Previous studies have concluded
that pressure­controlled air inlets can be complicated to simulate [20]. This notion could
also merit why the performance of the inlet did not showcase the potential found in the
literature review.
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Figure 5.3: The pressure difference across the living room facade for the studied systems
and floor levels.
5.5
Sensitivity and impact analysis
The sensitivity analysis supports existing literature stating that natural ventilation systems
are more sensitive to variable environmental forces when compared to mechanical sys­
tems with a constant exhaust airflow [9]. The high sensitivity of the IAQ indicators to a
change in the door opening, regardless of the simulation case, implies that the free move­
ment of air between zones has a great impact on the IAQ, and thus confirms that keeping
the doors closed has a negative impact, with some cases scoring up to 42,000 %. The
impact analysis highlights that the performance of some systems is impacted to a high
degree when changing parameters from baseline. The passive stack cases are positively
impacted by lower wind pressures on the facade, and lower wind speeds at roof height,
especially on the ground floor. This verifies that the reduction of wind pressure allows for a
better stack effect, which is not as evident for the 4th floor case where wind pressure may
be the primary driving force. It is also evident that the orientation has the lowest impact
on the cases out of the four input parameters. Figure 5.4 shows the effect of changing the
wind conditions on the exhaust air flows in which lower wind speeds at roof height results
in less air ingress in the exhaust chimney.
Figure 5.4: Duration curve showing exhaust air flows for ground floor and 4th floor when
changing wind conditions from baseline.
58
==PAGE:66==
5.6. EXPLORING THE PARAMETER OUTPUT SPACE
5.6
Exploring the parameter output space
In order to select an optimal solution, an emphasis was placed on maintaining IAQ at the
cost of increased heat loss when exploring solutions in the output space. If any given
baseline case had a CO2h result above 10000 ppmh, indicating that ca. 10% of the occu­
pied hours were above 1000 ppm, then the optimal solution would be the solution closed
to 10000 ppmh. On the contrary, if the baseline case had a CO2h result below 10000
ppmh, then an emphasis was placed on reducing the heating consumption, allowing an
increase in ppmh. Therefore, the choice of the optimal case was a trade­off between
indoor air quality and associated ventilation heat loss.
(a) Solution space for all parametric runs on
the ground floor with a passive stack and CO2­
controlled air inlets.
(b) Solution space for all Parametric Runs on
the fourth floor with a passive stack and CO2­
controlled air inlets.
Figure 5.5: Selection of optimal case parameters from the input space of GFP2 and 4FP2.
See Appendix F for all cases and their solution space.
Figure 5.5 shows the choice of optimal solution case for GFP2 and 4FP2 with respect to
the baseline. The baseline for GFP2 had a CO2h value below 10000 ppmh and hence
reduced energy consumption was achievable at the slight expense of IAQ, noting that the
RHh and AAh performance indicators did not worsen considerably. On the contrary, the
baseline for 4FP2 had a CO2h value above 10000 ppmh in which an increase in heating
was necessary to improve IAQ. The entire output space for each case, when compared,
also shows that the 4th floor performance is worse when changing the boundary condi­
tions.
59
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Figure 5.6: Results for the investigated cases with optimal input parameters. See Ap­
pendix E.1 for KPI values.
The CO2­controlled air inlet appeared to perform the best within each system, as indi­
cated by the bubbles labelled (2) in Figure 5.6 being close to the balanced reference
cases. The CO2­controlled air inlet on the ground floor with a passive stack is closet to the
performance of the balanced system when regarding both the CO2h and energy results.
However, the solution does not meet the building code requirement for ventilation rate dur­
ing occupancy as highlighted by the size. Comparing all optimal case solutions showed
that the mechanical cases performed, under optimal parameters similarly, as opposed to
the passive stack cases which further establishes the mechanical system performance as
more robust.
In retrospect, the Pareto optimal cases could have been found instead as the unambigu­
ously optimal solution from the output space, where none of the other parameter solu­
tions would achieve both better indoor air quality and heat loss. For example, Laverge
and Janssens found the Pareto optimal cases when comparing ventilation systems [22].
However, as a topic of discussion on optimality, it is deemed adequate.
Optimal parameters
Case
Wind conditions
Air tightness
Orientation
Door
GFP0
City center & sheltered
2 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
GFP[1­4]
City center & sheltered
1 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
4FP0
City center & sheltered
3 L/(s · m2)
142°
Open
4FP[1­4]
City center & sheltered
3 L/(s · m2)
142°
Open
GFM0
City center & sheltered
3 L/(s · m2)
142°
Open
GFM[1­4]
City center & sheltered
1 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
4FM0
Urban & semi­exposed
1 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
4FM[1­4]
Urban & semi­exposed
1 L/(s · m2)
52°
Open
Table 5.1: Optimal input parameters for the simulation cases.
60
==PAGE:68==
5.6. EXPLORING THE PARAMETER OUTPUT SPACE
Table 5.1 shows the input parameters for the optimal solutions in Figure 5.6. A majority of
the cases perform best under wind conditions in the City Center with surrounding buildings
of equal height. For the passive stack cases on the ground floor
All air inlet control strategies on the ground floor with a passive stack perform optimally
under the same boundary conditions. The optimal parameters also shows that an in­
creased airtightness improved the performance on the ground floor when combined with
lower wind conditions. The 4th floor performs optimally under the same wind conditions
as the ground floor, although at a different orientation. In this case, the lower airtightness
is found to be optimal due to a lack of stack effect to drive airflow. This indicates the need
for potentially larger opening areas on the 4th floor.
From the bubble plots, the consistency of a system case can easily be determined by
the similarity in performance between the sensitivity cases. The more identical the bub­
bles are concerning placement, size and colour, the more consistent the system is under
the change of sensitivity parameters. This might suggest that a system performing simi­
larly under many parameter changes may be applicable to various apartment renovations.
Comparing the bubble plot of the same case on the ground floor and 4th floor will show
the applicability of the system for all floors of a renovated apartment. The results in Ap­
pendix E support the findings of the earlier analyses emphasising the higher stability of
the mechanical exhaust cases ­ the performance is similar across sensitivity cases. When
considering the ground floor and the 4th floor in Figure 5.7 (b) it is evident that the me­
chanical exhaust with CO2­controlled air inlets has a high degree of consistency.
(a) Entire output space of cases GFP2: ground
floor passive stack with CO2­controlled air in­
lets, and 4FP2: 4th floor passive stack with
CO2­controlled air inlets.
(b) Entire output space of cases GFM2: ground
floor mechanical exhaust with CO2­controlled
air inlets, and 4FM2: 4th floor mechanical ex­
haust with CO2­controlled air inlets.
Figure 5.7: Comparison between the output spaces for the passive stack and mechanical
exhaust cases with CO2­controlled air inlets.
For renovation projects where the mechanical exhaust will not be installed, the passive
stack cases with CO2­controlled air inlets may prove a viable system for the ground floor.
Solutions for the 4th floor with a passive stack were not performing well, and an alternative
solution should be investigated, as attempted in Section 5.8.
CO2­controlled air inlets are not a product on the current market yet, and therefore a
61
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
comparison to the occupancy controlled air inlet is shown in Figure 5.8. Earlier results
showed that the occupancy­controlled air inlet was performing quite similar to the CO2­
controlled, and the findings in the comparison support this statement, only the occupancy­
controlled air inlet performs slightly worse.
Figure 5.8: Entire output space for GFP2 and GFP4: ground floor passive stack with
CO2­control and occupancy­control, respectively.
5.7
Robustness of Parametric Runs
Table 5.2 highlights the robustness of the simulation model shown by the number of sim­
ulation runs either completing or issuing errors. The mechanical cases were less robust
compared to the passive stack cases by a considerable margin, as indicated by the num­
ber of simulation errors. IDA­ICE documentation states that a common reason for failure is
simulated systems not constituting a well­posed problem, meaning it must contain correct
boundary conditions.
Cases
Simulations
GFP[0­4]
4FP[0­4]
GFM[0­4]
4FM[0­4]
Total
Completed
354
354
290
213
1211
Error
6
6
70
147
229
Total
360
360
360
360
1440
Table 5.2: Overview of simulation runs that either completed or failed due to numerical
errors for each case group.
5.8
Further investigation
The percentage of time with CO2­concentration above 1000 ppm shown in Figure 4.12
indicates that one air inlet may not be suffice in the adult bedroom. A new case using
resized air inlets with c = 0.003 (originally c = 0.0025) and two air inlets in the adult bed­
room is posed to meet the high occupancy demand. The test was carried out for the
worst cases on the 4th floor with a passive stack. Figure 5.9 shows the results of the test,
comparing the original system of the 4th floor passive stack cases to the new system and
the original ground floor passive stack cases. The new system yields significantly better
62
==PAGE:70==
5.9. FINAL THOUGHTS
performance concerning CO2h and AAh. However, the performance for RHh did not see
a significant improvement. This might be due to the lack of exhaust flows from the wet
rooms which is still present when adding larger and more air inlets. In retrospect, it would
have been interesting to question industry stakeholders on how the sizing of adjustable
air inlets is considered when used, largely because the survey evidenced that they are
in use, and since the Danish Building Regulations have no provisions on the sizing of air
inlets when installed in apartment buildings.
Figure 5.9: Performance comparison of a new case with resized and one added air inlet.
Original: c = 0.0025, New: c = 0.003 and an extra inlet in the adult bedroom.
5.9
Final thoughts
The natural ventilation system, as presented in this study, with adjustable air inlets proved
to be the most effective when controlled according to the CO2­level in the occupied zones.
This allowed a reduction in energy consumption while maintaining adequate IAQ when
compared to fixed open. The CO2­controlled air inlet may not be feasible in reality, and
more market research is needed. Therefore, it is recommended that air inlets are opened
solely during occupied hours in order to provide a simple recommendation that improves
performance, albeit not as much as the CO2­controlled air inlet. It should be noted that
a large disparity in the performance of the natural ventilation system was found between
the ground floor and 4th floor due to the influence of the stack effect. The performance on
the 4th floor could be improved by installing more air inlets to match the occupancy loads.
The mechanical system cases proved to be desirable solutions with respect to system
robustness. When varying the boundary conditions in Parametric Runs, the sensitivity
results were shown to be more consistent and similar when compared to the correspond­
ing natural system cases, as exemplified by 5.7. Therefore, a mechanical system, as
presented in this study, would maintain a semblance of reliable performance when com­
pared to the natural ventilation system.
The baseline results showed that not installing adjustable air inlets would increase the
percentage of occupied time above 1000 ppm CO2­concentration and the mean age of
air for both passive and mechanical exhaust cases. Not installing air inlets would also
increase the percentage of time above relative humidity thresholds increasing the risk of
63
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
mould growth and dust mite proliferation. However, the system cases with no air inlets
installed had the lowest energy consumption, since the air exchange was limited to infil­
tration and no additional cooling from openings. It is worth noting that the CO2­control
managed to achieve almost the same heat loss as the case with no air inlets installed,
whilst improving IAQ, which further established the control type as optimal.
5.10
Future work
CFD may provide more precise results on the performance of adjustable air inlets when
used in natural ventilation systems. Biler et al. stated that a comprehensive study using
CFD to investigate adjustable air inlets is lacking in current literature and may be sug­
gested as future work [15]. Furthermore, Sakiyama et al. suggest that annual thermal
comfort of naturally ventilated buildings may be explored using CFD as future work and
that Ansys­fluent appears to be the most commonly used CFD tool when investigating
natural ventilation [24].
Future research could investigate the effectiveness of adjustable air inlets as a passive
cooling strategy. The study was limited to the heating season and thus did not investi­
gate their use for passive cooling. Passive cooling is considered a promising possibility
to face the challenge of increasing energy use for cooling and ventilation, constituting an­
other facet relevant to reducing energy needs and improving IAQ and thermal comfort in
buildings [66, 67]. The simulation cases with an increased building airtightness may be
prone to overheating during the summer and could be subject to further research when
considering the use of adjustable air inlets also.
The study assumed an average value for the power­law coefficient of the air inlet based on
3 real products. Future research could expand upon the impact of varying the air inlet size
and further investigate sizing strategies as previously studied by Laverge and Janssens
[22]. Furthermore, the study did not include the influence of factors such as cold draughts
or sound attenuation which may impact occupant behaviour due to noise and thus system
effectiveness.
64
==PAGE:72==
6
Conclusion
The survey did not yield a large sample of respondents. However, preliminary conclusions
can be drawn. The survey supports that the general goal of renovation is to reduce en­
ergy consumption and to increase the indoor climate quality, with a focus also placed on
repairing and/or preventing building damage. Furthermore, the implementation of natural
ventilation in renovated apartments is often due to a lack of installation space and a limited
project budget. The survey responses from industry stakeholders concluded that natu­
ral ventilation is used when renovating apartment buildings. Follow­up interviews would
be needed to deduce specific solutions. However, air inlets (trickle vents) were installed
to supply fresh air when replacing windows. Moreover, the survey supports the use of
fan­assisted systems.
It should be noted that the following research conclusions are based on relative compar­
isons between the investigated simulation cases. The simulation cases included two ven­
tilation systems; natural ventilation with a passive stack chimney and mechanical exhaust
ventilation. Each system had 5 configurations; one with no air inlets, representing the ex­
treme case of only using windows; and four systems with different control strategies for the
adjustable air inlets. The strategies included: fixed open during the entire heating season,
CO2­controlled opening above a set CO2 level, pressure­controlled opening according to
pressure differentials and occupancy­controlled opening during occupied hours. The pre­
sented conclusions are based on one occupancy schedule for a renovated apartment in
Denmark housing 2 adults and one child.
The study concludes that adjustable air inlets should be installed to provide purpose­
driven openings when renovating apartments. Still, their effectiveness depends on the
system in which they are installed. The adjustable air inlets are most effectively used if
controlled according to the CO2 level in the occupied rooms, regardless of the ventilation
system, to reduce heat loss and maintain IAQ. However, implementing such a control type
may not be readily feasible or commonplace in Danish retrofits, and it is suggested that air
inlets are opened during occupied hours. A similar performance between the two strate­
gies may be achieved on the ground floor in the studied natural ventilation system due
to the influence of the stack effect. However, on the 4th floor, a more significant perfor­
mance disparity was perceived due to opening size not meeting the ventilation need and
a lack of stack effect confining the driving forces to primarily wind pressure. There were
periods when the prescribed ventilation rate was not upheld, indicating periods of under
ventilation. Further studies are needed to consider sizing guidelines when using trickle
vents in natural ventilation systems since no provisions are established in the Building
Regulations. The study showed that installing the same sized air inlet on both the ground
floor and top floor highly impacts effectiveness. The survey concluded that trickle vents
were installed when renovating apartment buildings, further confirming the need for con­
tinued research and specific solutions. An emphasis could be placed on installing air inlets
based on anticipated occupants, especially in bedrooms, which would improve IAQ at the
expense of energy consumption, and require more active interaction with the ventilation
devices from occupants.
The baseline results showed that not installing adjustable air inlets would increase the
percentage of occupied time above 1000 ppm CO2­concentration and the mean age of
air for both passive and mechanical exhaust cases. Not installing air inlets would also
65
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
increase the percentage of time above relative humidity thresholds, increasing the risk of
mould growth and dust mite proliferation. However, the system cases with no air inlets
installed had the lowest energy consumption since the air exchange was limited to infil­
tration and no additional cooling from openings. It is worth noting that the CO2­control
managed to achieve almost the same heat loss as the case with no air inlets installed
whilst improving IAQ, further establishing the CO2­control as optimal.
When varying the wind conditions, the results showed that the CO2h of the passive stack
cases was highly influenced. An increase in wind speed at roof height would result in
more airflow ingress in the chimney, thus increasing the amount of CO2h. However, for
the same cases, an increase in energy consumption was evident when lowering wind
speeds. The energy consumption of the passive stack cases was negatively impacted
by a decreased airtightness and positively impacted with an increase due to lower infil­
tration. The same tendency could be seen with the mechanical exhaust cases; however,
they were less sensitive. In general, the mechanical cases were less sensitive to airtight­
ness change than the natural system cases. The passive stack cases performed better
with an increased building airtightness when also considering the lower wind conditions.
The sensitivity indexes for CO2h, RHh, and AAh (Age of Air hours) showed that all system
cases were susceptible to a change in the door opening. Therefore, occupant behaviour
plays a prominent role in the achievable system performance, which corresponds with
existing knowledge. The AAh results across all cases were susceptible when changing
the investigated input parameters; wind conditions, airtightness, and door opening. How­
ever, the mechanical cases were more sensitive when changing orientation concerning
AAh. The energy consumption was the least sensitive overall when altering parameters
and comparing the key performance indicators. Furthermore, the results showed that
orientation had the lowest impact on energy consumption performance and relative hu­
midity. The mechanical system cases proved to be more robust when altering boundary
conditions, and thus the preferred system to install in renovated apartments, unless cost
or technical difficulties hinder implementation.
66
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
“State of the building stock briefing”. In: Buildings Performance Institute Europe ().
URL: https://www.bpie.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/State-of-the-building-stock-
briefing_Dic6.pdf.
[2]
Energistyrelsen. Danish climate policies. https://ens.dk/en/our- responsibilities/
energy-climate-politics/danish-climate-policies. [Online] Accessed: 13.05.2022.
[3]
Kristen Brand, Bernhard Von Manteuffel, and Andreas Hermelink. “Energy Perfor­
mance Certificate Database in Denmark Federal Ministry for the Environment, Na­
ture Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU)”. In: (2018).
[4]
Grundejernes Investeringsfond Rambøll. Analyse af CO2­udledning og totaløkonomi
i renovering og nybyg, 2020. https://gi.dk/publikationer/2020/analyse- af- co2-
udledning-og-totalokonomi-i-renovering-og-nybyg. [Online] Accessed: 17.03.2022.
[5]
Jesper Kragh og Lise Lotte Beck Raunkjær. “Kilder til viden om ventilation af eksis­
terende etageboliger.” In: (2019).
[6]
Danish building regulations (BR18). Danish Energy Agency.
[7]
Per Heiselberg. “Design of Natural and Hybrid Ventilation”. In: Aalborg Univesitet.
Department of Civil Engineering. 2006 (). ISSN: 1901­7286.
[8]
H B Awbi. “Design considerations for naturally ventilated buildings”. In: Renewable
Energy 5 (1994), pp. 151–1090.
[9]
Ventilation med varme­genvinding i eksisterende etageejendomme ­ Guide. Viden­
scenter for Energibesparelser i Bygninger. 2014.
[10]
R.G. Southall. “An assessment of the potential of supply­side ventilation demand
control to regulate natural ventilation flow patterns and reduce domestic space heat­
ing consumption”. In: Energy and Buildings 168 (June 2018), pp. 201–214. ISSN:
03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.03.005.
[11]
DS/CEN/TR 14788:2006 Ventilation for buildings ­ Design and dimensioning of res­
idential ventilation systems. In: ().
[12]
Alireza Afshari et al. “SBI 2020:12 Hvidbog Ventilation af eksisterende etageboliger
­ Erfaringsopsamling og anbefalinger.” In: (2020).
[13]
HM Government. “Building Regulations Approved Document F (Ventilation)”. In:
The Building Regulations 2010 2 (October 2022).
[14]
Tim Sharpe et al. “Occupant Interactions and Effectiveness of Natural Ventilation
Strategies in Contemporary New Housing in Scotland, UK”. In: International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health 12 (7 July 2015), pp. 8480–8497.
ISSN: 1660­4601. DOI: 10.3390/ijerph120708480.
[15]
Ahmet Biler et al. “A Review of Performance Specifications and Studies of Trickle
Vents”. In: Buildings 8 (11 Nov. 2018), p. 152. ISSN: 2075­5309. DOI: 10.3390/
buildings8110152.
[16]
CIBSE. CIBSE Guide B2—Ventilation and Ductwork. CIBSE: London, UK, 2016.
[17]
J. Laverge et al. “Energy saving potential and repercussions on indoor air quality of
demand controlled residential ventilation strategies”. In: Building and Environment
67
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
46 (7 July 2011), pp. 1497–1503. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/J.BUILDENV.
2011.01.023.
[18]
Gaëlle Guyot, Max H. Sherman, and Iain S. Walker. “Smart ventilation energy and
indoor air quality performance in residential buildings: A review”. In: Energy and
Buildings 165 (Apr. 2018), pp. 416–430. ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.
2017.12.051.
[19]
I. Ridley et al. “Automatic Ventilation Control of Trickle Ventilators”. In: 5 (4 2016),
pp. 417–426. ISSN: 14733315. DOI: 10.1080/14733315.2007.11683756.
[20]
P Karava, T Stathopoulos, and A.K Athienitis. “Investigation of the performance of
trickle ventilators”. In: Building and Environment 38 (8 Aug. 2003), pp. 981–993.
ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/S0360-1323(03)00035-0.
[21]
Cristina Cornaro, Alessandro Paravicini, and Annamaria Cimini. “Monitoring indoor
carbon dioxide concentration and effectiveness of natural trickle ventilation in a mid­
dle school in rome”. In: Indoor and Built Environment 22 (2 Apr. 2013), pp. 445–455.
ISSN: 1420326X. DOI: 10.1177/1420326X11430099.
[22]
J. Laverge and A. Janssens. “Optimization of design flow rates and component siz­
ing for residential ventilation”. In: Building and Environment 65 (July 2013), pp. 81–
89. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.03.019.
[23]
BIN. Ventilatievoorzieningen in woongebouwen. Videnscenter for Energibesparelser
i Bygninger. Brussels 1991.
[24]
N.R.M. Sakiyama et al. “Perspectives of naturally ventilated buildings: A review”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 130 (Sept. 2020), p. 109933. ISSN:
13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2020.109933.
[25]
James Milner et al. “What should the ventilation objectives be for retrofit energy
efficiency interventions of dwellings?” In: Building Services Engineering Research
and Technology 36 (2 Mar. 2015), pp. 221–229. ISSN: 0143­6244. DOI: 10.1177/
0143624414566243.
[26]
Alo Mikola, Raimo Simson, and Jarek Kurnitski. “The Impact of Air Pressure Condi­
tions on the Performance of Single Room Ventilation Units in Multi­Story Buildings”.
In: Energies 2019, Vol. 12, Page 2633 12 (13 July 2019), p. 2633. ISSN: 1996­1073.
DOI: 10.3390/EN12132633.
[27]
Antony Wood and Ruba Salib. “Natural Ventilation in High­Rise Office Buildings”.
In: CTBUH Sustainability Working Group ().
[28]
Baptiste Poirier et al. “Development of an assessment methodology for IAQ ventila­
tion performance in residential buildings: An investigation of relevant performance
indicators”. In: Journal of Building Engineering 43 (Nov. 2021), p. 103140. ISSN:
23527102. DOI: 10.1016/j.jobe.2021.103140.
[29]
Gaëlle Guyot, Iain S. Walker, and Max H. Sherman. “Performance based approaches
in standards and regulations for smart ventilation in residential buildings: a summary
review”. In: International Journal of Ventilation 18 (2 Apr. 2019), pp. 96–112. ISSN:
1473­3315. DOI: 10.1080/14733315.2018.1435025.
[30]
Zhihong Pang et al. “The role of sensitivity analysis in the building performance
analysis: A critical review”. In: Energy and Buildings 209 (Feb. 2020), p. 109659.
ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2019.109659.
[31]
Wei Tian. “A review of sensitivity analysis methods in building energy analysis”. In:
(2013). DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2012.12.014.
68
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32]
D.M. Hamby. “A review of techniques for parameter sensitivity analysis of envi­
ronmental models”. In: Westinghouse Savannah River Company Savannah River
Technology Center Aiken, SC 29808, USA. ().
[33]
Martin Heine Kristensen and Steffen Petersen. “Choosing the appropriate sensitivity
analysis method for building energy model­based investigations”. In: Energy and
Buildings 130 (Oct. 2016), pp. 166–176. ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.
2016.08.038.
[34]
Annamaria Belleri, Roberto Lollini, and Spencer M. Dutton. “Natural ventilation de­
sign: An analysis of predicted and measured performance”. In: Building and Envi­
ronment 81 (Nov. 2014), pp. 123–138. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.
2014.06.009.
[35]
Per Heiselberg et al. “Application of sensitivity analysis in design of sustainable
buildings”. In: Renewable Energy 34 (9 Sept. 2009), pp. 2030–2036. ISSN: 09601481.
DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2009.02.016.
[36]
Matt Carlsson, Marianne Touchie, and Russell Richman. “Investigating the potential
impact of a compartmentalization and ventilation system retrofit strategy on energy
use in high­rise residential buildings”. In: Energy and Buildings 199 (Sept. 2019),
pp. 20–28. ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENBUILD.2019.06.035.
[37]
Jinghua Yu et al. “Sensitivity analysis of energy performance for high­rise residential
envelope in hot summer and cold winter zone of China”. In: Energy and Buildings
64 (Sept. 2013), pp. 264–274. ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.05.018.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378778813002946.
[38]
Sean Murray and DTJ O’Sullivan. “An optimization methodology and sensitivity
analysis of existing building retrofits”. In: (2012).
[39]
James Milner et al. “What should the ventilation objectives be for retrofit energy
efficiency interventions of dwellings?” In: Building Services Engineering Research
and Technology 36 (2 Mar. 2015), pp. 221–229. ISSN: 0143­6244. DOI: 10.1177/
0143624414566243.
[40]
M. Haase and A. Amato. “An investigation of the potential for natural ventilation
and building orientation to achieve thermal comfort in warm and humid climates”.
In: Solar Energy 83 (3 Mar. 2009), pp. 389–399. ISSN: 0038092X. DOI: 10.1016/j.
solener.2008.08.015.
[41]
SurveyXact by Ramboll. https : / / renover . dk / projekt / ryesgade - 25/. [Online] Ac­
cessed: 03.04.2022.
[42]
Hamed Taherdoost. “What Is the Best Response Scale for Survey and Question­
naire Design; Review of Different Lengths of Rating Scale / Attitude Scale / Likert
Scale”. In: International Journal of Academic Research in Management (IJARM) 8
(1 2019), pp. 2296–1747.
[43]
Københavnerkortet. https://kbhkort.kk.dk/spatialmap. [Online] Accessed: 06.06.2022.
[44]
Ryesgade 25 ­ Renoverprisen. https://renover.dk/projekt/ryesgade-25/. [Online]
Accessed: 01.07.2022.
[45]
Validation certifications ­ Simulation Software | EQUA. https://www.equa.se/en/ida-
ice/validation-certifications. [Online] Accessed: 04.06.2022.
[46]
Jakub Kolarik and Kevin Michael Smith. “Simulations of a novel demand­controlled
room­based ventilation system for renovated apartments”. In: IOP Conference Se­
69
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ries: Materials Science and Engineering 609 (3 Sept. 2019), p. 032041. ISSN: 1757­
8981. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/609/3/032041.
[47]
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy User Manual Version 4.8. EQUA Simulation AB.
January 2018.
[48]
Mette Havgaard Vorre et al. “Branchevejledning for indeklimaberegninger”. In: Statens
Byggeforskningsinstitut, Aalborg Universitet. (2017).
[49]
Rune K Andersen, Valentina Fabi, and Stefano P Corgnati. “Predicted and actual
indoor environmental quality: Verification of occupants’ behaviour models in resi­
dential buildings”. In: Energy and Buildings 127 (2016), pp. 105–115. DOI: 10.1016/
j.enbuild.2016.05.074.
[50]
Sebastian Herkel, Ulla Knapp, and Jens Pfafferott. “Towards a model of user be­
haviour regarding the manual control of windows in office buildings”. In: Building
and Environment 43 (4 Apr. 2008), pp. 588–600. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.
buildenv.2006.06.031.
[51]
Frédéric Haldi and Darren Robinson. “On the behaviour and adaptation of office
occupants”. In: Building and Environment 43 (12 Dec. 2008), pp. 2163–2177. ISSN:
03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2008.01.003.
[52]
DS/EN ISO 7730:2006 Ergonomics of the thermal environment ­ Analytical deter­
mination et al. In: ().
[53]
Kevin Michael Smith and Svend Svendsen. “The effect of a rotary heat exchanger
in room­based ventilation on indoor humidity in existing apartments in temperate
climates”. In: Energy and Buildings 116 (Mar. 2016), pp. 349–361. ISSN: 03787788.
DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.12.025.
[54]
Rationel Vinduer og døre. https://www.rationel.dk/blog/2021/05/05/faa-vinduerne-
til-at-lufte-ud-for-dig-med-friskluftventil/. [Online] Accessed: 07.06.2022.
[55]
DS/EN 13141­1:2019 Ventilation for buildings ­ Performance testing of components/
products for residential ventilation ­ Part 1: Externally and internally mounted air
transfer devices. In: ().
[56]
Christian Nicolai Nielsen. Teknologisk Institut: Graddage. https://www.teknologisk.
dk/ydelser/graddage/hvad-er-graddage/492,3. [Online] Accessed: 06.06.2022.
[57]
BSim — Climate data. https://build.dk/bsim/Pages/Climate-data.aspx. [Online]
Accessed: 07.06.2022.
[58]
David Carslaw. The openair Manual. Open­source tools for analysing air pollution
data. 2019.
[59]
Vasileios Filis, Jakub Kolarik, and Kevin Michael Smith. “The impact of wind pres­
sure and stack effect on the performance of room ventilation units with heat recov­
ery”. In: Energy and Buildings 234 (Mar. 2021), p. 110689. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.
2020.110689.
[60]
ASHRAE. Handbook Fundamentals. 2017.
[61]
M. Liddament. “A Guide to Energy Efficient Ventilation, Air Infiltration and Ventilation
Centre.” In: (1996).
[62]
DS/CEN/TR 16798­2:2019 Energy performance of buildings ­ Ventilation for build­
ings ­ Part 2: Interpretation of the requirements in EN 16798­1 ­ Indoor environ­
mental input parameters for design, lighting assessment of energy performance of
70
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
building addressing indoor air quality thermal environment lighting thermal environ­
ment, and acoustics (Module M1­6). In: ().
[63]
DS/CEN/TR 16798­1:2019 Energy performance of buildings ­ Ventilation for build­
ings ­ Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design, lighting assessment
of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality thermal environ­
ment lighting thermal environment, and acoustics ­ Module M1­6. In: ().
[64]
Zhenjun Ma et al. “Existing building retrofits: Methodology and state­of­the­art”. In:
Energy and Buildings 55 (Dec. 2012), pp. 889–902. ISSN: 0378­7788. DOI: 10.
1016/J.ENBUILD.2012.08.018.
[65]
D. Cóstola, B. Blocken, and J. L.M. Hensen. “Overview of pressure coefficient data
in building energy simulation and airflow network programs”. In: Building and En­
vironment 44 (10 Oct. 2009), pp. 2027–2036. ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI: 10.1016/J.
BUILDENV.2009.02.006.
[66]
Per Heiselberg and Maria Kolokotroni. “VENTILATIVE COOLING ­ State­of­the­art
review executive summary.” In: IEA ­ EBC Technology Cooperation Programme ­
Annex 62 Ventilative Cooling. (2017). URL: http://venticool.eu/.
[67]
Paul D. O’Sullivan. Ventilative Cooling in Residential Buildings. 2021. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-030-72385-9_11.
71
==PAGE:79==
Appendices
72
==PAGE:80==
A
IDA­ICE
A.1
Graphical Scripts
Figure A.1: Script to change the equivalent leakage area in all leak models when varying
airtightness.
Figure A.2: Script to change the building orientation.
73
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A. IDA­ICE
Figure A.3: Script to control door opening position.
Figure A.4: Script to switch strategy in control macro. CO2 control is shown as active.
74
==PAGE:82==
A.2. SCHEMATICS
A.2
Schematics
Figure A.5: Schematic of the air inlet modelling and control in IDA­ICE. (1) ’Air inlet’
damper (2) control macro from Figure 3.16 (3) facade leak model measuring pressure
difference.
Figure A.6: Math model at the Advanced level showcasing structural connections between
equation objects for the balanced mechanical system.
75
==PAGE:83==
B
Performance documentation
Dp Pa
1
2
4
8
10
15
20
30
40
60
80
AI.T
Pressure
ctrl.
m3/h
7.2
10.5
15.2
21
23.2
24.6
25
26.2
27.8
29.8
30.2
kg/s
0.0024
0.0035
0.0051
0.0070
0.0077
0.0082
0.0083
0.0087
0.0093
0.0099
0.0101
c
0.0024
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0024
0.0021
0.0019
0.0016
0.0015
0.0013
0.0011
Opn. factor
1
1
1
1
0.98
0.85
0.74
0.64
0.58
0.51
0.45
Adj. kg/s
0.0025
0.0035
0.0050
0.0071
0.0077
0.0082
0.0083
0.0088
0.0092
0.0099
0.0101
m3/h
7.5
10.6
15.0
21.2
23.2
24.7
24.8
26.3
27.5
29.6
30.2
AI.1
Fully open
m3/h
8.6
12.4
17.7
25.3
28.3
34.9
40.5
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
kg/s
0.0029
0.0041
0.0059
0.0084
0.0094
0.0116
0.0135
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
c
0.0011
0.0013
0.0015
0.0018
0.0020
0.0023
0.0027
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
AI.2
Fully open
m3/h
5.8
8.3
11.7
17.0
18.8
23.3
26.9
33.0
38.2
47.2
54.0
kg/s
0.0019
0.0028
0.0039
0.0057
0.0063
0.0078
0.0090
0.0110
0.0127
0.0157
0.0180
c
0.0019
0.0020
0.0019
0.0020
0.0020
0.0020
0.0020
0.0020
0.0020
0.0020
0.0020
AI.2
Half open
m3/h
4.3
5.7
7.9
11.4
12.6
15.3
17.4
21.7
25.2
30.8
36.0
kg/s
0.0014
0.0019
0.0026
0.0038
0.0042
0.0051
0.0058
0.0072
0.0084
0.0103
0.0120
c
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
AI.T
m3/h
7.5
10.6
15.0
21.2
23.7
29.0
33.5
41.1
47.4
58.1
67.1
kg/s
0.0025
0.0035
0.0050
0.0071
0.0079
0.0097
0.0112
0.0137
0.0158
0.0194
0.0224
c
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
Table B.1: Performance documentation for air inlets. The documentation for AI.1, AI.2 and
AI.T pressure ctrl. (unadjusted) originates from real product specifications. AI.T depicts
the average theoretical performance used in the baseline simulation cases.
76
==PAGE:84==
C
Questionnaire flowchart
Figure C.1: Questionnaire ­ Introduction text and end­of­questionnaire text.
77
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FLOWCHART
Figure C.2: Questionnaire ­ First question, sorting the respondents.
78
==PAGE:86==
Figure C.3: Questionnaire ­ Architects part 1.
79
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FLOWCHART
Figure C.4: Questionnaire ­ Architects part 2.
80
==PAGE:88==
Figure C.5: Questionnaire ­ Consultants part 1.
81
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FLOWCHART
Figure C.6: Questionnaire ­ Consultants part 2.
82
==PAGE:90==
Figure C.7: Questionnaire ­ Consultants part 3.
83
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FLOWCHART
Figure C.8: Questionnaire ­ Private owners and board members part 1.
84
==PAGE:92==
Figure C.9: Questionnaire ­ Private owners and board members part 2.
85
==PAGE:93==
D
Baseline results
Floor
Exhaust
Control type
Total CO2h
[ppmh]
Total RHh
[%h]
Zone heating
[kWh]
Total AAh
[h2]
4th
Balanced
None
0
538
1725
0
4th
Mech.
Fixed open
3097
818
5065
11.9
4th
Mech.
CO2
5635
956
4780
2.7
4th
Mech.
Pressure
3369
828
5015
11.7
4th
Mech.
Occ.
7798
922
4878
3.4
4th
Mech.
None
9919
897
4888
1.3
4th
Passive
Fixed open
62442
3711
3875
292.3
4th
Passive
CO2
77262
5535
3131
327.5
4th
Passive
Pressure
62440
3737
3839
295.1
4th
Passive
Occ.
100213
5931
3347
355
4th
Passive
None
244870
7182
2973
385.5
Gr.
Balanced
None
0
602
1818
0
Gr.
Mech.
Fixed open
7192
1194
4870
21.2
Gr.
Mech.
CO2
9268
1308
4636
4.9
Gr.
Mech.
Pressure
7437
1205
4819
20.7
Gr.
Mech.
Occ.
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
Gr.
Mech.
None
26210
1312
4664
4.2
Gr.
Passive
Fixed open
596
1119
6448
31.6
Gr.
Passive
CO2
2783
1818
5311
11.3
Gr.
Passive
Pressure
617
1136
6380
32.1
Gr.
Passive
Occ.
3053
1654
5747
13.8
Gr.
Passive
None
14353
2038
5202
7.3
Table D.1: KPI results of baseline simulation cases.
86
==PAGE:94==
E
Optimal parameter results
Baseline
Optimal
Case
CO2h
RHh
AAh
Zone heating
CO2h
RHh
AAh
Zone heating
GFP0
14349
20
7
5202
6517
11
2
5508
GFP1
603
11
31
6448
1482
12
4
5260
GFP2
2748
18
12
5311
5734
37
19
3581
GFP3
621
11
32
6380
1603
12
4
5159
GFP4
3063
17
14
5748
11299
32
7
4125
4FP0
244838
71
384
2973
75239
24
15
3879
4FP1
62395
37
292
3875
16349
16
14
4415
4FP2
77411
55
329
3131
20858
23
15
3949
4FP3
62448
37
296
3839
16355
16
14
4414
4FP4
100214
59
355
3346
28136
21
14
4106
GFM0
26240
13
4
4664
19345
13
0
4707
GFM1
7192
12
21
4870
922
13
0
4663
GFM2
9268
13
5
4636
0
15
0
4420
GFM3
7437
12
21
4819
951
13
0
4661
GFM4
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
698
14
0
4518
4FM0
9919
9
1
4888
6041
10
0
4830
4FM1
3097
8
12
5065
1013
9
0
4869
4FM2
5635
10
3
4780
1334
14
0
4306
4FM3
3369
8
12
5015
1562
10
0
4835
4FM4
7798
9
3
4878
2612
12
0
4536
Table E.1: KPI results for optimal sensitivity cases.
87
==PAGE:95==
88
==PAGE:96==
F
Solution space for simulation cases
(a) GFP0 solution space.
(b) GFP1 solution space.
(c) GFP2 solution space.
(d) GFP3 solutions space.
(e) GFP4 solution space.
Figure F.1: Entire solution space from Parametric Runs for each simulation case on the
ground floor with a passive stack chimney. 89
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX F. SOLUTION SPACE FOR SIMULATION CASES
(a) GFM0 solution space.
(b) GFM1 solution space.
(c) GFM2 solution space.
(d) GFM3 solution space.
(e) GFM4 solution space.
Figure F.2: Entire solution space from Parametric Runs for each simulation case on the
ground floor with a mechanical exhaust.
90
==PAGE:98==
(a) 4FP0 solution space.
(b) 4FP1 solution space.
(c) 4FP2 solution space.
(d) 4FP3 solution space.
(e) 4FP4 solution space.
Figure F.3: Entire solution space from Parametric Runs for each simulation case on the
fourth floor with a passive stack chimney.
91
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX F. SOLUTION SPACE FOR SIMULATION CASES
(a) 4FM0 solution space.
(b) 4FM1 solution space.
(c) 4FM2 solution space.
(d) 4FM3 solution space.
(e) 4FM4 solution space.
Figure F.4: Entire solution space from Parametric Runs for each simulation case on the
fourth floor with a mechanical exhaust.
92
==PAGE:100==
G
Graphs
Figure G.1: Duration curve of the exhaust air flows from the kitchen for mechanical cases.
Figure G.2: Pressure difference across bedroom facade for the studied systems and floor
levels.
93
==PAGE:101==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
