==PAGE:1==
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative
Analysis
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
Implementation of a Digital Complex Figure Test Application for Data Collection and Ex­
plorative Analysis
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Christian Lebeck Poulsen(s174287)
Michael Kaaberbøl Guldborg(s174254)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Health Technology at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
in Engineering degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Christian Lebeck Poulsen ­ s174287
Signature
Date
Michael Kaaberbøl Guldborg ­ s174254
Signature
Date
ii
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The complex figure test (CFT) is a widely used pen and paper neuropsychological assess­
ment that permits the evaluation of different cognitive and executive functions. Subjects’
approaches during the CFT can be analyzed with current state­of­the­art methods to eval­
uate their cognitive and executive functions. Nevertheless, this is rarely done in clinical
practice due to low clinical practicality. An idea for making the evaluation of the subject’s
process more practical is to automate the assessment of the process. However, to enable
the development of an automatic assessment solution, there first needs to be a suitable
amount of high­quality data on the drawing process. This project aims to design and pro­
totype a digital solution that allows for data collection of subjects’ drawing process, such
that future explorative analysis can be done to develop a reliable automatic solution.
This project used a user­centered Design Thinking process to understand the problem
and context and design and iterate on a digital solution. Throughout the project, clinical
experts were interviewed to understand the context and review the results. A think­aloud
usability study was conducted on five individuals to evaluate how well the solution could
be used as an alternative to the traditional pen and paper test. Moreover, three clinical
experts were interviewed to review if they could use the solution to assess their current
methods.
All the individuals found the solution easy to use, and all the experts could assess the
drawings reproduced using their current methods. These findings show that a digital so­
lution could be introduced in today’s clinics that allow the collection of data about the
drawing processes. However, to introduce the solution in clinics, convergent validation
studies of the solution must be conducted first, and security must be improved to fit reg­
ulations.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
AD Alzheimer Disease. 6, 22
ADHD attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 6, 13
ASD autism spectrum disorder. 14
BQSS Boston Qualitative Scoring System. 13, 14, 25, 39
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology. 7, 29
CANTAB Cambridge Neurological Test Automated Battery. 7
CFT Complex Figure Test. vii, 1, 5–7, 9, 10, 16, 17, 19–23, 25, 26, 29, 33–35, 39–43, 45
DSS­ROCF Developmental Scoring System for the Rey­Osterrieth Complex Figure. 14,
15, 25
ICS Philips IntelliSpace Cognition. 5–7
PAR, Inc. Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.. 14, 41
ROCF Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure. 5, 6, 9, 13–15
ROCFT Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test. 5–7, 9, 10, 14, 15, 19, 35, 41, 42
SEQ Single Ease Question. 24, 27, 33, 35
SUS System Usability Scale. 33, 35
UI user interface. 21, 27, 29, 40
iv
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We want to express our gratitude to our primary supervisor, Jakob Bardram, for his guid­
ance, sparring, and support during the master thesis. Without his guidance, this project
could quickly have gone off the rails. We would also like to thank our co­supervisor, To­
bias Andersen, for his expertise in the field of cognitive science and his helpful comments
and suggestions.
A special thanks to the clinical experts. They let us interview them and draw on their
expertise, especially Jens R. M. Jepsen for our initial and reviewing interview, and Ro J.
Robotham and Katrine S. Andersen.
Finally, we would like to thank our friends and family for their encouragement and excite­
ment, willingness to provide help and feedback, and love and support.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement & Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goals & Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Automated Scoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Digital CFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Requirement Analysis
9
3.1
Clinical Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Process Scoring Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Data for Exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Functional Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Design
19
4.1
Platform Design Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
User Interface Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Software Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Implementation
29
5.1
Framework & Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Data model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Key Functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Evaluation
33
6.1
Usability Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Clinical Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
Data Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7
Discussion
39
7.1
Research Questions & Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
51
A.1 Interview notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.2 The 18 Scoring Units of the ROCF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.3 Think aloud moderator guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.4 Quantitative usability test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.5 Distribution of Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
viii
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
This chapter contains an introduction to the thesis by providing a background and moti­
vation together with the problem statement, research questions and goals for this project.
All source code used in the project can be found publicly on GitHub1.
1.1
Background
A Complex Figure Test (CFT) is a psychological assessment in which patients are asked
to reproduce a complicated line drawing. The test consists of three stages. In the first
stage, the patient is shown an image of a complex figure and asked to draw a freehand
replica. In the second stage, the image is removed, and the patient is asked to draw it
again from memory. Finally, after a 20­30 minute delay, the patient is asked to draw it a
final time [1].
More than a dozen complex figures and methods exist for scoring patients’ performance [2,
3]. In general, however, a patient’s score is based on both the accurate reproduction and
placement of specific design elements in the figure and the strategy used; respectively
called the accuracy scoring method and the process scoring method [4]. The process
scoring methods are generally done by the test administrators noting their qualitative
observations regarding the patient’s approach to the task and the effectiveness of any
apparent strategy. The test takes a total of approximately 45 minutes to complete [1].
Many different cognitive abilities are needed for a healthy performance, and the test allows
for the evaluation of visuospatial abilities, memory, attention, planning, working memory
and executive functions. Where the accuracy scoring methods result in a single quantita­
tive score and has good clinical practicality, the accuracy scoring methods cannot assess
the organizational strategy and executive function of drawing [2, 3]. The process scor­
ing methods more extensively evaluate cognitive functions but has low clinical practicality
due to their shortcomings of being time­consuming and requiring standardized training [2].
Because of the shortcomings of the process scoring methods, the benefits of these meth­
ods’ comprehensive evaluation are less widely used in clinical practice relative to the
accuracy scoring methods [2]. However, automating the process scoring method can re­
move its shortcoming of requiring time and training. Some work has already been done to
automate the accuracy scoring methods [5, 6], but little work has been done to develop an
automatic scoring of the process scoring methods. Presumably, this is because almost
no data exist about the process of the CFTs, making it challenging to analyze and find a
solution.
Following the trend of using modern technology to digitize cognitive assessments in neuro­
science [2], the digitization of CFTs might enable the gathering of complete process data,
which could help further the goal of developing a digital CFT process scoring method to
standardize clinical practice. Furthermore, through an explorative analysis, which seeks
to discover patterns, spot anomalies, test hypotheses, or check assumptions of data
sets [7], further work can be done to explore the characteristic neuropsychological struc­
ture information of different disorders [2].
1https://github.com/MichaelGuldborg/complex-figure-test
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Problem Statement & Research Questions
The pen and paper CFT does not alone create the data required for designing an auto­
matic scoring algorithm for the process. If the data was available, the test’s shortcomings
being time­consuming and requiring standardized training, could presumably be removed.
Thus, having an automatic scoring algorithm would enable the process scoring method to
become more widely used in clinical practice. The focus of this thesis is then to answer
the following research questions:
RQ1 What is the current state­of­the­art administration and assessment of the CFT?
RQ2 How should a digital version of the CFT be designed to capture data for exploratory
analysis?
RQ3 How can a digital CFT application substitute the traditional pen and paper test?
RQ4 How can the captured test data be used for accuracy and process scoring?
1.3
Goals & Methods
The following goals closely align with the previously stated research questions:
G1 Analysis of state­of­the­art CFT administration and assessment
G2 Collection of requirements for digital CFT application and data collection
G3 Design and implement digital CFT application
G4 Conduct a usability study of the CFT application
G5 Conduct an expert review of the data produced by the CFT application.
The design of the digital CFT is done using a user­centered Design Thinking process of
five phases; empathize, define, ideate, prototype, and test. The process follows a similar
process model, the Double Diamond model, with divergent and convergent activities that
seek to work with the issue and the solution. Each phase works towards one or more of
the stated goals. While the phases are sequential, they are also iterative such that one
phase can affect one of the previous phases. The process can be seen illustrated in Figure
1.1, where for each phase, the different activities, deliverables, and goals are shown.
The figure also shows where the project diverges and converges in the different phases.
Finally, the bottom shows how different external input has impacted two iterations.
The goal of the initial emphasizing phase of the project is to understand the problem and
the context. The learning is done through desktop research, reviewing related literature
and work, and initial qualitative interviews with clinical and data scientists. Interview notes,
selected literature and research are the “learning” deliverables used in the next phase.
After learning and understanding the problem and its context, the next goal is to define
the problem such that a befitting solution can be found. Defining the problem is done by
gathering the previous learnings and analyzing them, collecting a requirement list which
becomes the deliverable and foundation for the design and implementation.
With the requirements defined, different ideas are considered for solving the problem. The
ideas are brainstormed and gathered through, among other, inspiration from other related
work. These ideas are then evaluated against the requirements and problem context to
select a functional design.
2
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: Project process overview with timeline
Having chosen a working design that solves the problem and fits the context, the design
is then implemented as a functional prototype. Implementation constraints further shape
the design into a fully functional prototype.
This prototype is then evaluated to assess its usability, problem, and context fit. The
usability evaluation is done through a think­aloud test with a small sample size of five
people. Questions are asked post­task and tested to get a small quantification of the
solution’s usability and the qualitative feedback generated by the think­aloud test. A small
group of experts is interviewed to give a review of the solution.
1.4
Thesis Overview
The following overview summarizes each chapter as a brief paragraph to navigate the
thesis better.
Chapter 2 Related Work
is the initial research phase that looks at the related work for
this project. It is part of the initial divergent emphasizing phase that seeks to understand
the problem’s context and the state­of­the­art administration and assessment of current
CFTs. This chapter contributes significantly to the first goal.
Chapter 3 Requirement Analysis
is the problem discovering phase that seeks to define
the context and the problem. In this chapter, further divergence on the problem is done
through more research, literature review, and expert interview. With this, a convergent
analysis is done to understand the state­of­the­art CFT administration and assessment
and to create requirements for designing and implementing the digital CFT application.
This chapter contributes primarily to the first and second goals.
Chapter 4 Design
is the start of the solution phase where the hardware platform is se­
lected, the user interface and the general software architecture are designed. In each of
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
3
==PAGE:14==
these decisions, options are considered and chosen, going through divergent and con­
vergent activities. This chapter contributes partially to the third goal.
Chapter 5 Implementation
is where the design choices made in the previous chapter
become a reality through an implementation, which naturally is a convergent activity in
the solution space. Through the implementation, this chapter contributes partially to the
third goal.
Chapter 6 Evaluation
is the final phase where the design and implementation are eval­
uated against its usability and the clinical context. The usability is evaluated through a
small think­aloud usability study, which contributes to the fourth goal. Furthermore, the
clinical “fit” is evaluated through expert reviews, which contributes to the fifth goal. The
results of the evaluation will also be presented in this chapter.
Chapter 7 Discussion
will discuss the result of the project, its limitations, how the re­
search questions have been answered, and what future work this project recommends.
Chapter 8 Conclusion
will report the significant findings of the thesis and answer the
research questions.
4
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:15==
2
Related Work
This chapter contains an overview of related work about automating the accuracy and pro­
cess scoring methods of the CFT. This chapter aims to provide the reader with a timeline
of the development and research into the CFT and set the scene for project requirement
analysis. These activities will contribute to the first of the research goals set by this project.
2.1
Automated Scoring
Automated scoring of complex figures has been a research topic since 2000. Canham,
Smith, and Tyrrell worked on applying computer vision techniques to automatically score
the accuracy of a Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure (ROCF). The scoring system they used
for quantifying the figure’s accuracy is the Osterrieth Scoring System, the most popular
accuracy scoring system [5] (see Appendix A.1 for the ROCF feature numbering devel­
oped by Osterrieth). Because of the complexity of the figure, and the sometimes distorted
drawings that could be handed in, Canham, Smith, and Tyrrell’s most significant task was
to identify the right features. By using fuzzy metrics based on the Gestalt principles, they
could identify the scoring features within a highly distorted figure with a success rate of
99.3% [5].
It was first in the year of 2019 that another approach, using deep learning, was used to
score the ROCF again [6]. Here, Vogt et al. compared the ROCFs with the human score
and used a cascading deep neural network to extract the 18 segments and score the figure
drawn. Even though the algorithm had high performance, the results were not strictly
equivalent to the humans’ scores. Vogt et al. expects that an improved feature detection
would improve the automated scoring to the degree that matches human scorers. This
algorithm was only designed for the Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure variant and did not
work with others.
A recent study done by Webb et al. (2021) shows success in automating the accuracy
scoring process. The Automated Scoring Program used in the study is only developed
for the figures generated from the Oxford Cognitive Screen “Plus Figure Copy task” and
not the more commonly used ROCF. However, the program’s techniques should apply to
other complex figures if trained to do so. The program is developed using Python 3.7 and
employs packages from, among others, SciPy. The program uses data generated through
administering the CFT on a tablet with the Oxford Cognitive Screening Plus (OCS­Plus)
software. The generated data includes the images of the final drawings and contains in­
formation about (x,y) coordinates and timestamp of the patient’s responses [8]. Another
commercial study done by Vermeent et al. (2021) validates four automatic scoring algo­
rithms implemented and developed for the Philips IntelliSpace Cognition (ICS) digital test
battery, where one of the four algorithms is for scoring the Rey–Osterrieth Complex Fig­
ure Test (ROCFT). For assessing the ROCFT, they used deep learning algorithms trained
with input from expert human raters to automatize the process [9].
As seen, a few papers have already discussed the automated accuracy scoring of the
ROCF. One concerns a feature extraction­based approach using computer vision tech­
niques. Others use deep learning for feature extraction and scoring. Moreover, some
use the digital data generated by their platform to apply machine learning techniques for
feature extraction and scoring. Even though there are few studies on the automation of
the more “simple” accuracy scoring of CFTs, there have been no studies on automating
the other “more complex” process scoring.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
5
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Digital CFT
Even though the accuracy scoring method is more practical to implement in clinical prac­
tice, it can not assess the organization strategy and executive functioning in drawing the
complex figure. Because of this, if accuracy is the only thing scored, then meaningful
information about the drawing process of the patient is lost. With only accuracy scoring,
it is wholly disregarded in evaluating whether a patient has an intentionally organized and
planned approach or filling in lines in a fragmented and chaotic way, which can be criti­
cal information for diagnosing a patient correctly [2]. Multiple established methods have
already given an offer on how to solve the inherently difficult problem of quantifying a pro­
cess (Bennett­Levy [10], BQSS [11], DSS [12], Savage [13], Booth’s [14], Q­score [15]).
Nevertheless, the clinical practicality of scoring the process is still not good because of
the test format, pen and paper. Because the traditional format of the CFT is pen and pa­
per, all the data of how the patient drew a drawing is usually lost. Some of the methods
mentioned above utilize colored pencils [11, 13]. However, in recent years, digital devices
have been used in studies to capture all data throughout the drawing process, such that
the approach can be reviewed and analyzed later.
In year 2018, GJ et al. used a computerized tablet version of the ROCF to conduct a study
on the visuospatial working memory of patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Similarly to the problems highlighted in this project, GJ et al. identified that with
the traditional pen and paper format, it is impossible to accumulate a continuous database
on ROCF reproduction results [16].
A, JB, and M. had a similar problem. They wanted to design a new complex figure for use
with older adults, as the norms for copying the ROCF are so low that the performance
baseline of these patients could prove a problem in finding future cognitive changes. To
prove that the process evaluation could be done similarly on their new design, they needed
reliable data collection that kept the reproduction results. To do this, they had participants
use a digital pen with an infrared receiver to broadcast the pen’s movement to the exam­
iner’s laptop. Even though their study had too small of a sample size to say for sure, A,
JB, and M. showed that a digital tool could reliably be used for collecting data about the
drawing process [17].
In 2020, KW et al. also wanted to evaluate both accuracy and the process in their study
to detect Alzheimer Disease (AD). They knew the importance of assessing the finished
result and the process that led to the final drawing. As some final drawings can be highly
accurate, but the process that took the patient there is very different from the norm, which
is a sign of cognitive impairments. In their study, KW et al. used a digital pen and a tablet
to collect the data of people with normal cognitive abilities and patients with AD, as they
hypothesized that those with AD would have different kinetic movements and digitized
spatial information compared to normal people [18].
With the rapid development of technology and the lack of resources and access in the
health sector, the digitization of traditional cognitive tests has become a trend [2]. Apart
from the ROCFT, other cognitive tests have also undergone digitization, such as the Clock
Drawing Test, the Letter Fluency Test, Trail­Making Test, and the Digit Span Test, among
many others [2, 19]. These tests are sometimes combined (and commercialized) into
Digital Cognitive Test Batteries.
The reviewed automatic scoring algorithm by Vermeent et al. is part of the digital cognitive
test battery, Philips IntelliSpace Cognition (ICS). This digital test battery has recently in
2021 been validated against its traditional counterparts, where they found several sources
of evidence for the validity of the ICS test battery [19], which is a critical step before it can
6
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:17==
be used in a clinical setting. Another commercial battery already used in clinics world­
wide is the gold standard Cambridge Neurological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) [20].
CANTAB has been around for multiple years and has been rigorously validated and re­
viewed [20, 21, 22]. Like the ROCFT, CANTAB includes visuospatial memory tests such
as the Spatial Span and Spatial Working Memory [23, 24]. However, it does so far not in­
clude any CFTs. A third small open­source digital cognitive test battery, supported by the
Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET), is the Cognition Package which
implements 14 validated gold­standard cognitive tests at the time of writing [25, 26]. Con­
trary to platforms like the ICS and CANTAB, the goal of the Cognition Package is to enable
developers and researchers to design and build cross­platform (iOS and Android) cogni­
tive assessment applications. The Cognition Package is built using the CARP Research
Package and the Dart framework Flutter.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:19==
3
Requirement Analysis
This chapter contains an analysis of the state­of­the­art CFT administration and assess­
ment. This chapter will analyze the practical administration of the CFT in a clinical setting
and the process scoring methods used in clinical practice regarding the required data
points needed for future explorative analysis. The goal is to understand the context of the
CFT administration and to collect requirements for the design of the digital CFT that most
closely resembles the current pen and paper version and is suitable for future explorative
analysis. The context is understood by interviewing a clinical expert with clinician expe­
rience and reviewing and analyzing a selected set of process scoring methods. These
activities will contribute to the first two goals of the project (G2 & G3).
3.1
Clinical Administration
This section will analyze the administration of the CFT in a clinical setting mainly through
an interview with an experienced clinician, which will contribute toward the first two goals
(G1 & G2). The goal is to understand the administration and context of the CFT and create
a list of requirements such that a solution can support the CFT administration and fit in
today’s clinical context.
3.1.1
Expert Clinician Interview
As mentioned in Section 1.1, the administration of the ROCF and other complex figures
consists typically of three stages. An informal interview with a clinical neuropsychologist
was conducted on the 18th of February 2022 with the purpose of acquiring a more qual­
itative understanding of the clinical setting and test administration (see Appendix A.1.1
for interview notes). The dialogue centered around the ROCFT, which was role­played
throughout the conversation. From the conversation, it became clear that a subject would
be called into the clinic for an assessment without knowing how it would be administered.
At the start of the role­play, the examiner handed the subject;
• a blank A4 paper to draw on
• a pen to draw with
• an eraser to remove strokes with
• and the reference figure to copy
In this case, the reference figure was the Rey figure. After receiving the pen and paper,
the subject was asked to draw the reference figure. While the subject was copying the
figure, the examiner noted down qualitative notes, which for this examiner was the order
of features drawn as numbered by the original Osterrieth system (see Appendix A.2 for
the Osterrieth system and Appendix A.1.1 for the sequence). After the subject copied the
figure, the examiner purposely did not tell the subject that they were supposed to recall
the figure after a slight delay. During the waiting periods of the two delays, the examiner
held small­talk conversations with subjects to purposely divert attention from the test and
keep a friendly atmosphere. Casual talk and a pleasant demeanor would seem is part of
the clinical administration, as it is vital that the subject feels the environment is safe. To
create this safe environment, the examiner can encourage the subject, trying to ensure
the subject of confidentiality and establish trust. As said by the expert: “If you are really
sick, you need a safe human space”. The reason why this is important is not merely to
keep the subject comfortable. It is part of ensuring the test results are valid. Because, if
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
9
==PAGE:20==
the subject is sick and does not feel safe, s/he may use tactics that have worked during his
or her daily life but which may have required the exertion of effort for the lack of cognitive
skills. So to mitigate the risk of unpredictable subject behavior, an empathetic trained
person must be there to ensure the safe human space.
The subject’s journey is mapped as seen in Figure 3.1 to understand what the subject
goes through when undergoing a ROCFT in a clinic. This Journey Map does not explain
all possible journeys of various subjects but works as a foundation for understanding the
current process of the test administration, the subject’s actions, and feelings. When peo­
ple are presented with a difficult task, it usually invoices a feeling of frustration. This
frustration can cause the subjects to seek out distractions in their surroundings or refuse
the task altogether, especially for subjects with different neurological disorders (see Ap­
pendix A.1). Therefore, the presumed level of frustration is the primary emotion shown
in the Journey Map. As the Journey Map shows, the three steps of drawing, copying,
immediate recall, and delayed recall are the critical steps of the current state­of­the­art
administering of the CFT, as shown by the expert and as described by Meyers and Mey­
ers in their Professional Manual. However, the last step, the delayed recall step, is rarely
included in administering the test for some patient groups. As studies have shown, the
delayed recall step does not show much more else than what the immediate recall step
does (see Appendix A.1). Instead of small­talking with the subject, clinicians can use the
time during the long delay to have the subject take other tests [10]. Multiple methods and
tools are often used for a more comprehensive cognitive assessment. This comprehen­
sive assessment is why the number 5 step seen in the Journey Map includes both options
of small­talking and testing.
3.1.2
Summary
By analyzing the three steps of the CFT administration, 1) copying the reference figure, 2)
immediately recalling the figure, and 3) recalling the figure after a delay. Specific require­
ments must be met to draw, copy and recall the figure as intended. These requirements
include being able to draw the figure freehand. Drawing is then further split into the ac­
tions of adding strokes and removing strokes. Combining these enables free drawing,
editing, and deletion of any figure. The reference figure must be visible to copy the figure.
Moreover, anything related to the reference figure must be removed to “recall” the figure
correctly. Furthermore, the flow of time must be known to the examiner to correctly admin­
ister the test inside the immediate and delayed recall time ranges. Apart from conducting
up to three steps of the CFT, any solution should also fulfill human needs in today’s clin­
ical setting. The solution should work in collaboration with the clinician as a tool, not as
a replacement, as in administering the CFT, a human is still necessary for establishing a
safe space for the subject. These clinical CFT administration requirements can be found
summarized in Table 3.1
10
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:21==
AR#
Name
Description
AR1
Freehand drawing
To be able to draw the figure, the subject must be
able to draw lines freehand on a flat surface.
AR2
Erasing
To allow editing while drawing, the subject should
be able to erase drawn lines.
AR3
Visible figure
To copy the figure, the figure has to be clearly visible
to the subject when copying.
AR4
Removed figure
To ensure the figure is recalled from memory, both
the presented figure to be copied and the drawn copy,
must not be visible to the subject under recollection.
AR5
Known time
To control the delayed administration of the recollected
drawing, flow of time must be known to the examiner.
AR6
Human collaboration
To facilitate a safe human space for the subject
the solution should work in collaboration with a human
Table 3.1: Administration requirements
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Journey Map of a subject undergoing the ROCFT. Yellow describes the steps of the subject, red is the action of the step, green is
who the actor interacts with, and blue is the emotion related to the step
12
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Illustrations by Bennett­Levy (1984). (Left) shows the ROCF where numbers
indicate the units specified by the Taylor scoring system; arrows, the points of good con­
tinuation; and the crossed arrow, a point of poor continuation. (Right) shows examples
of copying strategies and symmetry points [10]
3.2
Process Scoring Methods
This section will review and analyze the current state­of­the­art process scoring methods
to the extent possible within copyright laws, which will contribute toward the first two goals,
G1 and G2. The goal is to understand how the current methods assess the approach used
by subjects and create a list of parameters that the solution must be able to capture, such
that a solution can be found that gathers data that supports scoring using these models.
3.2.1
Review
The process scoring methods commonly used in clinical practice and research includes
the Bennett­Levy, Boston Qualitative Scoring System (BQSS), Developmental Scoring
System, Denman, Savage, Booth’s, and Q­score [2]. All the process scoring methods
evaluate the participant’s cognitive function and organizational strategy from multiple di­
mensions and scores using the direction and order of drawing and the placement of figure
units.
Bennett­Levy
Bennett­Levy published in 1984 a method to quantify measurement of
copying strategy as one of the earlier process scoring methods. The procedure is very
similar to the original procedure developed by Rey and Osterrieth but has the experi­
menter noting down every line drawn in sequence in addition to the time taken to draw
the figure. Bennett­Levy has in total six scores, “copy score”, “strict recall score”, “lax re­
call score”, “good continuation”, “symmetry”, and “strategy total”. The total strategy score
is the sum of the good continuation and symmetry scores, which are the only process­
relevant scores. Good continuation is demonstrated when a straight line is drawn as one
piece and continued until it intersects with another line, as illustrated in the left subfigure
of Figure 3.2. Symmetry is scored based on the principle that the order in which a subject
draws components of the complex figure accurately reflects the structure and symmetry
that the subject perceives the figure [10].
BQSS
Somerville, Tremont, and Stern published in 1994 the BQSS process scoring
manual for the ROCF. The executive variables of the BQSS can distinguish executive dis­
orders from normal people, including vascular dementia, Parkinson’s disease, schizophre­
nia, ADHD, and senile depression [2]. The BQSS for the ROCF includes six summary
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
13
==PAGE:24==
scores, but only five of the scores are relevant for executive function assessment, “plan­
ning”, “fragmentation”, “neatness”, “preservation”, and “organization” [11]. Due to copy­
right by the publisher, Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc. (PAR, Inc.), the details
of the test procedure cannot be reproduced in this project. However, a general idea can be
assumed about what data the BQSS uses to evaluate. This evaluation includes placement
of features on the page relative to other features, order of drawn features, and “neatness”
of lines drawn [11].
Developmental Scoring System
Waber and Holmes published in 1985 the Develop­
mental Scoring System for the Rey­Osterrieth Complex Figure (DSS­ROCF) to objectively
evaluate ROCF performance within a developmental context and to determine age appro­
priateness of children’s copy and recall productions. DSS­ROCF is under a strict copy­
right by PAR, Inc., so evaluation details can not be reproduced in this project. However,
DSS­ROCF evaluates on four parameters an organization score, style rating, accuracy
score, and error score. The organization score quantifies the child’s appreciation for the
organizational correctness of complex, visually represented materials. Furthermore, the
style rating objectively categorizes the subject’s approach to information processing as
part­oriented, intermediate, or configurational [12].
Savage
Savage et al. published (1999) a paper on administering the ROCFT to subjects
with obsessive­compulsive disorder, using neuropsychological tests to assess various as­
pects of their executive function. Savage’s procedure was similar to the original admin­
istration of the ROCFT in addition to having the subject draw with colored pencils that
would be changed every 15 seconds allowing examination of organizational strategies.
Savage, additionally, administrated other tests during the delay. To evaluate the subjects,
Savage then assessed their ROCFT construction accuracy, organizational strategy, and
ability to initiate and shift mental set. The organizational strategy was evaluated in two
ways: a quantitative analysis of organizational strategy and then a descriptive analysis of
the organizational sequence. The quantitative analysis scores the subject for each con­
figural feature as defined by Binder (1982) that was constructed as an unfragmented unit.
2 points were given for the large rectangle, and 1 point was given to the rest configural
features to reflect the importance of the fundamental organization of the figure. The order
of construction was not considered. The descriptive analysis only considers the order of
configural and non­configural features. [13]
Booth
Ronda D. L. Booth published (2006) her PhD thesis on local­global processing
and cognitive style of people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The ROCFT were
one of the high­level visuospatial coherence assessments used to measure the subjects
of Booth’s study. Multiple of Booth’s references have found that people with ASD show
poor organizational strategy, taking a fragmented approach and starting with local details
rather than the global structure [14]. Eg. Fein et al. 1990 found that children with ASD
(5 to 17 years) would more often show fragmentation and overlap of parts, and Minshew
and Goldstein 2001 found that recall in the ROCFT is often deficient in ASD because of
mentioned reasons.
Q­score
Weider et al. published in 2016 a study to investigate the validity of the Q­score
as a new method for measuring the performance of central coherence using the ROCFT
on eating disorder patients. Weider et al. found a strong coherence correlation between
the Q­score and the Central Coherence Index (r=0.77). The Q­score method rates the
14
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Illustration from Weider et al. (2016) demonstrating the scoring system of the
Q­score, based on the ROCFT. (Left) The three most important units. (Right) The ten
remaining units
degree to which a subject draws the significant features of the Rey figure, which is pro­
duced by scoring the drawing process according to a qualitative scoring system. The
subject earns points when each of 13 specific units is drawn consecutively as one unit.
The 13 units can be seen in Figure 3.3. As illustrated in the left figure, the three units con­
sidered most important within the scoring system are each awarded both unit and order
points. The ten remaining units, seen in the figure to the right, are only awarded by unit
points. Some of the units are also considered more important than others. Drawing the
base rectangle as one unit is awarded 3 points, drawing the diagonals and the bisectors
consecutively are awarded 2 points each, and the other recognized units are awarded 1
point, resulting in a unit score of 0–17 points [15].
3.2.2
Summary
All of the selected process scoring methods are based on the different units that the ROCF
is composed of and categorize them as global or local elements, as described by Salvadori
et al. (2018). Where the global elements are primarily defined as the large rectangle, the
diagonals, the horizontal and vertical lines, and the large triangle to the right, these global
elements are fundamental for the organization of the figure, and all the selected process
scoring methods recognize that a successful reproduction requires these elements to be
drawn first, as they are the structural framework of the other local elements. The local
elements can then further be categorized into units of shapes or lines that form a unit in
coherence with the gestalt principles within the main structure of the figure [29].
As Salvadori et al. writes, several approaches qualitatively evaluate the ROCFT perfor­
mance focusing only on one or two qualitative parameters, such as organization or sym­
metry. These parameters are included in the Bennett­Levy method, one among other
methods based on the Gestalt principles of perceptual organization, and reflect the order
in which elements are drawn and their fragmentation. Others are Savage’s method, de­
vised to score the organizational quality of the drawing process. Furthermore, there are
methods developed specifically for children, such as the DSS­ROCF, which evaluates or­
ganization and production style, and the Organizational Strategy Score [30] that is based
on the sequence of elements drawn and their relevance within the structure [29].
Looking at the six reviewed process scoring methods and isolating only the process rel­
evant assessments, the inferred parameters that the different methods used to evaluate
process performance are summarized in Table 3.2.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
15
==PAGE:26==
Element order
Fragmentation
Time
Line neatness
Bennet­Levy
X
(X)*
X
BQSS
X
(X)**
X
DSS­ROCF
X
Savage
X
X
Booth
X
X
Q­score
X
X
Table 3.2: Inferred ROCF process scoring method performance parameters. *Bennett­
Levy’ focus on the gestalt principles, line continuation and symmetry is seen as way to
score fragmentation. **BQSS’ element placement relative to other elements is also seen
as a way to score fragmentation
3.3
Data for Exploration
This section will discover and analyze the data requirements, contributing to the second
project goal. The purpose is to explore ”good” data and define a list of requirements for
how and what data should be collected.
In order to better understand the problems with data collection within the problem con­
text, an informal interview was conducted with a professor in cognitive science and data
science from the Technical University of Denmark. This interview revealed two significant
points considered for this project (see Appendix A.1.4 for interview notes). The two points
are the following:
1. Interpretability through feature analysis is more beneficial to the clinical field than a
machine learning model
2. A larger set of features leads to more possibilities of finding interesting correlations.
The first point emphasized that collecting data within the clinical field should not be to
train an machine learning model to predict a patient diagnosis outright. The decision to
prescribe a diagnosis should, in the end, fall in the hands of the clinician. If statistical tools
assist this decision, it should always be interpretable to avoid unwanted bias. An example
in this context might be that a statistical model would predict cognitive impairment purely
based on the parameter ”age”.
The second point describes what this report will refer to as data parameters. The point is
that when collecting data for explorative analysis, it is unknown beforehand which param­
eters will have exciting correlations. Because of this, collecting as many different context
relevant data parameters as possible is beneficial since it can be deleted later if proven
irrelevant.
Of course, collecting all possible data comes with the caveat that the collected data should
always be relevant to the problem and accurately describe the real­life situation to be ex­
plored. For this project, the relevant features are those used to analyze the process
scoring parameters described in Table 3.2. Thus, the relevant data is the parameters that
accurately describe the drawing process, including kinetics and device­human interac­
tion. These parameters have also been collected in other studies that have digitized the
CFT [2].
Finally, the data must have a certain quality in terms of reliability and completeness [31,
32]. Reliability in data means that the collected data should be free of duplication, contra­
16
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:27==
dictions, omitted values and wrongly formatted values. These issues might be introduced
through human mistakes during input. As such, a way of reducing the number of inconsis­
tencies and improving the quality of data is to restrict user inputs such that it is enforced
by design.
In summary, collecting “good” data for future explorative analysis relies on capturing all
problem­specific data and ensuring completeness. For this project, the physical param­
eters related to the drawing process need to be captured. These must include the time
and location of the pen on the drawing surface and should generally include as many pa­
rameters as possible. In order to ensure data quality, the user inputs should be restricted
and required to enforce completeness and reliability by design. These requirements are
summarized in Table 3.3.
DR#
Name
Description
DR1
Basic kinetics
The most relevant physical drawing parameters, are
those that says something about the when the pen is
where, on or off the surface.
DR2
Data parameters
The more context relevant parameters there is, the better.
DR3
Structure by design
The more the design enforces good data collection, the better.
Table 3.3: Data requirements
3.4
Functional Requirements
In this section, functional and non­functional requirements will be collected from the analy­
ses of the clinical administration, the process scoring methods, and the data for analysis.
Any solution proposal must fulfill the stated functional requirements to be considered a
solution for this project. The non­functional requirements will be used to decide which so­
lution will be implemented for the options that fulfill the needed functional requirements.
Functional Requirements
Requirements for the CFT administration have been found
and summarized in Table 3.1, and requirements for the data collection have been identi­
fied in Table 3.3. The solution must be replaceable with the traditional pen and paper test.
Thus all the administration requirements must be functional requirements for this project.
To make the data collected by the helpful solution, it must capture the fundamental kinet­
ics as described in data requirement number one (DR1) which makes this a functional
requirement too.
Non­Functional Requirements
The non­functional requirements will be used as crite­
ria to judge which solution will be implemented of the options that fulfill the needed func­
tional requirements. Thus, these criteria are not specific as the functional requirements
but rather an aspect on which to judge. The number two and three data requirements
(DR2 & DR3) identified and summarized in Table 3.3 are aspects for which the solution
should be judged. The more context relevant data parameters, the better (DR2), and the
more structure that can be incorporated into the design, the better (DR3).
Apart from the requirements previously identified in Subsection 3.1 and 3.3, other aspects
are critical to introducing design choices properly. Some of the most important aspects
are usability, feasibility, and security. Usability of the solution is of high importance, as an
unusable solution will not be used to conduct a proper neuropsychological assessment
test if the solution is not intuitive, e.g. if the subject is confused or otherwise causes trou­
ble for the subject to perform the steps in the CFT. Then there is a likely risk that this will
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
17
==PAGE:28==
FR#
Name
Description
FR1
Freehand drawing
To be able to draw the figure, the subject must be
able to draw lines freehand on a flat white surface.
FR2
Erasing
To allow errors while drawing, the subject should
be able to erase drawn lines.
FR3
Visible figure
To copy the figure, the figure has to be clearly visible
to the subject when copying.
FR4
Removed figure
To ensure the figure is recalled from memory, both
the presented figure to be copied and the drawn copy,
must not be visible to the subject under recollection.
FR5
Known time
To control the delayed administration of the recollected
drawing, flow of time must be known to the examiner.
FR6
Human collaboration
To facilitate a safe human space for the subject
the solution should work in collaboration with a human
FR7
Basic kinetics
To know the basic physical drawing parameters
when and where a pen is on the surface must be known.
Table 3.4: Functional Requirements
affect the subject and the validity of the data. Feasibility focuses on whether the solution
is realistically implemented within the time frame of this project. Here technologies, plat­
forms and their integration ability will play a significant role and will be further evaluated
to assess the feasibility of the solution. Security is a somewhat relevant aspect to judge,
as the topic of the project is data collecting in a clinical context. However, because the
project’s purpose is only to implement a prototype, not a fully­fledged security­certified
and clinically approved system, this aspect becomes less important when making design
choices. These five non­functional requirements can be found in Table 3.5.
NF#
Name
Description
NF1
Usability
Ease of use for subject
NF2
Feasibility
Integration with platform etc.
NF3
Security
Data security, privacy and anonymity
NF4
Data parameters
Context relevant data parameter collection possibilities
NF5
Structure by design
Structured design possibilities
Table 3.5: Non­Functional Requirements
18
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:29==
4
Design
This chapter describes the design process of the digital CFT. The chapter will describe
and analyze different platforms for implementing a digital CFT. This analysis will be based
on the requirements established in the previous chapter. This chapter will then explain
the process of designing the user­facing interactions and the design of the underlying
software architecture needed to fulfill the requirements. These activities will contribute to
the third goal set out by this project (G3).
4.1
Platform Design Choice
As described in related work, there are already a few published papers that try to tackle
the digitization of the ROCFT in different ways. The different approaches can generally
be split into the platform categories; video, trackpad, smart pen, and tablet. This section
will review the advantages and disadvantages of these different platforms concerning the
previously defined requirements.
4.1.1
Review
Video
By recording the complete examination as it would usually be administered using
a web camera or a dedicated camera, video can be used to “digitalize” the test data.
The benefit of this approach is that the collected data is very rich, containing both the
image and audio of the entire interaction. The downside, however, is that the data is
very unstructured and contains a lot of noise not relevant to the problem targeted by the
CFT. The noise would have to be filtered and features extracted through computer vision
before it could be used for analysis [5]. This downside makes the option of recording
the examination with video less feasible. However, this could allow for a more significant
data parameter collection (NF4) which conflicts with the desire to structure the data by
design to increase its reliability (NF5). The clinical psychologist interviewed said that the
implementation of videos was already something they had tried. However, they found
that this affected the subject and their evaluation. Some subjects found it intrusive and
uncomfortable to have a camera pointed at them while trying to concentrate on performing
a complex mental task, which affected some of the patients’ willingness to participate and
negatively affected the “safe space” of the participant (see Appendix A.1.1).
To summarize, video is great for usability (NF1), does not harm security (NF3), and en­
ables a possible large variety of data parameters to be collected (NF4). However, to fulfill
the functional requirements, additional work using computer vision must be done to pro­
cess the video, which is a large and challenging project in itself (NF2), and it is difficult
to enforce structure by design when collecting data this way (NF5). Additionally, previ­
ous experience by clinicians tells that the format affects the subjects’ performance, which
should be considered.
Trackpad
The trackpad is a touch­sensitive interface where one can use a pen to draw
on the pad and have the drawing show up on the computer to which the trackpad is
connected. By replacing the pen and paper entirely with a trackpad and a computer
screen, the cursor movements could be tracked and collected when the subject is drawing
the figure. Depending on the track pads’ API, the time and place of each movement on the
pad can then be collected and used as part of the data collection. Because most trackpads
are designed for the digital artist, the data it can collect should be pretty sophisticated,
making this solution attractive regarding the collection of context relevant data parameters
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
19
==PAGE:30==
(NF4). The trackpad, however, requires familiarity and practice to allow the user to draw
anything, as writing on a surface and seeing the drawing on another surface is not very
intuitive. Because the drawing is only shown on the computer, the subject can then also
erase strokes from the same interface that the drawing is shown. This disconnect makes
the solution less usable for everyday people (NF1).
To summarize, the trackpad should be feasible to integrate with (NF2), can be secure
by design (NF3), and can collect a good variety of data parameters (NF4). However,
because of its disconnect between drawing surface and stroke view, its usability is less
good (NF1).
Smart pen
The smart pen works similarly to the trackpad, but with the significant dif­
ference that the image is shown on the surface, you draw on. This connection between
drawing surface and viewing surface more closely resembles the experience of the pen
and paper version of the test (NF1). Most smart pens use specialized dotted or elec­
tronic paper or notebooks to track the movements of the pen accurately and transmit it to
a nearby computer or tablet. Assuming that the intelligent pen’s API allows integration,
which cannot be assumed to be the standard, this platform allows the subject to draw
freely and collect every pen movement’s location and time. However, because the sub­
ject draws on the actual paper surface, the ability to erase strokes becomes a complex
requirement to satisfy. The subject can erase the strokes on the paper with a regular
eraser, but this would then not, or wrongly, be registered in the digital version of the draw­
ing. Some researchers have used the smart pen platform for digital CFT by disallowing
the subjects to erase their strokes [18]. However, this presumably modifies the original
test. It is also worth mentioning that because smart pens are specialized products, it is
often more difficult to integrate or write specialized software for them, making this plat­
form less feasible to integrate with (NF2). Furthermore, because of the lack of integration
ability, most of the smart pens on the market upload the drawings to their servers, which
could impede privacy rights and create security issues for the future (NF3).
To summarize, the smart pen is smart; its usability is high, remarkably similar to pen and
paper (NF1), but the platform is closed, making integration difficult and very platform­
dependent. This problem might hinder even collecting the required data and endangers
security as most smart pens upload data to their corresponding cloud solutions to function.
Tablet
A digital version of the CFT could be implemented using a tablet device by de­
veloping a software application that allows the user to draw. The application would then
record the patient’s pen movements, which could be played back to the clinician. Re­
placing the pen and paper of the original test with a tablet device would introduce a less
familiar environment for the elderly and not have the data richness of video. However, it
satisfies all other requirements defined in Table 3.4 and evaluates high on all criteria as
seen in Table 3.5.
To summarize, the tablet has high usability as it is a common household device (NF1) and
high integration possibility (NF2), as they are often platforms meant to be developed for
and used by the general population. It is possible to ensure data security (NF3), and the
tablet can capture all necessary data and probably more (NF4) while allowing a structure
by design (NF5).
4.1.2
Summary
All the reviewed platforms’ summarized points are put into Table 4.1. Though all the plat­
forms have their possibilities, the tablet platform is the choice that most fulfill the functional
20
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:31==
FR1
FR2
FR3 ­ FR6
FR7
NF1
NF2
NF3
NF4
NF5
Video
X
X
X
(X)
X
X
Track pad
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Smart pen
X
(X)
X
X
X
Tablet
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Table 4.1: Platform design choice evaluation
and non­functional requirement indicated by the full line of crosses in Table 4.1. The tablet
is known to most (Danish) children and the elderly. You see what you draw on the surface
you are drawing on, which makes it more likely for subjects to be at ease. The platform is,
furthermore, designed for development and integration, as most tablets have dedicated
developer tools made available. Compared to the other platforms where one must al­
most have to hack the platform to use it. Finally, tablets can also easily be used by the
examiner, as it is easy to pass and receive the tablet at the different administration steps.
4.2
User Interface Design
The user interface (UI) for the digital CFT implementation was designed through a non­
linear Design Thinking process. By first interviewing a clinical expert, one of the critical
users of the application with a deep understanding of the process, an understanding of the
clinical context was acquired, see Figure 3.1. The patient and clinician UI flows were then
brainstormed for the tablet platform based on the requirements in Table 3.4 within the clin­
ical context. Following this, a complete UI design was chosen for prototype development.
With a prototype of the complete UI design, a small think­aloud usability study was con­
ducted to capture obvious design flaws and oversights. A chosen subset of these found
mistakes was then incorporated into a new design, and the prototype was adjusted ac­
cordingly. Experts were included, among others, to review the design using this updated
prototype. Their input resulted in new areas of improvement, which were incorporated
into the final design and prototype of this project.
The design of the digital CFT is centered around two scenarios, administration and as­
sessment of the CFT. Both scenarios are set in the context of the clinic. However, only
the administration involves the patient and the clinician, where the assessment is for the
clinician only.
4.2.1
Administration
As was discovered in Section 3.1, the need for a human to sit together with the patient is
critical to establishing a safe space. If the patient does not feel safe, there is a risk that this
will unpredictably affect the results. One such example is the subject’s exertion of effort
to make up for lack of cognitive or executive ability. If the subject relies on an effort to
overcome any impairment and the test administration is not monitored, it might lead to the
clinician being unable to help the patient. Therefore, the administration using the digital
CFT implementation will still involve the physical presence of a clinician or a similarly
trained and empathetic individual, and an attempt to design a remotely administrated CFT
will not be part of this project.
Two areas received significant design consideration when designing the UI for the test
administration. First was considering where to put the reference figure and drawing area
and how these would work together. The second was the consideration of how to erase.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Administration design ideas
Reference figure & drawing area
The main component of the administration of the CFT is the reference figure and the
drawing area. A patient must be able to see the figure when copying, and the figure and
copy must be removed when recalling. Moreover, the patient must also be able to take a
pen and put what they either see or recall on a surface. See the functional requirements
in Table 3.4.
Initial design ideas
The initial proposed design solutions for the needs of the adminis­
tration scenario involves three design options. The first considers the screen split into two
views with the reference figure on top and the drawing area on the bottom. The second
utilizes the entire screen for drawing and has a button that creates a full­screen pop­over
with the reference figure. The third uses the entire screen as a drawing area with no ref­
erence figure built­in, as the intention is to provide the reference figure outside the tablet,
using paper or the like. See Figure 4.1 for a draft of the three design ideas, where the first
option is seen to the left, second in the middle, and the third to the right:
First design
The first design is inspired by the project done by KW et al. (2020), where
this design option was used to quantify the “closing­in” phenomenon found in some AD
patients. Their project showed that it is possible to administer using this design. However,
it leads to three possible caveats:
1. It reduces the size of the drawing area
2. It limits the solution to only function with the figures implemented
3. It creates design inconsistency
It creates inconsistency in the design because it would not make sense to use this view for
recall, which would result in another view. Maybe the view would be full­screen? Maybe
the area of the reference figure would just be filled out with something else? Whatever
the solution, it would be different from what is presented for the copy task.
Second design
The second design was inspired by the caveat of the limited screen
size of the first design option. This option utilizes the whole screen, making the drawing
area closer to the traditional drawing area, an A4 paper. However, this proposal has one
major caveat compared to the first one. The act of “toggling” the view of the reference
figure while drawing, overwriting the drawing area, disrupts the task of copying the figure
and risks making the task more cognitively similar to recalling rather than copying. The
need to toggle back and forth presumably also puts a higher emphasis on digital device
proficiency.
22
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:33==
Third design
The third design does not involve a reference figure. This solution will
use the whole screen as a drawing area, similar to the second option. Nevertheless,
the reference figure will not be implemented in the solution. Instead, it is required that
the clinician print out a version of the complex figure used for the test. It is assumed
this is a possible requirement, as the solution would be used in clinical practice where it
is assumed they have access to computers and printers, which is also required for the
current pen and paper test.
Although the first option has been used in a previous study, it will not be used in this project
because of the above caveats. The second option of toggling between the drawing area
and reference figure might exclude some patient groups with low digital device proficiency
and is not chosen for the prototype implementation because of this. The third option is
chosen because it:
• Is not limited to the implemented figures
– Which removes copyright restrictions
– Which gives the clinician the total freedom to chose reference figure
• Has a drawing area size that resembles an A4 paper more
• Enables a more consistent data collection
The importance of giving clinicians multiple figures to choose from was uncovered during
the initial expert interview, as clinicians sometimes need to try out different figures to
capture what they want (see Appendix A.1.1).
Erasing
Another component that has not been exhaustively discussed in other studies is the act
of erasing strokes during the drawing phase of the administration. When conducting the
initial interview A.1.1, a pen and eraser were given in the role play administration of the
test, such that the patient could erase his’ or her strokes as described in Section 3.1. In
all the studies that digitalized the CFT, there were no options for the patient to erase [16,
17, 18]. The ability to erase strokes is included in this project because it more closely
resembles the traditional test defined in the functional requirements, see Table 3.4.
Three ideas were considered to find a solution for how to erase strokes on a tablet. One
was the option of having an “undo” button that erases the previous stroke. The other was
the option of using an “erasing stroke”, where, when selected, the path drawn erases or
clears the strokes it touches. The last option was “delete­able strokes”, where strokes
could be deleted by clicking on them.
Undo
The undo option would be a button that, when pressed, would remove the last
drawn stroke. This design has the limitation that parts of strokes cannot be erased, and
one has to delete multiple strokes to delete a stroke that is not most recently drawn. Its
strengths are its simplicity and ease of use.
Erasing stroke
The erasing stroke option would be similar to having an eraser or using
other eraser functionalities in digital painting software. First, the eraser button is clicked,
and then it becomes possible to drag with the pen the path for which one wants to erase.
This option has multiple limitations. Erasing large strokes can become tedious if the eraser
is not “large”. Erasing small parts of strokes can become tedious if the eraser is not “small”.
This need for different stroke sizes adds to the complexity of managing different brushes of
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Test administration design
eraser heads and would presumably require a higher digital device proficiency than, e.g.,
the undo button. However, with the added complexity comes the strength of its flexibility.
Delete­able strokes
The delete­able strokes option stems from the desire to delete
entire strokes without having to go through all strokes drawn after that point as in the
undo option. By clicking some button to toggle between drawing and erasing, and when
toggled to erase, then when one clicks on strokes, they become erased. This function
could address the limitation of the undo option. However, because it is not a commonly
used functionality, there is a risk that adding a new approach to solve an “old” problem,
especially for users with a low digital proficiency, would find the functionality confusing.
The undo option is chosen as the erase implementation for this project, as its simplicity
gives it an advantage over the other options. In summary, Figure 4.2 shows the drawing
area which utilize the full screen of the tablet and includes:
• A back button in the top left, which interrupts the test and goes back.
• A stop button in the top right, which finishes the test
• The undo button in the bottom right, which erases the previously drawn stroke
Changes to administration based on usability study
From what the small usability
study says, the participants found the administration from a subject’s point of view rela­
tively easy. Looking at Table 6.2, tasks 1 and 2 are about drawing using the designed
administration interface. As the average Single Ease Question (SEQ) score is 5.5 with
a max of 7, a score of 6.8 and 6.2 is in the easy­to­use end [33]. The primary usability
problem the participants experienced was where to put their drawing hand, as seen in
Table 6.1. In order to address this issue, the application was updated to disable the finger
touch input when drawing. Through the usability study, it was found that people with high
digital proficiency assumed this was impossible, showcasing that explicit instruction would
sometimes be required by the clinician of this feature. The issue of having to go through
multiple strokes to delete a stroke that is not the previous one was also raised. Neverthe­
less, because the participant seemed to handle it well, the satisfaction is generally high
for the design. No further changes will be made in this project.
24
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:35==
4.2.2
Assessment
Assessment of the CFT is done by the clinician or another similarly trained personnel after
the administration has taken place. The assessor must be able to view the patient’s test
to complete this task.
Session overview
Because a CFT session contains multiple rounds of testing, copying, immediate recall,
and sometimes delayed recall, seeing the difference between each test in a session could
prove valuable in the assessment process. To accommodate the comparison of test draw­
ings inside a session. When creating a test for a patient, a session will be created that
can “store” multiple drawings. After completing the three steps, it should be possible to
view the drawings side by side. Working with the notion of the session, the design seen in
Figure 4.3a shows how this could look. The figure shows two things. Test session details
are seen up to the left, and the three drawings are centered in the middle. Each of these
cards then has a button that can be clicked to review every single drawing.
Review
To assess the approach used in the test, the assessor must also know the order each
stroke has been drawn, as it is one of the most fundamental principles used in the process
scoring methods (See Table 3.2).
Time colors
Some of the reviewed process scoring methods, such as the BQSS and the
DSS­ROCF methods, utilize color pencils to add time to the drawn images [11, 12]. It is
done by preparing a sequence of pencils in different colors, which the subject is supposed
to switch between every 10­15 seconds. By doing this, the assessor can, to a degree, see
which elements are drawn in order. However, this is highly impractical because it disrupts
the subject and is rarely used (see Appendix A.1). However, with a digital solution, it
should be possible to assign colors to strokes, letting the assessor view a time colored
version of the drawn figure.
Unit sequence
Another approach used today by some clinicians is to write the se­
quence of units drawn, writing the respective unit number down as they are completed.
Being able to do this requires that units of the complex figure have been given a number,
which is the case for some complex figures, such as the Rey figure using the Osterrieth
system [10]. However, it also requires an experienced assessor to make this sequence,
as it would require s/he to recognize and remembers the unit number as the subject draws
them. To show this unit number sequence to the assessor with the drawn figure would
require that the solution can distinguish features of the figure and assign their unit number
in the sequence they are drawn. To be able to do this, inspiration from Canham, Smith,
and Tyrrell (2000) and Vogt et al. (2019) can be drawn. However, feature extraction lies
outside of the scope of this project.
Playback
A third solution is to leverage the digital platform and play back each stroke
as they were initially drawn. Following the functional requirements, as seen in Table 3.4,
it should be possible to re­draw each stroke in its original sequence because the time and
place of each stroke are known. The caveat of this solution is the time it will take the
assessor to review the playback contra having the information in a single image.
By combining playback of drawn tests with the option to toggle time­colored strokes, the
colors compensate for the playback functionalities main caveat by embedding time into
each image shown. The last image thus shows the entire drawing with all its strokes
colored relative to their time of drawing. Moreover, it becomes possible to understand
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
25
==PAGE:36==
(a) Test session design
(b) Test assessment design
Figure 4.3: CFT assessment
the order of elements drawn by a single glance. Furthermore, by adding playback speed
the caveat of time consumption can also be reduced, such that an assessor can, in, e.g.
3x speed, review a drawing. Using the playback functionality and colors also makes it
possible to review the approach used to draw any complex figure, as neither the playback
functionality nor color functionality is reliant on any specific type of complex figure.
Changes to assessment based on usability study
Through the usability study, three
minor problems were found for the initial design and implementation, which can be seen
in Table 6.1 (P9, P10, & P11). Because the full image of the drawing is the first image
the assessor sees when clicking to review a single drawing, the playback slider is to the
end. Participants pressed the play button when they wanted to play back the drawing.
However, because the slider was at the end, it “had already played”. Because of this
found issue, replay now happens if play is pressed when at the end, solving problem nine
(P9). Some of the participants were initially unsure what the colors meant, as the color
gradient, that the strokes were colored by was small and squeezed down to the left beside
its button. The color gradient is expanded to fit the slider’s length to increase the change
so that the user sees how the colors correlate with time, which could solve problem 10
(P10). In the initial design, a double­speed button was designed to increase the speed.
However, users had trouble seeing how much the playback sped up, making them click
the button multiple times. A selector with speeds is made to show the current setting,
to solve problem eleven (P11). The final design of the assessment view can be seen in
Figure 4.3b.
4.2.3
Annotating
The purpose of this project is to design and implement an application that can be used
to gather data about a subject’s drawing process for future explorative analysis. Because
of this focus, a view was designed and implemented such that an assessor could walk
through a subject’s drawing and annotate how “correct” a stroke was. The goal was to
use the annotated data to calculate an accuracy and strategy score for the drawing to
motivate the assessor to annotate the data. The view had the drawing on the left and the
reference figure on the right to be able to annotate the drawing, as seen in Figure 4.4.
Each stroke would then be highlighted in the sequence they were drawn, requiring the
assessor to annotate the stroke as either:
• Unrecognizable
26
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.4: Test annotation design
• Recognizable
• Incorrect
• Correct
These four annotations were inspired by the explanation of the accuracy scoring method
found in the paper by Bennett­Levy in year 1984.
However, as seen in Table 6.2, the usability of this solution was terrible, with an SEQ
score of 3.2. The reason for this, as seen in Table 6.1, lies not only with some parts of
the UI design but more greatly in interpreting what a “correct” stroke is. This problem is
a matter of training and leans up against the general inter­rater reliability problem that
all the clinical experts could agree to experience (see interview notes in Appendix A.1).
Because of these issues and designing and implementing an automatic scoring algorithm
is outside this project’s scope, the annotation view as described has been removed from
the final solution.
4.3
Software Architecture
In order to develop a mobile application that supports the UI flows for administration and
assessment, it is essential to define a software architecture — defining the overall ar­
chitecture before implementation leads to a more structured implementation during the
development process.
The software architecture for this prototype should follow a standard client/server pattern.
Additionally the frontend should be implemented through best practices for cross­platform
mobile applications with the three different layers presentation, business logic and data.
This design ensures flexibility when changing different components throughout the devel­
opment process [34].
The backend application should satisfy the data security requirements and implement all
functionality required by the frontend UI flows. This includes functionality for Authentica­
tion, Data storage and File storage. Authentication is required for the backend application
to restrict access to data collected by individual user accounts. The data storage service
should be able to receive and store the data collected through the patient’s interaction
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
27
==PAGE:38==
with the administration. The data should be formatted in a JSON structure and be able to
be retrieved at a later time for the clinician to view it in a video playback­like format on the
assessment screens. The file storage services are required for the application to store
thumbnail images to be used on the test session view, see Figure 4.3a.
28
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:39==
5
Implementation
The chapter describes the critical aspects of implementing the prototype application, fo­
cusing on the previously defined designs and requirements. The chapter will highlight
important choices in frameworks and patterns used during development and finally give
an overview of the data produced by the CFT application. These activities contribute to
the third project goal (G3).
5.1
Framework & Patterns
The prototype was implemented with the cross­platform framework Flutter [35]. Flutter
is a high­level framework based on the programming language Dart and allows a single
code­base to be deployed to iOS and Android mobile devices. This ability makes it a
good candidate for developing prototype applications. Additionally, Flutter was selected
because it is currently used by the CACHET to develop a cognitive test battery along with
other Med Tech research [36]. Because this project is close to CACHET, implementing
the prototype can ease the integration into their cognitive test battery.
Because the focus of this project is to pave the way for future explorative analysis of the
data generated by a digital CFT, it was decided during implementation to use the Backend
as a Service platform Firebase as a replacement for developing a backend application.
Firebase satisfied all the requirements as a backend service to implement a working pro­
totype with all the flows described in the design Section 4. Specifically the three services
Authentication, Firestore and Storage was used. The compromise of this approach is that
Firebase does not satisfy the strict requirements for storing user data of patients in clinical
practice. This choice means that if this project is to be used as a reference for developing
a replacement for current practice, this integration would have to be removed.
The following UML component diagram shows the main components of the application
and their interactions. The components marked in blue are data layer components man­
aging the integration with the Firebase SDK. Both the ComplexFigureTestService and the
TestSessionService expose a CRUD interface implemented by the abstract class Fire­
baseCrudService.
CRUD is an abbreviation of the words Create, Read, Update and
Delete which is also the function names. The red components describe the business
logic layer, which manages the global state across different UI components. The green
components describe the presentation layer and specifically refer to the two primary UIs
introduced in the design section as administration and assessment 4.2.
Figure 5.1: UML component diagram
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
29
==PAGE:40==
As hinted at by the component names in the diagram, the application implements a Provider/­
Consumer pattern to manage a global application state and most business logic. Com­
pared to other patterns, the primary benefit of this pattern is its minimal overhead, making
it perfect for prototype applications. This pattern is also a recommended approach by the
official Flutter documentation [37]. Additionally, this pattern, along with the abstraction
of the integration with Firebase, further increases the modularity of the implementation.
This abstraction makes it possible to remove the Firebase integration and replace it with
a custom backend later without changing any application functionality.
5.2
Data model
When collecting data from the complex figure test sessions and storing them in the back­
end data service, it was essential to define a data model. The following diagram shows
the Session data model, its fields, and their subsequent data structure.
Figure 5.2: Domain model
A Session represents the entire test session from when the clinician starts a new test by
filling out information about the patient to the final drawing that the patient performs in the
three steps test sequence copy, immediate­recall and delayed­recall. Most notable is that
the model contains a uid field used by the backend application to restrict access to this
data model to only the user account who created the session.
A ComplexFigureTest represents the data collected from a single test drawing. As such,
it has a field called type which will have a value equal to the name of one of the three
steps in a session. This model also includes information about the screen size and orien­
tation of the device when the drawing was completed to allow for correction when doing
data analysis. The most important part of this model is the list of events with the type
MouseEvent describing the drawing sequence performed by the patient.
A MouseEvent can have one of the following types TAP, PAN_START, PAN_UPDATE, PAN_END,
UNDO as described by the enum MouseEventType. All events have a timestamp to describe
at what UTC time the event was triggered. Additionally, all events have a position that
describes the x and y coordinate on the screen where the event was triggered. The
PAN_UPDATE event has the extra field called delta which describes the x and y differ­
ence from when the event started and, similarly, a duration field to describe the time in
milliseconds for this transition.
This data structure allows the application to keep track of the drawing state during admin­
istration and allow playback of the drawing sequence during the assessment. To store
the object in a NoSQL database, all models implement the functions fromMap and toMap
to convert between a JSON encoding that can be sent through the REST API and stored
in the database.
30
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:41==
5.3
Key Functionality
Authentication
The application implements a standard set of authentication features
to allow for user creation, user login, and password reset. Authentication is included in
the project to meet the data security requirements. This feature enables the backend
application to restrict access to data not directly created by the user, as this could also
prove helpful in collecting data. Because the architecture allows changing the data layer
to a custom backend solution, the authentication feature helps the application score better
on the third non­functional requirement (NF3), as seen in Table 3.5.
Drawing/Playback
The drawing surface was implemented using the built­in flutter com­
ponents CustomPainter and GestureDetector. The GestureDetector allows for detecting
user interactions with the screen. This functionality was used to update a state with a list
of events when they were triggered. The CustomPainter component allows for render­
ing a list of Paths on a blank canvas. The only thing required then was to convert the
events into a list of Path elements that can be passed to the CustomPainter. Figure 5.3
showcases the pseudo­code for the function that makes this conversion. When the pa­
tient drew, all events should be converted and displayed as lines. However, to allow for
the playback functionality, this function takes a parameter called time. This function can
exclude events triggered later than a specific time allowing for showing a partial drawing.
Combined with a render loop that updates this time every second, this creates the illusion
of video playback.
result = []
for (event in cft.events) {
if (time < event.start) {
return result
}
if(event.type == PAN_START) {
result.add(Path(event.position))
}
if(event.type == PAN_UPDATE) {
result.last.lineTo(event.position)
}
if(event.type == UNDO) {
result.removeLast()
}
}
return result
Figure 5.3: Convert ComplexFigureTest to Paths
Data Export
It is also noted that Firebase supports data export in JSON or CSV format,
which helps students or researchers to continue with this project to collect data for explo­
rative analysis. Firebase supports this functionality as part of their online developer con­
sole. They also have API documentation for the most popular development languages,
including Python, for directly querying the Firestore database. This functionality allows
researchers to easily retrieve and start analyzing the collected data if a more extensive
study was conducted following this project.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:43==
6
Evaluation
This chapter will evaluate the design and implementation of the digital CFT and the data
that the digital version can collect through studies with users and experts. The design
and implementation will be evaluated by conducting a usability study with healthy sub­
jects. The usability study contributes to the fourth goal set out by this project (G4). The
evaluation of the collected data will be done through expert reviews, which will contribute
to the fifth goal set out by this project (G5).
6.1
Usability Testing
The goal of the usability testing was to assess if the administration and the assessment
of the digital CFT were usable. The notion is that if administration using the digital CFT
ranks high on usability, it can substitute the traditional pen and paper format.
6.1.1
Method
The think­aloud method was used to evaluate the usability of the administration of the
digital CFT. This method was chosen because the concurrent verbalization uncovers the
thought process behind the user actions [38], which is critical for the early­stage design
phase. Test participants of the study were all healthy adults; even though young children
and brain­impaired adults were the target group, getting access to these was beyond the
resources for this project. Only five participants were included in the usability study, which
was deemed sufficient considering the app’s complexity, the planned number of iterations,
and the need for statistical analyses. Studies also show that five people should be enough
to cover about 80% of usability problems [39], the most critical problems.
The think­aloud test was centered around tasks the participants would have to try to per­
form. It was essential to pick and create meaningful tasks with clear goals and without
instructions to cover the most critical parts of the app [39]. The number of tasks could also
negatively affect the quality of the feedback if the participant became fatigued throughout
the process. Because of this, the participants were asked to draw, score, and review the
CFT. See Appendix A.3 for the Think Aloud moderator script.
Each participant was asked three types of questions; questions before and after the test
and a single question after completing each task. The pre­test questions covered the
background and attitude toward the system, and the post­test questions gathered insight
into the overall user experience. The post­task question covered task­relevant informa­
tion.
The pre­test questions covered age, gender, and education, as these would also be asked
of actual CFT participants. Participants’ digital device use was also asked how comfort­
able test participants were with digital devices could bias their experience with the digital
CFT. Because users would test different aspects of the system, taking the role of test
participant and clinician, a single task satisfaction question was asked for each task. This
decision was chosen to ensure the system would be evaluated on its parts. The SEQ was
chosen as the post­task question, as it is short, easy to respond to, easy to administer,
and easy to score [33]. For the post­test questions, the System Usability Scale (SUS)
was used because it is the de facto standard used for post­test questionnaires [39]. No
custom­made questionnaires were used for the post­task and post­test evaluation to en­
sure reliability [39].
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.1: CFT copying by participant 1
Figure 6.2: CFT copying by participant 2
When conducting the think­aloud test with participants, problems will emerge. These
problems are organized into their importance according to scope and severity. The scope
of the problem refers to how widespread the problem is. The severity then refers to its
impact when occurring, its persistence, and its frequency [39]. The four­level scale given
by Dumas and Redish (1993) is used to organize the problems with explicit reference to
the impact on the users’ tasks. The four levels of problems are the following:
1. Prevents users from completing a task
2. Significantly slows down the users’ performance and frustrates them
3. Have a minor effect on usability
4. Points to potential upgrades in the future
6.1.2
Participants
Participants were friends and family of the authors with a small distribution in age, gender,
and education level. 80% the participants had high or very high digital device proficiency.
See Appendix A.4.1 for more details about the participants information.
6.1.3
Results
The following figures 6.1 and 6.2 show the time­colored playback of two different par­
ticipants approaches to the copy task. The first figure shows a process expected of an
adult normal functioning adult. The square outline is drawn first, followed by the diagonal
and horizontal lines depicted in red and orange colors before finally filling in the details.
The second approach showcases a participant who utilizes the undo feature to correct a
mistake. The participant realizes that the diagonal and horizontal lines do not connect in
the center of the square. Because of this, they undo this part of the drawing and create a
new approach that ensures this flaw will not re­occur.
These drawings show how both participants, although having different approaches, can
complete the task of copying the complex figure.
The problems found during the think aloud usability test using the tasks seen in the mod­
erator guide (see Appendix A.3) can be seen in Table 6.1.
34
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:45==
P#
Task
Problem
Level
P1
1&2
Tablet registers hand on the screen when drawing, creating small strokes
2
P2
1&2
Can only undo strokes, sometimes having to go through many to erase
desired stroke, losing strokes in the process
4
P3
3
Wording difference in ”Playback” and ”Review”
3
P4
3
Explanation is skipped
1
P5
3
Doesn’t always see question mark for clarifying details on how to score
1
P6
3
Difficulty understanding and applying definitions of correctness
1
P7
3
Difficulty in seeing small highlighted strokes
2
P8
3
Can’t go back, so must finish prematurely and redo whole process
3
P9
4
Pressing play when slider is at the end expects it to replay the drawing
2
P10
4
Initially unsure what the colors mean
3
P11
4
Can’t see playback speed, so presses multiple times
3
Table 6.1: Usability problems
T#
Task
Score
T1
Draw 3 squares
6.8
T2
Copy complex figure
6.2
T3
Score complex figure
3.2
T4
Review drawing of complex figure
6.2
Table 6.2: Task level satisfaction SEQ scores
For all four tasks, the task satisfaction level was also measured, as can be seen in Ap­
pendix A.4.2. The most relevant results are the results that assess the usability of the
drawing, as the participants resembled actual CFT subjects the most, rather than a trained
clinician. As can be seen in Figure 6.3a, all the participants found the drawing of the
squares easy or very easy to draw, whereas the participants were a bit more troubled
when copying a complex figure, as seen in Figure 6.3b.
The average score for each of the tasks can be seen in Table 6.2, where it is also clear
that the system was generally easy to use, except for the scoring of the complex figure.
Each test session was finalized by measuring the system’s overall usability using SUS,
which answers can be seen in Appendix A.4.3. The total average SUS score is calculated
to be 88.625.
6.2
Clinical Assessment
In this section, clinical psychologists will evaluate the app for fit in a clinical setting and
usefulness for test evaluation.
6.2.1
Method
The expert interview is a loose qualitative interview centered around several questions.
The questions are asked while showcasing the digital solution and its features. During
the interview, notes are taken as a combination of direct quotes, indirect thoughts, and
expressed needs. These notes can be found in Appendix A.1.
To assess whether the implementation of the digital CFT can be used in clinical practice
or not, the interview with the experts will center around the three following questions:
Q1: Can this replace how you use pen and paper to administer the ROCFT?
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
35
==PAGE:46==
(a) Task 1: Square drawing
(b) Task 2: Figure copying
Figure 6.3: Overall drawing experience
Q2: Can you assess the drawings produced with this digital solution?
Q3: Can you implement this in (your) clinical practice? What would be needed to make
it happen?
6.2.2
Experts
The clinical experts were found through the authors’ network and are all academic experts
in the field of neuropsychology.
6.2.3
Results
Through expert interview A.1.2 it was found that the administration experience was very
similar to the traditional pen and paper test. Using the playback functionality, the expert
affirmed that the playback could be used to assess the subject’s drawing process and
their drawing. Furthermore, it was expressed throughout the interview that there were
no practical limitations in trying this out for research in the clinics known by the expert.
However, before the digital solution could be used as a tool in clinics, it was highlighted
that the solution must undergo a convergent validation process. Until then, the solution
had to be used experimentally.
Similarly the interview with another expert A.1.3 it was expressed that they found it very
similar to the traditional pen and paper test. However, before anything could be said in
this regard, the digital administration must undergo a convergent validation study to see
how it relates to the traditional test. Both found the application quite flexible and straight­
forward, giving the clinician similar flexibility as one would have with pen and paper. Both
interviewees expressed that they could assess the drawing using the playback function­
ality in the application. Under the assumption that all data is appropriately secured for
use in a clinical setting and the application also works on a “normal” iPad, both saw that a
36
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:47==
convergent validation study could be initiated. By “normal” iPad, there presumably means
an iPad 10.2” or the like.
The most important takeaway from the experts is that they can review, assess, and score
the drawing that is played back.
6.3
Data Assessment
The collected data defined by the data model is evaluated based on the requirements
from Table 3.3.
The data model describing the structure of the collected data includes pen movements
and timestamps satisfying the seventh functional requirement (FR7). The collection of this
data also allows for the playback functionality, which is sufficient for assessing a patient.
Several additional parameters have been included to create a dataset with a large variety
of context relevant data parameters (NF4). Examples of these are screen size and screen
orientation. These are still well defined within the problem context, but their significance
cannot be determined before analysis. The design and implementation cannot guarantee
that these parameters are utterly exhaustive from an analytical standpoint, but it is a better
collection than any current pen and paper test can provide.
Additionally the data includes information about the patients age, sex and education in
order to allow for bias correction during analysis. These parameters are obtained through
user input and have been designed to be required and restricted. This restriction enforces
the collection of data (NF5) and ensures data reliability and completeness.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results from the usability study and the expert reviews, the
fulfillment of the problem statement and research questions, and the limitations of this
project. The chapter will end with a discussion of future work.
7.1
Research Questions & Goals
The purpose of the goals set in Section 1.3 was to plan the activities that would help an­
swer the research questions stated in Section 1.2. In the project’s initial phase, research
and analysis were carried out to understand the context of the problem, which also an­
swered the first research question (RQ1). From a better understanding of the problem and
the context, it was possible to gather requirements for the project’s solution. A solution
was designed and implemented from this understanding and these requirements, which
together answered the second research question (RQ2). Finally, the usability study and
the expert review were responsible for answering the last third and fourth questions (RQ3
& RQ4).
What is the current state­of­the­art administration and assessment of the CFT
Desk­
top research, literature review, and interview with experts were carried out in the initial
phases of this project to analyze the current state­of­art of the Complex Figure Tests.
These activities made it clear that the current state­of­the­art administration of CFTs in
Denmark is still done with traditional pen and paper, as seen in Section 3.1. The current
state­of­the­art assessment of CFTs is mainly focused on accuracy scoring, based on the
method and the units developed by Osterrieth. On top of that, examiners note down the
drawing process for further analysis if needed but are not based on any particular process
scoring method. As most methods were under strict copyright protection, it was difficult
to dive deep into how these methods work in detail. The BQSS is often seen as one of
the most advanced process scoring methods [2]. However, it does not seem widespread
in Denmark due to a lack of resources, as the method is very time­consuming.
How should a digital version of the CFT be designed to capture data for exploratory
analysis?
The project’s purpose has been to create a digital version of the CFT to cap­
ture data about the drawing process. The analysis and interviews reveal that the applica­
tion must resemble the current pen and paper test as closely as possible because it will
lead to less friction in clinicians’ adoption. In the end, a data collection tool only has value
if it is used to collect data. For this reason, the project has used a user­centered design
approach to best fit the solution to the context of the clinician.
The choice of the tablet as a platform in Section 4.1 proved to enable the development
of a product that resembled the pen and paper test and satisfied the data requirements,
as shown in Section 6. Making the product closely resemble the pen and paper test did,
however, come with a set of challenges. Some of these are highlighted in the problems
brought up during the usability study, as seen in Table 6.1. The critical problems were
mitigated through changes, and the usability study did prove that the application enables
two direct actions of administration and assessment. Based on the post­test questionnaire
the product even rated high on overall usability (see Figure 6.3 and Section 6.2.3).
The choice of not including the reference figure inside the application has, as far as this
project has discovered, not had any negative impact on the administration of the CFT.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
39
==PAGE:50==
As initially expected, leaving the reference figure outside the application allowed a more
flexible usability test session, as the session was not fixed on only drawing a single figure.
This little lab experience indicates that clinicians could similarly benefit from this choice
of flexibility.
In Section 4.2, it was decided to enable erasing of strokes through a undo button, as it was
the most straightforward choice considered, even though it had the impractically of only
allowing the previous stroke to be erased. Considering the usability results seen in Figure
6.3, which shows that most usability test participants found the drawing easy, no results
show that this is not the case. Most of the participants quickly learned the functionality and
the limitation of the undo button, which also shows in the post­test answers (see Appendix
A.4.3). Moreover, all managed to draw and copy with this single erasing functionality.
However, the problem that a user had to go through and delete multiple strokes to delete
an earlier imperfect stroke also appeared in the usability test study, as is seen in Figure
6.2. This figure shows that participant number 2 drew multiple strokes and then deleted
the main horizontal and vertical line because it was not centered correctly. Participant
number 2 changed their drawing approach to accommodate this previous mistake, as
seen in the middle drawing of Figure 6.2. Whether this change in approach affects the
explorative analysis or process evaluation is unsure.
The final UI design for the assessment included elements from both the time colors and
playback approach. This design choice was well received by experts 6.2.3. It was even
pointed out that both the playback and color­coding were an improvement on how the
assessment was currently performed of the drawing process A.1.3 because it allowed
them to watch the test again later time.
How can a digital CFT application substitute the traditional pen and paper test?
The usability study showed that people could quickly draw on the tablet, even though
they had trouble placing their hand on the screen in the earlier versions of the prototype.
However, even though this problem occurred, the test administration suffered no signifi­
cant usability issues, and all the interviewed experts found the solution very similar to the
traditional test. However, the solution needs to undergo a convergent validation study
before any conclusion can be made regarding whether the prototyped digital CFT appli­
cation can replace the traditional pen and paper test, which is way outside the scope of
this project.
How can the captured test data be used for accuracy and process scoring?
From
the expert interviews A.1, there was no doubt that the captured test data, which was played
back to the experts through the app, could be scored using their usual way of assessment.
Their regular assessment included scoring the accuracy based on the traditional method
developed by Osterrieth and writing qualitatively about the patient’s process. None of the
experts did any process scoring in their regular work and primarily relied on notes from
the administration. They did, however, mention that the stricter accuracy scoring methods
were very peculiar about details to require a ruler to make the assessment. Because the
drawing is scaled differently during playback, this type of ruler measurement might not
satisfy these specific assessment methods.
7.2
Limitations
Access to material
The first significant limitation that affected this project was the strict
copyright of the majority of accuracy and process scoring methods. Because of the strict
40
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:51==
copyrights, mainly by PAR, Inc., which is known to prosecute hard for any copyright viola­
tion, it was not easy to gather detailed knowledge about the methods. Even if the methods
were available, they could not have been replicated or described in this project. This lack
of access to material made it difficult to analyze the state­of­the­art assessment of the
CFT, as described above.
Usability study
Five people were used in the usability study, which were all friends and
family of the authors. Because of this social connection, positive bias might have affected
the usability study results. Even though this is a limitation, how one struggles using a
system is difficult to “hide” no matter the connection. It is not believed the decision has
impacted the study in any harmful way. Furthermore, under the administration of the think­
aloud test, it was observed that a lack of context of how the digital solution is used, “who
does what, when?”, negatively impacted parts of the usability study. For future reference,
it could probably have reduced the context confusion:
• If the roles were specified more clearly upfront
• If the shift from one role to another was made more distinct and clear
• If more role­play as part of the think­aloud test
Expert interviews
Only three experts with a background in neuropsychology were inter­
viewed, which is not a sampling size of any statistical significance. While these interviews
were purposely more qualitative and in the format of small­talk and regular dialogue, this
format might have added bias to some questions and answers. This bias could come
from an increased need to please, leading or loaded questions, yes or no questions, and
other types of questions that already subconsciously had a bias in them.
Clinical resources
Another potential limitation of this project is the resources that clinics
have available. At the initial phase of this project, it was assumed there was no difference
between different iPads and that all clinics would have access to one. After the third
expert interview A.1, it became clear that the clinics managed by the regions of Denmark
probably have access to iPads, but not the iPad Pro 12.9” 5th generation acquired for
this project. Moreover, even if Danish clinics have access to iPads, that does guarantee
that other non­Danish clinics have. This lack of resources, therefore, could become a
limitation regarding implementing this solution in places outside of Denmark.
A more technical limitation of this project is that it does not have a group to operate and
maintain it after its conclusion. Software generally needs to be upgraded, and security
updates must be dispatched to keep up with the ever­changing world.
7.3
Future Work
This project has been an explorative process in itself, where the initial problem of the
project has been revised and revisited multiple times to fit the format of a master thesis.
The original problem was to create a solution that could automatically score the ROCFT,
which then stands to answer: What are the next steps from here to be able to score the
ROCFT automatically? When wanting to score the ROCFT automatically, one first needs
to distinguish between scoring the accuracy or process.
7.3.1
Accuracy scoring
This project has primarily focused on the process scoring since this seemed to be the
least explored and developed area. Through the interview with the experts, the problem
of inter­rater reliability in accuracy scoring surfaced. An algorithm scoring the figures
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
41
==PAGE:52==
could help clinicians ensure good inter­rater reliability and possibly replace today’s manual
work to score a test. Although this might not be interesting from a theoretical point of
view, since multiple articles already exist on the topic [5], it could significantly impact how
clinical practice operates and use the test for cognitive assessment. An accuracy scoring
algorithm must be validated through a convergent validation study and implemented under
the standards and regulations imposed on clinics and hospitals. The project by Canham,
Smith, and Tyrrell, Vogt et al. has already shown that such a tool to assess a ROCFT and
ensure good inter­rater reliability is possible to develop.
7.3.2
Process scoring
The problem of automatically scoring the ROCFT process might prove more attractive as
an academic study. One approach would be to implement an algorithm that follows the
steps of a standardized method introduced in Section 3. The more explorative approach
would be to develop a statistical model based on a large dataset collected through the
digital CFT.
Implementing a method
At some point, this project considered implementing a pro­
cess scoring method to score how patients copied and recalled the figures automatically.
However, this endeavor led to questions that would be out of scope for the time frame of
this project:
• If a method is to be implemented, which one should it be?
• If an existing method is chosen, can the score be calculated from the data this project
captures?
• Because the majority of process scoring methods are under strict copyright owner­
ship, should a new method be developed?
• If a new method is developed, much work must be done to validate that it can accu­
rately assess certain neurological diseases. Is it then worth the resources to develop
a new one?
These are just some of the questions this project considered answering but realized are
best left to be answered by a cross­functional group of neuropsychology and computer
science experts.
Even if a method is chosen, found, or developed, what does it mean to quantify a process?
What is a correct process? Can you even get something worthwhile out of quantifying the
process if there exist multiple rights and wrongs? Should a single quantitative result be
the goal, or is it more useful for the clinicians to quantify on multiple parameters? What
should those parameters be?
This line of questions led to the idea of scoring a patient drawing process based on sta­
tistical deviance from the norm rather than a fixed equation defined by human intuition.
Developing a statistical model
Through discussion with experts, the question of what
the “right” process came up. The experts’ opinion on the matter was explained with the
example that the proper process was that of any healthy adult patient. The “better” pro­
cess for children and adolescents was that of slightly older children or adolescent. These
examples show that there is no definitive “right” process and more so when considering
different age groups.
What experts are looking for when assessing the drawing process of a patient is this de­
viance from what they consider normal. So it stands to reason that if a statistical model
could be developed as a tool to showcase these deviations in a CFT better, it might help
42
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:53==
clinicians to make more accurate assessments and remove human bias.
Such a statistical model could be developed by collecting data from hundreds of healthy
subjects in different norm groups defined by age, gender, and education. This dataset
could then be analyzed to discover the most significant parameters and used as a bench­
mark when assessing unhealthy patients. If implemented in practice, further data on un­
healthy patients could be collected, and different cognitive impairments could be catego­
rized based on statistical fingerprints.
7.3.3
Putting the solution in practice
Even without automatic scoring, the digital solution implemented in this project can al­
ready be helpful for clinicians today. All experts said they could assess the drawings
in the digital solution, as they would with the pen and paper version. Furthermore, the
playback function allows all clinicians to review an old process, not just alone but also
together. Moreover, while the digital solution might not be optimal for all patient groups,
especially older patients with low digital proficiency, the opposite is true. Some patient
groups might prefer the digital solution over pen and paper. The point is that putting the
digital solution to use in clinical practices has value in and of itself and enables a more
significant data collection for analysis than otherwise possible.
Two main things must be addressed to achieve this goal. Firstly, the digital solution must
be updated to fit the standards and regulations of hospital clinics concerning handling
sensitive patient data. Secondly, the digital administration must be validated through a
convergent validation study such that the solution can be non­experimentally used to re­
place the traditional pen and paper test. Other studies have shown validity with their
digital solution [19, 8], and because the usability tests conducted in this project showed
promising results. It is not expected that critical validity problems using the digital CFT
application will appear with most target groups.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:55==
8
Conclusion
This project found that it is possible to implement a digital version of the CFT that satisfies
all the requirements defined by current state­of­the­art administration and expert inter­
views. The design and development of a prototype application showed that this would
enable data collection of the drawing process as hypothesized in the project definition.
This project found through usability tests and expert review that this improves the current
test assessment process because it enables a playback­like functionality.
These findings imply that introducing a digital replacement of the current CFT allows clin­
icians to include the drawing process in their assessment. Additionally, it enables ex­
plorative statistical analysis of the CFTs, which could lead to findings and solutions that
could further the field, such as statistical models or algorithms that allow for the automatic
discovery of cognitive impairments.
Two directions for further work in the field of digital CFT for cognitive evaluation are pro­
posed, and their respective next steps have been outlined. More work can be done to
prepare the prototype for clinical practice and collect data with the existing solution.
For the prototype application to be used in clinical practice as a replacement for the current
pen and paper test, further convergent validation studies would be required, and the back­
end system must be migrated to satisfy national and European data regulations. The val­
idation study might reveal issues in compatibility for patients with less digital proficiency,
but other studies have shown validity with similar digital solutions. It is not expected that
validity problems will occur with most target groups. With no additional development, the
prototype application can already be used to gather data for explorative analysis. The
data can then be extracted through the user interface or API provided by Firebase. The
next step would be to gather data by administering the digital CFT to a larger group of
people to collect data for explorative analysis with their consent.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
John E. Meyers and Kelly R. Meyers. Rey Complex Figure Test and Recognition
Trial: Professional Manual. PAR, Inc.
[2]
Xiaonan Zhang et al. “Overview of the Complex Figure Test and Its Clinical Appli­
cation in Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Including Copying and Recall”. In: Frontiers
in Neurology 12 (2021). ISSN: 1664­2295. DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.680474. URL:
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fneur.2021.680474.
[3]
Min­Sup Shin et al. “Clinical and empirical applications of the Rey–Osterrieth Com­
plex Figure Test”. In: Nature Protocols 1.2 (Aug. 2006), pp. 892–899. ISSN: 1750­
2799. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2006.115. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.115.
[4]
Simon R. Davies et al. “The ecological validity of the Rey–Osterrieth Complex Fig­
ure: Predicting everyday problems in children with neuropsychological disorders”.
In: Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 33.7 (2011). PMID: 21957867,
pp. 820–831. DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2011.574608. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/
13803395.2011.574608. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2011.574608.
[5]
R.O. Canham, S.L. Smith, and A.M. Tyrrell. “Automated scoring of a neuropsycho­
logical test: the Rey Osterrieth complex figure”. In: Proceedings of the 26th Eu­
romicro Conference. EUROMICRO 2000. Informatics: Inventing the Future. Vol. 2.
2000, 406–413 vol.2. DOI: 10.1109/EURMIC.2000.874519.
[6]
J Vogt et al. “Automated scoring of the Rey­Osterrieth Complex Figure Test using a
deep­learning algorithm”. In: Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 34.6 (July 2019),
pp. 836–836. ISSN: 1873­5843. DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acz035.04. eprint: https://
academic . oup . com / acn / article - pdf / 34 / 6 / 836 / 29227076 / acz035 . 04 . pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acz035.04.
[7]
IBM Cloud Education. Exploratory Data Analysis. Accessed: 27/06/2022. Aug. 2020.
URL: https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/exploratory-data-analysis.
[8]
Sam S. Webb et al. “Validation of an Automated Scoring Program for a Digital Com­
plex Figure Copy Task Within Healthy Aging and Stroke”. eng. In: Neuropsychology
35.8 (2021), pp. 847–862. ISSN: 19311559, 08944105. DOI: 10.1037/neu0000748.
[9]
Stefan Vermeent et al. “Validation of Four Automated Scoring Algorithms Imple­
mented in the Philips IntelliSpace Cognition (ISC) Digital Test Battery (4097)”. In:
Neurology 96.15 Supplement (2021). ISSN: 0028­3878. eprint: https://n.neurology.
org/content. URL: https://n.neurology.org/content/96/15_Supplement/4097.
[10]
Jamie Bennett­Levy. “Determinants of performance on the Rey­Osterrieth Complex
Figure Test: An analysis, and a new technique for single­case assessment”. In:
British Journal of Clinical Psychology 23.2 (1984), pp. 109–119. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1984.tb00634.x. eprint: https://bpspsychub.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1984.tb00634.x. URL: https://bpspsychub.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1984.tb00634.x.
[11]
Jessica Somerville, Geoffrey Tremont, and Robert A. Stern. “The Boston Qualitative
Scoring System as a Measure of Executive Functioning in Rey­Osterrieth Complex
Figure Performance”. In: Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology
22.5 (2000). PMID: 11094396, pp. 613–621. DOI: 10.1076/1380-3395(200010)22:
5;1-9;FT613. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1076/1380-3395(200010)22:5;1-9;FT613.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1076/1380-3395(200010)22:5;1-9;FT613.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
47
==PAGE:58==
[12]
Deborah P. Waber and Jane M. Holmes. “Assessing children’s copy productions of
the Rey­Osterrieth complex figure”. In: Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neu­
ropsychology 7.3 (1985). PMID: 3998091, pp. 264–280. DOI: 10.1080/01688638508401259.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/01688638508401259. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
01688638508401259.
[13]
Cary R Savage et al. “Organizational strategies mediate nonverbal memory im­
pairment in obsessive–compulsive disorder”. In: Biological Psychiatry 45.7 (1999),
pp. 905–916. ISSN: 0006­3223. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006- 3223(98)
00278-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006322398002789.
[14]
Rhonda Denise Lowsley Booth. “Local­global processing and cognitive style in autism
spectrum disorders and typical development”. PhD thesis. University of London Ph.
D, 2006.
[15]
Siri Weider et al. “Central Coherence, Visuoconstruction and Visual Memory in Pa­
tients with Eating Disorders as Measured by Different Scoring Methods of the Rey
Complex Figure Test”. eng. In: European Eating Disorders Review 24.2 (2016),
pp. 106–113. ISSN: 10990968, 10724133. DOI: 10.1002/erv.2385.
[16]
Hyun GJ et al. “Visuospatial working memory assessment using a digital tablet in
adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder”. In: (Jan. 2018). DOI: 10.
1016/j.cmpb.2018.01.022. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29477422/.
[17]
Poreh A, Levin JB, and Teaford M. “Geriatric Complex Figure Test: A test for the
assessment of planning, visual spatial ability, and memory in older adults.” In: (Sept.
2018). DOI: 10.1080/23279095.2018.1490288. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/30183429/.
[18]
Kim KW et al. “A Comprehensive Evaluation of the Process of Copying a Complex
Figure in Early­ and Late­Onset Alzheimer Disease: A Quantitative Analysis of Dig­
ital Pen Data.” In: (Dec. 2020). DOI: 10.2196/18136. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/32491988/.
[19]
Stefan Vermeent et al. “Philips IntelliSpace Cognition digital test battery: equiva­
lence and measurement invariance compared to traditional analog test versions”.
In: The Clinical Neuropsychologist 0.0 (2021). PMID: 34528868, pp. 1–22. DOI:
10.1080/13854046.2021.1974565. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/13854046.2021.
1974565. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/13854046.2021.1974565.
[20]
CANTAB. Accessed 22/06/2022. URL: https://www.cambridgecognition.com/cantab/.
[21]
Gold standard cognitive research. Accessed 22/06/2022. URL: https://www.cambridgecognition.
com/what-we-do/gold-standard-cognitive-research/.
[22]
Gold standard cognitive research. Accessed 22/06/2022. URL: https://www.cambridgecognition.
com/products/cognitive-research/.
[23]
Spatial Span (SSP) | Cambridge Cognition. Accessed 23/06/2022. URL: https://
www.cambridgecognition.com/cantab/cognitive-tests/memory/spatial-span-ssp.
[24]
S. F. Chen et al. “Deficits in executive functions among youths with autism spectrum
disorders: An age­stratified analysis”. eng. In: Psychological Medicine 46.8 (2016),
pp. 1625–1638. ISSN: 14698978, 00332917. DOI: 10.1017/S0033291715002238.
[25]
CARP COGNITION PACKAGE. Accessed 23/06/2022. URL: https://carp.cachet.
dk/cognition-package/.
[26]
Cognition Package. Accessed 23/06/2022. URL: https://github.com/cph-cachet/
cognition_package.
[27]
D Fein, D Lucci, and L Waterhouse. “BRIEF REPORT ­ FRAGMENTED DRAW­
INGS IN AUTISTIC­CHILDREN”. eng. In: Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders 20.2 (1990), pp. 263–269. ISSN: 15733432, 01623257. DOI: 10.1007/
BF02284723.
48
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:59==
[28]
N. J. Minshew and G. Goldstein. “The pattern of intact and impaired memory func­
tions in autism”. eng. In: Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Dis­
ciplines 42.8 (2001), pp. 1095–1101. ISSN: 00219630, 14697610. DOI: 10.1111/
1469-7610.00808.
[29]
Emilia Salvadori et al. “Qualitative Evaluation of the Immediate Copy of the Rey–
Osterrieth Complex Figure: Comparison Between Vascular and Degenerative MCI
Patients”. In: Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 34.1 (Feb. 2018), pp. 14–23.
ISSN: 1873­5843. DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acy010. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/
acn/article-pdf/34/1/14/27597171/acy010.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/
acy010.
[30]
P. Anderson, V. Anderson, and J. Garth. “Assessment and development of orga­
nizational ability: The Rey Complex Figure Organizational Strategy Score (RCF­
OSS)”. eng. In: Clinical Neuropsychologist 15.1 (2001), pp. 81–94. ISSN: 13854046,
17444144. DOI: 10.1076/clin.15.1.81.1905.
[31]
Emmanuel Raj. Engineering MLOps: Rapidly build, test, and manage production­
ready machine learning life cycles at scale. Packt Publishing, 2021. Chap. 3. ISBN:
9781800562882.
[32]
The Size and Quality of a Data Set. Accessed: 24/06/2022. URL: https://developers.
google.com/machine-learning/data-prep/construct/collect/data-size-quality.
[33]
PhD Jeff Sauro. If You Could Only Ask One Question, Use This One. Accessed
28/05/2022. Mar. 2010. URL: https://measuringu.com/single-question/.
[34]
Mobile App Architecture Guide for 2022. Accessed 18/06/2022. URL: https://www.
netsolutions.com/insights/mobile-app-architecture-guide.
[35]
Build apps for any screen. Accessed 18/06/2022. URL: https://flutter.dev.
[36]
WE ARE CARP. Accessed 18/06/2022. URL: https://carp.cachet.dk.
[37]
List of state management approaches. Accessed 18/06/2022. URL: https://docs.
flutter.dev/development/data-and-backend/state-mgmt/options.
[38]
JAKOB NIELSEN. “Chapter 6 ­ Usability Testing”. In: Usability Engineering. Ed. by
JAKOB NIELSEN. San Diego: Morgan Kaufmann, 1993, pp. 165–206. ISBN: 978­
0­12­518406­9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-052029-2.50009-7. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080520292500097.
[39]
Sirpa Riihiaho. “Usability Testing”. In: The Wiley Handbook of Human Computer In­
teraction. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2018. Chap. 14, pp. 255–275. ISBN: 9781118976005.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118976005.ch14. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118976005.ch14. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/9781118976005.ch14.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
The report’s appendices contain notes, guides, results, and other material relevant to the
project.
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
51
==PAGE:62==
A.1
Interview notes
A.1.1
Context interview with expert
While administering the test, Jepsen notes down the feature numbers that are being
drawn.
The resulting feature unit sequence Jepsen notes down as his qualitative notes are:
2, 3, 5 + 9, 13, 4, 15, 16, 14, 6, 18, 17, 1, 10, 11, 8, 7, 12
Jepsen do not let the patient know that s/he is supposed to redraw the complex figure
from memory after finishing copying it, and uses small talk to divert attention from it.
“A digital complex figure test is too structured for clinical purposes, as it damages the
assessment of executive functions.”
“For kids, we don’t do the delayed recall step, as studies have shown that it doesn’t tell
that much else than what the immediate recall step does.”
“If you are really sick, you need a safe human space to give encouragement, ensure
confidentiality and establish trust.”
“Some patients have gone all their life using pure effort or IQ to make up for a lack of
cognitive skills. For some it works, but even still, it puts a lot of strain on the mind.”
When some patients are presented with a difficult task, it usually invoices a feeling of
frustration. This can cause the subjects to seek out distractions in their surroundings
or simply refuse the task completely. This is especially the case with different types of
neurological disorders.
“You can’t always use the same figure for the same patient. To accommodate for the
ceiling effect, you have to chose a figure accordingly.”
A.1.2
Review interview with expert
Disclaimer: The interview was in Danish and the following quotes have been translated
by the authors.
“This [the administration of the digital CFT] works great. It works very equivalent to paper.
It’s very close to being the same.”
“Yes [I would be able to use this app], but I would just not be able to interpret it. I wouldn’t
be able to insert it into an hospital’s journal.”
“To introduce this app, you have to introduce the old method together with the new. The
RCFT is widespread [in Denmark], so it should not be difficult.”
Before the app can be used in clinical practice, it must go through a clinical validation
process, a convergent validation process that tests the new method against old methods
that intends to measure the same.
When looking at the playback, Jepsen says aloud the unit number as their drawing are
being replayed.
“The use of colors are not used now, as it disturbs the patient when you need to ask them
to change color pencil while drawing.”
“Yes, I would be able to do it [score the drawing based on the playback].”
“When I have finished administering a RCFT today, I write my thoughts about the process
into a journal.”
52
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:63==
“Inter­rater reliability is a problem and it takes time. When I work with new employees,
we sit together and score using the documentation to ensure we have good inter­rater
reliability.”
“For research purposes we have had difficulty quantifying [the process]. [And] something
that can not be quantified can not be part of a study. Yes, there is the Boston Qualitative
Scoring method, but if you don’t have a lot of time or someone with a low wage... [it does
not make sense to use]”
What you can expect of a 6 year old is very different from what you can expect from
a 12 year old. “Girls are almost always better at everything compared to boys”. When
quantifying the process you must therefor take into account the participant’s age and
gender. To understand the method properly, you must compare healthy and unhealthy
subjects, compare on gender and various age ranges.
“You just have to find [a method] that is smart. Something that is intuitively correct.”
A.1.3
Review interview with neuropsychologist from KU
Disclaimer: The interview was in Danish and the following quotes have been translated
by the authors.
“The [Rey­Osterrieth] test is widely used in Denmark today. And yes, the Osterrieth ac­
curacy scoring method is the most commonly used accuracy scoring method as far as I
know.”
“There is not a single hospital in Denmark, that can afford such an (new, 5th gen. 12.9­
inch) iPad. Once hospitals only did tests on pen and paper, but now they often have
“normal” iPads available.”
“Neuropsychologis have a standard lists of educations they use for comparing norms.”
“[The app] is very simple, manageable and nice”
“After working multiple hours, I think it can be very nice to go back and review how the
patient drew. Of course, I have my notes, but being able to see the drawing, I think, is
very helpful”
“It could be very cool to use this app to test different types of dementia. We know there is
a clear difference in the drawing process between classic Alzheimer and frontotemporal
dementia”
“I’m worried that people over the age of 50 would have trouble being comfortable with the
tablet and app.”
“The weight of the tablet can actually be of help in ensuring the drawing area will be
centered in front of the patient. For patient with neglect, this could prove very helpful.
Sometimes we also need to hold down the paper with our hand, to keep it in place when
the patient draws. The weight of the tablet could actually help in this regard.”
“Yes [I would be able to score and review this drawing on the tablet, as I would score and
review a pen and paper drawing today]”
“I’m worried that this format can be difficult for people with motor problems or language
problems.”
“When we educate new neuropsychologists, we have them score the test together to train
and ensure good inter­rater reliability. Inter­rater reliability is very important, but it is a bit
tedious”
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
53
==PAGE:64==
“It’s easier to get funding for the development of a digital solution, but much less to operate
one. How would this be maintained in 5 years?”
“And of course, the security needs to be proper for it the be used in clinical practice”
“We note down the (accuracy) score every time we have a test with a patient, and over
time we can then compare and thereby understand their development.”
“When we look at the (accuracy) score, we see it relative to the potential maximum to
identify if there is a problem. From there, we then look deeper into why there is a problem,
and what the cause is.”
“Yes, I think that if the security is in place, and the test works on “‘normal” iPads, then a
convergent validation study can be started.”
A.1.4
Review interview with expert in data science
“All data is good data in relation to Machine Learning.”
“If you want to train a supervised model you would need classification labels of the data.”
“We will not have a future scenario were we insert a picture and then [the app] spits out
the diagnosis ”dementia”. It is important [for the medical industry] to be able to show the
features used to conclude the end result.”
“[The data] can be used to figure out what is good features? The stroke order? The
continuation?”
“The next steps would be, which features do we think is informative, [in relation to] clas­
sification or regression?”
“The problem with neural networks [in a clinical context] is interpretability”
“Consider collecting the pressure from the apple pen”
“In the end it is the clinician who makes the final decision. The algorithm does not provide
the answer [diagnosis], but supports the decision by the clinician, which is why it is more
important to collect and understand the data features rather than fit it to a deep learning
model.”
“Classification without explanation does not help the clinician. It might introduce bias.”
“Age [can be used] to correct for bias in old people and [a higher likely hood of] dementia.”
“You are saving raw data, that is good.”
“Maybe the first lines are some of the most important. Pick colors that represents this.”
“Template matching and image processing is not the same as training a supervised model.”
“Could you use image processing to make a quick accuracy scoring to support the clini­
cians diagnosis?”
54
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:65==
A.2
The 18 Scoring Units of the ROCF
Figure A.1: The 18 Scoring Units of the ROCF, illustration from Zhang et al. (2021)
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
55
==PAGE:66==
A.3
Think aloud moderator guide
Link to questionnaire: https://forms.gle/BYhbLb3EBmSQWtvf6
Purpose
The purpose of this test is to asses the system, not assess you. Therefor, you cannot do
anything wrong, so please don’t worry about that.
Think aloud
We are going to do a ”think aloud” test, where you are given the tablet with the app in­
stalled, and a set of tasks that you should try to execute to the best of your ability. While
you are performing the tasks, I want you to try say what is on your mind. Try to verbalize
what you are doing and why you are doing it.
I will give you the tasks, but I will not help you try to solve them as its important for us to
see, if you can execute them by yourself.
Do you have any questions?
Pretest
Alright, first, tell us a bit about yourself. What’s your age and education level? How would
you rate your digital device proficiency?
[Fill in pretest questions]
Tasks
We will go through 4 different tasks, and after each task I will ask you one question. While
you do the tasks, I might also ask you why you are doing what you are doing.
1. Given this tablet and app, try to draw 3 different sized perfect squares.
2. You are now a test participant that is given the task to copy this complex figure. Try
to copy it to the best of your ability.
3. You are now a clinician that has finished a test session with participant AAA. After
finishing, you want to score AAA’s Copy drawing. Try to score it to the best of your
ability.
4. You are now again a clinician that, after some time, wants to review test participant
BBB’s complex figure test. When you review it, you want to look for how accurate
the copy is and which approach s/he used. Try to review it and tell us what you see.
Posttest
Alright, that’s it for the tasks. Now I just need to ask you a few follow­up questions.
[Ask posttest questions]
Thank you so much for taking your time to go through these tasks and question with us.
This was very valuable!
56
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:67==
A.4
Quantitative usability test results
A.4.1
Basic participant info
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
57
==PAGE:68==
A.4.2
Task level satisfaction with SEQ
Task 1: Draw 3 squares
58
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:69==
Task 2: Copy complex figure
Task 3: Score drawing
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
59
==PAGE:70==
Task 4: Review drawing
60
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:71==
A.4.3
Test level satisfaction with SUS
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
61
==PAGE:72==
62
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:73==
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
63
==PAGE:74==
64
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
==PAGE:75==
A.5
Distribution of Contributions
Overall, Poulsen’s main contribution was the coordination, planning, structuring and writ­
ing of this project. Whereas Guldborg’s main contribution was the development of the
prototype application. The major decisions included in the project were all decided on
together through discussion and sparring of ideas and thoughts.
See more details in Table A.1. An X indicates who was key responsible for the chapter,
section or empirical activity. An (X) indicates a strong direct support, whereas nothing
means there was weak to no direct support in this activity. If two Xs appears on a row, it
means that the contribution was, what we consider to be, equally strong.
Contribution
C. Poulsen
M. Guldborg
Report
Ch. 1 Introduction
X
Ch. 2 Related Work
X
Ch. 3 Requirement Analysis
X
(X)
Sec. 3.1 Clinical Administration
X
X
Sec. 3.2 Process Scoring Methods
X
Sec. 3.3 Data for Exploration
X
X
Sec. 3.4 Functional Requirements
X
Ch. 4 Design
X
X
Sec. 4.1 Platform Design Choice
X
X
Sec. 4.2 User Interface Design
X
(X)
Sec. 4.3 Software Architecture
X
Ch. 5 Implementation
X
Ch. 6 Evaluation
X
Ch. 7 Discussion
X
(X)
Ch. 8 Conclusion
(X)
X
Empirical
Flutter Development
X
Firebase Integration
X
Usability tests
X
(X)
Expert interviews
X
X
Table A.1: Distribution of Contributions
Digital Complex Figure Test for Explorative Analysis
65
==PAGE:76==
The complex figure test (CFT) is a widely used pen and paper neuropsychological assessment that
permits the evaluation of different cognitive and executive functions. Subjects’ approaches during the
CFT can be analyzed with current state­of­the­art methods to evaluate their cognitive and executive
functions. Nevertheless, this is rarely done in clinical practice due to low clinical practicality. An idea
for making the evaluation of the subject’s process more practical is to automate the assessment of
the process. However, to enable the development of an automatic assessment solution, there first
needs to be a suitable amount of high­quality data on the drawing process. This project aims to
design and prototype a digital solution that allows for data collection of subjects’ drawing process,
such that future explorative analysis can be done to develop a reliable automatic solution.
This project used a user­centered Design Thinking process to understand the problem and context
and design and iterate on a digital solution. Throughout the project, clinical experts were interviewed
to understand the context and review the results. A think­aloud usability study was conducted on
five individuals to evaluate how well the solution could be used as an alternative to the traditional
pen and paper test. Moreover, three clinical experts were interviewed to review if they could use the
solution to assess their current methods.
All the individuals found the solution easy to use, and all the experts could assess the drawings
reproduced using their current methods. These findings show that a digital solution could be intro­
duced in today’s clinics that allow the collection of data about the drawing processes. However, to
introduce the solution in clinics, convergent validation studies of the solution must be conducted first,
and security must be improved to fit regulations.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
