==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Topology optimization of jacket support 
structures for offshore wind turbine
Marcos Vinicius Teijeira Correia 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0525
August 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0525 
August 2022
Project period: 
January - August 2022
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Suguang Dou
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above 
education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind 
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Marcos Vinicius Teijeira Correia
Title:
Topology optimization of jacket support structures 
for offshore wind turbine
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
Master Thesis
August, 2022
By
Marcos Vinicius Teijeira Correia
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, , Frederiksborgvej 399, 4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Wind Energy Department, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Sci­
ence in Mechanical Engineering, MSc Eng.
Marcos Vinicius Teijeira Correia ­ s202860
Signature
Date
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
ii
Marcos V. Teijeira Correia
06/08/2020
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Greater wind speeds associated with steady flows is one of the reasons why offshore wind
energy has a higher capacity than its onshore counterpart. These benefits are balanced
by the much higher capital required to manufacture, transport, and install the larger tur­
bines and its substructures. To keep offshore wind as a feasible segment in renewables,
innovative designs and solutions are needed to drive down costs in new projects. Account­
ing for about one­fifth to one­third of the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE), the support
structures are seen as a good opportunity for structural optimization and consequently
cost reduction. With a focus on jacket frame structures, this thesis focused on developing
an efficient framework that can provide a variety of initial designs for support structures
for offshore wind turbines. The framework is based on topology optimization and a set of
numerical techniques to promote diverse designs and modular designs. The foundation
of this work is based on an open­source code for 3D topology optimization. The design
domain is discretized into 3D solid elements, where each element is assigned with an
artificial density variable whose value is between one (i.e. the element is solid) and zero
(i.e. the element is removed). From the baseline code, numerical techniques are imple­
mented to expand the possibilities in designs firstly by evaluating individual and combined
loading conditions and by modelling the soil­structure interaction. Furthermore, a variable
linking scheme with mirroring of patterns is used to impose symmetric conditions on the
geometric layouts and is later expanded to generate modular designs with a translational
repetition of patterns. The results obtained showed structures with four­legged configura­
tions and well defined x­bracing patterns. By changing geometric definitions such as the
number of modules and general dimensions of the design domain, a wide range of designs
were made possible and showed similar values of compliance. However, complex pro­
files, connections and larger cross­sectional areas make it difficult to manufacture these
conceptual designs based on current technologies. For this reason, a post­processing
approach is proposed to reconstruct the jacket structures using 3D truss elements.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank God for guiding me and for allowing the realization
of this dream to achieve a Master’s degree at DTU.
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to my thesis supervisor Suguang Dou,
for giving me the chance to take on this challenge in an exciting project and for dedicating
his time in sharing so much knowledge.
I want to thank my flatmates and family Gisele, Tauã and Oreo who have been my basis
over these two years in Denmark. I miss you already and will always cherish the memories
we gathered in these years.
My deepest gratitude to my parents Mario and Maria, who gave me all the support and
encouragement I needed to keep pursuing this dream, everything I am and everything I
have I owe it to you.
Finally, I must thank my fiancée and very soon to be wife Isabelle for all the support, love
and courage that inspired me to keep going in these years, none of this would have been
possible without you.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Jacket Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Structural Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Optimization Problem
18
3.1
3D Topology Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Problem Description: Jacket Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Preliminary Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Variable Linking
30
4.1
Enforcing Symmetry with Variable Linking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
Adjusting Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Overview of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Modular Designs
38
5.1
New Design Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Results and Discussion
45
6.1
Design Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Overview of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7
Reconstruction With 3D Trusses
59
7.1
Mapping of Coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.2
Topology Optimization of 3D Truss Elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.3
Results and Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8
Conclusions
65
Bibliography
68
A Project Plan
70
B Variable Linking Code
73
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
This chapter addresses the basis of work, providing an initial discussion about the advan­
tages of offshore wind applications and the costs associated with manufacturing, transport
and installation of the support structures. Based on these motivations, the main objective
and the thesis outline are also presented.
1.1
Motivation
Limited fossil fuels, significant increase in population, and the environmental impact caused
by carbon­based methods for energy generation are the key drivers for the expansion of
wind energy over the past 20 years. These issues have been present for many years,
however current political scenario and a major crisis in fossil fuels are expected the push
European markets even further towards renewable solutions. Although onshore wind
applications are more widespread, some setbacks may arise especially due to limited in­
stallation sites and environmental concerns, such as noise and visual impact. In offshore
conditions, not only are these impacts reduced but the steadier wind speeds also allow
for a significant improvement in energy production [18].
In theory, the power output is a function of the cube of the wind speed. The latter substan­
tially increases with the distance to shore, which means a great potential for generation
is present in deep­water offshore applications [3].
Figure 1.1: Wind energy potential for different water depth conditions, see [3]
It can be noted from figure 1.1 that the highest power generation potential occurs in deep­
water conditions ranging from 40 to 50 meters (green curve). Although the net gains from
increased energy production can serve as advocate for offshore technologies, a much
higher capital is required to manufacture, transport, install and provide maintenance to the
larger turbines and its substructures [18]. To keep offshore wind as a feasible segment
in renewables, innovative designs and solutions are needed to drive down costs in new
projects.
1.1.1
Cost Overview
One way to evaluate the costs associated with wind energy production is to look into the
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE). This is a measure of the unit cost of 1MWh over the
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
1
==PAGE:9==
lifetime of the wind farm [21]. As a general rule, a project with a strong business case
would have high energy production associated to a reduced LCOE.
Figure 1.2: Different shares of total cost in offshore wind applications, adapted from [17]
One large share of the total LCOE is related to foundations (or support structures), which
can amount to one­fifth of the levelized cost. This share can become even larger for ap­
plications in deep­water conditions, which would require even larger substructures. By
creating new and optimized solutions for the support structures, not only the costs for
foundations would be reduced but a positive effect could also be seen regarding trans­
portation logistics and installation.
1.1.2
Offshore Support Structures
The support structures can be seen as responsible for holding the turbine in place while
transferring the loads from the turbine to the seabed [15]. The turbine tower, the sub­
structure and the foundation together compose the support structure. While the first is
designed by the turbine manufacturers with several specific requirements and containing
internal equipment, the substructure can be targeted for structural optimization, being the
focus of this thesis. An overview of the current support substructures for different ranges
of water depth can be seen in figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Types of offshore wind turbine foundations. (a) Gravity based foundation, (b)
monopile, (c) suction caisson, (d) tripod, (e) jacket, (f) tension leg platform and (g) ballast
stabilised spar buoy, see [8]
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
2
==PAGE:10==
The usage of jacket support structures is common in water depths ranging from 40 to 50
meters. This can also be seen as a transition range into (very) deep­water applications,
after which bottom fixed foundations are no longer viable and floating solutions gain the
spotlight. As mentioned, the potential for energy production in these conditions is very
high, but the economic feasibility of these applications depend on reducing the associated
costs. Structural optimization techniques can be applied to drive down material usage,
overall weight and consequently reduce costs in manufacturing and transportation. With
a focus on jacket substructures, new design frameworks with the introduction of modular
designs can create solutions that can be mass produced and assembled off­factory.
1.1.3
Objectives
This thesis aims to develop an efficient framework that can provide a variety of initial
designs for jacket support structures for offshore wind turbines. The framework is based
on topology optimization and a set of numerical techniques to promote diverse designs
and modular designs. The main objectives of this project include:
• Evaluate loading conditions for different load cases using an existing open­source
code for 3D topology optimization.
• Modify boundary conditions to account for different seabeds.
• Implement a variable linking scheme to enforce symmetric conditions and reduce
computational costs.
• Expand variable linking scheme to enable a translational periodic optimization, achiev­
ing modular designs suitable for mass production.
• Reconstruct conceptual designs using with 3D trusses, reducing overall shape com­
plexity for manufacturing .
• Comparison between reconstructed designs and the reference jacket support de­
signed by INNWIND [9].
1.2
Thesis Outline
This master thesis is divided into 7 chapters, including the current one. Chapter 2 brings
forth fundamental concepts needed to understand structural optimization with finite ele­
ments, along with an overview of common designs for offshore jackets. In chapter 3 the
optimization problem is defined, including the formulation and optimization methods used
in the pre­existing 3D topology optimization code. The governing load components are
obtained from the INNWIND reference jacket design report, subsequently individual anal­
ysis are carried out for each load case as well as a combined loading condition. Chapter
4 introduces some of the numerical techniques used to promote different designs, which
comprehend updated boundary conditions, 3D variable linking scheme with mirroring of
patters to obtain symmetry. This approach is expanded in chapter 5 introducing a trans­
lational periodic optimization for creating modular designs. After incorporating these im­
provements to the code, the final conceptual design configurations are presented and
compared in chapter 6. As a post­processing technique, chapter 7 establishes a frame­
work for reconstructing the conceptual designs with 3D truss elements. This stage in­
cludes a procedure to map the nodal coordinates and another optimization method to
define the ideal element densities for the frame jacket structure. Finally the final remarks
with opportunities for future work are identified in chapter 8.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
In this chapter, an overview of common designs for offshore support structures will ini­
tially be given. Furthermore, fundamental concepts in topology optimization and different
element formulations will be reviewed to provide the basis for this work, which will be
examined with other inspirational papers and previous references.
2.1
Jacket Structures
Depending on the water depth range, different types of support structures can be em­
ployed. In a comparative analysis by Fenech et al. [12], four different configurations
(monopile, triple, tripod and jacket) were evaluated for a water depth of 70m. The study
showed that the least expensive configuration considering local costs of manufacturing is
the jacket support. Furthermore, the usage of smaller tubular sections also affected the
hydrodynamic performance, impacting wave and current loads on the structure. Jacket
designs showed the smallest hydrodynamic loads out of the four configurations [12, 30].
In transitional water regions, where the sea depth makes it difficult to deploy monopile
and gravity based supports, it is common the usage of tripod and jacket substructures.
Traditional jackets are mainly frame structures with three or four legs made of tubular
steel members interconnected by welded joints. In the interface with the turbine tower, a
transition piece is fixed to the jacket top, which consists of a large steel circular housing
to accommodate the tower. At last, the fixation to the seabed is achieved with foundation
piles made for each jacket leg [10, 14].
Figure 2.1: Traditional jacket structure for offshore wind turbines, adapted from [20]
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
4
==PAGE:12==
Although most of the components shown in figure 2.1 are common to all types of jackets,
some variations in design may occur. The main changes in configuration are usually the
number of vertical legs, the connecting patterns of the middle braces or any kind of twisting
angle between the legs. In the work by Chen et al. [10], existing types of jacket structures
were investigated and compared. This analysis included traditional jackets with three and
four legs connected by k­braces, x­braces and z­braces, along with more recent designs
of the so called ”twisted jacket”.
(a) Traditional Jacket
(b) Twisted Jacket
(c) Tripod Jacket
(d) Twisted­tripod Jacket
Figure 2.2: Jacket Substructures, see [10]
The comparative static analysis in the study by Chen et al. [10], showed that traditional
jacket structures with three and four legs presented smaller level of stresses in the tubular
elements, which can justify why configurations shown in figure 2.2a and 2.2c are the most
common in the offshore industry. However, the study also indicates that fewer elements
and welded joints are needed for twisted jacket and twisted­tripod jacket designs (figures
2.2b and 2.2d), which also implies a reduced weight and complexity in manufacturing [10].
Given the particularities of the wind and wave conditions at each offshore operation site,
it is not safe to say which kind of jacket structure is the most cost­effective as this may
change depending on the external loading conditions and the operational life expectancy.
It becomes clear, however, that several types of designs can be used and an efficient
framework for design optimization is needed to generate cost­effective designs based on
the unique load requirements of each site.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
5
==PAGE:13==
2.1.1
Design Basis
Jacket substructures are commonly used for offshore oil and gas platforms, as such, the
same design concept is also applied for offshore wind [30].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: Offshore oilgas vs wind applications, from [5]
In the initial stages of the design process, specific requirements are set according to local
government regulations, design standards and environmental conditions which are used
to establish the loads and boundary conditions [4, 9]. These may include among others:
• Description of the structure, main dimensions and water depth
• Expected service and design lives
• Environmental conditions, including wind, wave, current, ice and earthquake prob­
ability
• Soil and foundation conditions
• Stability requirements
• Material and welding design criteria
To meet the expected service lives and ensure the mechanical integrity of the components,
the material selection and protective coating used are very important, as is the fatigue
analysis carried out in the design phases. For offshore conditions, where structures are
submerged in a corrosive environment, similar classes of low carbon stainless steel such
as the 316L are commonly employed for the tubular members [32]. An overview of the
material properties for type 316L steel can be seen in table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Mechanical properties for SS 316L steel [11]
Density [g/cm3]
Tensile Strength
(Yield) [MPa]
Tensile Strength
(Ultimate) [MPa]
Modulus of
Elasticity [GPa]
8.0
205
515
193
Most of the design requirements previously listed are dependant on the location in which
the jacket will be commissioned. The environmental conditions can be obtained based on
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
6
==PAGE:14==
statistical ocean data, such as the Marsden areas [16] which can provide average wave
parameters for specific locations around the globe.
Figure 2.4: Different zones defined for global wave statistics, see [16]
Wave parameters such as wave height and period are used to calculate the wave loading
pattern in those locations. Meteorological and ocean data can also be used to determine
typical wind and current values, serving as input for the other load calculations [9, 16].
2.1.2
Loads and Boundary Conditions
The first step to properly model the interaction between the foundation and soil is to an­
alyze the sea floor by drilling and sampling the soil. By doing this, the geotechnical data
can be determined along with the soil profile, and the latter is used to describe the load­
displacement interaction between the foundation and soil [9, 23]. The soil resistance to
axial and lateral movement can be modelled as sets of springs using linear stiffness ma­
trices that can be added to the structure’s overall stiffness matrix [9, 4]. This can be seen
in figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Soil­foundation interaction model, see [23]
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
7
==PAGE:15==
With a proper model capable of simulating the seabed conditions, the next step is to deter­
mine the loads acting on the structure. For offshore jackets for wind turbines, other than
the weight of the turbine itself, there are three main external conditions that will generate
loads: Wind acting on the turbine, which transfers loads into the support structure (and
direct wind flow interaction with structure), wave loads closer to the sea level region, and
current loads in the submerged part of the structure [10].
Figure 2.6: Simplified schematics of loads acting on an offshore jacket, adapted from [10]
The interaction between fluids and structural components with circular section can be
modelled through Morison’s equation, which can be used to determine wind, wave and
current loads based on metocean statistical data [10]. The remaining load components
depend on the wind interaction with the different components of the turbine (blades, na­
celle and tower), these can be achieved by computational fluid simulations and will not be
the focus of this work.
2.1.3
Design Steps
Three main approaches can be taken regarding the design process. According to the
DNVGL­ST­0126, the design can be achieved by the partial safety factor method, in which
load and resistance factors are applied to the governing design variables through a lin­
ear combination of individual loads. A similar approach is called the ”direct simulation
of load effect of simultaneous load processes”, a method by which, as the name sug­
gests, the combined load effect is evaluated simultaneously. At last, design by testing
and performance observation can also be implemented, but it should also be supported
by other analytical design methods. For offshore wind applications, where several load
components are present at the same time, the second design method is a more attractive
approach [14].
In the design process, the initial requirements established in the design basis along with
the meteorology and oceanography data are used to determine the loads acting on the
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
8
==PAGE:16==
structure. One initial configuration of geometry and member size can be evaluated for the
given loads and foundation model, if the requirements are not met, then a new element
size configuration is needed and later re­evaluated until the structural model meets all
design requirements and is compatible with the foundation model [23]. This procedure
can be seen in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Design steps for fixed offshore jacket structures, extracted from [23]
It can be seen that this is an iterative process based on trial and error, which requires a
lot of technical expertise to generate efficient designs on initial attempts. Although the
outcome will be a design that meets all requirements in normative standards, there is no
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
9
==PAGE:17==
guarantee that this would be the optimum solution (lightest or least expensive).
2.2
Structural Optimization
The types of structural optimization can be categorized based on the design variables be­
ing evaluated. If the nodal positions are being optimized without changes to the connec­
tivity, a shape optimization problem would be defined. The variation of a cross­sectional
area or the thickness of a shell structure can characterize a sizing optimization problem.
However, density­based problems where both geometries and connectivity are changed,
can be tackled by topology optimization [31].
Figure 2.8: Different methods for structural and multidisciplinary optimization, see [31]
The implementation of optimization methods to target the design of jacket support struc­
tures has been the focus of many academic papers. Most applications focus on the opti­
mization of the element diameter and thickness, with fixed nodal positions and therefore
limited outcomes in design. In the work by Oest et al. [22], a gradient­based sizing op­
timization was proposed to define the diameter and thickness of the tubular elements
while considering frequency and fatigue constraints. Similarly, in a static analysis model,
Sandal et al. modelled the jacket structure using three­dimensional Timoshenko beam
elements. Sizing optimization was performed to reduce the overall mass while adhering
with the constraints on fatigue and ultimate limit states [25]. Although sizing optimization
can assist in developing conceptual designs, it relies on pre­defined frame structures to
be evaluated. In the work by Sandal et al. [25] for instance, 100 jacket designs were
modelled for different ranges of leg distances and this required 100 different optimization
calls.
Some of the limitations in generating initial frame structures for sizing optimization can be
targeted by applying the ground structure method. In this approach, fixed nodal positions
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
10
==PAGE:18==
are defined and the element connectivity is optimized by completely removing or adding
members. This can be categorized as a topology optimization problem in which element
densities can vary from 0 (remove element) to 1 (keep element) [31].
Figure 2.9: Ground structure method, see [31]
In the thesis dissertation by Guarnero [15], the ground structure method was used as
an initial optimization to define the topology of the frame structure. Using beam element
formulations, a sizing optimization was then performed to define the diameter of each
member. The element connectivity is based on the nodal positions initially defined, since
the locations of the nodes cannot change, this also restricts the outcomes of the optimiza­
tion.
A different approach for size and topology optimization was proposed by Savsani et al.
[26]. In this work a teaching learning­based optimization algorithm (TLBO) and a genetic
algorithm (GA) were used and later compared while considering aerodynamic, hydrody­
namic and structural forces. A pre­defined frame structure was optimized by associating
the two meta­heuristic algorithms with an open source software capable of simulating dy­
namic responses of the wind turbine with respect to the loads [26]. Although this approach
differs from other conventional methods, some unfeasible designs were created with dis­
continuities in element connectivity and clear asymmetry along the different faces of the
jacket.
Rather than focusing on sizing optimization alone, Tian et al. [30] proposed a method­
ology to simultaneously consider topology, sizing and shape optimization using PIPE59
elements to model the jacket structure in ANSYS. In this approach, the tower structure
was modelled using shell elements and directly connected to the jacket frame using con­
tact elements. In this way, the transition piece connecting the jacket to the tower was
not included as part of the optimization. The first of the three stages was the topology
optimization, in which the aim was to achieve an optimal material distribution by using
a minimum compliance formulation. To facilitate the convergence of the very large op­
timization model, shell elements were modelled for the topology optimization stage and
the transition piece was simplified to a mass point. Based on the topology optimization
results, each member is reconstructed with tubular elements which can be used for the
shape optimization. The goal of the shape optimization procedure is to determine the best
configuration of nodal positions by changing the height position of each joint to achieve
lower stress values. As the last step, the size optimization was carried out afterwards,
by which the diameter and thickness of each tubular member was obtained. The com­
bination of the different optimization techniques resulted in a significant decrease in the
overall mass when compared to the original structure (38.24%) [19]. Despite the outstand­
ing results in terms of mass reduction, the final structure presented five different levels
each with its own individual diameter and thickness. Furthermore, very different internal
bracing patterns were achieved along the height of the jacket, adding complexity to the
manufacturing stages.
Although beam element formulation can provide a good model with a small computational
effort (lower number of elements and degrees of freedom), complex shapes cannot be
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
11
==PAGE:19==
reproduced with accuracy, such as the top transition piece connecting the jacket to the
turbine tower. Another limitation of employing beam elements is the fixed position of the
nodes (joint connections), which can certainly influence the resulting geometry and make
it difficult to predict the force transmission path [25, 30]. Solid 3D element formulation, as
proposed in this work, can generate complex shapes and expand the design possibilities
by defining a much broader design space. The discretization using a refined mesh of 3D
quadrilaterals allows for innovative designs with more different shapes and patterns than
the typical frame structure seen in the literature. By applying other numerical techniques
such as variable linking and modular designs, realistic design concepts can be achieved
with well defined symmetry along all sides and a clear repetition of bracing patterns that
enable mass manufacturing. This approach using 3D solid elements and variable linking
for the optimization of jacket structures is (to the author’s knowledge) unprecedented.
2.2.1
Topology Optimization
In the present section, the formulation required to implement a gradient­based topology
optimization algorithm will be discussed. This will be taken as the theoretical basis to the
this work, which will later make use of an open­source 3D topology optimization code.
The basis for topology optimization relies on defining the ideal features of a structure within
a specified design domain or region. These features can be the connectivity of elements
or geometric patterns, such as the shape of holes and their positions [7].
The Minimum Compliance Problem
In the field of structural optimization, a general objective is usually to obtain structures
with high stiffness while significantly reducing its weight. In a way, it becomes a matter of
finding the best material distribution with the given circumstances (or constraints). Com­
pliance can be defined as the inverse of stiffness, that is, a highly compliant structure will
show large displacements when subjected to loading conditions. To maximize the stiff­
ness of a structure means to minimize its compliance, and this becomes the basis for the
optimization problem [7, 31].
Resource constraints are introduced to control the amount of material that can be dis­
tributed. For density­based methods this is implemented by defining a prescribed volume
fraction equivalent to the ratio of the material volume and the total design domain volume
[27].
f = V (x)
V0
(2.1)
In equation 2.1, the design variable x is the discrete density variable that can take the value
of xmin (close to zero to represent void) or 1 (solid) [31, 27]. By solving the optimization
problem, the optimum individual densities of every element can be achieved:
min :
c(x) = U T KU
st :
V (x)
V0
= f
:
KU = F
:
0 < xmin ≤x ≤1







(2.2)
When solving problems like in equation 2.2, a typical approach is to use finite elements
to discretize the problem [7]. This means that each element will have one design variable
(density) assigned along with its own element displacement vector ue and stiffness matrix
ke. By doing the summation of the stiffness contribution of each element, it is possible to
determine the global stiffness matrix K:
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
12
==PAGE:20==
K =
%
e
ke
(2.3)
The equilibrium equation, one of the constraints in the optimization problem, can be sat­
isfied by computing the global displacement U from the global stiffness matrix K and the
force vector F.
Parametrization
By defining the optimal placement of material in a given design space, some points will
have a solid representation and others will appear as void. This geometric representation
of a structure can be compared to pixels in a black and white composition of an image. By
considering the discretization of the reference domain Ω, the goal is to define the subset
of ”solid” points Ωsolid in which material can be used [7]. Here, the elastic modulus can
take one of two forms depending if the element in question is a part of the Ωsolid subset
or not:
E = jΩsolidE0,
jΩsolid =
&
1 if x ∈Ωsolid
0 if x ∈Ω\ Ωsolid
(2.4)
'
Ω
jΩsoliddΩ= V ol (Ωsolid) ≤V
(2.5)
The inequality in equation 2.5 sets a upper bound limit on material volume that is available
for distribution. With the definition of the modulus of elasticity in equation 2.4, a discrete
valued design problem is formulated (also known as a 0­1 problem [7]). To tackle this
problem, a common approach is to implement a continuous parametrization of the design
variables, that is, replace the integer variables with continuous variables that depend on
a function of the density. The goal is to obtain optimized designs with well defined regions
of material or void, and this is implemented through a penalization technique that inhibits
intermediate values of the density function [7, 31].
The solid isotropic material with penalization method (SIMP) is a common interpolation
scheme that relates the elastic modulus and the element density function:
E(xe) = xp
eE0,
p ≥1
(2.6)
Where E0 is the modulus of elasticity of solid material and p is the penalization factor of the
density function. To avoid induced singularities, the SIMP method has been reformulated
to account for the stiffness of void Emin (which is very small, but not zero) [31].
E(xe) = Emin + xp
e (E0 −Emin) ,
xe ∈[0, 1]
(2.7)
In the SIMP approach, a penalization factor larger than 1 will make intermediate densi­
ties unwanted due to reduced stiffness compared to the element’s material volume. It
becomes costly to have intermediate densities and the optimal design will seek to remove
those elements rather than keep a very small contribution in stiffness [7].
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
13
==PAGE:21==
Solving the Optimization Problem
Different mathematical methods can be applied to solve the optimization problem de­
scribed in equation 2.2, such as the Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA), Sequential
Linear Programming (SLP) or the standard Optimality Criteria (OC) method which is the
focus of this work. With an iterative loop, the idea behind the OC method is to update the
design variables (densities) at each element based on the conditions for optimality [7].
The updating scheme for the design variables can be formulated from the Karush­Kuhn­
Tucker (KKT) conditions for optimality [27], such that the new design variable xnew
e
is given
as
xnew
e
=



max(xmin, xe −m)
if
xeBη
e ≤max(xmin, xe −m)
xeBη
e
if
max(xmin, xe −m) < xeBη
e < min(1, xe + m)
min(1, xe + m)
if
min(1, xe + m) ≤xeBη
e
(2.8)
where η is a numerical damping parameter and m is a move limit. Both coefficients control
the changes carried out in each iterative step of the optimization loop [7]. In the updating
scheme, Be can be found as the ratio between the sensitivity of the compliance and the
sensitivity of the volume constraint with the Lagrange multiplier λ:
Be =
−∂c
∂xe
λ ∂V
∂xe
(2.9)
The volume constraint function is a monotonically decreasing function of λ and can there­
fore be found by employing a bi­section scheme [28].
Sensitivity Analysis
For the sensitivity analysis, it is interesting to look at the compliance problem with the
finite element formulation:



min c(xe)
s.t. + vexe ≤V,
0 < xmin < xe < 1,
e = 1, · · · , Ne
(2.10)
Where the compliance is given as a function of the displacement U:
c(xe) = F T U,
where
Ne
%
e=1
xp
ekeU = F
(2.11)
The gradients required to solve the optimization problem can be easily derived for the
objective and constraint functions that depend only on the design variable x (density). As
seen in equation 2.11, the objective function also depends on the displacements U, and
can be obtained by the chain rule [7]. The new expressions will include derivatives of the
displacement, which can be found by an implicit method of calculation called the adjoint
method.
To calculate the derivative of the objective function, initially the compliance function is
re­written by adding a zero function:
c(x) = F T U −˜U T (KU −F)
(2.12)
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
14
==PAGE:22==
Where ˜U is a fixed and arbitrary real displacement vector. The derivative of the objective
function (compliance) can be seen as
∂c
∂xe
= −˜U T ∂K
∂xe
U,
(2.13)
when ˜U satisfies the adjoint equation:
F T −˜U T K = 0
(2.14)
It can be obtained directly for compliance that ˜U = U, and the sensitivity of the compliance
can then be easily calculated by taking the derivative, such that:
∂c
∂xe
= −p(xe)p−1uT
e keue
(2.15)
A key aspect from equation 2.15 is that all variables involved are related to the element
level and the sensitivity can be considered as localized [7]. Furthermore, the negative
sign also indicates the intuitive physics of adding more elements to increase stiffness
(decreasing compliance).
Restricting Gradients: Filtering Techniques
One challenge regarding the SIMP topology optimization problem is that it lacks solutions
in a continuum setting. The issue arises from the introduction of more and more holes in
the design domain while maintaining the defined upper bound on volume. This process
leads to the formation of microstructures with an improved use of material, which are not
isotropic and therefore cannot be modelled by the SIMP method [7]. Computationally, this
can be seen when refining the finite element mesh of the design domain, more holes will
tend appear when using a finer mesh and it ultimately results in much more detailed (and
different) layouts of the structure. The so­called mesh­dependency of results can be seen
in figure 2.10, which shows different optimization results for the classical MBB­problem.
Figure 2.10: Effect of mesh refinement, a) being a course mesh (2700 elements), b) with
4800 elements and c) a well refined mesh with 17200 elements. Extracted from [7]
To ensure the existence of solutions while controlling the mesh­dependency of the results,
different types of gradient constraints can be used. One approach is to implement den­
sity filters, which modifies the SIMP method by only allowing for filtered densities in the
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
15
==PAGE:23==
stiffness (leading to a reduced design space). The implementation works by multiplying
the density in equation 2.6 with a convolution kernel such that:
E(xe) = (Kr ∗xe)pE0
(2.16)
Where Kr is a convolution kernel like the one from equation 2.17.
Kr(∆) =
&
1 −∥∆∥
r
if
∥∆∥≤r
0
otherwise
(2.17)
With r being the density filter radius and ∆the position. The filter implies that the stiffness
at a certain position ∆is a function of the densities in all neighboring elements within a
certain radius.
Another approach to control the mesh­dependency problem is to implement filters for the
sensitivities. In this formulation, rather than the densities, the sensitivities of the objective
function (compliance) are modified based on the weighted average of the neighboring
element sensitivities.
∂c
∂xe
=
1
xe
+
i∈Ne
ˆHi
Ne
%
i
ˆHixi
∂c
∂xi
(2.18)
Where Ne is the total number of elements, and ˆHi is the convolution operator that can be
obtained based on the filtering radius and the center­to­center distance between elements
e and i:
ˆHi = rmin −dist(e, i),
{i ∈Ne| dist(e, i) ≤rmin}
(2.19)
It can be noted that outside the minimum radius area, the convolution operator ˆHi is equal
to zero. This also means that the sensitivity will converge to its original value when the
radius is close to zero, and alternatively all sensitivities will be the same when rmin tends
to infinity [7].
The improved effects of the filtering techniques on the optimization results can be seen
in figure 2.11. Although the mesh is being refined, the mesh­dependency problem is
corrected by the sensitivity filter. Instead of creating more detailed (and different) topology,
the discretization with more elements only increases the resolution of results. Using an
open source code for 2D topology optimization, the MBB problem was modelled with the
same boundary conditions but for three different meshes.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.11: Effect of mesh refinement with sensitivity filtering. Obtained through open­
source TopOpt 88 line code
Although the methods and formulations presented in the current section are valid for both
2D and 3D topology optimization, a discretization in 3 dimensions requires some addi­
tional changes to the code. In the next chapter of this work, the formulations addressed
in this section will be used for an expansion to a 3­dimensional design domain using the
top3D125 code by Ferrari and Sigmund [13].
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
17
==PAGE:25==
3
Optimization Problem
This chapter will bring forth the 3D expansion of the topology optimization method used in
a pre­existing Matlab code. This initial setup will be used to generate conceptual designs
for different load cases.
3.1
3D Topology Optimization
For the optimization of frame structures such as jackets, a common approach used in
the literature is the ground structure method in topology and sizing optimization (see [15]
and [26]). However, it can be noticed that the type of element formulation can restrain
the outcome of the designs. If beam elements are part of the formulation, the resulting
structures will be limited to what can be built with beams only. Aiming to expand the
possibilities for conceptual designs, the top3D125 code by Ferrari and Sigmund was used
as a basis and further modified.
3.1.1
Top3D125 Code: Density­Based SIMP Method
The formulation provided in section 2.2.1 is virtually the same as the one used here, how­
ever, an expansion to a 3D domain requires some modifications. The main difference lies
in the finite element discretization, in which elements will no longer be plane quadrilater­
als with four nodes in each corner. The top3D125 code considers a total Ne equi­sized
quadrilateral (cubic) elements based on a Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization (SIMP)
approach [13]. This means that each element will now be 8­node hexahedrons and con­
sequently show more degrees of freedom, affecting the overall size of the stiffness matrix
K along with the load and displacement vectors F and U. Here, the design variable
x = {xe}e=1:Ne ∈[0, 1]Ne is the density of each element, which can be divided into groups
of active and passive elements.
By specifying which elements in the design domain should be targeted for optimization,
only the active design variables xA will be taken into account in the optimization problem.
At the same time, the passive elements are initially set as either solid or void and remain
as such after the optimization [13]. Furthermore, a set of physical variables ˆxA is defined
by using a relaxed Heaviside projection used for volume preserving:
ˆxA = H ( ˜xe, η, β) = tanh (βη) + tanh (β ( ˜xe −η))
tanh (βη) + tanh (β (1 −η))
(3.1)
Where η and β are threshold and sharpness factor respectively [13]. The ˜xe term accounts
for the filtered element densities obtained through a convolution operator like the one
shown in equation 2.19 in section 2.2.1. The filtered field ˜x = Hx can be seen as a
function of the following operator:
H (xe, rmin) :=
+
i∈Ne he,ixi
+
i∈Ne he,i
(3.2)
Where Ne = {i | dist (Ωi, Ωe) ≤rmin} defines the radial distance between the center of
element Ωe and the center of element Ωi. Similarly, he,i = max (0, rmin −dist (Ωi, Ωe)).
The projection and filtering techniques are used to define the set of relevant design vari­
ables to be targeted in the optimization problem. As previously shown, the top3D125
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
18
==PAGE:26==
code is based on a minimum compliance problem with a SIMP model approach. The
compliance can be found based on the displacement vector U and the load vector F,
such that:
c (ˆx) = U T F
(3.3)
The optimization problem can then be written as:
min
xA∈[0,1]NeA
:
c(ˆx) = U T KU
st
:
V (ˆx) ≤f |Ωh|
:
KU = F
:
0 < ˆxmin ≤ˆx ≤1









(3.4)
Where f ∈(0, 1), is the volume fraction, V (ˆx) is the upper bound on material volume [13]
and Ωh is the 3D discretization of the entire domain (volume). In order to solve the above
problem, the equilibrium equation KU = F (linear elasticity) must also be fulfilled [13].
To solve the optimization problem defined in equation 3.4, the Top3D125 code uses a
nested iterative loop with a pre­defined maximum number of iterations and a stop criterion.
In each iteration loop, the displacement U is computed after defining the stiffness matrix
K = K (ˆx). To enable the use of gradient­based algorithms, a penalization scheme can be
used in determining the stiffness matrix. One very common material interpolation scheme
is the SIMP method, which relates the Young modulus to the physical variables [6].
E ( ˆxe) = Emin + ˆxp
e (E0 −Emin)
(3.5)
Having defined the the relation between the objective function and the design variables,
the element sensitivities can be computed as
∂c
∂xe , which is the same approach shown
in section 2.2.1. The methods addressed in the last chapter are also used for solving
the optimization problem. The design variables are updated based in the optimality cri­
teria (OC) method, which depends on the sensitivity of the compliance and the volume
constraint associated with the Lagrange multiplier λ [13].
An overview of the algorithm can be seen in figure 3.1. First, material and continuation
parameters are introduced, followed by the mesh generation by specifying the number of
elements in x­y­z directions which is used to determine the element level stiffness matrix.
Loads, supports, passive domains along with the implicit functions (projections, update
function) are set in this earlier stage.
Within the optimization loop, the physical density field is computed by using the projection
functions, the filtered design variables are also obtained in this stage. The equilibrium
equation is used to determine the displacements U, which in its turn is used to compute
the sensitivities. At last, the design variables are updated based on the OC method until
a certain threshold is reached and the optimum configuration is available [13].
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Overview of the optimization process, adapted from [13]
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
20
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Problem Description: Jacket Structure
The 3D discretization of the system into equi­sized quadrilaterals also implies that the
initial design geometry will be a regular quadrangular prism with sides equivalent to the
number of elements in the x­y­z directions. Therefore, by defining nelx, nely and nelz, the
base width and height of the jacket are also being defined indirectly.
Figure 3.2: 3D discretization of design domain. Relation between umber of elements in
x, y and z with overall dimensions.
Performing topology optimization for large structures is a task that requires a lot of com­
putational effort. For a very detailed analysis, a configuration with a fine mesh is needed,
which also means more of the 8­noded cubic elements will be present.
One approach to target large scale topology optimization is to use parallel computing. In
the work by Aage et al. [2], a framework is proposed for implementing parallel topology
optimization using the Portable and Extendable Toolkit for Scientific Computing (PETSc).
This can surely be seen as a good opportunity for future work in the design of even more
detailed jacket structures that can be created with finer discretizations. Although this
open­source code is available for educational purposes, in this current project it was not
taken into consideration for the sake of simplicity. With this in mind, the computational
limitations of a standard 3D topology optimization code restricted the individual element
sizes to 1 × 1 × 1m in x­y­z directions. Therefore, as an example, a jacket height of 70m
could only be divided in 70 elements and no more (in its finest configuration).
3.2.1
Jacket Geometry
As previously mentioned in section 1.1.2, a common water depth range for the application
of jacket/tripod structures in between 30 and 50 meters. In these conditions, most of the
jacket will be submerged but part of it will also remain above water along with the transition
piece to connect the turbine tower. Therefore, as a general rule, the jacket will usually be
around 15­20m taller than the actual water level. This arrangement can be seen in figure
3.3, where an average water depth of 50m was considered.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Sea depth and jacket height, adapted from [24]
For the sake of future comparison with other existing designs, the overall height of the
jacket was set to 70m including the transition piece. However, the base dimensions were
limited due to the overall number of elements. Considering a discretization with an indi­
vidual element size of 1m3, it was observed that a jacket with 70m in height would require
over forty­thousand elements to define the design domain. With nelx = 70 (height) and
nely = nelez = 24 (squared base width), a total of 70x24x24 = 40320 elements appeared
to be the computational limit for Matlab. Since no parallel computing techniques were
employed in the current work, a maximum base width of 24m was therefore defined as a
geometrical limitation. Other configurations with a smaller base width were still evaluated.
The final limitation in terms of the geometry is that the 3D quadrilateral elements will keep
the jacket legs from taking any other angle than 90◦(upright position). Most jacket designs
seen in the literature present a variation in the base width with regards to the top, leading
to a battered angle for the jacket legs. In order to achieve these designs with inclined
legs similar to the ones seen in figure 2.2, a new design variable (slope) would need to be
introduced in the optimization problem. In this case, the current element formulation with
8­noded cubic elements would no longer be applicable. Given the extensive modifications
that would be needed in order to accommodate this new design variable, it was decided
to maintain the original code for all the analysis to be carried out in this work.
3.2.2
Loads and Boundary Conditions
As seen in section 2.1.2, offshore support structures are exposed to several different
loading components that arise from wind, wave and currents. To determine these loads, a
thorough analysis of the wind interaction with the turbine is needed, which is not the focus
of this dissertation. Therefore, for simplicity and future comparison, the design load cases
were obtained from the aero­elastic simulations performed in the INNWIND reference 4­
legged jacket design report [9]. The fully assembled turbine with rotor, nacelle and tower
was modelled and analyzed using LACflex software for wind and ROSAP software to
compute wave and current effects. This is used as input for the Ultimate Limite State
(ULS) design load case analysis. Here, 80% of the maximum wind load and 100% of
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
22
==PAGE:30==
the maximum wave load are combined in a condition where wind, wave and current are
aligned [9].
The results from the analysis in the INNWIND reference report can be seen in table 3.1.
The governing load components would be the shear force and bending moment acting in
the top part of the jacket, a smaller portion of torsional moment is also present.
Table 3.1: Applied Loads based on INNWIND Reference Jacket report [9]
Governing Load
Component
Included Load
Factor
Vres
[MN]
Mres
[MNm]
MT
[MNm]
Shear Force Vres
Bending Moment Mres
1.1
2.797
255.370
2.395
For the preliminary optimization results which will be addressed in the next section, the
interaction between the seabed and foundation was neglected. Therefore, on the initial
designs presented in the current chapter, the jacket support structure is considered to
be fixed in all degrees of freedom at the bottom nodes. At the same time, to avoid an
uneven distribution of loads, the same were applied upon four different nodes at the top
of the jacket. All loaded nodes have a fixed radial distance from the center that would
be equivalent to the tower bottom section. A representation of the simplified boundary
conditions can be seen in figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Loaded and fixed nodes
3.3
Preliminary Optimization
Although it is known that the loads shown in table 3.1 are acting in combination, in order to
assess the influence of each load component in the outcome of the optimization, individual
analysis were carried out for each loading condition.
Considering that this preliminary optimization only aims to provide conceptual designs for
different individual loads, a discretization with less elements was adopted for the analysis
in this chapter. By employing Ωh = 40 × 12 × 12 (5760 elements) rather than Ωh =
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
23
==PAGE:31==
70 × 24 × 24 (40320 elements), a large reduction in computational costs is achieved.
Therefore, the costlier and detailed effects of mesh refinement will only be addressed at
a later stage.
3.3.1
Shear Force
The load described in 3.1 for the shear force was divided into four components acting on
the top four nodes of the jacket, each with a magnitude of approximately 0.7MN. Con­
sidering the mechanical properties of steel from table 2.1, the modulus of elasticity for
solid material E0 was used as 193GPa. For the optimization input parameters, a volume
fraction f = 0.15 was seen as an appropriate value that ensured no discontinuities in
the results. A penalization factor p = 3 and filter radius rmin =
√
3 were initially defined
based on typical values used for 3D topology optimization [13]. The top3D125 code how­
ever includes a continuation scheme to update some optimization parameters such as the
penalization factor p and the projection threshold and sharpness factors eta and β. The
results obtained for the first individual load case can be seen in figure 3.5
Figure 3.5: Optimization results for shear load case
The boundary conditions can be seen in the top left of figure 3.5. The optimization leads
to very uneven designs with some internal members for bracing. It can be seen that the
material distribution is concentrated on jacket sides where the force is acting, creating a
clear asymmetry. Different configurations with smaller volume fractions were also eval­
uated, but as expected, by using less material the overall compliance of the structures
would increase and some internal members would become disconnected.
3.3.2
Bending Moment
To create a bending moment at the top of the jacket, two pairs of vertical forces with the
same magnitude and opposing directions were applied at a fixed distance from the center.
This offset distance from center associated with the correct equivalent force components
can be used to define the resulting bending moment Mres of 255.37MNm. Similar opti­
mization parameters from the shear force analysis were used here, with a filter radius of
√
3, penalization factor p = 3, and (according to numerical tests performed in the MBB
beam problem in the work by Ferrari and Sigmund [13]) a threshold factor η = 0.5 was
adopted. The loading conditions and optimization results can be seen in figure 3.6.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6: Optimization results for bending load case
The resulting topology is highly dependant on the direction of the bending moment being
applied. Changes in the volume fraction and other optimization parameters did not show
significant difference in the geometry, which remained as two vertical legs placed on the
more demanded sides of the structure. However, it becomes clear that if the same load
were to come from a different direction, the structure seen in figure 3.6 would be highly
ineffective.
3.3.3
Torsional Moment
Similarly to the bending moment, opposing forces within a fixed distance to the center
were defined to create a torsion load acting on the structure.
Figure 3.7: Optimization results for torsion load case
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
25
==PAGE:33==
A torsional moment of approximately 2.4MNm was applied on the top nodes of the design
domain while the bottom nodes were fixed in all degrees of freedom. The same optimiza­
tion parameters described in previous analysis were used to obtain the results shown in
figure 3.7. The resulting material distribution leads to regular x­braces formed in the four
faces of the jacket.
3.3.4
Combined Loading
Although the individual analysis provide a good overview of how each load influences the
material distribution, it is important to evaluate the problem as a whole. In real operating
conditions, an offshore support structure will be subject to all the above mentioned loads
at once. With this in mind, the loading components were combined in order to asses what
kind of initial design could possibly withstand the conditions described in table 3.1. The
directions of the loads applied can be seen in figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Boundary conditions for combined loading
The initial element discretization evaluated was the same used for the individual cases,
being Ωh = 40 × 12 × 12. For the combined analysis, a volume fraction of 15% was
adopted, a penalization factor p = 3 and filter radius rmin =
√
3 were also established. As
mentioned before, the top3D125 code includes an option to select a simple density filter
(without the Heaviside projection) or the filtering scheme that allows the projection (with η
and β as parameters). Initially, the projection filtering method was used and the threshold
and sharpness parameters were defined as η = 0.5 and β = 1.0 (with a continuation
scheme for updating them).
From table 3.1 it can be seen that the governing load component is the bending moment,
this dominance can also be seen in the optimization results, which somewhat resemble
figure 3.6.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: Optimization results for combined load case. Ωh = 40 × 12 × 12
To obtain more detailed designs, a finer mesh was employed with more elements. The
new discretization with Ωh = 70 × 20 × 20 can be considered as proportional to the pre­
vious one, simply scaled by a fixed factor. However, by defining a design domain with
more of the 8–noded trilinear H8 elements, the computational costs increase substan­
tially. Besides the new mesh created, two different options for filter boundary conditions
were compared in regards to the global compliance, while maintaining the same volume
fraction and filter radius. The results in figures 3.10 and 3.11 clearly depicts the changes
in topological patterns. In terms of minimum compliance, the configuration with the Neu­
mann filter boundary conditions was the best of the two.
Figure 3.10: Optimization results with zero­Dirichlect filter boundary conditions. Ωh =
70 × 20 × 20
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.11: Optimization results with zero­Neumann filter boundary conditions. Ωh =
70 × 20 × 20
It can be seen that the main difference between the two are the brace connections, which
appear to be external for the zero­Dirichlect case, and internal for the zero­Neumann. In
terms of computational time, as expected the discretization with less elements (figure 3.9)
was the fastest with a time of 133.1s. The two other configurations had a lot more elements
and presented a significant increase in run time, with 1923.3s and 1977.2s to perform the
optimization. All Analysis were performed in Matlab under the same conditions using a
virtual environment in DTU’s databar. A summary of the preliminary results can be seen
in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Comparison of preliminary optimization results
Setup
Ωh
Filter Boundary
Condition
Iterations
Run Time [s]
Compliance
1
40 × 12 × 12
zero­Dirichlect
200 (max)
133.1
0.1276
2
70 × 20 × 20
zero­Dirichlect
163
1923.3
0.0532
3
70 × 20 × 20
zero­Neumann
176
1977.2
0.0512
The optimization results seen in figure 3.10 clearly depicts the influence of the governing
load components (shear and bending moment). The results appear to be a rough com­
bination of figures 3.5 and 3.6. However, like the individual cases, the results obtained
create very uneven designs that depend on the direction of forces and moments acting
on the jacket. It is worth to notice that in offshore conditions, wind and waves could come
from any direction of the jacket and therefore it is needed to have symmetry along all
jacket sides.
In order to enforce symmetry along all sides and achieve designs capable of sustaining
loads from all directions, a variable linking scheme with periodic unit cells can be intro­
duced [33]. The goal is to use a recurring arrangement of unit cells that share the same
topological design [29]. Besides the symmetry, one other point for improvement that will
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
28
==PAGE:36==
be considered in the next chapter is the boundary condition at the seabed. The soil­
structure interaction can be modelled to reflect the four foundation piles used to connect
the jacket legs, and this can be associated with added spring stiffness to model the soil
response in certain degrees of freedom. The details in the formulation needed to arrive
at a variable linking scheme and to modify the boundary conditions will be discussed in
the following chapter.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
29
==PAGE:37==
4
Variable Linking
The goal of this chapter is to go over the formulation necessary to introduce a variable link­
ing scheme to the pre­existing top3D125 code. The modifications will be used to enforce
symmetry along all jacket sides, including changes to the boundary conditions.
4.1
Enforcing Symmetry with Variable Linking
A finite periodic optimization can be seen as process in which a representative unit cell is
optimized and the resulting topology is reproduced to form a periodic macro­structure [29].
This approach can be used to enforce symmetry along the different sides of the jacket by
computing the element densities within a unit cell and then replicating it throughout the
entire design domain. The patterns can be replicated by translation, rotation, mirroring
or a combination of them, however, to enforce symmetry only the mirroring of patterns is
considered in this stage.
Considering a single layer of 16 cubic (8­noded) elements, this would yield a total of 16
element densities to be optimized. By defining a unit cell to be replicated, the number
of design variables to be optimized can be reduced significantly by simply mirroring the
patterns. This can be seen in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Overview of variable linking scheme with mirroring of patterns
Here, a single unit cell (matrix A) can be reproduced in order to define the entire design
domain (generating matrices B, C and D). Therefore, by applying this mirroring scheme,
the 16 initial design variables (on the left) can be reduced, or linked, to only the 3 variables
within A. The resulting matrices A, B, C and D are merged to build the original layer with 16
elements, but now with only 3 different element densities being distributed. The enforced
conditions of symmetry can be seen in figure 4.2.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: Enforced symmetry along different sides
It becomes clear that all element densities on side I are also the same on sides II, III and
IV. The mirroring technique shown in figures 4.1 and 4.2 is valid for one layer of elements,
in a 3D discretization several layers are present and therefore the mirroring procedure
has to be repeated for each vertical layer that is introduced. The necessary changes to
implement this numerical technique are detailed in the next section.
4.1.1
Formulation
The formulation needed to introduce variable linking is based on the work by K. Wu, O.
Sigmund and J. Du [33]. This can be done by using a local mapping matrix G0 composed
of ones and zeros, which is capable of indicating the relationship between the initial design
variables and the reduced variables within the unit cell. The size of the G0 matrix is
equivalent to Nlayer × ncell, that is, the total number of initial design variables in one layer
Nlayer by the number of reduced design variables in a single unit cell ncell.
As an example, by considering a simplified 3D discretization Ωh = 4 × 4 × 4, this would
define 4 vertical layers of 16 elements and therefore 16 design variables for each layer
(Nlayer = 16). As shown in figure 4.1, these 16 design variables can be reduced (or linked)
to only 3, being ncell = 3. For this case, the size of the local mapping matrix G0 would be
Nlayer × ncell = 16 × 3. At last, the local mapping matrix can be filled by applying a simple
rule: G0 (j, i) = 1 if the density of element j can be mapped to the i­th design variable in
the unit cell [33]. If that is not the case, then G0 (j, i) = 0.
The previous mapping rule can be implemented through a simple iterative loop based on
the mirrored patterns shown in figure 4.2. With a symmetry assembly matrix defined as:
S =
,A
B
C
D
-
(4.1)
Where A is the matrix representing a single unit cell and B, C and D are mirrored patterns
of A. The computation of the mapping rule can be done as follows:
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.3: Implementation of mapping rule
By employing this iterative loop for the example case of Ωh = 4 × 4 × 4, the resulting G0
matrix for the above described example case would be:
G0 =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0


Nlayer×ncell
(4.2)
It is worth noting that the above formulation was developed for two­dimensional design
domains, and therefore an adaptation is needed to account for 3D elements. As men­
tioned, the local mapping matrix G0 is only valid for a single layer of elements, a global
mapping matrix G valid for the entire design domain would require superimposed repe­
titions of the same initial G0 matrix. This can be achieved by using a Kronecker tensor
product operation relating the total number of layers (identity matrix of (nelx)) and the local
mapping matrix G0.
G = Inelx ⊗G0
(4.3)
When nelx = 4 e.g., the operator in 4.3 leads to an assembly of the global G matrix as:
G =


G0
0
0
0
0
G0
0
0
0
0
G0
0
0
0
0
G0


Ne×ne
(4.4)
Where G is the size of Ne (total number of elements) by ne (total number of mapped
design variables). Therefore, the global mapping matrix relates the initial vector of design
variables ρ (densities) and the vector of linked design variables from each layer κ:
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
32
==PAGE:40==
ρ = Gκ
(4.5)
At last, with a defined mapping matrix G it becomes easy to adjust the sensitivity analysis
of the objective and constraint functions. The relation is given by the transposed G matrix:
∂c
∂κ = GT ∂c
∂ρ
(4.6)
4.2
Adjusting Boundary Conditions
Once set all the necessary changes to the code to introduce a variable linking scheme,
one more adaptation is needed to the boundary conditions. Although a fully fixed base
can be a reasonable approximation of the conditions for the preliminary analysis carried
out in the previous chapter, it is known that in practice, these offshore structures are fixed
to the seabed through piles in the corners. In reality, the soil­foundation interaction allows
for some displacements in vertical and lateral degrees of freedom (DOF). Therefore, it is
important to capture this behavior with a proper model for the boundary conditions.
As discussed in section 2.1.2, the soil resistance to axial and lateral movement can be
defined as sets of springs that provide added linear stiffness to the structure’s overall stiff­
ness matrix K. To implement this approach, four patch areas were defined in the bottom
corners of the design domain and the desired nodal degrees of freedom are selected to
allow for an indexing operation with the stiffness matrix.
To understand this procedure, the first step is to select the nodes in the interface between
the four patches and the soil. Each node will have three degrees of freedom, one for
vertical movement (x­direction) and two for lateral movement (y and z­direction). In a
single vector, all the vertical degrees of freedom are stored (for every node within the
4 patch areas), where each position of this vertical DOF vector accounts for a specific
column and row of the stiffness matrix. Therefore, it provides relevant information of the
index positions of the stiffness matrix that require added spring stiffness in the vertical
direction. The same procedure is repeated for the lateral degrees of freedom that need
to be constrained with the spring.
Figure 4.4: Selected degrees of freedom for each corner position
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
33
==PAGE:41==
In the vertical direction, it was considered that a larger stiffness is required so that the
structure can be considered as nearly fixed, which is due to smaller soil displacement
in this direction. However, for the lateral direction several analysis were carried out to
evaluate what reasonable spring stiffness value could be added and what influence did it
show on the final structure. For the optimizations carried out in this section, a discretization
with Ωh = 70 × 20 × 20 elements was defined, with combined loads applied in the same
way as in section 3.3.4. A volume fraction of f = 0.15 was defined with a filter radius
of rmin =
√
3 and zero­Dirichlect filter boundary conditions. The re­defined boundary
conditions can be seen in figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Re­defined boundary conditions
By comparing the optimization results in figure 4.6, it becomes clear that no significant
changes in the topology were originated from the variation of lateral spring stiffness. Fur­
thermore, it was observed that if the stiffness in these DOFs was reduced too far (near­
zero), singularities started to occur in the global stiffness matrix, causing the system to
be under­constrained and therefore making it impossible to perform the finite element
calculations (solving the equilibrium equation).
Figure 4.6: Optimization results for different added lateral spring stiffness
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
34
==PAGE:42==
From figure 4.6, a direct influence of the boundary conditions on the global compliance
was also observed. As the compliance depends on the nodal displacements across the
structure, conditions with less constrained lateral degrees of freedom allowed for more
displacement of the structure and therefore increased the final output for compliance. The
same was observed for increasing corner patch areas. For a fully fixed base assumption
like in the previous chapter, the compliance was much smaller due to a larger contact
area with fully fixed conditions. By re­modelling the BCs to four corner areas, the overall
compliance of the resulting structures increased significantly.
At this stage, it was also observed that the optimization converged very quickly (in the
first 20­25 iterations), with no significant changes in compliance reduction after this. This
behavior can be seen in figure 4.7 where the smallest admissible lateral spring stiffness
(Kspring = 1 × 10−3) was used.
Figure 4.7: Compliance and topology convergence history
4.3
Overview of Results
Although the soil­foundation interaction model with springs did not produce any difference
in the resulting topology, an added value of Kspring = 1×10−3 in lateral DOFs was used for
the remainder of this dissertation to maintain a consistent approach in boundary conditions
and allow for future comparison of compliances in the same order of magnitude. In terms
of topology itself, the results obtained can be compared to the ones in the preliminary
analysis from the previous chapter.
The implementation of the variable linking scheme also reduces the amount of design
variables considered in the optimization. Although a reduced computational time was
expected, there was no improvement when compared to the results in section 3.3.4. One
assumption is that some of the iterative loops added to compute the degrees of freedom
to be constrained had a negative impact on the code’s performance, counterbalancing the
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
35
==PAGE:43==
benefits of the imposed symmetry. Table 4.1 gives an overview of the different results,
the compliances were not compared due to discrepancies in the boundary conditions
implemented in chapter 3 and the ones updated in section 4.2.
Table 4.1: Comparison of optimization results
Setup
Ωh
Variable
Linking
Filter Boundary
Condition
Run Time [s]
Iterations
1
70 × 20 × 20
No
zero­Dirichlect
1923.3
163
2
70 × 20 × 20
No
zero­Neumann
1977.2
176
3
70 × 20 × 20
Yes
zero­Dirichlect
2010.5
156
4
70 × 20 × 20
Yes
zero­Neumann
2498.8
194
Graphically, the results can be seen in figures 4.8 and 4.9, which show the changes in
material distribution once the variable linking scheme was implemented. Furthermore, a
comparison is made between the optimization results for the two different filter boundary
conditions.
Figure 4.8: New optimization results for zero­Dirichlect filter boundary condition
From figure 4.8, it becomes clear that the variable linking scheme was successful in en­
forcing symmetry along all sides of the jacket. Contrary to the previous optimization on the
left, the new design introduces a four­legged configuration of the jacket, which is already
more realistic.
By changing the filter boundary conditions, no apparent changes were made to the opti­
mized design, which can be seen in figure 4.9.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.9: New optimization results for zero­Neumann filter boundary condition
At this stage, clear improvements were made regarding the overall complexity of the gen­
erated designs. For offshore structures, not only is reducing weight important but also the
manufacturability of the components, which need to be assembled and transported out to
sea. Aiming to generate new conceptual designs that can be mass manufactured, a new
design framework is proposed and implemented in the following chapter.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
37
==PAGE:45==
5
Modular Designs
In the current chapter, the methodology used to enforce symmetry with variable linking
was expanded to account for modular designs by creating a translational periodic opti­
mization.
5.1
New Design Framework
Support structures can amount up to 20% of the total levelized cost of energy (LCOE)
[17], an efficient design framework should be able to generate initial designs capable of
supporting the constantly increasing size of offshore wind turbines, while retaining the
LCOE to an acceptable level.
One solution to reduce the costs associated with production and also logistics is to create
modular designs that can be mass produced and later assembled on­site. The concept is
based on generating identical sections that can be stacked on top of each other to build
a new jacket. An overview of this concept can be seen in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Mass manufacturing and assembly of jacket modules
Modifications to the top3D125 code are necessary to implement this approach. Now, be­
sides the variable linking scheme for symmetry, a vertical repetition of patterns is needed
and the numerical techniques used to make these changes will be disclosed in the fol­
lowing sections. The goal is to evaluate several configurations with different number of
vertical levels (or modules) and determine which design shows the best performance for
the given load conditions.
5.1.1
Formulation
The same approach used for variable linking can be extended to produce modular de­
signs. The entire formulation is based on modifying the assembly procedure for the global
mapping matrix G, which is responsible for relating the linked design variables with the
rest of the design domain. Looking back at the way G was defined with the Kronecker
tensor in equation 4.3:
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
38
==PAGE:46==
G = Inelx ⊗G0
(5.1)
Where G0 is the local mapping matrix used to mirror the patterns along the different faces,
and Inelx accounted for the total number of layers in vertical direction. To enforce modu­
larity, the formulation in equation 5.1 has to be modified. Here, the idea is to divide all the
vertical layers (nelx) into equal groups (or modules), so that a new modular Gmod matrix
can map the resulting topology for each module. With this purpose, the same formulation
with the Kronecker tensor can be implemented:
Gmod = Imod ⊗G0
(5.2)
The difference here is that the size of the identity matrix Imod is based on the number
of vertical layers for each module, while Inelx from equation 4.3 is proportional to the
total number of elements in x­direction (nelx). For example, considering a jacket with 70
elements in the height direction and divided into 5 modules, each module would have 14
elements and the size of Imod would be 14 × 14.
Since each module will be identical to the previous one, the global mapping matrix G will
then be a repetition of the Gmod matrix, it can be built by using the repmat function from
Matlab where Gmod is repeated for the total number of modules.
G =


Gmod
Gmod
...
Gmod


Ne×ne
(5.3)
Where the number of rows nmod accounts for the total number of modules, and therefore
defines how many times the Gmod matrix has to be repeated. In the end, the global G
matrix is still responsible for mapping the original design variables for the whole domain
ρ with the linked variables κ. The size of G has to be equivalent to Ne × ne, so that:
ρ = Gκ
(5.4)
This replicated pattern can also be seen as a translational periodic optimization described
by S. Thomas (2021) [29].
Figure 5.2: Translational periodic optimization, see [29]
To evaluate the results after this updated formulation, a configuration with Ωh = 70×20×20
and 5 modules was used for validation. The same loads and optimization parameters
were used as in section 4.2. It was seen that the results converged much faster, with only
64 iterations (as opposed to over 150 iterations in previous analysis) and a computational
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
39
==PAGE:47==
time of 757.3s (less than half of the previous time), evidencing the benefits of the reduced
design variables.
Figure 5.3: Compliance convergence history
The resulting geometry with 5 vertical modules can be seen in figure 5.4. In terms of
compliance, the new proposed design showed very similar results when compared to the
designs in chapter 4 (variable linking).
Figure 5.4: Conceptual design with 5 identical modules
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
40
==PAGE:48==
Although the formulation used enabled the creation of identical modules, the complex
patterns would be difficult to recreate with current manufacturing methods. Furthermore,
the repetition of modules leaves no space for a transition piece in the interface between
jacket and turbine tower.
5.1.2
Top Transition Part
The formulation in the previous section forces the topological patterns to repeat along the
height of the jacket. However, when closer to the jacket top where the loads will be acting,
it is interesting to allow for the code to generate optimized patterns for load distribution.
This can be done by defining a transition part with a certain range of layers in which the
pattern repetition would not be enforced.
Once again, to implement this change it is necessary to modify the formulation for the
global mapping matrix G. The key is to reserve a certain number of vertical layers for the
top transition section, similarly to equation 5.2 a top transition piece mapping matrix Gtop
can be defined as:
Gtop = Itop ⊗G0
(5.5)
The identity matrix Itop is defined by the number of elements in x­direction (height) for
the top transition part, this can also be seen as the number of vertical layers for the top
piece. From other reference jacket designs, it was considered that a common height for
the transition part would be in a range from 8 −10m, and this was taken as baseline for
future analysis [9].
The global mapping matrix G can be assembled based on the contributions from the
modular mapping matrix Gmod and the top transition piece matrix Gtop. Numerically, this
can be done by defining a block diagonal matrix with both the repetitions of Gmod and
Gtop:
G =


Gmod
Gmod
...
Gmod
Gtop


Ne×ne
(5.6)
From equation 5.6 it is known that the size of G must be equivalent to Ne × ne, and this is
a condition to be met when putting together Gmod and Gtop.
In this way, the following geometrical parameters are now necessary in order to define
the optimization problem:
• Number of modules nmod
• Number of elements in height direction for top transition part neltop
• Number of elements in height direction for each module nelmod
Some key aspects need to be taken into consideration when defining the above character­
istics. One significant cost driver in manufacturing is the overall number of welding spots.
Configurations with five or more modules will consequently present a larger amount of
joint connections, and therefore will require more welding spots. Due to this condition,
designs with three or four modules would usually be preferred.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
41
==PAGE:49==
Based on reference designs, it is also known that the top transition part should have
around 10m of height. Therefore with a fixed overall jacket height of 70m and a pre­
established element size of 1 × 1 × 1m, this infers a transition piece with neltop = 10.
Different configurations can be achieved by simply changing the number of modules (and
therefore modifying nelmod.
Validation
For an initial validation of the modifications made to the code, a jacket configuration with
Ωh = 70 × 20 × 20, neltop = 10 for the top transition part and four modules was analyzed.
Here, the same combined load case was evaluated for a volume fraction of f = 0.15, initial
penalization factor p = 3 and filter radius of
√
3. Like the previous analysis in this chapter,
the Heaviside projection filtering scheme was used with zero­Dirichlect filter boundary
conditions. The results obtained can be seen in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Optimization results after introduction of top transition piece
The new conceptual design brings well defined x­braces that resemble real­life structures
employed for offshore conditions. Although it is possible to see the pattern repetition
along the height of the jacket, the optimization failed to generate 4 identical modules.
This can be seen specifically in the bottom section (circled in yellow), where the preferred
configuration with four­legs on the corners was not reached.
5.1.3
Bottom Transition Section
As seen for the top transition part, regions where loads are being applied (or the bottom
fixation) require additional freedom to generate topological designs capable of distribut­
ing and absorbing the loads. The way that the mapping matrix G was previously built,
accidentally enforced the modularity also in the bottom section of the jacket, which might
have been the cause for the unexpected x­braces connected to the floor.
The solution implemented to address this issue is based on section 5.1.2. The same
approach used for the top transition part can be used to generate a bottom transition, with
it’s own component of the global mapping matrix, Gbottom.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
42
==PAGE:50==
Gbottom = Ibottom ⊗G0
(5.7)
From equation 5.7, Ibottom is defined based on the number of layers in the bottom section
(nelbottom), which also becomes an geometrical input for the optimization problem. The new
assembly of the G matrix will now take into consideration the contribution of the bottom
section Gbottom, the repetition of the modular patterns Gmod and finally the top transition
Gtop:
G =


Gbottom
Gmod
Gmod
...
Gmod
Gtop


Ne×ne
(5.8)
To confirm that the above changes can actually fix the issue for the bottom connection
and generate 4 identical modules, a new analysis was carried out with the following geo­
metrical configuration, where each layer is equivalent to 1m in height.
Table 5.1: Geometrical inputs for optimization
­
Configuration
Discretization Ωh
70 × 20 × 20
Number of modules
4
Top transition
10 layers
Bottom transition
4 layers
For the sake of comparison, the same optimization setup used for the analysis in figure
5.5 was repeated.
Figure 5.6: Effects of bottom transition section on optimization results
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
43
==PAGE:51==
When compared to the initial results shown in figure 5.5, the new optimized structure
shows a significant improvement specially in regards to the bottom section, where now
it is possible to see 4 well defined legs that can be easily mounted on the 4 foundation
piles.
Figure 5.7: Compliance convergence history
After the first 50­70 iterations, no significant changes occurred for the topology, however,
only after 128 iterations the code reached its stop criteria, with a computational time of
1541.3s and very similar compliance to the one shown in figure 5.5. At this stage, the
code is capable of successfully replicating the optimization patterns along the height of
the jacket. A translational periodic optimization similar to the one shown in figure 5.2 can
be seen below.
Figure 5.8: Translational periodic pattern as in [29]
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
44
==PAGE:52==
6
Results and Discussion
Depending on the base width of the jacket and the number of modules to be replicated,
different configurations of designs can be achieved. One restraint is related to the base
width and the increased computational cost for larger structures with more elements. As
already mentioned in section 3.2.1, a configuration with Ωh = 70 × 24 × 24 represents
the computational limit of the code within Matlab, any finer discretization simply cannot
be processed due to memory issues. For comparison, designs with 1­5 modules and two
different base widths were evaluated (20 and 24m).
6.1
Design Configurations
An overview of the different configurations can be seen in table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Different input parameters for optimization
Configuration
ID
Discretization
Ωh
Number of
Modules nmod
Top
Layers
Bottom
Layers
Layers
per Module
Design 1
70 × 20 × 20
1
10
4
56
Design 2
70 × 24 × 24
1
10
4
56
Design 3
70 × 20 × 20
2
10
4
28
Design 4
70 × 24 × 24
2
10
4
28
Design 5
70 × 20 × 20
3
10
3
19
Design 6
70 × 24 × 24
3
10
3
19
Design 7
70 × 20 × 20
4
10
4
14
Design 8
70 × 24 × 24
4
10
4
14
Design 9
70 × 20 × 20
5
10
5
11
Design 10
70 × 24 × 24
5
10
5
11
The number of elements in the bottom transition section was adapted to ensure that when
divided by the total number of modules, an integer number of elements for each module
was achieved. This explains the differences for the number of layers in the bottom tran­
sition.
Layers per Module = Total Layers −(Top + Bottom Layers)
Number of Modules
(6.1)
For future comparison, all optimizations performed in this section had the same loads,
boundary conditions and optimization parameters as in the previous sections of the current
chapter.
6.1.1
Designs 1 and 2: Configurations with 1 Module
A configuration with one single module can be seen as a structure with no repetition of pat­
ters, like the approach from chapter 4 in which symmetry is enforced but no translational
movement of patterns is imposed. As expected, the results for design 1 (Ωh = 70×20×20)
are nearly the exact same as the ones shown in section 4.3.
After the first 20­25 iterations, no relevant updates in the topology were seen and the
same was valid for the compliance, which reached a minimum value of 122.3. Aiming to
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
45
==PAGE:53==
reduce the computational time required, a maximum limit of 70 iterations was defined for
all future analysis. The resulting topology can be seen in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Optimization results for Design 1
The convergence history plot can be seen in figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Compliance convergence history for Design 1
For the design configuration 2, a discretization with more elements is used, being Ωh =
70 × 24 × 24. This means that the entire design domain includes over 12000 elements
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
46
==PAGE:54==
more than the previous one, which has a negative impact on the computational costs and
is reflected on the overall run time that more than doubled.
Figure 6.3: Optimization results for Design 2
Like in figure 6.2, it was observed again that the topology patterns suffered no changes
after the first 20­25 iterations. The same was valid for the compliance.
Figure 6.4: Compliance convergence history for Design 2
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
47
==PAGE:55==
6.1.2
Designs 3 and 4: Configurations with 2 Modules
The design case 3 introduces two modules with 28 vertical layers each, with Ωh = 70×20×
20. The reduced iterations aligned with a second module (more linked design variables)
made it possible to arrive at reasonable results with less run time.
Figure 6.5: Optimization results for Design 3
The convergence history plot can be seen in figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Compliance convergence history for Design 3
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
48
==PAGE:56==
The optimization results for design case 4 presented a slightly smaller compliance than
the previous configuration. The material distribution achieved can be seen in figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: Optimization results for Design 4
The new geometry shows some variations in thickness of the jacket legs, especially in the
bottom transition section and in positions closer to the x­braces. The convergence history
plot can be seen in figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: Compliance convergence history for Design 4
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
49
==PAGE:57==
6.1.3
Designs 5 and 6: Configurations with 3 Modules
From the optimization results for design case 5, an improvement was seen regarding the
computational time, which appeared to decrease as more modules were present. This
effect is mainly due to more linked design variables, and therefore less densities to be
optimized in the entire domain.
Figure 6.9: Optimization results for Design 5
For the compliance, no difference was seen between configurations with 2 and 3 modules.
Figure 6.10: Compliance convergence history for Design 5
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
50
==PAGE:58==
For the design case 6, the element discretization Ωh = 70 × 24 × 24 led to a small im­
provement on minimizing the compliance. For all configurations analyzed up to this point,
it can be inferred that structures with larger base width showed better results in overall
stiffness.
Figure 6.11: Optimization results for Design 6
Both topology and compliance seemed to converge in the first 20 iterations. The results
can be seen in figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12: Compliance convergence history for Design 6
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
51
==PAGE:59==
6.1.4
Designs 7 and 8: Configurations with 4 Modules
The resulting topology for the design case 7 can be seen in figure 6.13, the compliance
obtained is very similar to results in cases 3 and 5.
Figure 6.13: Optimization results for Design 7
Unlike the previous cases, for the configurations with 4 modules it can be seen that more
iterations were needed to achieve structures with no discontinuities.
Figure 6.14: Compliance convergence history for Design 7
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
52
==PAGE:60==
As expected, the geometry with a wider base in design case 8 led to improvements in
minimizing the compliance. However, the results were no better than the ones achieved
in previous configurations that also had Ωh = 70 × 24 × 24.
Figure 6.15: Optimization results for Design 8
The convergence history for design 8 can be seen in figure 6.16. In this case, all the
maximum iterations established (70) were neeed to produce a feasible structure.
Figure 6.16: Compliance convergence history for Design 8
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
53
==PAGE:61==
6.1.5
Designs 9 and 10: Configurations with 5 Modules
Initial attempts showed that the maximum limit for iterations was not enough to create fully
connected x­braces. Therefore, for design case 9, 78 iterations were needed to create a
feasible structure.
Figure 6.17: Optimization results for Design 9
The different steps in the topology design can be seen in figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: Compliance convergence history for Design 9
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
54
==PAGE:62==
For the configurations with 5 modules, the task to generate good designs was more chal­
lenging and this was observed especially for design case 10. The optimization failed to
create a feasible design, some discontinuities can be seen for the x­braces in the upper­
most module.
Figure 6.19: Optimization results for Design 10
A much larger number of iterations was required as well, which explains the increased
computational time trun.
Figure 6.20: Compliance convergence history for Design 10
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
55
==PAGE:63==
6.2
Overview of Results
In the previous section, 10 different design configurations were evaluated regarding the
compliance and design convergence. It becomes clear that this framework is capable of
generating several conceptual designs that can be suited for offshore applications. For all
cases, 4­legged designs with well defined x­braces were obtained from the optimization,
which resembles some traditional jacket designs seen today in the industry. Table 6.2
brings a summary of the results achieved.
Table 6.2: Overview of optimization results for different cases
Design
Base Width [m]
Modules nmod
Iterations
Time per
iteration [s]
Compliance
1
20
1
64
13.03
122.299
2
24
1
70 (max)
31.79
122.284
3
20
2
70 (max)
12.28
122.302
4
24
2
70 (max)
30.64
122.286
5
20
3
70 (max)
12.17
122.302
6
24
3
70 (max)
30.41
122.286
7
20
4
70 (max)
12.02
122.303
8
24
4
70 (max)
30.24
122.288
9
20
5
78
12.13
122.303
10
24
5
95
30.93
122.288
One key aspect that became evident from the analysis carried out in the previous section
is the benefit of reducing the overall number of design variables to be considered in the
optimization. A larger number of modules means that more of the same linked variables
will be replicated across the design domain, which reduces computational costs. This
pattern can be seen in the time per iteration that steadily decreases as configurations
with more modules are implemented.
For configurations with 3 or less modules, it was seen that no significant changes to com­
pliance and material distribution happened after the first 20 iterations. Configurations
with 4 and 5 modules, however, required more iterations before arriving at feasible de­
signs without voids and missing connections. This effect is believed to be a source of
the increased complexity of additional x­braces in the setups with more modules. At the
same time, a fixed volume fraction f = 0.15 also increases the challenge of finding a good
material distribution without leaving any voids or introducing variations in the thickness of
some members, which could explain the increased computational time for design cases
9 and 10.
Figure 6.21: Issues with design case 10. a) Missing connection for x­brace. b) Changes
in cross section
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
56
==PAGE:64==
From the results in table 6.2, it can also be seen that all configurations with a wider base
presented a slightly smaller compliance. The benefits in overall stiffness from wider con­
figurations could not be further assessed due to computing limitations with very large
number of elements, which evidentiates the need for other techniques such as parallel
computing to deal with optimization of large structures.
Evaluating the compliance, design case 2 with 24m in base width and 1 module showed
the best results with the smallest compliance out of all configurations. The material dis­
tribution for case 2 is very irregular, with a sudden increase in the cross­sectional size of
the jacket legs that can be seen in detail in figure 6.22.
Figure 6.22: Irregularities in design case 2
The complex profiles and very large cross­sectional area closer to the top make it difficult
and expensive to manufacture this structure. The presence of only one module also rules
out the option to mass manufacture identical parts that can be assembled. Therefore, the
gains in overall stiffness may not compensate the manufacturing costs associated.
Although some of the best results regarding the compliance were achieved for configu­
rations with one or two modules, it is hard to determine which of the structures is better
suited because other design aspects such as fatigue, buckling and stress levels on the
members were not evaluated in the optimization. Therefore, the results shown in the cur­
rent section only serve as conceptual designs and still require further validation. However,
the structures that resembled the most conventional jacket designs and would better suit
the mass manufacturing approach of identical modules are the ones with three and four
levels.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
57
==PAGE:65==
(a) Design 5
(b) Design 6
(c) Design 7
(d) Design 8
Figure 6.23: Design configurations with 3 and 4 modules
By considering the jacket legs and middle bracing patterns as tubular elements, the de­
signs shown in figure 6.23 can be reconstructed. The diameters of each member would
require re­sizing but the coordinate positions of the joint connections can be used as
references for creating the more common configuration of frame structures. The main
challenge would be to replicate the top transition part, which cannot be built using tubular
elements. Some solutions in the industry can be seen as a good approximation of the
topology optimization results for the top piece, this can be seen in figure 6.24
(a) Design case 6
(b) Reference design from COWI [1]
Figure 6.24: Similarities of x­brace patterns and general shape of top transition part be­
tween optimization results and with real life designs [1]
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
58
==PAGE:66==
7
Reconstruction With 3D Trusses
One key aspect that was taken into consideration is the manufacturability of the designs
obtained in chapter 6. Although the optimization results show what the ideal structures
should look like, the complex shapes, connections and profiles make it very difficult to
reproduce these geometries based on current manufacturing processes. Therefore, these
configurations can be considered as conceptual designs that may serve as inspiration or
guidelines to new and reconstructed jacket substructures.
During this chapter, a framework will be presented for reconstructing the optimized de­
signs using truss elements as a post­processing technique. The new jacket structures
can be manufactured using conventional methods known to the industry. For a sake of
future comparison, a reference jacket design from INNWIND was also be modelled under
similar conditions [9].
7.1
Mapping of Coordinates
The symmetry conditions imposed with the variable linking scheme can significantly fa­
cilitate the procedure for mapping the nodal coordinates. Since all sides of the jacket are
identical, it is only necessary to measure the nodal positions in one face and then replicate
the distances obtained form the other sides.
All optimization results were exported from Matlab as .vtk files, which can be used for
external visualization in specialized programs for graphics such as Paraview. However,
due to the practicality of using annotating functions from commercial CAD software, the
optimized geometries were converted to .stl files compatible with SolidWorks. Figure 7.1
shows an example of the coordinate mapping procedure for the joint connections.
Figure 7.1: Example of coordinate mapping procedure using SolidWorks
Once all joint coordinates are defined, it is possible to recreate the jacket as frame struc­
ture. For the top transition part, which presents a very complex geometry, it is difficult to
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
59
==PAGE:67==
accurately model the topological pattern using truss elements. For this reason, additional
nodal positions and elements were introduced in the top part of the jacket.
As an example, the mapping procedure was carried out for one design configuration with
4 modules that was previously obtained. Nevertheless, to properly define the diameters
of each element and achieve a more realistic design, a new optimization is proposed. The
details regarding the formulation and the resulting designs will be addressed in the next
sections of this chapter.
7.2
Topology Optimization of 3D Truss Elements
Most applications of topology optimization with frame structures are performed with Tim­
oshenko or Bernoulli beam elements. The advantage of employing beams over trusses
in finite element applications is that beams are able to resist both twisting and bending
moments at the joint connections, which is not the case for truss elements (as it will be
seen in the next subsection). The choice of element formulation used to discretize the
domain was defined based on practicality due to a pre­existing code for topology opti­
mization of truss structures. The goal of this chapter is only to introduce possibilities for
post­processing and reconstruction of the jacket designs previously obtained, which fol­
lows the same basis regardless of the element formulation. For more accurate results in
modelling the jackets and for an optimization of the tubular sections (regarding diameter
and wall thickness), it is recommended as future work to use beam elements.
To optimize the size of each truss member, a 2D truss Matlab code developed for a pre­
vious course was expanded for 3D applications. The code is based on a minimum com­
pliance formulation with the element densities as the design variable.
min :
f({ρ})
st :
g({ρ}) = {ν}T {ρ} −V ∗≤0,
:
{ρmin} ≤{ρ} ≤{1} ,



(7.1)
Where f({ρ}) is the objective function (compliance), and g({ρ}) is the volume constraint
function. The latter is based on the element volume vector {ν} and the upper bound on
material volume V ∗[28]. To define V ∗, the overall volume of the reference jacket from
INNWIND was used as an initial estimate for the optimization.
Since the interest is not to eliminate members and actually define the optimum densities
for each element, the minimum density ρmin was set to 0.4 instead of a value close to zero
(which would represent a void element). Therefore, the vector of element densities {ρ} is
defined in a range such that ρ ∈[0.4, 1].
The optimality criteria approach is used to solve the optimization problem. This approach
is based on the ratio between the sensitivity of the objective function and product of the
sensitivity of the volume constraint and the Lagrange multiplier (λ) [28]. The condition for
optimality can be seen in equation 7.2.
−df
dρe
λ dg
dρe
= 1,
for
e = 1, · · · , NE
(7.2)
The Lagrange multiplier can be obtained from a bi­section scheme, it is later used as input
for the heuristic updating rule within the optimization loop. In each iteration, the vector of
element densities is changed based on the on the constant energy density rule. This will
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
60
==PAGE:68==
determine for each element, if the density should be brought to the upper or lower bound
of the range defined in equation 7.1.
7.2.1
Input Coordinates and Element Connectivity
As input for the optimization, all nodal positions were extracted from the simplified 3D
model in SolidWorks. Along with the joint coordinates, each truss element was defined
within the topology matrix, which states which two nodes are being connected for the
respective element.
The node and element numbering scheme can have a significant impact on the assembly
of the global stiffness matrix. Depending on the numbering, the overall bandwidth of
the stiffness matrix can be reduced, ensuing in lower computational effort for the FEM
calculations. In certain cases however, singularities may occur for joint connections with
multiple elements.
The initial input files considered the x­braces as four different elements with an indepen­
dent nodal position in between. It was observed that for this configuration, truss elements
cannot properly model the middle joint. The resulting stiffness matrix would present sev­
eral columns filled with zeros and the code would then fail to calculate the displacements
for these middle nodes, clearly showing why beam elements would be a better suited op­
tion. The solution shown in figure 7.2 replaces the four different elements in the x­braces
with a simpler model.
Figure 7.2: Element connectivity scheme for the x­braces with overlapping elements
The new element numbering scheme was successful in determining the nodal displace­
ments. The resulting input files contained all the information necessary for the optimiza­
tion, including the loads from table 3.1 and the boundary conditions fixing the bottom
nodes.
7.2.2
Reconstructed Jacket
For comparison with the INNWIND reference jacket, one of the jacket configurations with
four modules was reconstructed with 3D truss elements. The densities of each element
were optimized and used as scaling factors for determining the cross­sectional area. The
results obtained for the configuration with 20­by­20m base width and 4 modules can be
seen in figure 7.3
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 7.3: Reconstruction of design case 7 with trusses
Based on the overall dimensions and the diameters of the different tubular sections of
the INNWIND reference jacket, the nodal positions were extracted in order to model the
reference jacket with truss elements in a similar manner.
Figure 7.4: Reconstruction of INNWIND reference jacket with trusses [9]
With both structures modelled in the same conditions, although the truss model is not the
best suitable option and even though the actual numerical values may not be accurate, the
geometries of the two designs can be compared regarding approximate overall weight,
stress level on truss members and compliance.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
62
==PAGE:70==
7.3
Results and Comparative Analysis
As mentioned, the truss model brings several inaccuracies to the results. The tubular
sections of the real designs are considered solid truss elements with an equivalent area,
which has a direct effect on the maximum stress observed for the two configurations.
Although the numerical results may not be correct, they still serve the purpose of allowing
for a comparison between the two configurations. After all, the influence of nodal positions
and geometrical parameters in the overall performance can still be seen regardless of the
model employed. For future work and an accurate representation of the structures, a
beam element formulation is proposed along with an optimization of the diameter of each
member and the wall thickness.
Figure 7.5 brings an overview of the element stress distribution for the reconstructed jacket
structures. The top transition part where loads are being applied are naturally subject to
higher stresses and therefore require a more detailed design. Since in real applications
the top piece is not built with tubular members, it would not make sense to compare the
maximum stress that is present in these regions.
(a) Design case 7
(b) INNWIND reference jacket design
Figure 7.5: Stress plot for the two jacket structures.
From the color shading, it is already possible to see that elements in figure 7.5b are under
smaller stresses than the proposed design in figure 7.5a, which is likely due to the larger
base width of the INNWIND configuration.
Table 7.1 brings an overview of the different aspects of the two designs. Here, the max­
imum stress σmax is obtained by disconsidering the stress values for the top transition
part.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
63
==PAGE:71==
Mass [tons]
σmax [MPa]
Compliance
Design case 7 (70x20x20)
1185
9.32
1.75E05
INNWIND Jacket
1855
6.03
1.31E05
Table 7.1: Comparison of design case 7 and INNWIND reference jacket design geome­
tries
As observed in chapter 6, once again the configuration with larger base width outper­
formed the others regarding the compliance and stress level. Design case 7 showed
slightly larger stresses but presented a much lighter structure. Other important design as­
pects such as resistance to buckling, fatigue, and the natural frequencies of the designs
were not evaluated in the current chapter. These factors are also very important in deter­
mining the feasibility of the designs and should be taken into consideration as additional
constraints in the optimization problem.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
64
==PAGE:72==
8
Conclusions
The main objective of this work was to develop a framework capable of creating diverse
designs and modular structures by implementing different numerical techniques such as
variable linking to impose symmetry, modified boundary conditions to model the interac­
tion with the seabed and repetition of patterns through a translational periodic optimization
setup.
The original top3D125 code by Ferrari and Sigmund (2020) was used for an initial analysis
with a fully fixed base. The loads acting on the structure were obtained from simulations
performed in the INNWIND reference jacket report, which accounted for wind, wave and
current effects on a generic structure. The contributions of these environmental factors
were extracted as equivalent forces, twisting and bending moments which served as in­
put for the topology optimization analysis carried out in this thesis. Both individual and
combined contribution of loads were evaluated to see how different types of moments and
forces could affect the resulting topology. With the initial baseline algorithm, it was ob­
served that the optimization results generated highly asymmetrical structures influenced
by the governing load components and the directions in which the forces and moments
were applied. In offshore conditions, perfect symmetry is needed to account for the wave
and wind forces that come from different directions, which highlights the importance of
enforcing symmetry on the designs.
By introducing a variable linking scheme with mirroring of patterns, it was possible to
enforce symmetry on all jacket sides. The implementation required a modification to the
approach described in the work by Wu et al. [33], namely the mapping matrix G had
to be reformulated to account for a 3D design domain. By linking design variables, not
only was the overall number of variables for the optimization reduced, but the topological
results converged much faster. Furthermore, updated boundary conditions modelling the
four foundation piles in the bottom (along with its interaction with the seabed) gave room
four more realistic designs with well­defined jacket legs. The approach used was to model
vertical and lateral movement of the piles in the soil by introducing the contribution of linear
springs in the stiffness matrix. This was done for the nodal positions (and its DOFs) in the
four bottom corner areas of the design domain, and different setups with increasing values
of added spring stiffness were evaluated to see the effect on the resulting geometry. At
this stage it was observed that regardless of the spring conditions (fully fixed or nearly free
to move), the resulting designs all showed the same topology, but the overall compliance
significantly decreased if the base was considered as fully fixed in lateral movement.
The last numerical technique applied to improve the designs was based on translational
periodic optimization. Here, topological patterns were replicated along the height to suc­
cessfully create modular designs that can be mass produced. The repetition of patterns
also had a positive impact on the CPU time, which steadily decreased as configurations
with more modules were introduced (more linked variables for the optimization). The ex­
pansion to modular design required further modifications to the mapping matrix G, also
including a top and bottom transition section to fix irregularities in the material distribution
in these regions. By employing this approach, structures with well defined x­bracing pat­
terns and with identical modules were achieved, resembling some of the traditional jacket
designs seen today in the industry.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure 8.1: Improvements in optimization after variable linking scheme and modularity
The aforementioned framework made it possible to create several configurations with dif­
ferent number of modules and different dimensions for each. In chapter 6, 10 different
conceptual designs were evaluated for two distinguished base widths and configurations
with 1­5 modules. One key take from this comparative analysis is that no clear bene­
fits were seen from employing 5 modules, which only made it more difficult to arrive at
feasible designs without any voids and discontinuities. Although the configuration with no
repetition of patterns presented the lowest compliance value, it also showed very complex
profiles and large cross­sectional areas that would significantly increase manufacturing
costs. For this reason, and due to similar structural performance, designs with 3 and 4
modules were favored due to the possibility of mass manufacturing of the modules.
It is worth pointing, however, that the element discretization with equi­sized 3D quadri­
laterals limited the batter angle of the legs, resulting in configurations with completely
upright legs. A new element formulation with a tapered scaling of the 8­noded elements
associated with an additional optimization variable (jacket leg slope) would be the next
step in future work to increase the possibilities of feasible designs. Furthermore, high
computational efforts became a significant challenge when dealing with large structures
that require an extensive number of elements to be defined. It becomes evident the need
to improve and create very compact and efficient algorithms when dealing with three­
dimensional topology optimization, where one option for future work is the implementation
of parallel computing techniques to provide more detailed and accurate designs.
Although the optimization results show what the ideal structures should look like and the
modular approach could theoretically allow for mass manufacturing, the complex shapes,
connections and profiles make it very difficult to reproduce these geometries based on
current manufacturing processes. Until new solutions in manufacturing arrive, these con­
figurations can be used as conceptual designs serving as inspiration or guidelines to new
and reconstructed jacket substructures. With well­defined modules and x­braces, it is
possible to map the coordinates of each connection joint and recreate the designs using
traditional frame structures. In the current project, the reconstruction was done with 3D
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
66
==PAGE:74==
truss structures, which showed several disadvantages especially when evaluating twisting
and bending moments in the joint connections. One approach used to simplify the prob­
lem was to remove intermediate nodes in x­braces by creating overlapping elements,
which allowed for the analysis of a reconstructed 4 module jacket design with trusses.
This post­processing technique can be better used if beam elements are employed rather
than trusses, and if the diameter and thicknesses of the tubular members can be opti­
mized rather than the truss element densities. Other failure modes such as buckling and
fatigue can be used as optimization constraints, leading to much more reliable designs.
The current work was successful in creating a new design framework and implementing
the numerical methods and extensions to the 3D topology optimization formulation. A
wide range of design configurations were made possible, and even better designs can be
achieved if some of the recommendations for future work are implemented. Furthermore,
the application of these methods can be expanded to other problems in the offshore wind
industry, one consideration is interchangeability of the designs, with the possibility to cre­
ate universal jackets for different applications, focusing mainly on the individual design
for the top piece and the foundation studies. Another application is to focus on designs
of semi­submersible structures for floating turbines, along with a study to understanding
how to model the boundary conditions for floating structures. In any case, the possibili­
ties for application of 3D topology optimization are countless, and some of the numerical
techniques implemented in this work were proven to be effective.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
67
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
COWI A/S. “Offshore Wind Farms. Selected Project References”. In: COWI Tech­
nical Brochure (2021).
[2]
Niels Aage, Erik Andreassen, and Boyan Stefanov Lazarov. “Topology optimiza­
tion using PETSc: An easy­to­use, fully parallel, open source topology optimization
framework”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization (2014).
[3]
European Environment Agency. “Europe’s onshore and offshore wind energy po­
tential. An assessment of environmental and economic constraints”. In: EEA Tech­
nical Report (2009).
[4]
Yong Bai and Wei­Liang Jin. Marine Structural Design (Second Edition). Elsevier
Ltd., 2015, pp. 197–227.
[5]
Jim Banks. Why offshore wind partnerships are proving so attractive to oil and gas
companies. 2021. URL: https://www.nsenergybusiness.com/features/oil-companies-
offshore-wind/.
[6]
Martin P. Bendsøe and Ole Sigmund. “Material interpolation schemes in topology
optimization”. In: Archive of Applied Mechanics (1999).
[7]
Martin P. Bendsøe and Ole Sigmund. Topology Optimization. Theory, methods and
applications. Springer, 2004.
[8]
William Beuckelaers. “Numerical Modelling of Laterally Loaded Piles for Offshore
Wind Turbines”. In: Doctor Thesis, University of Oxford (2017).
[9]
T. von Borstel. “Design report ­ reference jacket”. In: Technical report D4.3.1, IN­
NWIND.EU (2013).
[10]
I­Wen Chen et al. “Design and Analysis of Jacket Substructures for Offshore Wind
Turbines”. In: Energies (2016).
[11]
Matweb Database. Material Property Data: AISI Type 316L Stainless Steel, an­
nealed bar. 2020. URL: https://www.matweb.com/.
[12]
L. Fenech, T. Sant, and M. Muscat. “Design and cost evaluation of a deep water
support structure for a wind turbine in central Mediterranean waters”. In: EWEA
European Wind Energy Association (2011).
[13]
Federico Ferrari and Ole Sigmund. “A new generation 99 line Matlab code for com­
pliance Topology Optimization and its extension to 3D”. In: Structural and Multidis­
ciplinary Optimization (2020).
[14]
DNV GL. “Support Structures for Wind Turbines”. In: DNVGL­ST­0126 Technical
Report (2016).
[15]
Marco Guarnero. “Topology optimization of offshore wind turbine support struc­
tures”. In: Master Thesis, Technical University of Denmark (2017).
[16]
N. Hogben, N. M. C. Dacunha, and G. F. Olliver. Global wave statistics. Unwin
Brothers, 1986.
[17]
IRENA. “Renewable Energy Technologies: Cost Analysis Series”. In: Technical Re­
port, International Renewable Energy Agency (2012).
[18]
J. K. Kaldellis and M. Kapsali. “Shifting towards offshore wind energy — Recent
activity and future development”. In: Energy Policy (2012).
[19]
Philipp Lehman et al. Biblatex – Sophisticated Bibliographies in LaTeX. 2018. URL:
https://www.ctan.org/pkg/biblatex.
[20]
Vineyard Wind LLC. Draft Construction and Operations Plan. Volume I. Vineyard
Wind Project, 2020.
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
68
==PAGE:76==
[21]
MegaVind. “Megavind LCOE Model Guidelines and Documentation”. In: Technical
Report (2015).
[22]
Jacob Oest et al. “On gradient­based optimization of jacket structures for offshore
wind turbines”. In: Wind Energy (2018).
[23]
Mohamed A. El­Reedy. Offshore Structures. Design, Construction and Maintenance.
Elsevier Inc., 2012, pp. 93–211.
[24]
Scottish Power Renewables. Offshore Construction Update. 2020. URL: https://
www.scottishpowerrenewables.com/pages/offshore_construction_update.aspx (visited
on 06/30/2022).
[25]
Kasper Sandal, Alexander Verbart, and Mathias Stolpe. “Conceptual jacket design
by structural optimization”. In: Wind Energy (2018).
[26]
Vimal Savsani et al. “Topology optimization of an offshore jacket structure consider­
ing aerodynamic, hydrodynamic and structural forces”. In: Engineering with Com­
puters (2020).
[27]
Ole Sigmund. “A 99 line topology optimization code written in Matlab”. In: Structural
and Multidisciplinary Optimization (2001).
[28]
Ole Sigmund. “Notes and Exercises for the Course: Finite Element Methods”. In:
Technical University of Denmark (2021).
[29]
Simon Thomas, Qing Li, and Grant Steven. “Finite periodic topology optimization
with oriented unit cells”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization (2021).
[30]
Xiaojie Tian et al. “Optimization design of the jacket support structure for offshore
wind turbine using topology optimization method”. In: Ocean Engineering (2022).
[31]
Chao Wang et al. “A comprehensive review of educational articles on structural
and multidisciplinary optimization”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
(2021).
[32]
Stainless Steel World. The role of stainless steel in offshore applications. 2020.
URL: https : / / stainless - steel - world . net / the - role - of - stainless - steel - in - offshore -
applications/.
[33]
Kai Wu, Ole Sigmund, and Jianbin Du. “Design of metamaterial mechanisms us­
ing robust topology optimization and variable linking scheme”. In: Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization (2021).
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
69
==PAGE:77==
A
Project Plan
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
70
==PAGE:78==
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
71
==PAGE:79==
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
72
-⇐←EzEEaT
==PAGE:80==
B
Variable Linking Code
Topology optimization of jacket support structures for offshore wind turbine
73
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
