==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Implementation of hybrid simulation on fiber
composite high-voltage mast arm
Daniel AlkjΟΠr Christiansen - s165019
Submission date: 19-08-22
Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
Danish title:
Implementering af hybrid simulering pΟΞ fiber komposit hΟΗjspΟΠndings-mastearm
Dissertation by:
Daniel AlkjΟΠr Christiansen
s165019
Supervisors:
Jacob Paamand WaldbjΟΗrn, DTU
Christian Berggreen, DTU
Section for Solid Mechanics
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels AllΟ©, Building 404
DK-2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface &
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been prepared during a six months period at the Section for Solid Mechanics,
DTU Construct Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
I will like extend my professional gratitude towards my two supervisors researcher Jacob Paa-
mand WaldbjΟΗrn and associate professor Christian Berggreen for their guidance, discussion
and help throughout this thesis. I will also like to thanka Xiuyu βÄôShawnβÄô Gao for sharing his
insight and knowledge within the field of hybrid simulation. Lastly, I will also like to extend a
huge thanks to the technical personal in the laboratory. Their help and joyous attitude have
been indispensable.
On a more personal note, I will like to thanks my group of friends from the βÄùcoffee-clubβÄù
for their support and motivation boost during our coffee-breaks and lunch dates.
My family have played a huge roll during this thesis by supporting me in every single
possible way.
For that I am forever grateful.
Last by not least, I will like to thank my
beloved girlfriend for her loving- and supportive nature throughout my thesis and her help in
proof-reading this thesis.
Daniel AlkjΟΠr Christiansen - s165019
Kgs. Lyngby, August 2022
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Traditional power pylons are constructed using a steel lattice design. BYSTRUP ARKITEK-
TER OG DESIGNERE ApS has proposed a novel design where a monopile with two mast
arms are constructed using a fiber composite material.
This novel design offers numerous advantages compared to the traditional design. One of
most important once is the electrical insulation of the fiber composite. The electrical insulation
reduces the overall size of the novel power pylon design compared to the traditional design.
Because of the novel choice of material the further knowledge dynamic response pylon is
desired. Therefore, the main focus of this thesis will be to implement the hybrid simulation
methodology to capture the cross-coupled dynamic response the three attached transmission
lines.
The hybrid simulation methodology consists of a numerical- and experimental substructure
where the displacements and reaction forces are transferred through a hybrid simulation loop.
The transmission lines will be constructed in the numerical substructure by use of beam
elements within Ansys 17.2. The transmission lines are exerted by a dynamic load caused by
the wind.
The experimental substructure consists of the mast arm of the novel design.
For each
transmission line attached to the mast arm three actuators are connected to the mast arm,
such that it can be loaded in all three directions.
This thesis shows how the wind load acting on the transmission lines can be captured by a
finite element analysis and transferred to the mast arm. The architecture needed to perform
a hybrid simulation will also be defined by the use of OpenFresco.
To validate the implementation of the hybrid simulation architecture a series of hybrid
simulations will be conducted. The performance of two types of hybrid simulations will be
compared by virtual simulations. An experimental hybrid simulation will show that the stiff-
ness of the mast is highly depending of the angle of attack for the applied load.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
APDL
Ansys Parametric Design Language
CMD
Command
CP
Control Point
DAQ
Data Acquisition
DMI
Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut
DOF
Degree Of Freedom
FB
Feedback
FE
Finite Element
GFRP
Glass Fibre Reinforced Plastic
HPC
High Performance Computing
HS
Hybrid Simulation
IIS
Institute of Industrial Science
MPE
MultiPurpose Elite
MPT
MultiPurpose TestWare
MTS
MTS Systems Corporation
OpenFresco
The Open-source Framework for Experimental Setup and Control
PDHS
PeudoDynamic Hybrid Simulation
PEER
Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center
PoPyFu
Power Pylon of the Future
QS
Quasi Static
QSHS
Quasi Static Hybrid Simulation
RTHS
Real Time Hybrid Simulation
TE
Transfer Element
UEL
User-element
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Roman symbols
A
Cross sectional area
C
Dampening matrix
CD
Drag coeο§Äicient
Cf
Aerodynamic coeο§Äicient
CL
Lift coeο§Äicient
D
Diameter of transmission line
DN
Numerical displacement vector
DE
Experimental displacement vector
E
YoungβÄôs modulus
FD
Drag force
FL
Lift force
fs
Sample frequency
fv
Vortex shredding frequency
g
Gravitational acceleration
H
Horizontal force
k
Sag
K
Stiffness matrix
M
Mass matrix
PE
External load
q
Eigenvector
R
Vertical force
RE
Experimental reaction force vector
RN
Numerical reaction force vector
Re
Reynolds number
S
Span
St
Strouhal number
U
Wind velocity
Uavg
Average wind velocity
v
Bernoulli-Euler beam deflection
x
Displacement in x-direction
Υôx
Velocity in x-direction
¬®x
Acceleration in x-direction
Υôy
Velocity in y-direction
==PAGE:10==
viii
Nomenclature
Greek symbols
Έ±
Mass dampening coeο§Äicients
Έ≤
Stiffness dampening coeο§Äicients
Έ≥
Relative position of the applied load
βàÜt
Change in time
ΈΕ
Damping ratio
¬Β
Weight per meter
ΈΫ
Kinematic viscosity
ΈΨ
Relative position along the mast arm
œ¹
Density of air
œâ
Eigenvalues
œâv
Vortex shredding angular frequency
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface & Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
iii
List of abbreviations
v
Nomenclature
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Hybrid simulation for substructural testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Wind impact on high-voltage transmission pylons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Project statement & hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Thesis guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory & Method
7
2.1
Structural behavior of transmission lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Hybrid simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Numerical implementation
21
3.1
Wind load from realistic wind profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Element formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Numerical simulation strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Implicit vs. explicit solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Numerical validation
27
4.1
Static validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Dynamic validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Experimental quasi static
33
5.1
Finite element model of the mast arm & transmission lines
. . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Quasi static analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Hybrid simulation
41
6.1
Single control point virtual hybrid simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Single control point experimental hybrid simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
Triple virtual control point hybrid simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Numerical implementation of transmission line
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Quasi static analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Hybrid simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Conclusion & suggestion for future research activities
53
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.2
Suggestion for future research activities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
55
A
An Appendix
57
A.1 Drag, lift and Strouhal data tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Matlab scrip for evaluation of drag- and lift forces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.3 Triple control point PDHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.4 Ansys 17.2 Transfer element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.5 Actuator specifications and drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.6 PID Settings for all channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.7 Quasi-Static MPE 9 channel set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.8 Single control point PDHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.9 Single control point QSHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Project background
Electrical power is transmitted all around the country by high-voltage transmission pylons,
which are mainly build as steel lattice towers. The towers are general seen as visual pollution
for the landscape which is due to their great size and appearance.
A novel slender and simpler design is proposed by BYSTRUP ARKITEKTER OG DE-
SIGNERE ApS [1], where the transmission pylons are made of composite glass fibre reinforced
plastics (GFRP) material.
This novel material for high-voltage transmission pylons offers
numerous advantages in relation to strength vs. weight, temperature expansion, resistance
against corrosion, electrical insulation etc.
As a result of the electrical insulation the general size of the T-pylon can be reduced
significantly compared the current steel lattice tower design [1]. The proposed T-pylon design
can be seen in Fig. 1.1 alongside a traditional steel tower design. The T-pylon design consists
of a monopile and two mast arms that are tilted by 30β½Πcompared the horizontal line as shown
in the figure below. On each mast arm three 400 kV transmission lines can be attached [1].
Mast arms
Monopile
30βà‰
Figure 1.1: On the left hand side, the proposed T-pylon design by BYSTRUP ARKITEKTER
OG DESIGNERE ApS. On the right hand side the traditional steel lattice tower.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
The GFRP T-pylon has been under development for some time and has been a part a
HORIZON2020 PROJECT called Power Pylon of the Future (PoPyFu) [2] where the mast
arm has been through numerous mechanical- and electrical tests at varying length scale.
The focus of this thesis will be on employing the hybrid simulation (HS) methodology to
capture the cross-coupling effect from the loads introduced by the wind on the attached trans-
mission line through a physical test-rig of the mast arm, cf. Fig. 1.4.
1.2
Hybrid simulation for substructural testing
In the 1960s the common test method for mimicking seismic activity was a shaking table which
was, and still is, considered as the most direct tool to mimic seismic behavior [3]. A shaking
table requires large hydraulic capacity and control accuracy to be able to carry out seismic
test on a realistic size test specimen. It was not possible to carry out shaking table test at
the time because the hydraulic actuators could not handle the capacity and control associated
with large scale testing [3]. Therefore a novel approach was needed.
HS was first developed at Institute of Industrial Science (IIS) at the University of Tokyo
which where able to mimic realistic seismic behavior in the laboratory [4].
The HS methodology consists of a numerical- and an experimental substructure. An ex-
ternal load is applied to the numerical substructure from which a displacement is calculated.
The displacement is then transferred though a shared boundary to the experimental substruc-
ture where it is applied. The reaction force is recorded and transferred back to the numerical
substructure to update the resulting force within the numerical substructure. This process is
repeated for all load steps defined by the user.
Numerical
Substructure
Reaction force
External load
Shared
Boundary
Dispalcement
Experimental
Substructure
Figure 1.2: Simple schematic representation of HS methodology.
In this thesis the experimental substructure will be the mast arm (cf. Fig. 1.3 (c) and
1.4) which is build in GFRP composite, as mention earlier. Composite material can undergo
experimental analysis on several different length scales as depicted in Fig.
1.3.
For most
structural material testing an idealised loading scenario, e.g.
an uni-axial stress/strain, is
considered since the complex real-world loading scenarios are diο§Äicult to mimic.
On the sub- and structural scale, complex loading is necessary in order to correctly evaluate
the responds of the structure.
The numerical structure in HS can be used to capture the
complex loading and then transfer the displacement to the substructural component of interest.
Since the experimental test can be preformed on a substructural scale, a smaller experimental
set-up is needed. Therefore offers the HS methodology a cost-effective testing technique by
combining the advantages of numerical modeling and experimental testing [5].
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Wind impact on high-voltage transmission pylons
3
(c) Substructural scale
(d) Structural scale
(b) Laminar scale
(a) Micro scale 
Length scale [m]
ύ§Ωύ§Η
ύ§Ωύ§Ε
ύ§Β
ύ§Ε
Figure 1.3: Representation of the different length scales for structural testing of composite
material. Illustrations originates from (a) [5], (b) [6], (c) the structural lab, and (d) [1].
1.3
Wind impact on high-voltage transmission pylons
Between 30 and 170 days a year the average wind velocity is above strong breeze in Denmark,
depending on the location. A strong breeze is defined as an average wind velocity between
10.8 βà£13.8 m/s and classified as a six on the Beaufort scale which is used to categorise wind
velocity into different categories, as seen in Tab. 1.1.
Hurricanes and hurricane like storms are classified, according to the Beaufort scale, to be
a mean wind velocity of 24.5 m/s or above. In Denmark, hurricanes and hurricane like storms
occur approximately once every fourth year. Since 1891, 30 hurricanes or hurricane like storms
have been recorded in Denmark.
The most violent storm ever recorded in Denmark was in 1999 where the mean wind velocity
(average during a period of 10 minutes) was above 40 m/s and gust of wind above 50 m/s [7].
Table 1.1: Beaufort scale according to Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut (DMI) [8].
Beaufort
number
m/s
km/t
Description
12
>32.6
>117
Hurricane
11
28.5-32.6
103-117
Violent Storm
10
24.5-28.4
89-102
Storm, whole gale
9
20.8-24.4
75-88
Strong/sever gale
8
17.2-20.7
62-74
Gale, fresh gale
7
13.9-17.1
50-61
High wind, moderate gale
6
10.8-13.8
39-49
Strong breeze
5
8.0-10.7
29-38
Fresh breeze
4
5.5-7.9
20-28
Moderate breeze
3
3.4-5.4
12-19
Gentle breeze
2
1.6-3.3
6-11
Light breeze
1
0.3-1.5
1-5
Light air
0
0.0-0.2
<1
Calm
The wind acting on the transmission lines attached to the mast arm has a major impact on
the T-pylon. Worst case scenario can result in mechanical failure of the T-pylon due to either
high static loading from a high velocity wind gust or fatigue failure due to the oscillating forces
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
over long periods of time. It can also be a combination of the two scenarios mentioned before.
Therefore, it is important to test and validate that the T-pylons are able to carry both the
static and fatigue loads.
1.4
Project statement & hypothesis
From the proposed design by BYSTRUP ARKITEKTER OG DESIGNERE ApS, three 400 kV
transmission lines can be attached to each of the mast arms [1].
The mast arms can be
subjected to several different types of weather-related loads such as increased own weight due
to ice forming on the transmission line, down burst of chaotic wind, high-intensity wind due
to storms etc. [9].
Previous master projects have dealt with with dynamics of a sagging cable (transmission
line) that is subjected to a phenomenon called βÄùgallopingβÄù. Where a constant wind velocity re-
sults in low-frequency, high-amplitude vibrations which have lead to a numerical finite element
(FE) formulation. The FE-formulation has been implemented into the commercial software
Abaqus as an User-element (UEL). The reason behind defining an UEL is because the commer-
cial FE-software (neither Abaqus nor Ansys) does have a predefined element that can capture
the dynamic effect of the galloping phenomenon [10, 11, 12].
In the latest master project the dynamic responds from a single transmission line have been
calculated during a given time period by the FE UEL simulation and then applied to the three
attachment points on the mast arm in the experimental set-up displayed in Fig. 1.4. Since the
dynamic forces were calculated for a single transmission line and then extrapolated to the other
two transmission lines attachment points the cross coupling effect from the mast arm is lost.
The validity of the dynamic response of the mast arm can therefore be of discussion since the
position, velocity and acceleration of each of the transmission lines attachment point have an
influence on the transmission line dynamics which must be cross-coupled through the mast arm.
In this thesis, the forces exerted on the mast arm originates from the wind load acting on
the transmission lines. Because of the dynamic nature of the wind loads, the forces acting on
the mast arm result in a non-static loading scenario. Therefore, the dynamic forces from the
Figure 1.4: Experimental set-up of the mast arm with three transmission line attachment
points, which are the shared boundary for the HS. At each point three hydraulic actuators are
attached to the mast arm in a way that it can be loaded in all three translational degree of
freedom.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Project statement & hypothesis
5
inertia and dampening effects of the moving transmission line will be taking into considera-
tion. The dynamic forces will be employed through a HS where the numerical substructure, the
transmission lines, will be constructed using beam elements within the commercial FE-software
Ansys. The external loads on the transmission lines are evaluated by hydrodynamic theory
for fluids moving around a cylinder. The external loads are then applied to the numerical
FE-analysis.
The numerical substructure are connected through a shared boundary to the experimental
substructure (See Fig. 1.4) such that the cross-coupled dynamic effect from the three trans-
mission lines can be recovered and evaluated through the mast arm. Based on this project
statement, the following hypothesis can be formulated,
Hybrid simulation can be used to cross-couple the dynamic responds of the thee transmission
lines attached to the mast arm
which will be the foundation for this thesis. The hypothesis leads to eight objectives which
must be fulfilled in order to answer the hypothesis. These objectives can be seen in bullet
points below.
1. Define and validate the wind load on a transmission line through a numerical implemen-
tation in Ansys 17.2.
2. Define an Ansys subroutine to enable HSs.
3. Define the simulation- and experimental architecture by use of OpenFresco- and MTS
software.
4. Define the numerical simulation strategy in order to capture the static- and dynamic
respond of the transmission line.
5. Determine the dynamic capability of actuators by a FE-analysis and subsequently a quasi
static (QS) analysis.
6. Conduct a virtual HS to validate the HS architecture.
7. Conduct an experimental HS of the wind load acting on the transmission lines.
8. Comparing obtained results from the HSs with simulated data from a FE-analyses.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.5
Thesis guide
Chapter two will present the theory used to describe the structural behavior of a transmission
line alongside the theory and methodology of HS.
Chapter three introduces the implementation of the static- and dynamic behavior of the trans-
mission line presented in Sec. 2.1 into a FE-formulation.
In chapter four the structural behavior of the transmission line is validated. The static behavior
is validated by comparison of analytical expressions and numerical simulation. Thereafter the
dynamic responds of the transmission line will be compared with an existing FE-formulation.
Chapter five will present the dynamic respond from the transmission line which will be exerted
on the experimental substructure (mast arm) by a QS-analysis. The aim for the QS-analysis
is to ensure that actuators are capable of handle both the displacements and forces applied by
the transmission lines for the upcoming HS.
In chapter six a series of HSs will be preformed on the mast arm. Firstly a virtual HS for
a single control point will be conducted to evaluate the performance of the two types of HSs
presented later in the thesis. Thereafter, an experimental HS will be conducted and compared
with the findings form the virtual HS.
For chapter seven the obtained results of the previous five chapters will be discussed.
Lastly in chapter eight a conclusion of the thesis will be presented alongside a couple of sug-
gestion for future research activities for HS on the mast arm.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Theory & Method
In this chapter, the theory used to describe the structural behavior of a transmission line
is presented. First will the static behavior be elaborated followed by a presentation of the
dynamic behavior caused by an dynamic wind load. Lastly, will the theory and methodology
of each of the key components used in HS be presented.
2.1
Structural behavior of transmission lines
An overhead transmission line is used to transmit electrical power over a great distance to
supply its users. To reduce the risk of damage caused by the electrical current running inside the
transmission line, it is elevated by the T-pylon. The T-pylons are supporting the transmission
line with a giving span length which is governed by several parameters such as amount of
voltage, structural properties etc. [9]. In this thesis, a transmission line is described as a cable
which is suspended between two mast arms. At each endpoint of the transmission line the
cable is pinned. Therefore are all translational degrees of freedom (DOF) restrained but it is
free to rotate as shown in Fig. 2.1 below.
k
S
Figure 2.1: Schematical representation of a transmission line.
For a transmission line suspended between two points in space where gravity is present the
transmission line will deform into a catenary shape, as depicted in the figure above. In the
figure above S is the span length and k is the sag of the transmission line. Sag is defined as the
vertical difference in elevation between the endpoints and the lowest point on the transmission
line. In this thesis, the two endpoints are at the same elevation and thus will the lowest point
of the transmission line always be in the middle.
To enable the transmission lines to be used in a HS, two types of loading scenarios will be
considered, namely static- and dynamic loading. Theses two scenarios will be introduced in
the coming two sections.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory & Method
2.1.1
Static loading
As described above, the transmission line is subjected to a static load from the gravitational
force acting as a distributed load on the transmission line as depicted in Fig.
2.2.
The
distributed forces results in both a vertical- and horizontal force. The horizontal forces can be
calculated from Eq. (2.1) cf. [13].
H = 1
8
¬ΒgS2
k
(2.1)
In the equation above g is the gravitational acceleration determined to be 9.81 m/s2 and ¬Β is
the weight of the transmission line per meter in kg/m.
It can be seen from the equation that a smaller span, S, results in a lower horizontal force
and a reduction of the sag, k, will increase the horizontal forces. Note that the horizontal
forces are acting in the opposite direction of each other which results in tension inside the
transmission line. The vertical forces can be found by Eq. (2.2) which is derived from vertical
equilibrium.
R = ¬ΒSg
2
(2.2)
H
R
R
H
Figure 2.2: Schematical representation of the static distributed load from the gravitational
acceleration acting on the transmission line.
2.1.2
Dynamic loading
The dynamic loads acting on the transmission line originates from the wind being forced around
the circular shape of the cable cross section. The flow of air around the cable will exert a force
on the transmission line with two components, a drag- and lift force [14]. The resulting force
with the two components are depicted in Fig. 2.3.
U(t)
F (t)
L
F    (t)
Res
F (t)
D
Figure 2.3: Free body diagram of the dynamic forces acting on the cable cross section.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Structural behavior of transmission lines
9
As the figure above shows, the magnitude of the force can change with time which is due to
the change of wind velocity, U(t). To be able to capture the change in magnitude over a time
period, each time period is divided into small time steps where the wind velocity is captured
and the forces can be calculated. This will be further elaborated in Sec. 3.1.
The wind load is applied under a quasi-steady assumption meaning that the drag- and lift
forces are determined by the instantaneous wind velocity while the velocity of the transmission
line is neglected.
Another important assumption, is that the shape of the transmission line is a perfect round
cylinder and therefore the catenary shape of the deformed transmission line is ignored. The
wind is always assumed to be perpendicular to the cross section and thus any wind speed along
the length of the transmission line [14] can be ignored. By these assumptions the model to
predict the forces action on the transmission line can be formulated.
At low wind velocities, the flow around the cable cross section produces a steady wake where
only the drag forces is present. Since two symmetrical vortices are forming behind the cable
cross section which cancel out the lift forces produced by the two symmetrical vortices, cf. Fig.
2.4 (a).
As the velocity of the wind increases, the wake behind the cable cross section becomes
unstable and vortex shredding occurs. The vortex shredding phenomenon occurs when the
boundary layer surrounding the cable cross section will separate due to change in the pressure
profile on the opposite side of the flow direction.
The formation of vortex appears on either the top or bottom of the cable cross section,
as seen in Fig. 2.4. The next vortex to be formed is on the opposite side of the previous
vortex. The frequency in which these vortex changes is called the vortex shredding frequency
and will be discussed later in this section. Form the formation of the vortices a lift force with
alternating magnitude occurs. The difference in steady wake and vortex shredding is depicted
in Fig. 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Characteristic flow regions for a circular cylinder: (a) steady wake, (b) Unstable
wake, hence vortex shredding. Taken from [15].
The change from stable to unstable wakes happens at Re βâΛ40 [14], where Re is the non-
dimension quantity called Reynolds number. Reynolds number can be evaluated for a cylinder
using the following equation:
Re = DU(t)
ΈΫ
(2.3)
where D is the diameter of the cable cross section and ΈΫ = 1.48Ο½10βà£5m2/s which is kinematic
viscosity of air. As the Reynolds numbers changes the flow around the cable cross section
undergoes tremendous changes which can be divided into several flow regimes which is listed
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory & Method
Table 2.1: A collection of the different flow regimes for 0 βâΛRe < 4 Ο½ 106 [14]
Fig. 2.5
sections
Flow
regime
Reynolds
number
(1)
A fixed pair of symmetrical vertices
0 < Re < 40
(2)
Laminar vortex street
40 < Re < 200
(3)
Transition to turbulence wake
200 < Re < 300
(4)
Wake completely turbulent
subcritical-regime
300 < Re < 3 Ο½ 105
(5)
Critical-regime (Lower transition)
3 Ο½ 105 < Re < 3.5 Ο½ 105
(6)
Supercritical-regime
3.5 Ο½ 105 < Re < 1.5 Ο½ 106
(7)
Upper transition
1.5 Ο½ 106 < Re < 4 Ο½ 106
in are. 2.1. The drag- and lift forces pr. unit length can be evaluated by utilising Eq. (2.4a)
and (2.4b), respectively.
FD(t) = 1
2œ¹CD(Re)DU(t)2
(2.4a)
FL(t) = 1
2œ¹CL(Re)DU(t)2 sin(œâvt)
(2.4b)
In the equation above, œ¹ = 1.25 kg/m2 is the density of the air, CD, and CL are the drag-
and lift coeο§Äicient respectively. These coeο§Äicients are non-dimensional quantities as a function
of Reynolds number. The angular frequency of vortex shredding in Rad/s and is dented as œâv.
The relation between the coeο§Äicients and Reynolds number are non-linear and are deter-
mined by a series of experiments. Three series of experiments have been carried out by Schlicht-
ing [16], Schewe [14] and Nordberg [17] where the two first focuses on the drag coeο§Äicient and
the latter on the lift coeο§Äicient.
The coeο§Äicients found for drag and lift are depicted as the black markings in Fig. 2.5 (a)
and (b) , respectively.
In Fig. 2.5 (c) the evolution of the Strouhal number is depicted. To estimate the Stouhal
number a series of experiments has been carried out by Kovasznay [18] and Schewe [14] which
are showed in Fig.
2.5 (C) as the black markings.
Strouhal number governs the vortex
shredding frequency and can be evaluated by:
St(Re) = fvD
U(t)
(2.5)
where fv is the vortex shredding frequency and St(Re) is the Strouhal number which is also a
function of Reynolds number. The vortex shredding frequency can be related to the angular
frequency used in Eq. (2.4b) by œâv = 2œÄfv.
To be able to evaluate on the drag force, lift force and Strouhal number for any given value
of Reynolds number a piecewise numerical approximation is employed through the Matlab
function polyfit. To use this approach, three Matlab functions have been developed Cd, Cl
and ST which are used to evaluate the drag, lift, and Strouhal coeο§Äicient, respectively. The
source code can be found in App. A.2. The fitted lines are depicted as the red lines in Fig.
2.5.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Structural behavior of transmission lines
11
Figure 2.5: The black markings are obtained by experimental investigation. The red line is
piece wise numerical fitted to the experimental data points. The numbers, (1) to (7), in this
figure refer to the flow regimes outlined in Tab. 2.1. The the full data set from Fig. 2.5 can
be found in App. A.1.
2.1.3
Damping
When considering the transmission line the internal dampening comes from the bending of the
transmission line under wind load. To capture the dampening of the transmission line Reyleigh
damping is used. The Rayleigh dampening can be introduced to the system by a dampening
matrix C, as Eq. (2.6) indicates.
C = Έ±M + Έ≤K
(2.6)
As seen in the equation above the dampening matrix is equal to the mass-, M, and stiff-
ness matrix, K, with two proportional coeο§Äicients, Έ± and Έ≤. These are determined either by
experimental- and/or numerical investigation which will be evident later. For a given structure
with Rayleigh dampening, the dampening must be evaluated for a specific modal frequency.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theory & Method
In Eq. (2.7) the damping ratio, ΈΕn, for the nth modal frequency is presented.
ΈΕn = Έ±n
2
1
œân
+ Έ≤n
2 œân
(2.7)
In Eq. (2.7) Έ±n and Έ≤n are the unknowns. The eigen frequency, œân, is determined by an
experimental and/or numerical investigation. To find the two unknowns, two eigen frequencies,
i and j, are considered and the following algebraic system of equation can be formed.
1
2
"
1/œâi
œâi
1/œâj
œâj
# "
Έ±
Έ≤
#
=
"
ΈΕi
ΈΕj
#
(2.8)
From the book Dynamics of structures by Chopra [19] it is reasonable to assume that the
dampening ratio is equal for both modes. Therefore the following two equations can be written
in order to evaluate the two coeο§Äicients.
Έ± = ΈΕn
2œâiœâj
œâi + œâj
(2.9a)
Έ≤ = ΈΕn
2
œâi + œâj
(2.9b)
Through out this thesis, the dampening of a plain transmission line is assumed to be 2% which
is supported by the work of M. Roshan Fekr and G. McClure [20].
2.2
Hybrid simulation
In this thesis, two types of HS are considered. The first is Pseudo dynamic hybrid simulation
(PDHS) where the dynamic effect of the numerical substructure is included in the HS. The
second type is the quasi static hybrid simulation (QSHS) where a predefined history of external
loads or displacements are applied directly to the shared boundary and therefore the dynamic
effects of the numerical structure are lost. A QSHS can include a numerical substructure where
the predefined external loads are applied, but this is not considered in this thesis.
Neither of the two HS types includes the dynamic effect of the experimental substructure.
A HS that includes the dynamic effects of the experimental substructure is denoted as real
time hybrid simulation (RTHS). To be able conduct a RTHS the actuators and numerical sub-
structure must be able to calculate the displacements and record the forces and in real time. A
previous master thesis indicated that the dynamic effect of the mast arm has little to no effect
on the dynamic responds of the transmission line [21]. Therefore, will RTHS not be included
in this thesis.
The numerical- and experimental substructure can be schematically represented for a PDHS
as a single DOF system, as shown in Fig. 2.6 where [ ]N and [ ]E denotes the numerical- and
experimental substructure, respectively.
The two substructures are connected through a shared boundary in a HS communication
loop where an external force, PN, is applied to the numerical substructure and a displacement in
x-direction is calculated for step i+1. The displacement is then transferred to the experimental
substructure where a reaction force, RE, is recorded as a result of the transferred displacement.
The reaction force is used to calculate the upcomming step, i+2, in the numerical substructure.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Hybrid simulation
13
M
K
CN
N
N
N
P
x
K
E
E
R
x
Numerical substructure
Experimental substructure
Figure 2.6:
Schematical representation of the numerical- and experimental substructure
including structural components effect for a single control point with one DOF.
This loop is continued until all external load steps have been considered.
The governing
equation of motion for the shared boundary can be formulated mathematical as described in
Eq. 2.10 [22].
PN
i+1 = MN¬®xi+1 + CN Υôxi+1 + KNxi+1 + RE
i
(2.10a)
RE
i = KE
i xi
(2.10b)
xi=0 = x0
(2.10c)
Υôxi=0 = Υôx0
(2.10d)
In the equation above M, C and K are the mass-, dampening-, and stiffness matrix, respec-
tively. Υôx and ¬®x denotes a single and double time derivative of the x-displacement.
As mentioned before the QSHS does not include the dynamic effects of neither the numerical-
or experimental substructure. Therefore, wil the mass- and dampening terms from Eq. 2.10a
vanish and the equation of motion for QSHS can be reduced to Eq. (2.11).
PN
i+1 = KNxi+1 + RE
i
(2.11a)
RE
i = KE
i xi
(2.11b)
xi=0 = x0
(2.11c)
Υôxi=0 = Υôx0
(2.11d)
To be able to perform a HS communication loop four key components are needed both software
and hardware. These four components and their connection are illustrated in Fig 2.7. The
four components are (1) a discrete numerical FE-substructure, (2) a transfer system, (3) a
control and data acquisition system (DAQ), and lastly (4) a test set up with actuators and
the experimental substructure [22]. Each of these components are explained in detail in the
upcoming sections.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory & Method
Figure 2.7: Key components of a HS. Taken from [22].
2.2.1
Discrete numerical substructure & integration scheme
The discrete numerical substructure normally consists of the majority of the structure to be
analysed and is considered uncritical for the HS analysis [5].
The numerical substructure presented in this thesis will be the transmission lines as depicted
in Fig. 2.8. The numerical implementation of the transmission line elements will be explained
later in Chap. 3.
In Fig. 2.8 a static example of three sagging transmission lines are shown. The shared
boundary between the numerical substructure and experimental substructure is where each
row of transmission lines are attached to the mast arm. Each of these shared boundaries are
denoted as a control point (CP). For the numerical system shown in Fig. 2.8 three CPs, called
CP1, CP2, and CP3, respectively, would be needed.
CP3
CP2 CP1
Figure 2.8: Discrete numerical FE-substructure. The red area indicates where the largest
deformations are present and blue area are where the smallest are located.
To enable Ansys to transfer the calculated displacement for each time step, an USER300
element has been developed at the University of California and further developed by X. Shawn
Gao at MTS system. The USER300 element, hereafter referred to as a transfer element (TE),
consists of one or more CPs which are defined as FE-nodes in the numerical substructure.
The TE is activated through the Ansys Parametric Design Language (APDL) by the script
presented in List. 2.1.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Hybrid simulation
15
1 ET,1,USER300
! user element
2 TYPE,1
3 USRDOF ,DEFINE,UX,UY,UZ
4 USRELEM ,3,3,ANYSHAPE ,1,1,,,,,
! NNodes=3,NDIM=3,NREAL=1,NSAVEVARS=1
5 R,1,8090
! tcp/ip port number for communication
6 !Assign generic client element
7 MAT,
8 REAL,1
9 E,CP1, CP2, CP3
! exp element
Listing 2.1: Extract from a full APDL script, See App. A.3 for the complete script.
In line one, the TE is assigned to element type one. Thereafter in line three the DOF of
the TE is defined. In this case displacements in x-, y-, and z-direction are considered.
In line four the TE element-shape is constructed where NNodes indicates how many
FE-nodes are in the element.
NDIM defines how many dimensions are considered.
The
ANYSHAPE command is used to shape the element, which can vary depending on how
many FE-nodes are considered. For a single CP, the LINE command is used.
NREAL refers to the real command in line five and eight.
In line five the TCP/IP
connection is enabled to the transfer system, here port 8090 is used.
The E command in line nine construct the TE, with three nodes, and settings from previ-
ous commands. The TE Fortran-source code can be found in App. A.4.
At the very first step, i, the initial stiffness in the global coordinate system for the TE is
assembled by an initial guess. The guess can be based on a FE-analysis or directly found
by the experimental substructure. However, for a system with three CPs and three DOF a
nine-by-nine stiffness matrix, as shown in Eq. (2.12), must be constructed.
Ki+1 =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
KCP1,x
0.0
0.0
¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ
0.0
0.0
KCP1,y
0.0
¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ
0.0
0.0
0.0
KCP1,z
¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ
0.0
...
...
...
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
KCP3,z
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(2.12)
In the stiffness matrix above, KCP1,x is the stiffness at CP1 in the x-direction. The initial
stiffness can be evaluated by KCP1,x = RE
x/DE
x , where DE
x is the displacement and RE
x is the
reaction force in the x-direction. However, it is up to the user to ensure that cross-coupling
effect is capture by initial stiffness. To ensure this, the very first load step can be calculated
by a FE-simulation which is then exerted onto the experimental substructure.
Where the
resulting displacements and reaction force can be used to formulate the initial stiffness matrix.
Each of the stiffness coeο§Äicients must be evaluated in order to enable Ansys to predict the
displacement for the first step. For the upcoming steps the TEβÄôs stiffness matrix is removed
and replaced by a reaction force as seen in Eq. (2.10) and (2.11). Therefore, the reaction force
used for step i + 1 is calculated for step i, which results in a permanent one time step delay of
the reaction forces throughout the HS [22].
Ansys employs a time integration scheme to solve the system of equations for the whole nu-
merical substructure including the CPs. The integration scheme can be solved either by an
implicit- or explicit solvers. These two types of solvers will be presented and discussed in
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory & Method
Sec. 3.4 since each solver has a profound effect on predicted forces and displacements of the
numerical substructure.
2.2.2
Transfer system
To transfer the deformation calculated by the FE-model to the actuator controller a middleware
is needed, in this thesis OpenFresco is used. OpenFresco is an abbreviation for the Open-source
Framework for Experimental Setup and Control. OpenFresco is developed at University of
California, Berkeley supported by Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center (PEER)
[23].
The software is an environmental-independent (can be used together with several differ-
ent FE-software such as Ansys, Abaqus, MATLAB ect.) frame-work that allows the user to
facilitate hybrid simulation by formulating the connection between the FE-model and actua-
tor control/DQA in the laboratory by a step-by-step formulation. In Fig. 2.9, a schematic
representation of the OpenFresco protocol is presented.
Ansys 
USER300 
element
SimApp-
ElemServer
Experimental 
Element
Experimental 
Site
Experimental 
Setup
Experimental 
Control
Control 
system in 
Lab
Transfer system OpenFresco
Client
Backend
TCP/IP
Figure 2.9: Modules used in OpenFresco.
For a local executed HS, OpenFresco consists of five modules: SimAppElemServer, Exper-
imental Element, Experimental Site, Experimental Setup, Experimental Control.
Theses five modules transform the input signal from the Ansys TE to the actuator controller
and DAQ. As Fig. 2.9 depicts the deformation at step, i, from TE is send to OpenFresco
through a TCP/IP connection into the first module, SimAPPElemServer, which enables the
connection between the FE-software and OpenFresco.
The global deformation is received in Experimental Element module where the deformation
is transformed to the control displacements in the element coordinates system.
The Experimental Site stores the deformation in case of the experimental disruption. The
element deformation then enters the Experimental Setup where the deformation is transformed
into actuator displacement.
Lastly, the displacement is transformed by the Experimental Control module to a signal
that the can be used by the actuators in the physical experimental setup.
The recorded
force signal from the DAQ is sent back through OpenFresco where the experimental force are
transformed back to the global coordinate system used for the numerical substructure.
The received reaction force is used in the upcoming step, i + 1, where the deformation at
the same step is calculated in the numerical substructure and then sent to OpenFresco for the
current step. This process is repeated for every time step [22].
2.2.3
Control, data acquisition & experimental substructure
The experimental substructure consist of a 11.2 m long mast arm showed in Fig. 2.10, where
the control and DAQ system (3) can be seen along side the mast arm (4).
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Hybrid simulation
17
To control the actuators the MTS 793 system is employed, which is installed on the slave
PC, seen as (3) in Fig. 2.10. The slave PC controls the servo vales in the actuators through
the Station Manager, a subsystem of the MTS 793 software. The DAQ is executed though the
MultiPurpose TestWare (MPT), also within the Station Manager. In MPT any signal sent
or received by the displacement transducers and/or load cells can be recorded with a chosen
sample frequency.
The number of fiber layers changes along the length of the GFRP mast arm. The mast
arm is fixed at the end-plate to the right in Fig. 2.10.
y
z
x
(3)
(4)
Figure 2.10: Control and data acquisition system (3) along side the experimental substruc-
ture (4). The coordinate system is rotated to fit the global coordinate system.
y
z
x
CP1
CP2
CP3
30¬Α
60¬Α
Figure 2.11: Schematic representation of the experimental substructure in the global coordi-
nate system. CP1, CP2, and CP3 are the three shared boundaries introduced in Sec. 2.2.1.
In Fig. 2.10 and 2.11 above, nine actuators can be spotted and the position and orientation
are highlighted in latter. As the figures depicts there are three actuators at each CP. These
are the three shared boundaries with the numerical substructure. Each CP can be translated
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory & Method
in the global xβà£, yβà£and zβà£direction and their point of attack for each actuators are on the
upper side of the mast arm.
There are two types of actuators used at each CP, two 25 kN and one 50 kN. The direction,
static- and dynamic stroke are shown in Tab. 2.2. A technical drawing, provided by MTS, can
be found in App. A.5.
Table 2.2: Actuators specifications. PID specifications for the actuators can be found in App.
A.6.
Global
coordinates
Force
kN
Static stroke
mm
Dynamic stroke
mm
X
25
182.9
152.4
Y
50
172.7
152.4
Z
25
182.9
152.4
This test-rig showed in Fig. 2.10 and 2.11 was already build prior to this thesis and therefore
did the author not have any saying regarding the placement and size of the actuators.
2.2.4
Advantages & challenges of hybrid simulation
In this section some of the advantages and challenges of HS will briefly be presented, starting
with the advantages:
(1) The left hand side of the equations of motion (Eq. (2.10a) and (2.11a)) is defined either
analytical or numerical. This gives opportunities to investigate the structural behavior of a
variety of loading conditions ranging from seismic actions to traο§Äic loads, impact loads and
wind action on the structures. This can be done without changing the physical appearance of
the experimental structure.
(2) The HS methodology gives the opportunity to divide the structure into smaller well
understood substructures that can be modelled by FE-models. Substructures which have a
high degree of non-linearity and/or diο§Äicult numerical modeling attributes can be handled by
the experimental substructure.
(3) With HS it is possible to do a full-scale specimen experiment with quasi-static, displacement-
based loading which can be executed on an extended time-scale. By the use of a full-scale
specimens, the diο§Äiculties of scaling the specimens and loads are eliminated.
(4) Since HS can be executed during an extended time-scale and quasi-static loading, the
actuators, the servovalves and the hydraulic power-supply are generally suο§Äicient in an already
well established testing facilities. This offers a great economical advantage for the test facility
since new testing equipment is generally expensive to acquire.
(5) The extended time-scale offers the opportunity to inspect the specimen during the HS,
which can give an important insight about the behavior of the structure.
(6) The time-scale of the HS can range from two orders of magnitude slower than the
actual time-scale and up to several times faster. Which ensures that the HS can be executed
in a reasonable time frame.
As shown above, HS offers a series of advantages but there are also some challenges one
must take into consideration while using HS.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Hybrid simulation
19
(1) There are a number of errors that can occur during a HS which can challenge the
validity of the obtained results from the simulation. Five of the most profound source of error
are listed below
βÄΔ Modeling errors from the numerical substructures during the discretization process and
assumption regarding energy-dissipation, hence an non-physical numerical substructure.
βÄΔ Numerical errors from the solution algorithms including the integration and equilibrium
scheme. This error will be shown in detail in Sec. 3.4.
βÄΔ Experimental error from the actuators where the command- (CMD) and feedback (FB)
have an unacceptable large error.
βÄΔ Error from the experimental data-acquisition system e.g. an uncalibrated load cell etc.
βÄΔ Errors in the experimental substructure can result in an introduction of energy into
the system and the system can become unstable, therefore must this be minimized or
compensated.
(2) To execute a very complicated load scenario which non-linear material parameters in
the numerical substructure where a displacement is transferred to an inelastic experimental
substructure can be very diο§Äicult. The reason why the numerical substructure can require an
implicit iterative integration method is that it can lead to convergence issues. The non-linearity
can result in large variations in magnitude of the computed load from one step to the next
which make it diο§Äicult or impossible to predict in real time.
(3) As the numerical substructure of the HS becomes larger (increasing numbers of nodes,
elements and degrees of freedom) and more complex (material- and geometrical non linearity)
the methodology suffers the same issues as the bullet point above. To solve the issue, high
performance computing (HPC) could be employed if the simulation needs to run in real time
or close to. Other methods exist in order to combat the increasing need for calculation speed.
An example of this could be multi-rate RTHS [24]. However, this is outside the scope of this
thesis and will therefore not be explained in further detail.
(4) To capture the inertia- and damping forces that generated by the mass of the experi-
mental structure, one has to use RTHS.
(5) It can be very diο§Äicult to execute the simulation under displacement control if the
experimental substructure contains a very stiff test specimen. Therefore, it can be necessary
to employ force control, mixed force/displacement or a switch during simulation.
This section, regarding the advantages and challenges of HS, are heavily inspired by Ad-
vanced Implementation of Hybrid Simulation written by Schellenberg et. al [22].
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Numerical implementation
This chapter concerns the implementation of the static- and dynamic behavior of the trans-
mission line presented in Sec. 2.1 into a FE-formulation.
3.1
Wind load from realistic wind profile
To enable the wind load to act as realistically as possible on the transmission line, a record of the
wind velocity from Anholt offshore wind farm provided by Ο‰rstad [25] is employed throughout
this thesis.
The wind profile can be seen in Fig.
3.1 where the average wind velocity is
Uavg βâà8.75 m/s. The measurements provided by Ο‰rstad are recorded with a sample frequency
of fs βâà173 Hz, which results in a change in time of βàÜt = 0.0058 s between each time step.
Figure 3.1: Wind velocity measurements during a period of ten minutes at a height of 40 m
at Anholt offshore wind farm. Provided by Ο‰rstad [25].
The equations for drag- and lift force (Eq. (2.4a) and (2.4b)) can be used at each time step.
A MATLAB script has been developed where the drag- and lift force are evaluated for each
load step, cf. App. A.2 . The forces are evaluated under a quasi-steady assumption which
means that the resulting forces are determined by the instantaneous wind velocity acting on
the non-moving transmission line. Which results in an input file for Ansys containing the
calculated load steps.
To be able to control the wind velocity and therefore the wind load on the transmission line,
a small MATLAB script has been developed. The script enables the user to chose a desired
average wind velocity for a given time period.
Three corresponding shifted wind velocities during an arbitrary chosen time period can be
seen in Fig. 3.2, which is an example of the performance of the before mentioned script.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Numerical implementation
Figure 3.2: Three average wind velocities during a ten seconds time span.
3.2
Element formulation
As stated earlier, the commercial FE-software Ansys version 17.2 will be used during this thesis
since the TE described in Sec. 2.2.1 is compiled with this version. Ansys includes a predefined
library of FE-elements where the user can utilise the individual ability of the elements according
the FE-analysis requirements. However, Ansys 17.2 does not include a cable element where
only the forces along the element are considered, in later version Ansys does include a cable
element called CABELL280 [11].
A LINK180 could be employed to capture the behavior of the transmission line but it is not
possible to apply a surface load on the LINK180 element. The wind load can therefore not be
applied to this element and the element becomes irrelevant for this thesis.
To enable Ansys to conduct the FE-analysis, a BEAM189 element is utilised instead, the
element geometry is depicted in Fig. 3.3.
x
y
I
J
L
z
1
3
2
4
5
189
Y
Z
X
K
Figure 3.3: Ansys 17.2 BEAM189. Taken from [11].
The BEAM189 is based on Timoshenko beam theory and consists of three nodes, i, j and
k, and have three translational- and three rotational DOF in each end-nodes. The rotational
DOF have been restrained to only include the axial forces. To enable the BEAM189 element
to correctly capture the catenary shape of a sagging transmission line the non-geometrical
command, NLGEOM, must be enabled which results in a non-linear analysis [26].
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Numerical simulation strategy
23
3.3
Numerical simulation strategy
To capture the behavior of the transmission line the APDL consists of one set-up phase and
two simulation phases are defined. During the set-up phase the FE-model is constructed and
initial forces are applied. The first simulation phase is the static deformation phase where the
transmission line deforms into its static catenary shape as depicted in Fig. 2.1. After the static
phase, the dynamic loads from the wind are applied which is called the dynamic phase. These
three phases will be explained in detail in the coming two sections. Both simulation phases
are considered as full transient analysis.
3.3.1
Set-up phase
In the first phase, the transmission line is modelled as a line with a span equal to the initial
distance between the mast arms. This line is then discretized into smaller BEAM189 elements.
Information regarding the physical attributes such as shape, weight and mass are controlled
by the following Ansys commands SECTYPE, SECDATA, and SECCONTROL, respectively.
The
transmission line is then pre-stressed by the INISTATE command. The initial stress is calculated
by a desired sag which is inserted into Eq. (2.1) where the horizontal force is found. The force
is then divided by the cross section to find the initial stress.
3.3.2
Static phase
The gravity load is then applied during several steps to enable the explicit solver to obtain a
solution and later ensure that the HS remains stable. This load will result in the characteristics
catenary shape as seen in Fig. 2.1. The dampening coeο§Äicients, Έ± and Έ≤, are increased in order
to damp the dynamical effect associated with static deformation of the transmission line.
3.3.3
Dynamic phase
After the static phase, the dynamic phase commence. In the dynamic phase the gravitational
load is still present and the pre-calculated drag- and lift forces are applied to the BEAM189
elements by the SFBEAM command for each time step. This phase is continued until all time
steps have been evaluated.
3.4
Implicit vs. explicit solver
When considering HS, the integration scheme used to solve the system of equations within the
numerical substructure is critical. In general two types of solvers can be used, implicit- and
explicit solvers, which have a profound effect on the precision of the obtained results. Therefore,
will the two types of solvers be presented and their effect on the simulation showed.
Ansys uses the Newton-Raphson algorithm while attempting to solve for a non-linear sys-
tem. The Newmark- and the generalised HHT-Έ±-method is an option Ansys can activate if
needed.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Numerical implementation
Those algorithms can utilise the non-linear term of the deformation of the transmission
line, which results in a stress stiffening effect [11] that is used to correctly predict the catenary
shape.
An explicit solver uses a sparse direct solver, can not include the stress stiffening effect from
the geometrical non-linearity [11]. This missing effect results in a poorly predicted catenary
shape. Since the explicit solver does not have the ability to find the best solution by iteration,
it requires smaller steps than the implicit solver.
To showcase the difference in the outcome of the two types of solvers a single transmission
line of 80 m is spanning between two pined points and is gradually subjected to an increasing
gravitation acceleration up to 9.81 m/s2 which is reached after 200 steps.
As seen in Fig. 3.4a the normalised pretension remains at a fixed value for the explicit
solver where the stress stiffening effect seen for the implicit solver increases as the gravitational
acceleration intensifies. The result of the stress stiffening effect is shown in Fig. 3.4b where
the implicit solver predict the correct sag (the correctness of the implicit solver will be shown
in Chap. 4) and the explicit overshot the sag βâà14 times.
(a) Normalised pretension forces, H (Eq. (2.1)), as
a function of ramped gravity.
(b) Normalised sag after initial ramped gravity.
Figure 3.4: Numerical comparison between the implicit- and explicit solvers within Ansys
17.2.
The vertical force exerted by the transmission line of the fixed ends is also influenced
by which solver is chosen. The normalised vertical forces for both solvers are shown in Fig.
3.5 along side the error between the two solvers. This simulation is conducted by the same
parameters as used in Fig. 3.4 but extended to also evaluate the dynamic phase from step
230 and forward. It is evident by the error plot that after the initial ramping of 200 steps,
the implicit solver predicts the vertical force very well where the explicit solver needs a βÄùdwell-
phaseβÄù (from step 200 to 230 in Fig. 3.5) to correctly predict the static vertical force.
After the βÄùdwell-phaseβÄù the dynamic forces are applied to the transmission line and a larger
error occurs. The explicit solver does not seem to have the ability to capture the spikes in
vertical forces very well. Therefore, the largest error is seen at each spike of the vertical force.
This difference between the two types of solvers resolves in an average error of 5.81% and a
maximum error of 34.52% at step 547 where the largest force spike is found.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Implicit vs. explicit solver
25
Figure 3.5: Numerical comparison of the vertical force of the implicit- and explicit solvers
within Ansys 17.2.
It has been tried to improve the results obtained by the explicit solver by reducing βàÜt
between two time steps. The reduction did not have an profound effect of the obtained results.
This indicates that the time step used has converged.
Currently, the Ansys TE transfers the displacement predicted for every step also the non-
converged iterative substeps while employing the implicit solver.
Since the non-converted
steps are transferred, the numerical substructure can become unstable and convergence prob-
lems while running a HS. Later in this thesis the implicit solver will be employed for the QSHS
and the explicit solver for the PDHS. The results will thereafter be analysed and compared.
==PAGE:38==
26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Numerical validation
In this chapter, the numerical model of the behavior of the transmission line presented in Sec.
2.1 is validated. Firstly the static phase is compared with the analytical models presented in
Sec. 2.1.1. Thereafter, the dynamic behavior is validated through a comparison with an article
regarding another numerical implementation of wind acting on a transmission line model.
4.1
Static validation
A transmission line is modeled as presented in Sec. 3.3.2 where only the static gravitational
load is acting on the transmission line. The dimensions and material parameters are taken
from Daniel JohansenβÄôs Master thesis [10], and displayed in Tab. 4.1.
Table 4.1: Physical parameters of the transmission line. Taken from [10].
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Span length
S
125.88
m
Sag
k
1.38
m
Diameter of cable
d
18.80
mm
YoungβÄôs modulus
E
568.50
MPa
Mass pr. length
¬Β
1.53
kg/m
As mentioned earlier the transmission line is pined in each ends and at the same vertical
elevation. The transmission line is discretized into 200 elements. An implicit solver is used to
obtain the results in this section. In Tab. 4.2 the results of the FE-simulation are presented.
The analytical results are obtained by employing Eq.
2.1 and 2.2 for the horizontal- and
vertical forces, respectively.
Table 4.2: Comparison with analytical- and numerical results.
H
[kN]
R
[N]
k
[m]
Analytical
21.54
944.68
1.380
Numerical
21.58
944.68
1.377
Percent error
0.19%
0.00%
0.22%
It is seen in the table above, that the numerical and analytical model predict the same
outcome, approximately. Therefore, it must be concluded that it is possible to predict the
static deflection and reaction forces of the transmission line by the use of Ansys.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Numerical validation
4.2
Dynamic validation
To validate the dynamic part of the simulation, the present model in this thesis will be com-
pared with a paper titled Finite Element Modelling of Electrical Over-head Line Cables under
Turbulent Wind Load by Stengel and Mehdianpour [27]. In the paper Stengel and Mehdian-
pour presents a FE-formulation of an overhead transmission line where a drag- and lift force
are applied. The input parameters for dynamic validation can be seen in Tab. 4.3.
Table 4.3: Physical parameters of the transmission line. Taken from [27].
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Span length
S
400
m
Sag
k
6.0
m
Area of cable
A
1190.80
mm2
YoungβÄôs modulus
E
74000
MPa
Mass pr. length
¬Β
3.992
kg/m
Stiffness damning
Έ±
0.02890
-
Mass damning
Έ≤
0.00538
-
Note that the dampening coeο§Äicients Έ± and Έ≤ can only be evaluated after the modal analysis.
4.2.1
Modal validation
Transmission lines have a very low damping as stated in Sec. 2.1.3. Their eigenvalues and
eigenvectors can be found by a linearisation of the equation of motion for a static solution as
seen in the equation below [28].

K βà£œâ2M

q = 0
(4.1)
In the equation above œâ is the eigenvalue in Hz and q is the eigenvector. To obtain a
representative set of eigenvalues and eigenvectors the transmission line is subjected to the
static phase, such the catenary shape is obtained.
The first six modal shapes are presented in Fig. 4.1. It is observed that for an even number
eigenvalues a symmetric modal shape around the middle of the span is seen. Likewise for an
uneven number of eigenvalues an anti-symmetric modal shape is observed.
Figure 4.1: Normalized modal shapes for the first six eigen frequencies.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Dynamic validation
29
In Tab. 4.4 the eigenvalues obtained for the present model are compared with those from
the paper.
The eigenvalues are divided into anti-symmetric and symmetric values, which
correspond to the modal shapes found in Fig. 4.1.
Table 4.4:
Anti-symmetric and symmetric eigenfrequencies in-plane obtained by a FE-
formulation by Stengel and Mehdianpour [27] compared to frequencies obtained by the present
model. All frequencies are in Rad/s.
Stengel and Mehdianpour [27]
Present model
Error
Anti-symmetric
Symmetric
Anti-symmetric
Symmetric
[%]
œâ1
1.90
1.89
0.53
œâ2
2.85
2.84
0.35
œâ3
4.31
4.29
0.46
œâ4
5.71
5.69
0.35
œâ5
7.14
7.19
0.28
œâ6
9.98
9.96
0.28
It is seen that the error between the present model and the one presented in the paper
is below 1%. The small error can be caused by different sizes of discretization or numerical
precision.
The dampening coeο§Äicients Έ± and Έ≤ can be determined by the two first eigenvalues (œâ1 and
œâ2) cf. Eq. (2.9). These two coeο§Äicients are used in the next section.
4.2.2
Dynamic forces
To validate the dynamic phase, a single transmission line is suspended between two points
and wind loads, which varies over time, are applied perpendicular to the transmission line as
depicted in Fig. 4.2.
Z
X
Y
U(t)
Figure 4.2: Dynamic validation model.
The wind profile during a period of 600 s is provided by Stengel and Mehdianpour [27] and
is shown in Fig. 4.3a which consist of 4420 steps and thereby a βàÜt = 0.1346 s. The wind
profile contains an average wind velocity of 32.22 m/s and a maximum wind gust of 51.12 m/s.
The wind forces applied to the transmission line is equal to those applied during a hurricane
according to the Beaufort scale, cf. Tab. 1.1.
In Fig. 4.3b the Reynolds number is evaluated according to the wind profile provided by
Stengel and Mehdianpour. It is seen that the value of Reynolds number range from βâà2 Ο½ 104
to βâà6.7Ο½104. The flow around the transmission line is within the later stages of the subcritical
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Numerical validation
regime, according to Tab. 2.1. In this part of the subcritical flow regime the drag- and lift
coeο§Äicients stabilises around CD βâà1.18 and CL βâà0.48, as seen in Fig. 2.5.
(a) Wind profile.
(b) Reynolds number evaluated by the wind pro-
file.
Figure 4.3: Wind profile and Reynolds number during a period of 600 seconds.
From the wind profile in Fig. 4.3a, the equation for drag and lift (Eq. (2.4a) and (2.4b))
can be used for each time step. The drag- and lift forces as a function of time can be seen in
Fig. 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Input forces as a function of time acting on the transmission line.
Because of the high wind velocity, both the Strouhal number and the resulting vortex
frequency are very rapid. Ranging from fmin βâà150 Hz to fmax βâà500 Hz. Therefore, a very
rapid change in direction of the lift forces are observed in Fig.
4.4, which are alternating
around the zero axis. The drag force seems to be proportional to the input wind velocity
which is in good agreement, since the drag coeο§Äicient is almost constant which linearise the
highly non-linear equation for drag cf. (2.4a).
The predetermined forces can then be used in Ansys 17.2, using an implicit solver, to
evaluate the dynamic respond of the transmission line. The reaction forces in the wind direction
can be seen in Fig. 4.5.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Dynamic validation
31
Figure 4.5: Reaction forces in the wind direction as a function of time.
Note that the forces recorded in Fig. 4.5 have first been through the static phase and
then subjected to the dynamic phase which is only presented in this figure. By comparing the
reaction forces found by the present model and the paper some discrepancies are found which
are shown in Tab. 4.5. Here the average difference in reaction forces is found to be around
30 % where the present model predicts a lower average reaction force. Likewise, the present
model predicts a lower minimum reaction force and a smaller maximum reaction force with an
error of 23% and 13%, respectively.
Table 4.5: Comparison between reaction forces from paper and present simulation.
Reaction forces in wind direction
Average
Minimum
Maximum
Unit
Stengel and Mehdianpour [27]
10.97
4.67
17.12
kN
Present model
7.84
3.56
14.85
kN
Percentage error
28.58
23.78
13.28
%
The reason for this discrepancy can be the way the forces are applied to the transmission
line. Firstly, the forces are calculated in a slightly different way as seen in Eq. (4.2a) and (4.2b)
[27]. The most significant difference is that the velocity of the transmission line is incorporated
in the set of equations by these terms Υôx and Υôy, which are evaluated for each time step in the
simulation.
FD,i = 1
2œ¹CfDS(Ui βà£Υôxi)2
(4.2a)
FL,i = 1
2œ¹CfDS(Ui βà£Υôyi)2
(4.2b)
Secondly, the aerodynamic coeο§Äicients constant used in the paper are a constant of Cf = 1
which is a minor change compared to the drag coeο§Äicient in for the present model. On the
other hand, the aerodynamic coeο§Äicients for the lift are about two times larger than the one
used in the present model.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Numerical validation
Thirdly, the lift force (Eq. (4.2b)) does not include the alternating direction of the force
from the Strouhal number which could be the reason for the discrepancy in the maximum
and minimum reaction forces. The alternating effect of the lift forces could be dampening the
maximum and minimum values of the reaction forces because of their rapid change in direction.
By this validation, it is evident that the eigenvalues predicted by Ansys are in good agree-
ment with those obtained by the paper. On the other hand, there is a noticeable discrepancy
between the obtained dynamic forces. However, the implementation of the wind load presented
in Sec. 2.1.2 will be used throughout this thesis.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental quasi static
In this chapter, the dynamic respond from the transmission lines will be exerted on the ex-
perimental substructure by a QS-analysis. The displacements in the x-, y- and z-direction for
each CP are calculated using a FE-model, with an implicit solver. The displacements are then
used to control the actuators which are attached to the mast arm. The aim for the QS-test is
to ensure that actuators are capable of handle both the displacements and forces applied by
the transmission lines for the upcoming HS.
5.1
Finite element model of the mast arm &
transmission lines
As mention above, the dynamic responds of the transmission lines are evaluated using a FE-
model of the mast arm.
The FE-model of the mast arm is developed by Jacob Paamand
WaldbjΟΗrn and further evaluated by Mads Bjerrum in his master thesis [29]. The mast arm
in the FE-model is constructed as a shell model where GFRP properties are smeared using a
SHELL181 elements. The base of the FE-model of mast arm is fully constrained such that no
translation or rotation are allowed. The incorporation of the transmission lines are depicted
in Fig. 5.1 where the FE-model is presented with the mast arm and transmission lines.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(3)
Figure 5.1: The transmission lines (1) are connected in the elastic center (2) of the mast
arm by use of MPC184 elements (3). Note that the transmission lines of 75 m, are connected on
either side of the mast arm. The mast arm is tilted with 30 β½Πto match the global coordinate
system.
The transmission lines are connected to the elastic center of the mast arm through the use
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Experimental quasi static
of MPC1841 elements where each of these elements are connected to the outer shell element
of the mast arm. As seen in Fig. 2.11 and 2.10 the point of attack of the transmission lines
are on upper-side of the mast arm which will result in some shear forces from the applied
displacement from the transmission lines. These shear forces are lost due to the point of attack
which is in the elastic center of the mast arm.
From Mads BjerrumβÄôs master thesis, it is evident by a mesh convergence study that the
FE-model of the mast arm can obtain good results if the elements along the length of the
mast arm have a length of 0.2 m and the circumference is divided into 72 elements [29]. This
discretisation will be used throughout this thesis whenever the FE-model of the mast arm is
used.
The input parameters for the transmission line can be found in Tab. 5.1 which are identical
compared to those for the static validation in Sec. 4.1 except that the span is shortened.
Table 5.1: Physical parameters of the transmission line are the same as for the static validation
in sec. 4.1, except span length.
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Span length
S
75
m
Sag
k
4.45
m
Diameter of cable
d
18.80
mm
YoungβÄôs modulus
E
568.50
MPa
Mass pr. length
¬Β
1.53
kg/m
Stiffness damning
Έ±
0.80853
-
Mass damning
Έ≤
0.00786
-
The FE-analysis is carried out as described in Sec.
3.3, where set-up-, static- and the
dynamic phase are considered. Fig. 5.2 shows the static deformation of the six, 75 m long,
transmission lines connected to the mast arm and is pined in each of the other ends of the
transmission lines.
After the static deformation, the wind loads are applied to the transmission lines. The
wind profile is from the 600 s wind profile from Ο‰rstad (cf. Fig. 3.1) from 150 s to 190 s. The
average wind velocity is increased to Uavg βâà20 m/s during the 40 s time span. The wind load
acting on the transmission lines are equal to those found during stronger/sever gale according
to the Beaufort scale in Tab. 1.1. The wind profile consists of 347 time steps and thus the
change in time between two time steps is βàÜt = 0.115 s. The wind profile and Reynolds number
can be found in Fig. 5.3. The range in Reynolds number in Fig. 5.3b shows that the flow is
well within the subcritical regime and therefore the drag- and lift coeο§Äicient becomes almost
constant at CD βâà1.2 and CL βâà0.46, respectively. By these coeο§Äicients the drag- and lift
forces can be evaluated and are displayed in Fig. 5.4. The displayed forces are applied to each
side of the mast such that each transmission line is subjected to the same wind load.
1Multi-point constraint elements that apply kinematic constraints between nodes [11]
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Finite element model of the mast arm & transmission lines
35
Figure 5.2: Static deformation of the mast arm and transmission lines.
(a) Wind profile.
(b) Reynolds number evaluated by the wind pro-
file.
Figure 5.3: The duration of the figures in a 40 seconds time period taken between 150 to 190
seconds from Fig.3.1.
The deformation of the transmission lines can be seen in Fig. 5.5. The static forces are
applied in Fig. 5.5a where the gravitational acceleration is acting directly downwards. In Fig.
5.5b the dynamic forces are applied and the displacement of the transmission line is moving
in the direction of the applied wind load.
Note that the displacement of the mast is so small compared to the displacement of the
transmission line. The displacement and forces acting in the three CPs will be shown in next
section.
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Experimental quasi static
Figure 5.4: Input forces as a function of time acting on the transmission lines.
(a) Static displacement of 4.45 m after the static
phase.
(b) Displacement during the dynamic phase after
6.3 seconds.
Figure 5.5: Side view of the FE-model including the transmission lines.
5.2
Quasi static analysis
To enable the QS-analysis, the displacements calculated for each time step in the FE-simulation
presented above is recorded and an input file for MultiPurpose Elite (MPE) can be formulated.
MPE is a drag-and-drop environment where a procedure for the QS-analysis can be defined
and executed.
The QS-analysis procedure for a single CP can be found in Fig. 5.6, which consist of four
different types of drag-and-drop boxes. From the top, the first box is the Assign Variables-
box (1) which is used to find the initial position of the active actuators and assign the position
to a variable which will be used later.
Then the procedure is split into four parallel paths. In the three paths furthest to the
left are the ramp-box (2) utilised to ramp each actuator to the initial displacement. The
initial displacements are equal to the deformation of the static phase. After the initial ramp,
the profile-box (3) is used. Here the predefined displacement from the FE-model is inserted
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Quasi static analysis
37
with a given time to reach each predefined displacement points. The predefined displacement
is applied in relevant to the initial position acquired in Assign Variables-box. Since the
dynamic effect of the mast arm are not of interest, the time between each time step have been
increased from βàÜt = 0.115 s to βàÜt = 2 s which is βâà17 times slower the simulation time to
ensure that the actuators had enough time to reach the desired displacement at each time step.
Each of the three paths represent the displacements of each actuators (DE
x,i, DE
y,i, and DE
z,i cf.
Fig. 5.6).
The parallel path furthers to the right have the DAQ-box (4) which is used to acquire
data (displacement and reaction force from each actuator) with a given sample frequency. For
this procedure the sample frequency was chosen to fs = 2 Hz. This path is ran in parallel until
the three path on the left hand side comes to an end, meaning that the all 347 time step from
the FE-simulation have been conducted, and then the procedures terminates.
(1)
(2)
(3)
πù£ô,πù£ä
πùê³
πù£ö,πù£ä
πùê³
πù£¦,πù£ä
πùê³
(3)
(3)
(2)
(2)
(4)
Figure 5.6: Three channels MPE procedure, see full nine channels MPE procedure in App.
A.7.
The displacement evaluated by the FE-simulation has been inserted into the MPE proce-
dure and the displacement recorded by the DAQ-box can be seen in Fig. 5.7a, 5.7c and 5.7e
for CP1, CP2 and CP3, respectively. The initial ramp is conducted between step 0 and 1
for all plots in Fig. 5.7. The three figures shows the same tendency of deformation but the
magnitude differs, which is expected since the forces exerted on the three CPs are equal but
the stiffness increases as closer the CP comes to the base of the mast arm. Therefore, the
displacement recorded at CP1 is the largest, then CP2 and the smallest at CP3. Note that
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Experimental quasi static
the direction is according to the global coordinate system presented in Fig. 2.11. The average
error between the CMD- and FB signal is βâà0.0064% and a maximum error of βâà0.0872%.
The reaction force is also recorded by the DAQ-box, and is presented in Fig. 5.7b, 5.7d
and 5.7f for CP1, CP2 and CP3, respectively. In the same figures the reaction force evaluated
by the FE-analysis as FE1, FE2 and FE3 for each of the CPs in each direction are shown as
well. It is seen that there is a noticeable error between the experimental recorded reaction
forces and those found by the FE-analysis.
The reaction forces in the x-direction (along the length of the transmission lines) are calcu-
lated by the FE-analysis to be βâà0 where the small deviation is from numerical imperfection.
This is due to equal wind load on the transmission lines on both side and those reaction forces
cancels out. From the experimental QS-analysis the x-reaction force recorded is ΧΗ= 0 and is
larger than the numerical imperfection. This deviation could be from the movement in y- and
z-direction since this movement will alter the position of the actuator in the x-direction and
therefore raise the x-reaction forces recorded for the QS-analysis.
The reaction force calculated in the y-direction from the FE-model is equal for the three
CPs but for the QS-analysis the reaction force differs. It is observed that the y-reaction force
in CP1 is βâà1.5 times larger than the corresponding reaction force from the FE-analysis. The
opposite is seen for the CP2 where there y-reaction force is βâà1.5 smaller than the reaction
force from the FE-analysis. The same tendency for the y-reaction force is seen for CP3 where
the y-reaction force predicted by FE-model, is larger than the one found by the QS-analysis.
In general the z-reaction force predicted by the FE-model is less than the one found by the
QS-analysis, but the tendency is roughly similar compared to the FE model.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Quasi static analysis
39
(a) Displacements in CP1 as a function of time
steps.
(b) Reaction forces in CP1 as a function of
time steps.
(c) Displacements in CP2 as a function of time
steps.
(d) Reaction forces in CP2 as a function of
time steps.
(e) Displacements in CP3 as a function of time
steps.
(f) Reaction forces in CP3 as a function of time
steps.
Figure 5.7: Experimental results compared with FE-analysis in the global coordinate system
from Fig. 2.11.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Experimental quasi static
By this QS-analysis, it is evident that the FE-model of the mast arm could be needing some
additional work to fully capture the dynamic respond of the transmission line. However, the
results shows that the forces exerted by the six transmission lines, spanning 75 m on either side
if the mast arm, with an average wind velocity of Uavg βâà20 m/s are well within the capabilities
of the actuators on the experimental substructure.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Hybrid simulation
The HS methodology presented in Sec. 2.2 will be utilised in order to conduct a HS on the
mast arm. In the first section a virtual HS for a single CP will be conducted to evaluate the
performance of the PDHS and QSHS. In the following section an experimental QSHS will be
conducted for a single CP on the mast arm. The results will be compared with the findings
from a virtual HS and a FE-analysis. Lastly in this chapter will the set-up for triple CP PDHS
be presented.
6.1
Single control point virtual hybrid simulation
6.1.1
One degree of freedom
In a virtual HS the experimental substructure is replaced by a mathematical expression for the
relation between the applied displacement and the subsequent reaction force. The expression
is hard-coded into the calculation editor within the MTS 793 software. For a single CP HookeβÄôs
law for a linear spring [30] is used as seen in Eq. (6.1).
RE
i = 357.14 Ο½ 10βà£3
|
{z
}
K
DE
i
(6.1)
Here K is the stiffness of the mast arm in kN/mm at CP1 in y-direction, found experimentally
The found stiffness is also the initial stiffness of the TE, where the stiffness matrix showed in
Eq. 2.12 is reduced to a single equation.
To compare the performance of PDHS with QSHS, two HS was conducted with the same
input parameters as the QS-analysis from the previous chapter, cf. Tab. 5.1, Fig. 5.3 and 5.4.
Wind load
R
Di
i
N
Ri
E
N
Di
E
Numerical substructure
Experimental substructure
D =
i
N Di
E
Z
X
Y
CP
CP
R =
i
N Ri
E
Wind load
Figure 6.1: Schematic representation of the PDHS for a single CP with one DOF. All other
DOF are restrained. The APDL script for the single CP PDHS can be found in App. A.8.
==PAGE:54==
42
6 Hybrid simulation
For the PDHS, the transmission line is modeled in the numerical substructure as depicted in
Fig. 6.1 where the wind load is applied on the transmission lines.
For the QSHS the transmission lines have been removed and predefined load steps, PN
i , have
been defined. The load steps have been evaluated by a FE-analysis where the transmission
line is present, as depicted in Fig. 6.1. All DOF have been restrained at the CP and therefore
can the load history be created. A schematic representation of the QSHS can be seen in Fig.
6.2.
Numerical substructure
Experimental substructure
D =
i
N Di
E
CP
CP
R
,Di
i
N
Ri
E
N
Pi
N
Di
E
Z
X
Y
R =
i
N Ri
E
Figure 6.2: Schematic representation of the QSHS for a single CP with one DOF. All other
DOF are restrained. The APDL script for the single CP QSHS can be found in App. A.9.
To enable the PDHS to include the transmission line within the numerical substructure an
explicit solver for both the PDHS and QSHS have been utilised for comparison. As a results
of the explicit solver, the sag from the transmission line increased from 4.45 m to βâà38.4 m
compared to Chap. 5.
The reaction forces (after the initial static- and dwell phase) as a function of time steps for
the two HS types can be seen in Fig. 6.3 alongside the error plot. The error plot shows that
there is a good agreement between the PDHS and QSHS with an average error of βâà0.35%
where the largest error observed where the force spikes. This can be seen in detail on the
zoomed-in figure on the right hand side of Fig. 6.3 where the PDHS estimates a larger force
than the QSHS. The error is still to be considered small since the largest error is βâà2.05%.
Figure 6.3: PDHS compared with QSHS using an explicit solver.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Single control point virtual hybrid simulation
43
The error can be related to the fact that the CP does not move when the predefined load file
is being calculated and thus is the inertial forces associated with the movement of the CP lost.
The horizontal flat spots observed for the PDHS are where Ansys is calculating the next time
step.
One of the advantages with the QSHS, is that the predefined load history can be calculated
using an implicit solver and then used in the HS. Where a PDHS is limited by the fact that an
explicit solver is needed in order to ensure a stable HS with a transmission line. The advantages
of the QSHS are shown in Fig. 6.4 where the predefined load file has been calculated using
an implicit solver, all other parameters have been kept the same. As seen, the reaction forces
have a larger span in magnitude that for the explicit solver showed in Fig. 6.3.
The QSHS has been compared with a FE-model where a COMBIN14 element has been
inserted, in the y-direction, as a spring element with same stiffness as used in Eq. (6.1). The
average error is βâà1.08% where a rise in the error plot is observed towards the end of the HS.
This could be an error from the post data processing, where a minor shift in the data results
in a large error in the end.
Figure 6.4: QSHS compared with FE-analysis using an implicit solver.
From the zoomed-in plot on the right hand side of Fig. 6.4 above, it is seen that the QSHS
reaches a marginal larger and smaller values at the spike values of force. This can be a result of
rounding of the transferred displacements and/or forces either within the OpenFresco modules
or the MTS 793 software.
6.1.2
Two degrees of freedom
The virtual QSHS has been expanded to include an extra DOF in the z-direction, as seen in
Fig. 6.5. The force and displacement in the z-direction are applied along the length of the
mast arm. Note that the mast arm is titled 30 β½Πas shown in Fig. 2.11.
This additional DOF changes the initial stiffness equation from the single linear equation
presented in Eq. (6.1) to a set of equation shown in Eq. (6.2), as a system of a two-by-two
matrix.
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Hybrid simulation
"
RE
i,y
RE
i,z
#
| {z }
Ri
=
"
357.14
0.0
0.0
400.00
#
|
{z
}
K
Ο½10βà£3
"
DE
i,y
DE
i,z
#
| {z }
Di
(6.2)
The stiffness matrix, K, has again been found experimentally. It is worth to mention that the
relation between the displacements and reaction forces in the two directions are decoupled and
therefore does not have an effect on each other.
Numerical substructure
Experimental substructure
D =
N D
E
CP
CP
R
,D
N
R
E
N
Pi,y
i,y
N
,D
N
Pi,z
i,z
N
D
E
i,z
i,y
D
E
i,y
i,y
D =
N D
E
i,z
i,z
Z
X
Y
i,y
R
N
i,z
R
E
i,z
i,y
R =
N R
E
i,y
i,y
R =
N R
E
i,z
i,z
Figure 6.5: Schematic representation of the two DOF QSHS. All other DOF are restrained.
The APDL script for the single CP QSHS with two DOF can be found in App. A.9. Note that
the forces ,PN
i,y, is commented out in the script.
The displacement and reaction force found from the decoupled QSHS with two DOF can
be seen in Fig. 6.6. The RE
y force seen in Fig. 6.6b is equal in magnitude and tendency for the
one found for the QSHS with a single DOF in Fig. 6.4. The new force, RE
z , is zero while the
static phase is progressing. This is expected for at decouple system since the two directions do
not influence on each other. Once the static- and dwell phase are completed at time step 230,
the dynamic phase commences. In this phase the wind load is applied and a reaction force
in the z-direction is seen. The reaction force is altering in magnitude of βâà¬±0.5 kN around
(a) Displacements from the two virtual actuators.
(b) Reaction forces from the two virtual force
transducers.
Figure 6.6: Results from the virtual QSHS with a single CP with two DOF.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Single control point experimental hybrid simulation
45
βâàβà£0.35 kN during the dynamic phase. From the figure it is evident that there is a linear
relation between the applied displacement and recorded reaction force, which is expected.
6.2
Single control point experimental hybrid simulation
6.2.1
One degree of freedom
As stated in the previous section the experimental substructure was replaced by a mathematical
expression which was coded into the MTS 793 software. Now, the experimental mast arm will
be included in the QSHS. Again, only CP1 is considered in the y-direction. Therefore, all other
actuators attached to the mast arm, except for those attached in CP1, will be dismantled or
in force-control at βâà0 N. Which is to remove the structural influence of the unused CPs.
The initial stiffness and QSHS set-up used in the virtual QSHS are the same for the experi-
mental QSHS, Eq. cf. (6.1) and Fig. 6.2, respectively. The displacement from the experimental
QSHS can be found in Fig. 6.7a alongside the recorded reaction force.
(a) Displacement and reaction force recorded for
the QSHS as a function of time steps.
(b) Comparison between the experimental stiffness
of the virtual and experimental QSHS as a function
of time steps.
Figure 6.7: Experimental QSHS with one DOF in the y-direction.
The reaction force recorded is in good agreement with those found by the virtual QSHS.
Since the external loads within the numerical substructure are not effected by the change in
stiffness from the experimental substructure, the reaction forces found are equal for both of
the virtual- and experimental QSHS.
Ont the other hand the displacements are larger for the experimental QSHS compared to
those found by the decoupled two DOF system in Fig. 6.6a. Since the displacement is larger
and the reaction force is the same compared to the decoupled two DOF QSHS. The stiffness
of the experimental substructure must therefore be smaller than the one used in the virtual
QSHS.
The stiffness as a function of time can be seen in Fig. 6.7b which is found by KE
y,i = RE
y,i/DE
y,i.
As the figure depicts, the virtual stiffness is constant though out the QSHS but the experimental
stiffness is changing as the QSHS progresses.
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Hybrid simulation
It is observed that the stiffness is depending on the displacement in the y-direction. An
explanation could be the change in angle of attack of the actuator as the actuator expands
and retracts due to the dynamic loading in the dynamic phase.
To further understand the relation between the displacements and reaction forces, a hystere-
sis plot can be seen in Fig. 6.8. The figure shows a linear correlation between the displacement
and reaction for the static phase. Just before the dynamic phase commences the dwell phase
can be seen in the zoomed-in figure on the right hand side of Fig. 6.8 as a cluster of tightly
packed points.
After the dwell phase, the first displacement during the dynamic phase is a small unload
which have a steeper slope than the initial linear relation for the static phase. After the unload,
an increase in load is observed to have the same slope as the initial static phase.
For the rest of the dynamic phase the same tendency for the load and unload is observed.
Where the loading have the same linear responds as observed in for the static phase. This
leads to an elliptic shaped relation which is observed during the dynamic phase.
Figure 6.8: Hysteresis plot of the single CP QSHS with one DOF.
6.2.2
Two degree of freedom
It is desired to extend the experimental QSHS presented in the previous section to include
two DOF. The schematic representation from Fig. 6.5 and initial stiffness from Eq. 6.2 from
the two DOF virtual QSHS have been reused. The two DOF QSHS became unstable while
running the simulation. The interlock on the MTS 793 system was activated due to too large
forces.
The reason for the instability is caused by the cross-coupling between the y- and z-direction.
During the static phase only the actuator in the y-direction is translated seen from the two DOF
QSHS in Fig. 6.6a. The actuator in the x-direction receives a zero CMD signal and thereby
does not translate.
Therefore, the reaction force, RE
z , increases due to the cross-coupling
effect. The increase in reaction force of the experimental substructure results in a reaction
force in the numerical substructure, RN
z , which is ΧΗ= 0. This results in a large displacement
in the z-direction, DN
z , for the upcoming time step. The large displacement is applied to the
experimental substructure where the interlock activates due to too large forces.
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Triple virtual control point hybrid simulation
47
Several changes/attempts have been made to stabilise the QSHS simulation, both within
the numerical substructure and in the MTS 793 software.
None of the changes improved
the unstable outcome of the QSHS. However, there is an add-on to the MTS 793 software
where a transformation matrix can be established by the initial position of the actuators. The
CMD signal sent to the actuators are altered through a virtual channel where the relation
between the two directions is establish by the transformation matrix. The implementation of
the transformation matrix was unfortunately not able to be conducted due to time limitation
of this thesis.
6.3
Triple virtual control point hybrid simulation
In this section, the virtual PDHS has been extended to include all three CPs. A schematic
representation of the mast arm with three CPs can be seen in Fig. 6.9. The vertical- and cable
direction forces are considered for the three CPs.
Z
X
Y
Py3
Px3
Py2
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
Px2
Py1
Px1
L ,EI
L ,EI
L ,EI
CP
2
CP
1
CP
Figure 6.9: Cantilever beam.
The mast arm as seen in Fig. 6.9 is simplified to include three different sections with three
different flexural rigidities (EI) and lengths.
For the triple CP HS, a mathematical expression regarding the relation between the applied
displacement and subsequent reaction force must be established. The mathematical expression
is based on the Bernoulli-Euler beam theory [31]. Eq. (6.3) shows the relation between the
deflection, v, and the applied force, P, as a function of the relative position along the mast
arm, ΈΨ. The relative position of the applied load is denoted as Έ≥.
v(ΈΨ) =
(
PL3/(6EI)ΈΨ2(3Έ≥ βà£ΈΨ)
if
ΈΨ βâΛΈ≥
PL3/(6EI)Έ≥2(3ΈΨ βà£Έ≥)
if
ΈΨ βâΞΈ≥
(6.3)
Through superposition [31] a mathematical expression can be used to calculate the three
flexural rigidities (EI) of the mast arm. The flexural rigidities for the mast arm can be fund
in the table below.
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Hybrid simulation
Table 6.1: Flexural rigidities of the three section of the Bernoulli-Euler beam from Fig. 6.9
EI1
Nm2
EI2
Nm2
EI3
Nm2
1.84 Ο½ 106
9.18 Ο½ 106
2.46 Ο½ 107
The same expression can inserted in the calculation editor within the MTS 793 software. The
numerical substructure for the triple CPs PDHS can be found in App. A.3. The experimental
substructure has also been prepared to be able to receive the calculated CMD signal from
numerical substructure. While running a virtual three CP PDHS, an error is observed, when
the TE tries to transfer the displacements calculated at the first step. Thereby, the numer-
ical substructure wonβÄôt receive the displacements for the upcoming step and the numerical
substructure fails and PDHS is terminated.
Therefore, the interface between OpenFresco and TE need further work to be able to include
multiple CP within the numerical substructure TE.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter, the obtained results throughout the thesis are discussed in detail.
7.1
Numerical implementation of transmission line
7.1.1
Further development of the wind load
The dynamic wind load introduced in Sec. 2.1.2 has been used throughout this thesis. The
drag- and lift forces are calculated based on quasi-steady assumptions which is one of the main
shortcomings of this method. To counteract this problem the instantaneous velocity of the
transmission line must be included in the calculated of the wind load. This can be completed
in two ways either by a new UEL or multi-physic simulation.
The UEL must be developed from scratch which could offer diο§Äiculties. It must be able to
calculate the relative wind velocity acting on the transmission line. Thereby, the absolute wind
velocity and absolute velocity of each element within the transmission line must be included
in the UEL. The equation for drag- and lift force (cf. Eq. (2.4a) and (2.4b)) can with fairly
minor changes be implemented in the UEL. The fully developed UEL would be able to be
implemented seamlessly into the already defined APDL script for HS.
To avoid the diο§Äiculties of implementing the before mentioned UEL the multi-physic sim-
ulation could be used. The multi-physic simulation is an already well defined simulation type
which is offered through numerous suppliers of FE-software. The multi-physic simulation in-
cludes the wind moving around the transmission line resulting forces acting on the transmission
line.
However, two challenges arise. First, it is unknown to the author if it is possible to im-
plement multi-physics simulation within the capabilities APDL scripting. This would need
further investigation. The second challenge is that the multi-physics simulation requires a lot
of computational time [32] to evaluate the simulation in a realistic time frame. The user needs
to keep the increase in computational time in mind while setting up a multi-physic HS.
7.1.2
Implicit- and explicit solver
The dynamic behavior of the transmission line shown in Sec. 3.4 was poorly captured by the
explicit solver. This was later confirmed by a comparison between two types of HSs, cf. Sec.
6.1.1. However, it is currently not possible to utilise the implicit solver for a HS. Since the
iterative substeps are also transferred to the numerical substructure. To enable the implicit
solver within Ansys, the TE must be altered to only transferring the converged time steps.
Whether it is possible to change the UEL only to transfer the converged steps needs further
investigation.
==PAGE:62==
50
7 Discussion
7.1.3
Validation of the structural behavior of the transmission lines
The static- and dynamic structural behavior were validated in Sec. 4. The validation of the
static behavior shows an error less than 0.3%. The minor error was also a results of the modal
validation where the largest error of the eigenfrequencies were βâà0.5%. Therefore, the behavior
of transmission line is in good agreement with those formulated by Stengel and Mehdianpour
[27].
On the other hand the dynamic force presented in Sec. 2.1.2 is off compared to those found
by Stengel and Mehdianpour with βâà21%. The reasons for the discrepancy in the obtained
dynamic forces are presented at the end of Sec. 4.2.2. It is unknown how well Stengel and
Mehdianpour captured the behavior of a real world transmission line.
The author did not find any paper regarding an experimental investigation of a transmission
line subjected to a known wind profile. Such paper could have been used as proper validation
of the model presented in this thesis.
7.2
Quasi static analysis
7.2.1
Finite element model of the mast arm
As presented in Sec. 5.1 the transmission lines are attached to the center of elasticity of the
mast arm thus the shear effect is lost. To enable the FE-model to include the shear effect the
transmission lines must be attached to the outer circumference of the mast arm. This change
will make the FE-model more complex since the attachment point of the transmission line
must be modeled as well.
Another change to the FE-model could be to replace the clamped fixture at the base of the
mast arm with spring elements. This change would replicate the behavior of the mast arm in
the laboratory better, because a fully clamped physical experimental set-up would be next to
impossible to produce. To find the correct spring stiffness, a series of experiments would have
to be conducted.
By these two changes the obtained results by the FE-model could be in better agreement
with those found from the experimental test-rig used in this thesis.
7.2.2
Quasi static experimental analysis
The QS-analysis carried out in Sec. 5.2 showed some discrepancies between the forces obtained
by the FE-model and QS-analysis. This was expected since a FE-model is only an approxima-
tion of the real structure. With the suggested improvement from the previous section a better
approximation by FE-model is expected.
On the other hand the MTS 793 software showed that it were able to control the actuators,
even for very small displacements. This is evident since the average error between the CMD-
and FB signal is βâà0.0064% and a maximum error of βâà0.0872%.
The QS-analysis indicated also a high level of cross-coupling effect through the mast arm.
This is shown as the discrepancies between the forces in the x-direction found by the FE- and
the QS-analysis. The FE-analysis estimated the x-force to be βâà0 and the QS-analysis showed
that the x-force was ΧΗ= 0. This difference occurs from the actuator in the x-direction which
receives a CMD signal to remain in the same position (displacement in x-direction = 0) but
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Hybrid simulation
51
the CP moves in the y- and z-direction. This cross-couple results in a non-zero force in the
x-direction.
It is validated by the QS-analysis that the experimental substructure including the MTS 793
software and actuators are able to handle the displacements and loads from all six transmission
line.
7.3
Hybrid simulation
7.3.1
Single control point virtual hybrid simulation
The comparison between the PDHS and the QSHS in Sec. 6.1.1 showed that while using an
explicit solver the average error was βâà0.35% for the reaction forces. Therefore, it was possible
to use a QSHS instead of a PDHS.
However, it was also shown that the dynamic reaction forces are poorly predicted while
using an explicit solver compared with an implicit solver. As a result, the reaction force found
by the implicit solver is greater, cf. Fig. 3.5, than the reaction force found by the explicit solver.
Sine the reaction force acting in the CP is greater, the acceleration of CP must therefore also
be greater. This effect can be seen in Fig. 7.1. The acceleration found for QSHS Imp. is the
double numerical derivation of the displacement associated with the reaction force from Fig.
6.4. Likewise, the PDHS Exp. is the acceleration associated with the reaction force from Fig.
6.3.
Figure 7.1: Instantaneous acceleration in y-direction (cf. Fig. 6.1 and 6.2) for a single CP
with one DOF.
It can be seen from the figure above that the QSHS Imp. has much greater acceleration
at certain time steps than the PDHS Exp.. A larger deviation between PDHS and QSHS is
therefore expected, if the implicit solver was used for both HS types. To confirm if a PDHS
with an implicit solver results in a larger deviation from the QSHS, a PDHS must be conducted
where the issue regarding transfer of iterative substeps must be resolved.
==PAGE:64==
52
7 Discussion
A linear relation between the applied displacement and reaction forces are shown for the
QSHS with two DOF even though the forces are decoupled.
7.3.2
Single control point experimental hybrid simulation
The experimental one DOF QSHS conducted in Sec.
6.2.1 showed that the instantaneous
stiffness of the mast arm changes in relation to the displacement.
From the stiffness plot
in Fig. 6.7b it is seen that the stiffness seems to become more and more soft as the QSHS
progresses. This could be due to some relaxing of the actuators since the QSHS have been
conducted for one hour and 42 minutes. To further understand this phenomenon more QSHS
must be conducted and with a shorter running time.
The experimental stiffness is also more soft than the one used for the virtual QSHS. This
is evident both by the stiffness plot and the displacement/reaction force plot in Fig. 6.7.
The hysteresis plot in Fig. 6.8 showed that the slope between displacement and reaction
force changes as the mast arm is being loaded and unloaded.
As stated in Sec. 6.2.2 it was desired to conduct a HS with two DOF for a single CP. This was
not possible due to the cross-coupling effect and the time limitation of this thesis. However,
the transformation add-on within the MTS 793 can be employed to overcome this issue.
7.3.3
Triple control point hybrid simulation
The experimental- and numerical substructure for the triple CP PDHS have been prepared
and were ready to be used. However, there was an issue with the communication link between
the TE and OpenFresco.
It is not yet known why the TE and OpenFresco wonβÄôt communicate. One issue could be
how the TE assemblies the internal element matrix and vectors. In the Fortran source-code
(cf. App. A.4) the size of the element stiffness matrix, external force vector, and the iData is
depending on the value of nUserDof. The nUserDof variable could be linked to the USRDOF
command, introduced in List. 2.1. The question is if the TE can multiply the numbers of
DOF with the numbers of nodes in the TE. This could be an explanation why the triple CPs
TE wonβÄôt communicate properly with OpenFresco.
However, to fully understand the issue a holistic investigation of the whole HS architecture
must be conducted to ensure the triple CP HS is working properly.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion & suggestion
for future research activities
8.1
Conclusion
To conclude this thesis, the eight objectives presented in Sec. 1.4 will be concluded individually
which will lead to an answer to the hypothesis.
1. A formulation regarding the wind load acting on the mast arm has been presented. The
wind load is evaluated under quasi-steady assumptions and calculated by a Matlab script.
The wind load has been applied to the transmission line through Ansys 17.2. The Ansys
17.2 implementation has been compared with another FE-formulation for a transmission
line exerted by the wind load. The comparison showed some discrepancies between the
two formulations and therefore the model for the wind load needs further validation
and/or work.
2. The subroutine including the TE with APDL scripting has been defined and presented
in the Theory & Method chapter, cf. Chap. 2. It has been shown that the subroutine
works for a HS containing a single CP.
3. The simulation- and experimental architecture have been presented and defined in the
Theory & Method chapter.
4. To capture the static- and dynamic structural behavior of the transmission line a simu-
lation strategy has been defined. In the strategy, three phases have been defined. The
first phase is the set-up phase where the FE-model and initial configuration is defined.
Secondly, a static phase is introduced where the static deformation of the transmission
line is obtained by the gravitational acceleration. The third phase allows the deformed
transmission line to be subjected to the dynamic wind load. A dwell phase is discovered
to be needed between the static- and dynamic phase while employing an explicit solver
in order to correctly predict the static deformation.
5. The FE-analysis of the mast arm with six transmission lines attached have been con-
ducted. The found displacements have been exerted on the experimental substructure
by the QS-analysis. The QS-analysis shows that the MTS 793 software and actuators
are able to handle the forces and displacements from the transmission lines.
6. The virtual HS conducted in Sec. 6.1 and 6.2 validated the HS architecture for one CP
with either one- or two DOF. A comparison between the performance of the PDHS and
the QSHS with an explicit solver has been conducted. The comparison shows a minor
==PAGE:66==
54
8 Conclusion & suggestion for future research activities
discrepancy between the two types. A QSHS was performed with predefined load steps
using an implicit solver. This QSHS showed a more realistic dynamic phase.
The QSHS was extended to include two DOF where the decoupled displacements and
reaction forces are captured.
Lastly in Sec. 6.3 the numerical- and experimental substructure for a triple CP PDHS was
presented. However, it was not possible to execute the PDHS because of communication
issue between Ansys and OpenFresco.
7. A QSHS has been conducted on the experimental substructure. The QSHS showed that
there is a non-linear relation between the applied displacements and subsequent reaction
forces. This is evident by the stiffness- and hysteresis plot in Sec. 6.2.1.
It was desired to conduct a one CP QSHS with two DOF. However, this was not possible
because of instabilities. It was not possible to solve the instability issues within the time
limitation of this thesis. An solution to solve the issue have been proposed last in Sec.
6.2.2.
8. The obtained results from the virtual HS have been compared with a simple FE-analysis
which shows a minor discrepancy between the two.
By the achieved results in this thesis, the hypothesise presented in Sec. 1.4 can neither be
approved nor rejected. However, it should be possible to capture the cross-coupled dynamic
responds of the mast arm by use of HS.
8.2
Suggestion for future research activities
There are several possibilities for the further work within the topic of this thesis. This section
will present a few suggestions for further research to ensure that the HS methodology can be
implemented on the mast arm.
The first suggestion is to further develop the Ansys TE to be able to handle multiple CPs.
This will require a rework of the existing TE and perhaps an investigation of the the whole HS
architecture. The TE must also be modified to only transfer the converged steps while using
an implicit solver. Otherwise Ansys will not be able to properly evaluate wind loads acting on
the transmission line. An additional task for this suggestion is to include the wind velocity in
a new UEL to better evaluate the dynamic response of the transmission line.
If these modifications can not be made for the TE and UEL another suggestion would be
to implement the numerical substructure into Matlab. This implementation will require a full
FE-formulation of the transmission line and numerical solvers. As an additional challenge the
communication loop between the Matlab script and OpenFresco must be established which
could be tedious task. However, this implementation into Matlab would give the user full
insight in the HS architecture and the user is able to modify any issues fairly easily.
Either of the two suggestions could be employed to capture the dynamic response of the
attached transmission lines. When the HS is up and running a fatigue analysis of the mast
arm can be preformed at various wind velocities.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
BYSTRUP: The Composite Pylon. https://www.powerpylons.com/composite-pylon.
Accessed: 2022-03-07.
[2]
A HORIZON2020 PROJECT - PoPyFu. https://www.compositepylon.com/. Accessed:
2022-08-11.
[3]
Katsuro Kamimura, Yoshitsugu Aoki, and Masayoshi Nakashima. Register of world large
scale test facilities for building research. Building Research Institute, Ministry of Con-
struction, 1984.
[4]
Masayoshi Nakashima. βÄ€Hybrid simulation: An early history.βÄù In: Earthquake Engineering
& Structural Dynamics 49.10 (2020), pp. 949βÄ™962.
[5]
Jacob Paamand WaldbjΟΗrn. Hybrid Simulation of Wind Turbine Blades. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, 2016.
[6]
MTS Systems. https://www.mts.com/en. Accessed: 2022-07-10.
[7]
DMI: Storm history for Denmark. https : / / www . dmi . dk / vejr - og - atmosfare /
temaforside-vind/storme-i-danmark/. Accessed: 2022-03-24.
[8]
DMI: Beaufort scale. https : / / www . dmi . dk / vejr - og - atmosfare / temaforside -
vind/beaufortskalaen/. Accessed: 2022-03-24.
[9]
Task Committee on Electrical Transmission Line Structural Loading. βÄ€Guidelines for
Electrical Transmission Line Structural Loading.βÄù In: American Society of Civil Engineers
Reston, VA. 2020.
[10]
Daniel Johansen. βÄ€Mitigation of Conductor Line Galloping by Enhanced Damping in
Composite Power Pylons.βÄù PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[11]
Ansys Inc. Element Reference. 2021.
[12]
Dassault Systemes. Abaqus Analysis UserβÄôs Manual. 2020.
[13]
Steen Krenk. Mechanics and analysis of beams, columns and cables: a modern introduction
to the classic theories. Springer Science & Business Media, 2001.
[14]
B Mutlu Sumer et al. Hydrodynamics around cylindrical structures. Vol. 26. World sci-
entific, 2006.
[15]
Vlado Przulj. βÄ€Computational modelling of vortex shedding flows.βÄù PhD thesis. City
University London, 1998.
[16]
H Schlichting. βÄ€Boundary-Layer Theory 7th edition McGraw-Hill.βÄù In: (1979).
[17]
C Norberg. βÄ€Flow around a circular cylinder: aspects of fluctuating lift.βÄù In: Journal of
Fluids and structures 15.3-4 (2001), pp. 459βÄ™469.
==PAGE:68==
56
Bibliography
[18]
LSG Kovasznay. βÄ€Hot-wire investigation of the wake behind cylinders at low Reynolds
numbers.βÄù In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and
Physical Sciences 198.1053 (1949), pp. 174βÄ™190.
[19]
Anil K Chopra. Dynamics of structures. Pearson Education India, 2007.
[20]
M. Roshan Fekr and G. McClure. βÄ€Numerical modelling of the dynamic response of ice-
shedding on electrical transmission lines.βÄù In: Atmospheric Research 46.1-2 (1998), pp. 1βÄ™
11.
[21]
Joachim Holm Knudsen. βÄ€Structural testing and analysis of galloping vibrations in T-
Pylon high-voltage transmission masts.βÄù PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2020.
[22]
Andreas Heinrich Schellenberg. Advanced implementation of hybrid simulation. Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley, 2008.
[23]
Webpage for OpenFresco. https://openfresco.berkeley.edu/. Accessed: 2022-06-26.
[24]
Jacob P Waldbjoern et al. βÄ€Multi-rate Real Time Hybrid Simulation operated on a
flexible LabVIEW real-time platform.βÄù In: Engineering Structures 239 (2021), p. 112308.
[25]
Ο‰rstad: Wind Velocity data. https://orsted.com/en/our- business/offshore-
wind/wind-data. Accessed: 2022-03-23.
[26]
Ansys Inc. Advanced Analysis Guide. 2021.
[27]
Dominik Stengel and Milad Mehdianpour. βÄ€Finite element modelling of electrical over-
head line cables under turbulent wind load.βÄù In: Journal of structures 2014 (2014).
[28]
David J Ewins. Modal testing: theory, practice and application. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[29]
Mads Bjerrum. βÄ€Dynamic Cable Loads on T-Pylon High Voltage Transmission Masts.βÄù
PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[30]
Peder Klit. Machine Elements: Analysis and Design. Technical University of Denmark,
2006.
[31]
Viggo Tvergaard et al. Dimensionering og Styrke. DTU Mekanik, 2015.
[32]
David E Keyes et al. βÄ€Multiphysics simulations: Challenges and opportunities.βÄù In: The
International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 27.1 (2013), pp. 4βÄ™
83.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Drag, lift and Strouhal data tables
Table A.1: Drag coeο§Äicient for low values of Reynolds number from Schlichting (1979) [16]
CD
Re
CD
Re
CD
Re
CD
Re
4
4
1.95
70
1.15
680
1.05
5000
3.5
8
1.8
120
1.1
780
1.1
6000
3
14
1.7
150
1.05
1200
1.15
7000
2.8
19
1.6
180
0.95
1700
1.2
8000
2.4
21
1.5
320
0.95
1900
1.2
12000
2.3
25
1.4
400
0.95
2100
1.2
14000
2.25
30
1.3
420
0.95
3500
1.2
16000
2.1
42
1.2
500
1
4000
1.2
20000
Table A.2: Drag coeο§Äicient for high values of Reynolds number from Schewe (1983) [14]
CD
Re
CD
Re
CD
Re
CD
Re
1.14
22000
1.18
130000
0.23
350000
0.32
1550000
1.14
29000
1.19
131000
0.22
410000
0.38
1560000
1.1
31000
1.15
170000
0.21
510000
0.375
2050000
1.13
39000
1.11
190000
0.205
610000
0.395
2100000
1.2
43000
1.11
200000
0.205
710000
0.415
2800000
1.23
46000
1.03
240000
0.205
810000
0.45
3050000
1.28
52000
1
280000
0.25
900000
0.495
3400000
1.25
52000
0.96
285000
0.205
1200000
0.505
3950000
1.22
61000
0.8
290000
0.31
1400000
0.52
4200000
1.21
70000
0.7
300000
0.26
1400000
0.52
5200000
1.21
79000
0.5
290000
0.22
1450000
0.51
5800000
1.21
89000
0.49
305000
0.256
1460000
0.505
6500000
1.205
92000
0.48
310000
0.25
1550000
0.52
7100000
1.2
120000
0.43
320000
0.28
1550000
==PAGE:70==
58
A An Appendix
Table A.3: Lift coeο§Äicient vs. Reynolds number from Nordberg (2000) [17]
CL
Re
CL
Re
CL
Re
CL
Re
0.05
50
0.34
400
0.375
8000
0.52
175000
0.1
60
0.22
500
0.39
9000
0.52
210000
0.125
70
0.175
600
0.41
10000
0.475
250000
0.16
80
0.125
700
0.44
12000
0.35
300000
0.2
90
0.095
800
0.45
18000
0.205
310000
0.225
100
0.075
900
0.475
20000
0.14
350000
0.3
135
0.0505
1000
0.48
30000
0.115
400000
0.325
155
0.0495
1600
0.495
40000
0.0955
500000
0.39
180
0.0495
2000
0.5
50000
0.095
600000
0.32
180
0.0495
2700
0.505
60000
0.0955
700000
0.38
200
0.0505
3000
0.505
70000
0.105
800000
0.425
220
0.075
4000
0.51
80000
0.115
900000
0.475
250
0.145
5000
0.515
90000
0.125
1000000
0.525
270
0.25
6000
0.52
100000
0.475
300
0.34
7000
0.52
120000
Table A.4: Strouhal number for low values of Reynolds number from Kovaszney (1949) [18]
St
Re
St
Re
St
Re
St
Re
0.125
0.125
0.18
190
0.235
800
0.22
4000
0.149
0.149
0.2
230
0.23
1000
0.21
5000
0.152
0.152
0.205
300
0.23
1500
0.205
7000
0.17
0.17
0.225
500
0.225
2000
0.2
10000
0.175
0.175
0.23
600
0.225
2500
Table A.5: Strouhal number for high values of Reynolds number from Schewe (1983) [14]
St
Re
St
Re
St
Re
St
Re
0.195
22000
0.19
110000
0.47
495000
0.12
1700000
0.195
29000
0.19
130000
0.465
595000
0.12
1950000
0.19
31000
0.185
180000
0.46
695000
0.15
1650000
0.19
40000
0.185
200000
0.46
800000
0.14
1800000
0.185
48000
0.19
230000
0.45
1100000
0.175
2800000
0.185
54000
0.2
290000
0.43
1300000
0.21
2050000
0.195
61000
0.31
310000
0.44
1400000
0.22
2400000
0.19
71000
0.185
315000
0.43
1500000
0.21
3800000
0.19
79000
0.305
320000
0.42
1700000
0.22
4200000
0.19
86000
0.29
325000
0.41
1800000
0.27
4100000
0.19
91000
0.46
350000
0.41
1900000
0.28
5900000
0.19
99000
0.46
360000
0.38
2000000
0.285
6500000
0.19
105000
0.48
410000
0.12
1600000
0.29
7100000
==PAGE:71==
A.2 Matlab scrip for evaluation of drag- and lift forces
59
A.2
Matlab scrip for evaluation of drag- and lift forces
1 clear
2 close all
3 clc
4 set(groot,'defaulttextinterpreter','latex');
5 set(groot, 'defaultAxesTickLabelInterpreter','latex');
6 set(groot, 'defaultLegendInterpreter','latex');
7
8
9 %% Choose range
10 Start = 150;
% Real time
11 End = 190;
% Real time
12
13 %% Data
14 % Lift, drag and Strouhal
15 CD = load('CD.txt');
16 ST = load('ST.txt');
17 STLow = load('STAtLow.txt');
18 CDLow = load('CDAtLow.txt');
19 CL = load('CLAtLow.txt');
20 % Total drag and St
21 CDTOT = [CDLow' CD']';
22 STTOT = [STLow' ST']';
23
24 % Wind profil from Ο‰rstan
25 Utot = load('WindVelocityOrstad.txt');
26 deltaT = 10*60/length(Utot);
% Change in real time between two
measurments
27 avg_Utot = mean(Utot);
28 samlerate = length(Utot)/(10*60);
29 %Increas time step
30 Step = 20;
31 deltaTnew = Step * deltaT;
32 k = 1;
33 for i=1:Step:length(Utot)
34
Uinc(k,1) = Utot(i);
35
k=k+1;
36 end
37 Utot = Uinc;
38
39 T = linspace(0,600,length(Utot));
40 rho = 1.25;
% Density of air
41 nu = 1.48*10^(-5);
% kinematic velocity
42
43 % Cable data
44 D = 18.80e-3;
% Diameter of the transmission line
45
46 %% Find poly function for drag, lift and Strouhal
47 % Polyfit coefficient for Drag
48 q(1:4,1) = polyfit(CDTOT(1:9,3),CDTOT(1:9,1),3);
49 q(1:5,2) = polyfit(CDTOT(9:28,3),CDTOT(9:28,1),4);
50 q(1:3,3) = polyfit(CDTOT(28:32,3),CDTOT(28:32,1) ,2);
51 q(1:3,4) = polyfit(CDTOT(32:53,3),CDTOT(32:53,1) ,2);
52 q(1:3,5) = polyfit(CDTOT(53:61,3),CDTOT(53:61,1) ,2);
53 q(1:3,6) = polyfit(CDTOT(61:67,3),CDTOT(61:67,1) ,2);
54 q(1:3,7) = polyfit(CDTOT(67:end,3),CDTOT(67:end,1),2);
==PAGE:72==
60
A An Appendix
55
56 % Polyfit coefficient for Lift
57 p(1:6,1) = polyfit(CL(1:14,3),CL(1:14,1) ,5);
58 p(1:7,2) = polyfit(CL(14:29,3),CL(14:29,1) ,6);
59 p(1:4,3) = polyfit(CL(29:37,3),CL(29:37,1) ,3);
60 p(1:3,4) = polyfit(CL(37:49,3),CL(37:49,1) ,2);
61 p(1:3,5) = polyfit(CL(51:end,3),CL(51:end,1),2);
62
63 % Polyfit coefficient for St
64 k(1:4,1) = polyfit(STTOT(1:12,3),STTOT(1:12,1),3);
65 k(1:4,2) = polyfit(STTOT(12:19,3),STTOT(12:19,1) ,3);
66 k(1:3,3) = polyfit(STTOT(19:38,3),STTOT(19:38,1) ,2);
67 k(1:3,4) = polyfit(STTOT(44:57,3),STTOT(44:57,1) ,2);
68
69 % Define index
70 for i=1:length(Utot)
71
if Start < T(i)
72
Start = i;
% Index values
73
break
74
end
75 end
76 for i=1:length(Utot)
77
if End < T(i)
78
End = i;
% Index values
79
break
80
end
81 end
82 U = Utot(Start:End,1);
% Velocity of interest
83 t = linspace(1,length(U),length(U))*deltaTnew;
% Time of interest
84
85 %% Scale
86 meanCal = mean(Utot);
87 meanTarget = 20;
88
89 for iter = 1:0.001:1000
90
scalemax = iter;
91
U = U+scalemax;
92
meanCal = mean(U);
93
if meanCal > meanTarget
94
break
95
end
96 end
97 X = ['Mean vindvelocity ',num2str(meanCal)];
98 disp(X)
99
100 %% Calculate force and lift for all time step
101 % Reynolds number
102 Rey = D*U/nu;
103 %Prelocate
104 CD=zeros(length(U),1);
105 CL=CD;ST=CD;FL=CD;FD=CD;f=CD;
106 for i=1:length(U)
107
[CD(i)] = Drag(Rey(i),q);
% Function to calculate drag
coefficient
108
[CL(i)] = Lift(Rey(i),p);
% Function to calculate lift
coefficient
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Matlab scrip for evaluation of drag- and lift forces
61
109
[ST(i)] = Strouhal(Rey(i),k);
% Function to calculate Stouhal
coefficient
110
f(i) = ST(i)*U(i)/D;
% Frequency of vortex shredding
111
omega = 2*pi*f(i);
%
112
tt = i*deltaT;
% Real time
113
FD(i) = 1/2*rho*CD(i)*D*U(i)^2;
% Drag force pr. unit length
114
FL(i) = 1/2*rho*CL(i)*D*U(i)^2*sin(omega*tt);
% Lift force pr. unit length
115 end
116 %% Functions
117 function [Cd] = Drag(Rey,q)
118
if Rey <= 70
119
Cd = polyval(q(1:4,1),Rey);
120
elseif Rey < 8000
121
Cd = polyval(q(1:5,2),Rey);
122
elseif Rey < 20000
123
Cd = polyval(q(1:3,3),Rey);
124
elseif Rey < 280000
125
Cd = polyval(q(1:3,4),Rey);
126
elseif Rey < 350000
127
Cd = polyval(q(1:3,5),Rey);
128
elseif Rey < 900000
129
Cd = polyval(q(1:3,6),Rey);
130
else
131
Cd = polyval(q(1:3,7),Rey);
132
end
133 end
134
135 function [Cl] = Lift(Rey,p)
136
if Rey < 270
137
Cl = polyval(p(1:6,1),Rey);
138
elseif Rey < 5000
139
Cl = polyval(p(1:7,2),Rey);
140
elseif Rey < 20000
141
Cl = polyval(p(1:4,3),Rey);
142
elseif Rey < 250000
143
Cl = polyval(p(1:3,4),Rey);
144
elseif Rey < 310000
145
y2=0.14;y1=0.52;
146
x2=350000;x1=210000;
147
a = (y2-y1)/(x2-x1);
148
b = -a*x1+y1;
149
Cl = a*Rey+b;
150
else
151
Cl = polyval(p(1:3,5),Rey);
152
end
153 end
154
155 function [ST] = Strouhal(Rey,k)
156
if Rey < 1000
157
ST = polyval(k(1:4,1),Rey);
158
elseif Rey < 10000
159
ST = polyval(k(1:4,2),Rey);
160
elseif Rey < 290000
161
ST = polyval(k(1:3,3),Rey);
162
elseif Rey < 360000
163
y2=0.46;y1=0.2;
164
x2=360000;x1=290000;
==PAGE:74==
62
A An Appendix
165
a = (y2-y1)/(x2-x1);
166
b = -a*x1+y1;
167
ST = a*Rey+b;
168
else
169
ST = polyval(k(1:3,4),Rey);
170
end
171 end
Listing A.1: Matlab scrip for evaluation of drag- and lift forces
==PAGE:75==
A.3 Triple control point PDHS
63
A.3
Triple control point PDHS
1 ! Finish preprocessing
2
3 finish
4
5 /CLEAR,NOSTART
6 /title ,01_HS_AT1
7
8 /prep7
9 /UIS,MSGPOP ,3
10 /UIS,ABORT,OFF
11
12 /RGB,INDEX ,100,100,100, 0
13 /RGB,INDEX, 80, 80, 80,13
14 /RGB,INDEX, 60, 60, 60,14
15 /RGB,INDEX,
0, 0, 0,15
16 pi=acos(-1)
!Pi
17 gacc = 9.81
18
19 ! Input parameters
20 Ltot = 75
! Length of span [m] over two saggin cables
21 k1 = 2
! Sag of cable
22 mu = 1.53
! Mass pr. m'
23 d = 18.80e-3
! Diameter of the cable
24 n = 200
! Number of devision for cabel element
25
26 ! MATERIAL PARAMETERS
27 Ecable
= 568.5e6
! Youngs
28 G
= 1.16e6
! Torsional modulus
29
30 vd=0
31 v=vd*pi/180
32
33 ! Solution time parameters
34 Start
= 1
! Start time
35 NStep
= 347
! Total numbers of steps
36 Step
= 1
! Step size
37 deltaT
= 0.115361321
! change in time between two time steps
38 EndTime
= NStep*deltaT
! End time
39 FirstTime
= 1
40 RampStep
= 2
! Step size fro gravity ramp
41 RampSize
= 230
! Nubers of steps
42
43 ! Calculated values
44 RA = d/2
! Radius of cable
45 CA = pi*RA**2
46 H = (mu*gacc*Ltot**2)/(8*k1)
47 Ch = H/CA
48
49 ! Cable attachment points
50 A1 = (1270+350)/1000
51 A2 = (1270+350)/1000+(700+3700)/1000
52 A3 = (1270+350)/1000+(700+3700)/1000+(700+3700)/1000
53
54 ! Element type
55 ET,1,BEAM189
! For cables
==PAGE:76==
64
A An Appendix
56 Type
57 keyopt ,1,2,1
58 !keyopt ,1,1,0
59
60 ! MP, Lab, MAT, C0, C1, C2, C3, C4
61 MP,EX,1,Ecable
62 MP,PRXY ,1,0.3
63 MP,ALPD ,1,0.8085297430
64 MP,BETD ,1,0.007864066462
65
66 ! Keypoints
67 k,1,
0, sin(v)*A3, -cos(v)*A3
68 k,2,
ltot, sin(v)*A3, -cos(v)*A3
69 k,3, -ltot, sin(v)*A3, -cos(v)*A3
70
-
71 k,4,
0, sin(v)*A2, -cos(v)*A2
72 k,5,
ltot, sin(v)*A2, -cos(v)*A2
73 k,6, -ltot, sin(v)*A2, -cos(v)*A2
74
-
75 k,7,
0, sin(v)*A1, -cos(v)*A1
76 k,8,
ltot, sin(v)*A1, -cos(v)*A1
77 k,9, -ltot, sin(v)*A1, -cos(v)*A1
78
79
80 ! Cable lines
81 l,2,1
82 l,1,3
83
84 l,5,4
85 l,4,6
86
87 l,8,7
88 l,7,9
89
90 ! Element data for cable
91 SECTYPE ,1,BEAM,CSOLID,CABLE,
! Solid circulare cross section
92 SECDATA ,RA,,,,,,,,,,,
! Define radius of cross section
93 SECCONTROL ,,,,mu,,,,,,,,,
! Mass pr. unit length
94
95 ! Mesh cables
96 lsel,all
97 LESIZE , ALL,,,n,,,,,
98 secnum ,1
99 mat,1
100 type,1
101 lmesh,all,
102 allsel ,all
103
104 ! -------------------- Define initial stress of cable ----------------- !
105 LSEL,all
106 ESEL,ALL
107 inistate ,set,mat,4
108 inistate ,SET,DTYP,STRE
109 INISTATE , defi,,,,,CH,,,,
110
111
112 !! Find Transfer elements
==PAGE:77==
A.3 Triple control point PDHS
65
113 ! TE1 at AT1
114 NSEL, s, LOC, X, -0.001, 0.001,,
115 NSEL, R, LOC, Z, -cos(v)*A3-0.001 , -cos(v)*A3+0.001,,
116 *get,TE1,node,,num,max
117 ! TE1 at AT2
118 NSEL, s, LOC, X, -0.001, 0.001,,
119 NSEL, R, LOC, Z, -cos(v)*A2-0.001 , -cos(v)*A2+0.001,,
120 *get,TE2,node,,num,max
121 ! TE3 at AT3
122 NSEL, s, LOC, X, -0.001, 0.001,,
123 NSEL, R, LOC, Z, -cos(v)*A1-0.001 , -cos(v)*A1+0.001,,
124 *get,TE3,node,,num,max
125
126 allsel ,all
127
128 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
129 !Define Generic User Experimental Element
130 ET,2,USER300
! user element
131 TYPE,2
132 USRDOF ,DEFINE,UY,UZ
133 USRELEM ,3,2,ANYSHAPE ,1,1,,,,,
! NNodes=1,NDIM=2,NREAL=1,NSAVEVARS=1
134 R,1,8090
! tcp/ip port number for communication
135
136 !Assign generic client element
137 MAT,
138 REAL,1
139 E,TE1, TE2, TE3
! AT1
140 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
141
142
143 ! -------------------- Define load vs. time vector ----------------- !
144 ! Define size of array
145 !*DIM, Par, Type, IMAX, JMAX, KMAX, Var1, Var2, Var3, CSYSID
146 *DIM,Drag,TABLE,NStep ,1,1,,,,
147 *DIM,Lift,TABLE,NStep ,1,1,,,,
148 *DIM,RampG,TABLE,RampSize ,1,1,,,,
149 ! Load values
150 !*TREAD, Par, Fname, Ext, --, NSKIP
151 *TREAD, Drag, 'PressureDrag347', 'txt',,
152 *TREAD, Lift, 'PressureLift347', 'txt',,
153 *TREAD, RampG, 'RampG', 'txt',,
154
155 finish
156 /solu
157 ! Antype ,0 = static , Antype ,4 = transient
158 ANTYPE , TRANS!, NEW, 1, 1, CONTINUE ,,
159 TRNOPT , FULL
160 NSUBST ,1, , ,1
161 AUTOTS ,0
162 LUMPM ,0
163 KBC,1
164 pred,on
165
166 ! -------------------- First step, Static ----------------- !
167 *DO ,i,2 ,RampSize , RampStep
168
KBC,1
169
ALPHAD ,0.2910165824*10
==PAGE:78==
66
A An Appendix
170
BETAD ,0.02176496456*10
171
172
endTime = i*2!
173
TIME,endTime
174
175
! Displacement control on end lines
176
ksel,S,kp,,2,3,1
177
ksel,A,kp,,5,6,1
178
ksel,A,kp,,8,9,1
179
nslk,s,
180
D, ALL, UX, 0,,,,UY,UZ,
181
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
182
allsel,all
183
184
! Rotational control
185
LSEL,all
186
NSLL, S
187
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
188
189
allsel,all
190
D,TE1,UX,0,,,,!UY,UZ,
191
D,TE2,UX,0,,,,!UY,UZ,
192
D,TE3,UX,0,,,,!UY,UZ,
193
194
! TE Node control
195
D,TE1,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
196
D,TE2,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
197
D,TE3,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
198
199
! --------------- Gravety load --------------- !
200
ACEL,0,RampG(i),0
201
allsel,all
202
203
SOLVE
204
SAVE,,,,all
205
206 *ENDDO
207 ! -------------------- Next step, Dynamic ----------------- !
208 *DO ,i,Start ,NStep , Step
209
210
ALPHAD ,0.2910165824
211
BETAD ,0.02176496456
212
*if,i,EQ,1,THEN
213
KBC,1
214
! Static velocity delted
215
D, ALL, VELX,0,
216
D, ALL, VELY,0,
217
D, ALL, VELZ,0,
218
! Static acceleration delted
219
D, ALL, ACCX,0,
220
D, ALL, ACCY,0,
221
D, ALL, ACCZ,0,
222
*ELSE
223
! Velocity reinstated for trans sim
224
DDELE, ALL, VELX,0,
225
DDELE, ALL, VELY,0,
226
DDELE, ALL, VELZ,0,
==PAGE:79==
A.3 Triple control point PDHS
67
227
! Acceleration reinstated for trans sim
228
DDELE, ALL, ACCX,0,
229
DDELE, ALL, ACCY,0,
230
DDELE, ALL, ACCZ,0,
231
*ENDIF
232
TIME,endTime+i*deltaT
233
234
235
! Displacement control on end lines
236
ksel,S,kp,,2,3,1
237
ksel,A,kp,,5,6,1
238
ksel,A,kp,,8,9,1
239
nslk,s,
240
D, ALL, UX, 0,,,,UY,UZ,
241
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
242
allsel,all
243
244
! Rotational control
245
LSEL,all
246
NSLL, S
247
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
248
249
allsel,all
250
D,TE1,UX,0,,,,!UY,UZ,
251
D,TE2,UX,0,,,,!UY,UZ,
252
D,TE3,UX,0,,,,!UY,UZ,
253
254
! TE Node control
255
D,TE1,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
256
D,TE2,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
257
D,TE3,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
258
259
! --------------- Gravety load --------------- !
260
ACEL,0,RampG(RampSize),0
261
allsel,all
262
263
264
!SFBEAM , Elem, LKEY, Lab, VALI, VALJ, VAL2I, VAL2J, IOFFST , JOFFST , LENRAT
265
lsel,all
266
ESLL, S
267
SFBEAM,
ALL,
1,PRES,Drag(i),,,,,,
268
SFBEAM,
ALL,
2,PRES,Lift(i),,,,,,
269
270
LSEL,ALL
271
Esel,ALL
272
ALLSEL,ALL
273
274
SOLVE
275 *ENDDO
276
277
278 /post1
279 PLNSOL , U, SUM,0, 1,
280
281
282 /POST26
283 NUMVAR , 22
==PAGE:80==
68
A An Appendix
284 lines,Nstep+1
! Ensure that all lines gets printed
285 ! -------------------- Reaction forces in TE ----------------- !
286 !AT1
287 NSOL,
5,
TE1, U, X,
UXAT1,
288 NSOL,
6,
TE1, U, Y,
UYAT1,
289 NSOL,
7,
TE1, U, Z,
UZAT1,
290
291 RFORCE , 8, TE1, F, X, RFXAT1
292 RFORCE , 9, TE1, F, Y, RFYAT1
293 RFORCE ,10, TE1, F, Z, RFZAT1
Listing A.2: Triple control point PDHS
==PAGE:81==
A.4 Ansys 17.2 Transfer element
69
A.4
Ansys 17.2 Transfer element
1 ** ****************************************************************** **
2 **
OpenFRESCO - Open Framework
**
3 **
for Experimental Setup and Control
**
4 **
**
5 **
**
6 ** Copyright (c) 2006, The Regents of the University of California
**
7 ** All Rights Reserved.
**
8 **
**
9 ** Commercial use of this program without express permission of the
**
10 ** University of California , Berkeley , is strictly prohibited. See
**
11 ** file 'COPYRIGHT_UCB' in main directory for information on usage
**
12 ** and redistribution , and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
**
13 **
**
14 ** Developed by:
**
15 **
Andreas Schellenberg (andreas.schellenberg@gmx.net)
**
16 **
Yoshikazu Takahashi (yos@catfish.dpri.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
**
17 **
Gregory L. Fenves (fenves@berkeley.edu)
**
18 **
Stephen A. Mahin (mahin@berkeley.edu)
**
19 **
**
20 ** Modified and Completed by:
**
21 **
X. Shawn Gao (shawn.gao@mts.com)
**
22 ** ****************************************************************** **
23
24 ** $Revision:$
25 ** $Date:$
26 ** $Source:$
27
28 ** Written: Andreas Schellenberg
29 ** Created: 12/10
30 ** Revision: A
31 ** Modified:11/2017
32 ** Revision: B
33 ** Modified:01/2018
34 ** Revision: C
35
36 ** Description: This file contains the implementation of UserElem.
37 ** UserElem is an implicit ANSYS (R) client element. The element
38 ** communicates with the OpenFresco middle -tier server through
39 ** a tcp/ip connection.
40
41
subroutine UserElem (elId, matId, keyMtx , lumpm, nDim, nNodes ,
42
*
Nodes, nIntPnts , nUsrDof , kEStress ,
43
*
keyAnsMat , keySym , nKeyOpt , KeyOpt ,
44
*
temper, temperB , tRef, kTherm ,
45
*
nPress, Press, kPress, nReal, RealConst ,
46
*
nSaveVars , saveVars , xRef, xCur,
47
*
TotValDofs , IncValDofs , ItrValDofs ,
48
*
VelValDofs , AccValDofs ,
49
*
kfstps, nlgeom, nrkey, outkey , elPrint , iott,
50
*
keyHisUpd , ldstep , isubst , ieqitr , timval ,
51
*
keyEleErr , keyEleCnv ,
52
*
eStiff, eMass, eDamp, eSStiff ,
53
*
fExt, fInt, elVol, elMass , elCG,
54
*
nRsltBsc , RsltBsc , nRsltVar , RsltVar ,
55
*
nElEng, elEnergy)
==PAGE:82==
70
A An Appendix
56
*
57
58 c******************************************************************************
59 c
60 c
elId
(int,sc,in)
element number
61 c
matId
(int,sc,in)
material number of this element
62 c
keyMtx
(int,ar(10),in)
matrix and load vector form requests
63 c
0 = not requested , 1 = requested
64 c
see below for more details
65 c
lumpm
(int,sc,in)
mass matrix format
66 c
= 0 no lumped mass matrix
67 c
= 1 lumped mass matrix
68 c
nDim
(int,sc,in)
number of dimensions of the problem
69 c
(defined on USRELEM command as NDIM)
70 c
= 2 2D
71 c
= 3 3D
72 c
nNodes
(int,sc,in)
number of nodes of the element
73 c
(defined on USRELEM command as NNODES)
74 c
Nodes
(int,ar(nNodes),in)node list of this element
75 c
nIntPnts
(int,sc,in)
maximum number of integration points
76 c
(defined on USRELEM command as NINTPNTS)
77 c
nUsrDof
(int,sc,in)
number of DOFs of this element (matrix and
78 c
load vector size)
79 c
kEStress
(int,sc,in)
kEStress
80 c
(defined on USRELEM command as KESTRESS)
81 c
keyAnsMat (int,sc,in)
key to indicate if ANSYS material
82 c
routine is going to be called
83 c
(defined on USRELEM command as KEYANSMAT)
84 c
= 0, No
85 c
= 1, Yes
86 c
keySym
(int,sc,in)
key to indicate if element matrices
87 c
is symmetric
88 c
(defined on USRELEM command as KEYSYM)
89 c
= 0, symmetric
90 c
= 1, unsymmetric
91 c
nKeyOpt
(int,sc,in)
number of element key options able to be
92 c
used in this routine
93 c
KeyOpt
(int,ar(nKeyOpt),in) values of element key option defined
94 c
by et or keyopt command for the
95 c
user elements , only the first
96 c
nKeyOpt values are passed in and can
97 c
be used to branch the routine for
98 c
different formulations
99 c
temper
(dp,ar(nNodes),in) nodal temperatures at current time
100 c
temperB
(dp,ar(nNodes),in) nodal temperatures at the beginning of this
101 c
incremental step (substep)
102 c
tRef
(dp,sc,in)
reference temperature
103 c
kTherm
(int,sc,inout)
input:
flag for thermal loading
104 c
= 1, Temperatures at nodes are different
105 c
from the reference temperature ,
106 c
thermal loading might be needed.
107 c
= 0, Temperatures at nodes are the same
108 c
as the reference temperature ,
109 c
thermal loading is not needed.
110 c
output:
flag for thermal strains
111 c
nPress
(int,sc,in)
number of pressure values for this element
112 c
Press
(dp,ar(nPress),in) applied elemental face load (pressure)
==PAGE:83==
A.4 Ansys 17.2 Transfer element
71
113 c
kPress
(int,sc,in)
flag for pressure loading
114 c
= 1, pressure load is applied and
115 c
equivalent nodal forces should be
116 c
calculated
117 c
= 0, no pressure loading
118 c
nReal
(int,sc,in)
number of real constants
119 c
(defined on USRELEM command as NREAL)
120 c
RealConst (dp,ar(nReal),in)
user defined real constants
121 c
nSaveVars (int,sc,in)
number of saved variables
122 c
(defined on USRELEM command as NSAVEVARS)
123 c
saveVars
(dp,ar(nSaveVars),inout) user saved variables
124 c
xRef
(dp,ar(nDim,nNodes),in)
125 c
nodal coordinates in initial configuration
126 c
xCur
(dp,ar(nDim,nNodes),in)
127 c
nodal coordinates in current configuration
128 c
TotValDofs (dp,ar(nUsrDof),in) total values of DOFs (displacements)
129 c
from time = 0
130 c
IncValDofs (dp,ar(nUsrDof),in) incremental values of DOFs (displacements)
131 c
for the current step
132 c
ItrValDofs (dp,ar(nUsrDof),in) iterative values of DOFs (displacements)
133 c
for the current iteration
134 c
(normally needed for debug only)
135 c
VelValDofs (dp,ar(nUsrDof),in) first time derivatives of DOFs
136 c
(velocities) (normally not needed)
137 c
AccValDofs (dp,ar(nUsrDof),in) second time derivatives of DOFs
138 c
(accelerations) (normally not needed)
139 c
kfstps
(int,sc,in)
key for the first iteration of first
140 c
substep of the first load step
141 c
= 1 yes
142 c
= 0 no
143 c
nlgeom
(int,sc,in)
large deformation key [from nlgeom command]
144 c
= 0 NLGEOM,OFF
145 c
= 1 NLGEOM, ON
146 c
nrkey
(int,sc,in)
key to indicate a newton -raphson
147 c
(incremental) procedure
148 c
= 0 No
149 c
= 1 Yes
150 c
outkey
(int,sc,in)
key to indicate if any element output is
151 c
to be placed on the print file or the
152 c
result file
153 c
= 0 No
154 c
= 1 Yes
155 c
elPrint
(int,sc,in)
key to indicate if any element output is
156 c
to be placed on the print file
157 c
= 0 No
158 c
= 1 Yes
159 c
iott
(int,sc,in)
print output file unit number
160 c
keyHisUpd (int,sc,in)
key to indicate if history -dependent
161 c
variables need to be updated , like
162 c
equivalent plastic strain , back stress
163 c
etc. since the iteration is already
164 c
converged
165 c
= 0 not converged , don't need to update
166 c
history dependent variables
167 c
= 1 yes, converged , need to update
168 c
history dependent variables
169 c
==PAGE:84==
72
A An Appendix
170 c
--- The following 7 variable group can usually be ignored.
171 c
--- The variables are used for debug, timing , and convergence control.
172 c
ldstep
(int,sc,in)
current load step number
173 c
isubst
(int,sc,in)
current substep number
174 c
ieqitr
(int,sc,in)
current equilibium iteration
number
175 c
timval
(int,sc,in)
current time value
176 c
keyEleErr (int,sc,inout)
key to indicate if there is any element
177 c
formulation error, like negative Jacobian.
178 c
The error could be caused by too
179 c
large incremental step, illegal model.
180 c
= 0 no error (preset value before calling)
181 c
= 1 some error happens. ANSYS will
182 c
decide to stop the analysis or cutback
183 c
the substep (bi-section) based on other
184 c
user input and information at higher
185 c
level.
186 c
keyEleCnv (int,sc,inout)
key to flag if this element satisfies
187 c
the user defined element convergence
188 c
criterion.
189 c
= 1, yes, the criterion is satisfied
190 c
or don't have any criterion at all
191 c
it is preset value before calling
192 c
= 0, no, the element doesn't satisfy
193 c
element convergence criterion. If
194 c
this is the case, the iteration will
195 c
not converge even when both force
196 c
and displacement converge
197 c
---- end of 7 variable group -----
198 c
199 c
requested if
200 c
eStiff(dp,ar(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof),inout) stiffness matrix
keyMtx(1)=1
201 c
eMass (dp,ar(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof),inout) mass matrix
keyMtx(2)=1
202 c
eDamp (dp,ar(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof),inout) damping matrix
keyMtx(3)=1
203 c
eSStiff(dp,ar(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof),inout)stress stiffness matrix
keyMtx(4)=1
204 c
fExt
(dp,ar(nUsrDof),out)
applied f vector
keyMtx(5)=1
205 c
fInt
(dp,ar(nUsrDof),out)
internal force vector
keyMtx(6)=1
206
207 c
elVol
(dp,sc,out)
element volume
208 c
elMass
(dp,sc,out)
element mass
209 c
elCG
(dp,ar(3),out)
element centroid coordinates in current
210 c
configuration
211 c
nRsltBsc
(dp,sc,in)
number of basic elemental results saved in
212 c
result files
213 c
RsltBsc
(dp,ar(nRsltBsc),out) basic elemental results
214 c
(see EXPLANATION below)
215 c
nRsltVar
(int,sc,in)
number of elemental results saved in
216 c
result file as non-summable miscellaneous
217 c
variables
218 c
(defined on USRELEM command as NRSLTVAR)
219 c
RsltVar
(dp,ar(nRsltVar),out) variables to saved in result files as
220 c
non-summable miscellaneous variables
221 c
requested when outkey = 1
222 c
223 c
nElEng
(int,sc,in)
number of energies (fixed at 3)
224 c
225 c
elEnergy
(dp,ar(nElEng),out) elemental energy
226 c
elEnergy(1), element strain energy
==PAGE:85==
A.4 Ansys 17.2 Transfer element
73
227 c
elEnergy(2), element plastic strain energy
228 c
elEnergy(3), element creep strain energy
229 c
230 c
EXPLANATION OF RsltBsc
231 c
232 c
Basic element results are saved and total number of result
233 c
quantities is nRsltBsc , where:
234 c
nRsltBsc = (7+7)* number of corner nodes at one element.
235 c
To process the quantites by post processing properly , the results
236 c
must be in the following order:
237 c
1.) Stresses: Sx Sy Sz Sxy Syz Sxz Seqv at all corner points ,
238 c
followed by:
239 c
2.) Strains : Ex Ey Ez Exy Eyz Exz Eeqv at all corner points
240 c
where Seqv and Eeqv = equivalent stress and strain respectively
241 c
242 c
243 c******************************************************************************
244 c
245 #include "impcom.inc"
246 #include "locknm.inc"
247 c
248
integer
elId, matId, keyMtx(10), lumpm, nDim, nNodes ,
249
*
Nodes(nNodes), nIntPnts , nUsrDof , kEStress ,
250
*
keyAnsMat , keySym , nKeyOpt , KeyOpt(nKeyOpt),
251
*
kTherm , nPress , kPress , nReal, nSaveVars ,
252
*
kfstps , nlgeom , nrkey, outkey ,
253
*
elPrint , iott, keyHisUpd ,
254
*
ldstep , isubst , ieqitr , keyEleErr , keyEleCnv ,
255
*
nRsltBsc , nRsltVar , nElEng ,
256
*
i, j, k
257
258
double precision temper(nNodes), temperB(nNodes), tRef,
259
*
Press(nPress), RealConst(nReal),
260
*
saveVars(nSaveVars),
261
*
xRef(nDim,nNodes), xCur(nDim,nNodes),
262
*
TotValDofs(nUsrDof), IncValDofs(nUsrDof),
263
*
ItrValDofs(nUsrDof), VelValDofs(nUsrDof),
264
*
AccValDofs(nUsrDof),
timval ,
265
*
eStiff(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof), eMass(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof),
266
*
eDamp(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof), eSStiff(nUsrDof ,nUsrDof),
267
*
fExt(nUsrDof), fInt(nUsrDof),
268
*
elVol, elMass , elCG(3),
269
*
RsltBsc(nRsltBsc), RsltVar(nRsltVar),
270
*
elEnergy(nElEng)
271
272
external
vzero, erhandler
273
274 ! c
local variables
275
integer*4 dataSize
276
parameter (dataSize = 32)
277
278
integer*4 sizeInt , sizeDouble
279
parameter (sizeInt = 4, sizeDouble = 8)
280
281
integer*4 port
282
integer*4 sizeMachineInet
283
integer*4 socketID
==PAGE:86==
74
A An Appendix
284
integer*4 stat
285
286
integer*4 iData(11)
287
real*8
sData(dataSize)
288
real*8
rData(dataSize)
289
290
real*8
alphaf
291
parameter (alphaf = 0.67)
292
real*8
fext_preStep(3)
293
save
fext_preStep
294
data
fext_preStep/3*0.0/
295
296
real*8
init_Stiff(3,3)
297
save
init_Stiff
298
data
init_Stiff/9*0.0/
299
300
301
302
303
! write(*,*) 'Before init'
304 ! c
initialize user saved variables
305
if (kfstps .eq. 1) then
306
if (nSaveVars .lt. 1) then
307
write(*,*) 'ERROR - need at least 1 user saved variable'
308
endif
309
saveVars(1) = 0.0
310
311
endif
312
! write(*,*) 'saveVars = ',saveVars
313
314
315 ! c
extract socketID
316
socketID = int(saveVars(1))
317
318 ! c
setup connection with SimAppElemServer
319
if (socketID .eq. 0) then
320
write(*,*) 'Setup Connection'
321 ! c
get port number and initialize connection
322
port = int(RealConst(1))
323
sizeMachineInet = 9+1
324
write(*,*) 'port = ',port
325
write(*,*) 'sizeMachineInet = ',sizeMachineInet
326
write(*,*) 'socketID_01 = ',socketID
327
write(*,*) 'saveVars = ',saveVars
328
call setupconnectionclient(port,
329
*
'127.0.0.1'//char(0),
330
*
sizeMachineInet ,
331
*
socketID)
332
! write(*,*) 'socketID = ',socketID
333
if (socketID .le. 0) then
334
write(*,*) 'ERROR - failed to setup connection'
335 ! c
call erhandler ('UserElem', 1000, 3, 'failed to
336 ! c
*
setup connection.',dperr(1),
337 ! c
*
' ')
338
endif
339
saveVars(1) = socketID
340 ! c
set the data size for the experimental element
==PAGE:87==
A.4 Ansys 17.2 Transfer element
75
341 ! c
sizeCtrl(disp)
342
iData(1)
= nUsrDof
343 ! c
sizeCtrl(vel)
344
iData(2)
= nUsrDof
345 ! c
sizeCtrl(accel)
346
iData(3)
= nUsrDof
347 ! c
sizeCtrl(force)
348
iData(4)
= 0
349 ! c
sizeCtrl(time)
350
iData(5)
= 1
351 ! c
sizeDaq(disp)
352
iData(6)
= 0
353 ! c
sizeDaq(vel)
354
iData(7)
= 0
355 ! c
sizeDaq(accel)
356
iData(8)
= 0
357 ! c
sizeDaq(force)
358
iData(9)
= nUsrDof
359 ! c
sizeDaq(time)
360
iData(10) = 0
361 ! c
dataSize
362
iData(11) = dataSize
363
364
call senddata(socketID , sizeInt ,
365
*
iData, 11, stat)
366
endif
367
368 ! c
commit state (update history variables)
369
if (keyHisUpd .eq. 1) then
370
sData(1) = 5
371
call senddata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
372
*
sData, dataSize , stat)
373
374
! write(*,*) 'sData - commit state = ',sData
375
! write(*,*) 'rData - commit state = ',rData
376
endif
377
378 ! c
create External force vector
379
if (keyMtx(5) .eq. 1) then
380 ! c
send trial response to experimental element
381
sData(1) = 3
382
do i = 1, nUsrDof
383
sData(1+i) = TotValDofs(i)
384
sData(1+nUsrDof+i) = VelValDofs(i)
385
sData(1+2*nUsrDof+i) = AccValDofs(i)
386
enddo
387
sData(1+3*nUsrDof+1) = timval
388
389
call senddata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
390
*
sData, dataSize , stat)
391
392 ! c
get measured resisting forces
393
sData(1) = 10
394
call senddata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
395
*
sData, dataSize , stat)
396
397
call recvdata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
==PAGE:88==
76
A An Appendix
398
*
rData, dataSize , stat)
399
400 ! c
zero vector first then assign values
401
call vzero(fExt(1),nUsrDof)
402
do i = 1, nUsrDof
403
!write(*,*) 'fExt ', fExt
404
do j = 1, nUsrDof
405
fExt(i) = fExt(i) + init_Stiff(i,j)*TotValDofs(j)
406
!write(*,*) 'fExt ', fExt
407
enddo
408
fExt(i) = -(rData(i) - fExt(i))
409
enddo
410
411
!write(*,*) 'TotValDofs ', TotValDofs
412
!write(*,*) 'fExt ', fExt
413
! write(*,*) 'fext_preStep ', fext_preStep
414
! write(*,*) 'eStiff = ',eStiff
415
! write(*,*) 'init_Stiff = ',init_Stiff
416
!write(*,*) 'sData - send receive = ',sData
417
!write(*,*) 'rData - send receive = ',rData
418
endif
419
420
421
422
423 ! c
create stiffness matrix
424
if (keyMtx(1) .eq. 1) then
425 ! c
get tangent stiffness matrix
426
sData(1) = 13
427
call senddata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
428
*
sData, dataSize , stat)
429
430
call recvdata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
431
*
rData, dataSize , stat)
432
433 ! c
zero matrix first then assign values
434
call vzero(eStiff(1,1),nUsrDof*nUsrDof)
435
k = 1
436
do i = 1, nUsrDof
437
do j = 1, nUsrDof
438
eStiff(i,j) = rData(k)
439
init_Stiff(i,j) = eStiff(i,j)
440
! eStiff(i,j) = 1E-12
441
k = k + 1
442
enddo
443
enddo
444
445
!write(*,*) 'sData - stiffness matrix = ',sData
446
!write(*,*) 'rData - stiffness matrix = ',rData
447
endif
448
449 ! c
create mass matrix
450
if (keyMtx(2) .eq. 1) then
451 ! c
get mass matrix
452
sData(1) = 15
453
call senddata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
454
*
sData, dataSize , stat)
==PAGE:89==
A.4 Ansys 17.2 Transfer element
77
455
456
call recvdata(socketID , sizeDouble ,
457
*
rData, dataSize , stat)
458
459 ! c
zero matrix first then assign values
460
call vzero(eMass(1,1),nUsrDof*nUsrDof)
461
k = 1
462
do i = 1, nUsrDof
463
do j = 1, nUsrDof
464
eMass(i,j) = 1E-12
465
! eMass(i,j) = rData(k)
466
! if (i .eq. j .and. eMass(i,j) .le. 0.0) then
467
! eMass(i,j) = 1E-12
468
! endif
469
470
k = k + 1
471
enddo
472
enddo
473
474
! write(*,*) 'sData - mass matrix = ',sData
475
! write(*,*) 'rData - mass matrix = ',rData
476
endif
477
478
return
479
end
Listing A.3: Transfer element USER300
==PAGE:90==
78
A An Appendix
A.5
Actuator specifications and drawings
DESCRIPTION
THE INFORMATION AND DESIGN(S) 
DISCLOSED HEREIN ARE CONFIDENTIAL 
AND THE PROPERTY OF MTS SYSTEMS 
CORPORATION AND MAY NOT BE USED, 
REPRODUCED OR DISCLOSED IN ANY 
FORM EXCEPT AS GRANTED IN WRITING 
BY MTS SYSTEMS CORPORATION.  THIS 
RESTRICTION EXCLUDES INFORMATION 
THAT IS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN OR 
WAS LEGITIMATELY IN THE PRIOR 
POSSESSION OF THE RECIPIENT.
PROPRIETARY DATA
SOURCE/REF
DRAWING
MATERIAL DESCRIPTION
MATERIAL SIZE
FINISH
MASK
M
THREAD DEPTHS ARE TO MIN FULL THDS
DRILL DEPTHS ARE TO FULL DIA
REMOVE BURRS AND SHARP EDGES
DO NOT SCALE PRINT
SCALE
MACHINED
SURFACES
180    
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
.XXX HOLE SIZE TOLERANCE
0.000
TO .750
+.010/-.002
OVER .750
TO 1.500
+.015/-.003
2
ANGLE 
GENERAL
TOLERANCES
X Y
.X
.XX
.XXX
THIRD
ANGLE
PROJ
C
MTS SYSTEMS CORPORATION
1/4
EDEN PRAIRIE, MINNESOTA U.S.A.
.1
.03
.010
DRAWN
CHECK
ENGR
DATE
MFG
DATE
DATE
DATE
SIZE
TITLE
NEXT LEVEL
PRODUCT CODE
NUMBER
SHEET
OF
REV
D
REVISIONS
DATE
ENGR
DRAWN
LETTER
ECN NO
m
R
D
P
HYDRAULIC SCHEMATIC
-
100-302-282
252.23, BR
CDB
-
NRS
-
03-24-15
-
03-15
-
1
1
-----
244.12
SEE BOM
-----
-----
NONE
-
ACTR ASSY-244.12, 150MM, 
A
3.    UNITS ARE "INCHES [MILLIMETERS]" UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED. 
4.    TORQUE ALL FASTENERS PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-005-727 TO VALUES PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-005-602.
5.    TORQUE ALL FITTINGS PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-005-727 TO VALUES PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-006-723.
 
LUBE AND TORQUE 5/16-18 TO 19 LB-FT [26 N-m].
6
NOTES: 
2.    ALL DIMENSIONS ARE FOR REFERENCE ONLY. 
1.    REVIEW ALL SUB-ASSEMBLY DOCUMENTS FOR ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS, TORQUE VALUES, AND TEST PROCEDURES. 
SPECIFICATIONS
MODEL NUMBER: 244.12
PRESSURE RATING: 3000psi [207bar]
FORCE RATING: 5.5kip [25kN]
PISTON AREA: 2.10in¬≤ [13.5cm¬≤]
ROD DIAMETER: 1.75 [44.5]
DYNAMIC STROKE: 6.00 [152.4]
STATIC STROKE: 7.20 [182.9]
CUSHION LENGTH: 0.60 [15.2] BOTH ENDS
SERVOVALVE FLOW: 5gpm [19L/min] EACH
ESTIMATED WEIGHT: 90lb [41kg]
5
2
7
8
9
1
2
4
6
10
2
3
187.3
7.37
2.03
51.6
.97
24.6
DRAIN
-06 37¬Α FLARE
RETURN
-16 37¬Α FLARE
PRESSURE
-16 37¬Α FLARE
11
2
9.18
233.2
15.38
390.7
95.3
3.75
47.6
 42.52 [1080.0] MAXIMUM STATIC
 41.92 [1064.8] MAXIMUM DYNAMIC
1.88
 38.92 [988.6] MID STROKE
 35.92 [912.4] MINIMUM DYNAMIC
 35.32 [897.1] MINIMUM STATIC
47.6
1.88
127.1
5.01
4.76
120.8
SWIVEL MOUNTING
PATTERN
TYPICAL BOTH ENDS
2.50
83.5
63.5
63.5
86.6
3.29
3.41
2.50
4X
.42 THRU
Figure A.1: 25 kN actuator
DESCRIPTION
THE INFORMATION AND DESIGN(S) 
DISCLOSED HEREIN ARE CONFIDENTIAL 
AND THE PROPERTY OF MTS SYSTEMS 
CORPORATION AND MAY NOT BE USED, 
REPRODUCED OR DISCLOSED IN ANY 
FORM EXCEPT AS GRANTED IN WRITING 
BY MTS SYSTEMS CORPORATION.  THIS 
RESTRICTION EXCLUDES INFORMATION 
THAT IS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN OR 
WAS LEGITIMATELY IN THE PRIOR 
POSSESSION OF THE RECIPIENT.
PROPRIETARY DATA
SOURCE/REF
DRAWING
MATERIAL DESCRIPTION
MATERIAL SIZE
FINISH
MASK
M
THREAD DEPTHS ARE TO MIN FULL THDS
DRILL DEPTHS ARE TO FULL DIA
REMOVE BURRS AND SHARP EDGES
DO NOT SCALE PRINT
SCALE
MACHINED
SURFACES
180    
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
.XXX HOLE SIZE TOLERANCE
0.000
TO .750
+.010/-.002
OVER .750
TO 1.500
+.015/-.003
2
ANGLE 
GENERAL
TOLERANCES
X Y
.X
.XX
.XXX
THIRD
ANGLE
PROJ
C
MTS SYSTEMS CORPORATION
1/4
EDEN PRAIRIE, MINNESOTA U.S.A.
.1
.03
.010
DRAWN
CHECK
ENGR
DATE
MFG
DATE
DATE
DATE
SIZE
TITLE
NEXT LEVEL
PRODUCT CODE
NUMBER
SHEET
OF
REV
D
REVISIONS
DATE
ENGR
DRAWN
LETTER
ECN NO
m
R
D
P
HYDRAULIC SCHEMATIC
3.    UNITS ARE "INCHES [MILLIMETERS]" UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED. 
4.    TORQUE ALL FASTENERS PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-005-727 TO VALUES PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-005-602.
5.    TORQUE ALL FITTINGS PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-005-727 TO VALUES PER MTS DOCUMENT 700-006-723.
 
LUBE AND TORQUE 5/16-18 TO 19 LB-FT [26 N-m].
6
NOTES: 
2.    ALL DIMENSIONS ARE FOR REFERENCE ONLY. 
1.    REVIEW ALL SUB-ASSEMBLY DOCUMENTS FOR ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS, TORQUE VALUES, AND TEST PROCEDURES. 
SPECIFICATIONS
MODEL NUMBER: 244.21
PRESSURE RATING: 3000psi [207bar]
FORCE RATING: 11kip [50kN]
PISTON AREA: 3.90in¬≤ [25.2cm¬≤]
ROD DIAMETER: 2.75 [69.9]
DYNAMIC STROKE: 6.00 [152.4]
STATIC STROKE: 6.80 [172.7]
CUSHION LENGTH: 0.40 [10.2] BOTH ENDS
SERVOVALVE FLOW: 10gpm [38L/min] EACH
ESTIMATED WEIGHT: 205lb [93kg]
-
100-302-281
150MM, 252.24, BR
CDB
-
NRS
-
03-24-15
-
03-15
-
1
1
-----
244.21
SEE BOM
-----
-----
NONE
-
ACTR ASSY-244.21, 
A
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
2
6
71.4
2.81
200.2
7.88
1.50
38.1
RETURN
-16 37¬Α FLARE
DRAIN
-06 37¬Α FLARE
-16 37¬Α FLARE
PRESSURE
11
2
398.8
26.1
1.03
3.75
95.3
198.1
76.2
3.00
76.2
3.00
1.03
26.1
7.13
181.1
8.76
222.5
15.70
7.80
40.20 [1021.0] MINIMUM STATIC
40.60 [1031.1] MINIMUM DYNAMIC
43.60 [1107.3] MID STROKE
46.60 [1183.5] MAXIMUM DYNAMIC
47.00 [1193.7] MAXIMUM STATIC
SWIVEL MOUNTING
PATTERN
TYPICAL BOTH ENDS
4.50
114.3
114.3
4.50
5.63
5.62
142.7
143.1
4X
.69 17.5  THRU
 
Figure A.2: 50 kN actuator
==PAGE:91==
A.6 PID Settings for all channels
79
A.6
PID Settings for all channels
AT1
AT2
AT3
P=10.0, I=1.00, D=0.00
P=7.00, I=0.60, D=0.00
P=4.60, I=0.46, D=0.00
P=7.50, I=0.75, D=0.00
P=5.00, I=0.47, D=0.00
P=5.10, I=0.51, D=0.00
P=10.0, I=1.00, D=0.00
P=5.00, I=0.45, D=0.00
P=5.10, I=0.43, D=0.00
==PAGE:92==
80
A An Appendix
A.7
Quasi-Static MPE 9 channel set-up
==PAGE:93==
A.7 Quasi-Static MPE 9 channel set-up
81
Figure A.3: QS 9 channels MPE procedures
==PAGE:94==
82
A An Appendix
A.8
Single control point PDHS
1 ! Finish preprocessing
2
3 finish
4
5 /CLEAR,NOSTART
6 /title ,01_HS_AT1
7
8 /prep7
9 /UIS,MSGPOP ,3
10 /UIS,ABORT,OFF
11
12 /RGB,INDEX ,100,100,100, 0
13 /RGB,INDEX, 80, 80, 80,13
14 /RGB,INDEX, 60, 60, 60,14
15 /RGB,INDEX,
0, 0, 0,15
16 pi=acos(-1)
!Pi
17 gacc = 9.81
18
19 ! Input parameters
20 Ltot = 75
! Length of span [m] over two saggin cables
21 k1 = 1
! Sag of cable
22 mu = 1.53
! Mass pr. m'
23 d = 18.80e-3
! Diameter of the cable
24 n = 200
! Number of devision for cabel element
25
26 ! MATERIAL PARAMETERS
27 Ecable
= 568.5e6
! Youngs
28
29
30 ! Solution time parameters
31 Start
= 1
! Start time
32 NStep
= 347
! Total numbers of steps
33 Step
= 1
! Step size
34 deltaT
= 0.115361321
! change in time between two time steps
35 EndTime
= NStep*deltaT
! End time
36 FirstTime
= 1
37 RampStep
= 1
! Step size fro gravity ramp
38 RampSize
= 230
! Nubers of steps
39 ! Calculated values
40 RA = d/2
! Radius of cable
41 CA = pi*RA**2
42 H = (mu*gacc*Ltot**2)/(8*k1)
43 Ch = H/CA
44
45 ! Cable attachment points
46 A3 = (1270+350)/1000+(700+3700)/1000+(700+3700)/1000
47
48 ! Element type
49 ET,1,BEAM189
! For cables
50 Type
51 keyopt ,1,2,1
52
53 ! MP, Lab, MAT, C0, C1, C2, C3, C4
54 MP,EX,1,Ecable
55 MP,PRXY ,1,0.3
==PAGE:95==
A.8 Single control point PDHS
83
56
57 ! Keypoints
58 k,1, 0, 0,A3
59 k,2, ltot, 0,A3
60 k,3, -ltot, 0,A3
61
62 ! Cable lines
63 l,2,1
64 l,1,3
65
66 ! Element data for cable
67 SECTYPE ,1,BEAM,CSOLID,CABLE,
! Solid circulare cross section
68 SECDATA ,RA,,,,,,,,,,,
! Define radius of cross section
69 SECCONTROL ,,,,mu,,,,,,,,,
! Mass pr. unit length
70
71 ! Mesh cables
72 lsel,all
73 LESIZE , ALL,,,n,,,,,
74 secnum ,1
75 mat,1
76 type,1
77 lmesh,all,
78 allsel ,all
79
80 ! -------------------- Define initial stress of cable ----------------- !
81 LSEL,all
82 ESEL,ALL
83 inistate ,set,mat,1
84 inistate ,SET,DTYP,STRE
85 INISTATE , defi,,,,,CH,,,,
86
87 !! Find Transfer element
88 NSEL, s, LOC, X, -0.001, 0.001,,
89 *get,CP1,node,,num,max
90 allsel ,all
91
92 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
93 !Define Generic User Experimental Element
94 ET,2,USER300
! user element
95 TYPE,2
96 USRDOF ,DEFINE,UX,UY,
97 USRELEM ,1,2,LINE,1,1,,,,,
! NNodes=1,NDIM=2,NREAL=1,NSAVEVARS=1
98 R,1,8090
! tcp/ip port number for communication
99
100 !Assign generic client element
101 MAT,
102 REAL,1
103 E,CP1
! exp element
104 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
105
106 ! -------------------- Define load vs. time vector ----------------- !
107 ! Define size of array
108 !*DIM, Par, Type, IMAX, JMAX, KMAX, Var1, Var2, Var3, CSYSID
109 *DIM,Drag,TABLE,NStep ,1,1,,,,
110 *DIM,Lift,TABLE,NStep ,1,1,,,,
111 *DIM,RampG,TABLE,RampSize ,1,1,,,,
112 ! Load values
==PAGE:96==
84
A An Appendix
113 !*TREAD, Par, Fname, Ext, --, NSKIP
114 *TREAD, Drag, 'PressureDrag347', 'txt',,
115 *TREAD, Lift, 'PressureLift347', 'txt',,
116 *TREAD, RampG, 'RampG', 'txt',,
117
118 finish
119 /solu
120 ! ANTYPE , Antype , Status , LDSTEP , SUBSTEP , Action , --, PRELP
121 ! Antype ,0 = static , Antype ,4 = transient
122 ANTYPE , TRANS
123 TRNOPT , FULL
124 NSUBST ,1, , ,1
125 AUTOTS ,0
126 LUMPM ,0
127 KBC,1
128 pred,on
129
130 *DO ,i,2 ,RampSize , RampStep
131
KBC,1
132
ALPHAD ,0.2910165824*10
133
BETAD ,0.02176496456*10
134
! -------------------- First step, Static ----------------- !
135
endTime = i*2!
136
TIME,endTime
137
138
! Displacement control on end lines
139
ksel,s,kp,,2,3,1
140
nslk,s,
141
D, ALL, UX, 0,,,,UY,UZ,
142
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
143
Allsel,all
144
145
! CP Node control
146
D,CP1,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
147
D,CP1,UZ, 0,,,,UX,
148
D,100002,UY,0
149
150
! Rotational control
151
LSEL,all
152
NSLL, S
153
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
154
155
! --------------- Gravety load --------------- !
156
ACEL,0,RampG(i),0
157
allsel,all
158
159
SOLVE
160
SAVE,,,,all
161
162 *ENDDO
163
164 *DO ,i,Start ,NStep , Step
165
166
ALPHAD ,0.2910165824
167
BETAD ,0.02176496456
168
*if,i,EQ,1,THEN
169
KBC,1
==PAGE:97==
A.8 Single control point PDHS
85
170
D, ALL, VELX,0,
171
D, ALL, VELY,0,
172
D, ALL, VELZ,0,
173
174
D, ALL, ACCX,0,
175
D, ALL, ACCY,0,
176
D, ALL, ACCZ,0,
177
*ELSE
178
DDELE, ALL, VELX,0,
179
DDELE, ALL, VELY,0,
180
DDELE, ALL, VELZ,0,
181
182
DDELE, ALL, ACCX,0,
183
DDELE, ALL, ACCY,0,
184
DDELE, ALL, ACCZ,0,
185
KBC, 1
186
*ENDIF
187
TIME,endTime+i*deltaT
188
189
! Displacement control on end lines
190
ksel,s,kp,,2,3,1
191
nslk,s,
192
D, ALL, UX, 0,,,,UY,UZ,
193
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
194
Allsel,all
195
196
! CP Node control
197
D,CP1,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
198
D,CP1,UZ, 0,,,,UX,UY,
! FJERNES VED HS SIM!
199
200
! Rotational control
201
LSEL,all
202
NSLL, S
203
D, ALL, ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
204
205
! --------------- Gravety load --------------- !
206
ACEL,0,RampG(RampSize),0
207
allsel,all
208
209
!SFBEAM , Elem, LKEY, Lab, VALI, VALJ, VAL2I, VAL2J, IOFFST , JOFFST , LENRAT
210
lsel,all
211
ESLL, S
212
SFBEAM,
ALL,
1,PRES,Drag(i),,,,,,
213
SFBEAM,
ALL,
2,PRES,Lift(i),,,,,,
214
215
LSEL,ALL
216
Esel,ALL
217
ALLSEL,ALL
218
219
SOLVE
220
SAVE,,,,all
221 *ENDDO
222
223
224 /post1
225 PLNSOL , U, SUM,0, 1,
226
==PAGE:98==
86
A An Appendix
227 /POST26
228 NUMVAR , 22
229 lines,RampSize+Nstep+1
! Ensure that all lines gets printed
230 ! -------------------- Reaction forces in TE ----------------- !
231 ! AT1
232 NSOL,
5,
CP1, U, X,
UXAT1,
233 NSOL,
6,
CP1, U, Y,
UYAT1,
234 NSOL,
7,
CP1, U, Z,
UZAT1,
235
236 RFORCE ,
8, CP1, F, X, RFXAT1
237 RFORCE ,
9, CP1, F, Y, RFYAT1
238 RFORCE , 10, CP1, F, Z, RFZAT1
Listing A.4: Single control point PDHS
==PAGE:99==
A.9 Single control point QSHS
87
A.9
Single control point QSHS
1 ! Finish preprocessing
2
3 finish
4
5 /CLEAR,NOSTART
6 /title ,01_HS_AT1
7
8 /prep7
9 /UIS,MSGPOP ,3
10 /UIS,ABORT,OFF
11
12 /RGB,INDEX ,100,100,100, 0
13 /RGB,INDEX, 80, 80, 80,13
14 /RGB,INDEX, 60, 60, 60,14
15 /RGB,INDEX,
0, 0, 0,15
16 pi=acos(-1)
!Pi
17 gacc = 9.81
18 ! -------------------- Define load vs. time vector ----------------- !
19 ! Define size of array
20 !*DIM, Par, Type, IMAX, JMAX, KMAX, Var1, Var2, Var3, CSYSID
21 *DIM,ForceY,TABLE ,575,1,1,,,,
22 *DIM,ForceZ,TABLE ,575,1,1,,,,
23 ! Load values
24 !*TREAD, Par, Fname, Ext, --, NSKIP
25 *TREAD, ForceZ, 'ForceZ', 'txt',,
26 *TREAD, ForceY, 'ForceY', 'txt',,
27
28 AT1KY = 0.35714
29
30 ! Solution time parameters
31 Start
= 1
! Start time
32 SimSize
= 575!347!
! Total numbers of steps
33 SimStep
= 1
! Step size
34
35 N,100001, 0,0,1
36 ET,1,MASS21
37 R,2,0
38 REAL,2
39 E,100001
40
41 !! Find Transfer element
42 NSEL, s, LOC, X, -0.001, 0.001,,
43 *get,CP1,node,,num,max
44 allsel ,all
45
46 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
47 !Define Generic User Experimental Element
48 ET,2,USER300
! user element
49 TYPE,2
50 USRDOF ,DEFINE,UY,
51 USRELEM ,1,2,LINE,1,1,,,,,
! NNodes=1,NDIM=2,NREAL=1,NSAVEVARS=1
52 R,1,8090
! tcp/ip port number for communication
53
54 !Assign generic client element
55 MAT,
==PAGE:100==
88
A An Appendix
56 REAL,1
57 E,CP1
! exp element
58 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
59
60 finish
61 /solu
62 ! ANTYPE , Antype , Status , LDSTEP , SUBSTEP , Action , --, PRELP
63 ! Antype ,0 = static , Antype ,4 = transient
64 ANTYPE , 0
65
66 *DO ,i,1 ,SimSize , SimStep
67
68
D,CP1,ROTX, 0,,,,ROTY,ROTZ,
69
D,CP1,UX,0,,,,UZ
70
71
F,CP1,FY,-ForceY(i)/1000
72
!F,CP1,FZ,ForceZ(i)/1000
73
74
SOLVE
75
SAVE,,,,all
76 *ENDDO
77
78
79 /post1
80 PLNSOL , U, SUM,0, 1,
81
82 /POST26
83 NUMVAR , 22
84 lines,RampSize+Nstep+1
! Ensure that all lines gets printed
85 ! -------------------- Reaction forces in TE ----------------- !
86 ! AT1
87 NSOL,
5,
CP1, U, X,
UXAT1,
88 NSOL,
6,
CP1, U, Y,
UYAT1,
89 NSOL,
7,
CP1, U, Z,
UZAT1,
90
91 RFORCE ,
8, CP1, F, X, RFXAT1
92 RFORCE ,
9, CP1, F, Y, RFYAT1
93 RFORCE , 10, CP1, F, Z, RFZAT1
Listing A.5: Single control point QSHS
==PAGE:101==
==PAGE:102==
