==PAGE:1==
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of
an energy island
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
Maksym Pavlyuk
August, 2022
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
Supervisors: Dogan Keles, Juan-Gea Bermudez
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
August, 2022
By
Maksym Pavlyuk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this masters thesis there were analysed the outcomes of installing an energy island in
the North Sea. The Balmorel model has been providing results to this master thesis that
takes into account data found by companies like CIP, Ørsted that plan to present a bid to
Danish government to allow them to build the energy island in the North Sea. Entities like
Danish Energy Agency also have ideas about the energy island. All the presented ideas
are about the quantity of installed wind capacity the energy island is going to have and
whether there will be hydrogen technologies present in the energy island. Three different
scenarios based on the before mentioned data have been created, where they are called
scenario 1, 2 and 3 and belong to CIP bid, Ørsted bid and Danish Energy Agency proposal.
Scenario 1 has an installed capacity of 2 GW of wind power and allows investments in
hydrogen technologies starting from the year 2030. Scenario 2 has a difference from the
scenario 1 for not allowing hydrogen investments until 2050. Scenario 3 allows hydrogen
investments, however the initial installed wind capacity is of 5 GW. All the three scenarios
plan an expansion of installed wind capacity to 10 GW each by 2050.
The methodology that has been presented in this thesis provides with methods on how
to calculate the following parameters for different time steps and different regions: aver-
age electricity price, average hydrogen price, average hydrogen price, average hydrogen
production, total system costs, and total system revenues. The Balmorel model function
serves to minimise the system costs. Additionally other values like the weighted average
electricity and hydrogen prices have been calculated. With all this data, the three scenar-
ios were analysed and all the parameters were calculated accordingly to the presented
methodology. The three scenarios have been modelled for years starting from 2030 till
2050.
It has been found that the scenario with the highest average revenue from production of
electricity and hydrogen was the scenario 3 of Danish Energy Agency having an average
revenue of 1940.54 millions of euros per year. It was the scenario that had the high-
est weighted average price of electricity and the highest production energy production of
electricity from offshore energy. Scenario 3 was also found to have the highest average
system costs as it is the scenario that has the highest wind capacity installed amongst the
three scenarios, therefore its generational and operational costs were the highest. The
average system costs were 979.50 millions of euros per year. Regarding the hydrogen
production it has been found that it only starts in 2050 in all the the three scenarios and
does not make any role in the costs and revenues calculations due to having low produc-
tion. Hydrogen was mostly produced in other countries like France, and even in Denmark,
the North Sea energy hub did not have the highest production proportion compared with
the other regions.
The total average profits from the North Sea energy island were found to be the highest
in the scenario 3 of Danish Energy Agency, with 961.05 millions of euros per year. The
other scenarios had not very different results with 922.51 and 908.55 millions of euros per
year for scenario 1 and 2 respectively. Investing in the hydrogen technologies since the
beginning of the construction of the energy island and installing the highest capacity of
offshore wind provided with the highest profits. However, it had the highest system costs
and could bring many uncertainties.
ii
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would to thank all the people that helped me throughout the process of writing this thesis
project.
To Dogan for accepting to be my supervisor after I had problems to find one, and to Juan
for presenting me to Balmorel and for helping me in the first months of the thesis project
when I felt lost and overwhelmed with it.
Big thanks to my friends, family and specially to my girlfriend for all the emotional support
that she showed me in these 5 months.
I would like to dedicate this thesis to my late father, everything happened so fast and I
was caught up in the middle of the thesis with sad news, but I decided to continue to work
on it and finish it as I know that if he was here he would want me to finish it and move on.
This one is for you dad.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Existing plans for the energy island . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Motivation of the the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methodology
8
2.1
Introduction to modelling of energy systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Construction of the model and scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Description of the model in Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Results
17
3.1
Average and weighted electricity prices and electricity production from the
offshore wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Average and weighted hydrogen prices and hydrogen production from eletrol-
ysers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Total revenue for each scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Total System Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.5
Total profits of each scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Discussion
31
4.1
Analysis of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Limitations of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Conclusion
34
Bibliography
37
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The Working Group II report for 2022 from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[1] supplies the policymakers a clear view of how global warming is a reality and it is
bringing more and more dangerous and costly consequences. Therefore, new solutions
to tackle this problem need to be developed, and one of the most urgent issues is to
decrease the CO2 emissions.
A big chunk of the emissions comes from the energy sector, and by increasing the share
of the green energy in the energy mix, the total emissions can be reduced [2]. Moreover,
green energy, specially renewable sources like solar or wind, are very cheap to produce,
and developing these technologies can help to meet the energy demand in the future.
Besides, the development of new technologies like the use of hydrogen as a green fuel,
can help to mitigate the emissions from other sectors, like industry or transport [3].
One of the most promising technologies involved on the energy transition is the offshore
wind energy. Offshore wind energy has gained a lot of popularity during the last years and
it estimated that the investments on this technology will continue increasing greatly over
the following years. This is because bigger and taller wind turbines are being developed,
and the performance of the wind farms is improved, specially if they are installed further
from the shore and they have more available area for their installation. Therefore, the
wind offshore sector can be considered as one of the front leading ways to create green
energy in future markets. For the offshore wind energy installed in Europe, WindEurope
predicts an installed capacity of 450GW by 2050, from 20GW today [4]. In figure 1.1, the
installation rate of the offshore wind in Europe until 2050 is shown.
Figure 1.1: Installation rate of the offshore wind energy in Europe that is required to
achieve 450 GW of installed capacity by 2050. Source: BVG Associates for WindEu-
rope [4]
.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
1
==PAGE:9==
From this 450 GW of installed capacity in Europe, the North Sea is aiming to have installed
212 GW of offshore wind by 2050, being the sea with more installed capacity of Europe.
Figure 1.2 shows the before mentioned installed capacity of offshore wind energy that
each European sea can have. Hence, the North Sea can play an important role in the
process of the decarbonization of the European energy system.
Moreover, with the great potential of offshore wind energy, there may arise questions on
how and how much it will change the green energy technologies, and therefore these
technologies and their characteristics need to be studied in a broader detail.
Figure 1.2: Breakdown by sea basin and country of 450 GW of offshore wind in 2050,
with a special focus on North Sea that has a capacity of wind production of 212 GW.
Illustration: WindEurope [4]
There is evidence found in [5], that outlines that there is a low-cost opportunity and prof-
itability to invest in the offshore development in advanced offshore grid configurations in
the North Sea. For instance, Denmark has already approved the plans of an artificial en-
ergy island in the Northern Sea to deploy large scale offshore wind, with the possibility
also of including other types of energy production.
There are already studies that analyze the functionality of the energy islands and their
impact on the energy markets and grids [6]. Alongside with the other countries that share
the North Sea coastline, an extensive offshore grid is planned to be installed. However
another problem arises, whether the expected increase of uncertainties in electricity pro-
duction is going to create uncertainty regarding the overall offshore grid development (in
the generation of energy and in the transmission of it). The energy island is of a big impor-
tance for Denmark, but also for neighbouring countries like Germany and countries that
share the North Sea coast (The Netherlands, United Kingdom, Norway, etc.) Overall, the
energy island is a good addition to the whole energy system of Europe and is viewed with
good eyes by the European Union policymakers [7].
The majority of the currently projected offshore wind plants are planned to be located
2
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:10==
close to the European coastlines, less than a few hundred of kilometers from the shore,
due to the high costs of grid connection, limited grid availability and the lack of regulatory
frameworks [8].
In the case of the North Sea, that has a potential of hundreds of gigawatts of wind power,
as it was mentioned previously, an offshore grid connecting different regions of the sea
would allow the transfer of the power from the wind farms to load centres and, at the
same time, facilitate the competition and the trade of electricity between countries. A
multi-terminal offshore grid would reach offshore wind plants far from shore. Electricity
would be transmitted via high-voltage direct current cables to minimize losses, allowing
it to be sold and exchanged in all involved countries. Therefore, once again a creation
of an energy island in the high seas to work as ”hub” for the electricity transmissions of
these wind farms is beneficial [9].
There have also been proposed ideas and technology possibilities regarding the installa-
tion of Hydrogen (H2) on the energy island and further development for Power-to-X [10].
Moreover, it has also been suggested to make the island operate as a ”refuel hub” for
boats and ships than could refuel at the energy island and use it as one of its stops [11].
The following figure 1.3 presents the possible scheme on how the energy island would
work. The offshore island would be connected to Denmark and to the neighbouring coun-
tries energy system through transmission grids. Inevitably, studying the future of energy
islands comes with some difficulties, for example the uncertainties of the grid that in a
grand scale would create problems in the production of energy.
Figure 1.3: Situated 80km (50 miles) out to sea, the artificial island would be at least half-
owned by the state but partly by the private sector. Illustration: Danish Energy Agency
[12]
Figure 1.4 presents the possible area where the North Sea energy island would be located.
At the moment it is expected that the energy island will be built in the area marked with
the green color due to having strong winds and being a good geographical location for
the energy island itself, because it is not too far from the land. The area will be part of the
Denmark West transmission grid, also known as DK1.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.4: Map of areas indicating the location of island and offshore wind in the North
Sea. The Danish Energy Agency. Illustration: Danish Energy Agency [13]
1.1
Existing plans for the energy island
An official proposal by the Danish Energy Agency for the construction of the North Sea
energy island was presented [14]. This assessment includes possible construction dates
and the main specifications of the energy island. In the table below the specifications of
the energy island are shown:
North Sea energy island
Date (year)
Wind Capacity (GW)
Hydrogen investment
Initial plan
2030-2032
2
Yes
Possible expansion
2050
10
Yes
Table 1.1: Specifications of the North Sea energy island proposal by the Danish Energy
Agency [14].
There is a bidding process planned for 2023 [14] where the winner company will be chosen
for the construction of the energy island. At the moment there are two contenders for this
spot:
• A collaboration by Ørsted and ATP [15]: They plan that the first phase will involve the
connection of 3 GW of wind power from wind farms. This is subsequently expected
to be extended to a capacity of 10 GW of wind power by 2050 Currently, there is
no specific information about the possibility of production of hydrogen on the island,
the way the Danish government intends to do.
• A collaboration by Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners (CIP) [16], which has signed
a partnership agreement with four internationally renowned companies within ma-
4
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:12==
rine and offshore construction services to develop the energy island in the Danish
North Sea. The four chosen contractors are ACCIONA, Boskalis, DEME and MT
Højgaard International. CIP role is to be a project developer on behalf of an investor
consortium composed of PensionDanmark and PFA, two of Denmark’s largest pen-
sion funds, and Denmark’s largest utility company, Andel (collectively known as the
“VindØ consortium”)[16].
CIP plans that the energy island in the North Sea will be located approximately 80-
100 kilometres off the Danish west coast, where conditions for green energy pro-
duction based on offshore wind are optimal. The island will be able to connect 10
GW of offshore wind to Denmark and other neighbouring markets, host an innova-
tion zone with potential for large-scale energy storage and Power-to-X technologies,
and provide accommodation and operation and maintenance services from onsite
harbour facilities.
“Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners has thoroughly screened the most experienced
experts and the world’s best-suited contract partners for the Energy Island project.
We are confident that the NJORD Group offers the experience and capabilities
needed for a successful project execution in a safe and reliable manner, even in
a harsh marine environment far offshore in the Danish North Sea” [16]. CIP also
claims that they plan to invest in hydrogen at the island already at the beginning of
it construction.
Therefore, the plans that are going to be presented officially at the third quarter of 2022
and that will run for a bid in 2023, will look as in the following table 1.2.
Project owner
Start/Expansion
Date
Wind capacity (GW)
Hydrogen Investment
Ørsted
Start
2033
3
No
Expansion
2050
10
CIP
Start
2030
2
Yes
Expansion
2050
10
Table 1.2: North Sea energy island plans by Ørsted and CIP
As it can be observed in the table 1.2 the installed wind capacity proposed by the two bids
is quite similar, with Ørsted having a higher potential of installed wind capacity by 1 unit
of GW, however the earliest it can build the energy island is by 2033.
Once again, the hydrogen investment is only discussed by the CIP and partners bid, and
as of now (July 2022) there is no available information on what are the Ørsted’s plans
on Hydrogen investments, therefore the CIP bid could be viewed with better eyes by the
Danish government.
Lastly, the government’s initial plan was to have an installed wind capacity of 5 GW [14]
that until now was the most ambitious plan. However, as it can be observed by all the pre-
sented bids until now, no company or entity is ready to invest in such a project, therefore
its outcomes and consequences are unknown.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
5
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Literature review
There has been a big amount of academic work regarding the study of energy islands out-
comes and possibilities. There is a lot of focus specially on the North Sea energy island,
as it is the first artificial energy island that is planned to be build in the world.
Some research done about the North Sea energy island supports the idea of having an off-
shore transmission grid that can connect large offshore wind farms in a modular way [17].
This would allow to exploit all the potential of the North Sea while minimizing risks and en-
suring that there is enough technology to carry on with this ambitious project. Moreover,
having a modular design can allow a more flexible connection with different countries,
making more countries that share the North Sea coast to participate in the project. Al-
though this paper is focused on the potential of offshore wind energy, it also studies the
possibility of installing storage options, like hydropower stored from rainwater.
Other studies, [18] [19], analyze the economical feasibility of the North Sea energy island.
[19] concludes that 10 GW of wind power capacity installed would be cost competitive and
would help to reduce the carbon emissions across Europe, although not in an homoge-
neous way because of the different transmission grids in Europe. The research made in
the [20] paper insists on the importance of modelling the grid architecture and analyzing
different scenarios of the energy island to optimize the energy system of an offshore grid
between the countries that share the North Sea.
Although most of the studies analyze different scenarios of offshore transmission or gen-
eration in the North Sea, the first proposals by companies to install offshore wind farms
in an energy island were made by the companies presented in the table 1.2 [16], [15].
The existing literature regarding the hydrogen investments is very broad, with papers
like [21] explaining how it will work within the energy island itself. Definitely, hydrogen
production is crucial to decarbonize high-polluting industries like international aviation and
navigation, being electrolysis the preferred production process. Apart from this, there is
an existing study of Danish island Bornholm to work as an energy island itself, with big
focus on establishing hydrogen technologies on the island, what could help to understand
and model the future of installing the hydrogen technologies in the North Sea island [22]
[23].
In conclusion, a broad study based on the real world bids, like those by Ørsted and CIP
was not done yet, and as mentioned previously, there have been many studies on the
energy island layout, geography, its synergies within the energy markets, however none of
those studies analysed the data that Ørsted and CIP are presenting, and most importantly
have not compared it.
6
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:14==
1.3
Motivation of the the thesis
As of now, the existing plans for the construction of an energy island are the ones pre-
sented in the previous section 1.1. In this case, an energy island is going to be constructed
in the Danish North Sea waters with a distance of 80 to 100 km from the land. It will closely
with the Denmark West energy market known as DK West or DK1. The exact location of
the island is still being discussed.
As shown in the previous sections, the only official plans to construct the island come
from the collaboration between Ørsted and ATP, and CIP and its partners. The initial plan
for the energy island was to be built it by 2030 with a installed wind capacity of 5 GW
and have hydrogen investments. Later on, it was concluded to be 2 GW with hydrogen
investment. Ørsted pledges to install 3 GW of wind capacity with no hydrogen investment
for now, while CIP and partners plan to install 2 GW of wind capacity and an investment
in hydrogen technologies.
Both of the companies plan to expand the wind capacity to 10 GW by the 2050 and hy-
drogen technologies (Ørsted is more convinced that the hydrogen technologies could be
installed by the 2050 when the energy island capacity is expanded).
As seen previously, until now there were not found any studies about these future sce-
narios, specially on how much the energy island will have of a wind installed capacity and
how the introduction of hydrogen technologies.
Regarding the hydrogen investments, there is no data on the best time to invest in hydro-
gen technologies, on how by doing will change the energy island production and costs
itself within the energy markets. Therefore, the main motivation for this thesis is to create
scenarios that will be based on the bids that each company will present and on the the
plans by the Danish government to:
• To study the relations between the different configurations of each scenario (for
example including or not including the possibility of investment in the hydrogen and
at which point).
• With the results from installed technologies and their proprieties analyse the most
economically feasible scenario that maximizes the revenue from production of elec-
tricity and production of hydrogen and minimizes the system costs.
It is believed that the results of this thesis that are going to be known before the bid selec-
tion that going to happen in 2023, where the constructor of the North Sea energy island
and the final design of the island are going to be known, would help the Danish govern-
ment in choosing the most efficient project in therms of techno-economic values.
Lastly, the objective of this thesis is not to give a final scheme of the energy island on
how it will be built or in which market configuration will be part of, but solely to compare
the wind capacity of the energy island and the investments in the hydrogen technologies.
Also it will be a starting point for other studies that will determine how the energy islands
of the future will look like.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
7
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology
The objective of this chapter is to explain the methodology of this thesis, which involves
explaining the tools that are going to be used, the assumptions considered for the mod-
elling, and a bigger insight on the scenarios and their inputs. It is divided in three different
parts:
• An introduction to the modelling of energy systems, where its priorities are ex-
plained.
• The construction of the scenarios on the model, with their characteristics.
• Introduction to the Balmorel energy modelling: where the energy system modelling
tool Balmorel is introduced and the energy model is going to explained in therms of
how it is going to be modelled in Balmorel and what are the main assumptions that
are going to be used.
2.1
Introduction to modelling of energy systems
”All models are wrong, some are useful” is a famous quote by British statistician named
George Box from 1976. Modelling is necessary to predict outcomes of something that still
does not exist and therefore can show the prospects, and most importantly, the failures
of something in the long run.
The construction of an offshore energy island in the future can bring many challenges.
Therefore, the best start for a project of that size is to know how to construct from the
beginning and to predict its outcomes beforehand. For this, it is important to use a powerful
tool that can predict changes in the demand of energy, investments in hydrogen or offshore
wind power development with accuracy.
For this project, the chosen modelling tool is Balmorel. It is an open source code that is
transparent, flexible to many aspects of energy, environment and economy, and includes
data and extensions of the model that facilitate the work and increase its adaptability. For
this specific project, the objective function that is going to be optimized and minimized
and used to compare the different scenarios that are going to be discussed in the further
sections is total system operation cost.
8
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Construction of the model and scenarios
As it was explained in the previous sections, the scenarios to be analyzed will consist
on the proposals that each of the companies will present on the tendering process of
the energy island in the North Sea. To compare the scenarios between each other, the
characteristics of each of them are going to be used as an input for the modelling tool.
The results of each scenario will serve as criteria to compare between them.
For the study, three different scenarios are going to be compared. They are introduced
below:
• Scenario 1: Also referred as ”CIP Scenario”, it is a scenario based on the CIP pro-
posal for the energy island [16]. This proposal has the following characteristics:
installed wind capacity of 2 GW by 2030 and the investment in hydrogen technolo-
gies also in 2030.
• Scenario 2: A scenario based on the Ørsted and ATP proposal [15], that from now
own will be called ”Ørsted Scenario” where the proposed bid by Ørsted with its char-
acteristics is going to be presented, e.g.: installed wind capacity of 3 GW by 2033
and investment in hydrogen technologies only in 2050. For the sake of modelling
purposes and easier comparison with the CIP scenario, this scenario start will be
in 2030. For the purpose of comparison between this scenario and the scenario
by Ørsted, the assumed installed wind capacity in this scenario will be of 2 GW.
Therefore, the main characteristic that is going to be compared here is the fact that
CIP is going to invest in hydrogen technologies in the beginning of construction of
the energy island, and the found information on Ørsted states that it is planning to
invest in hydrogen only when during its expansion in 2050.
• Scenario 3: A scenario based on the initial proposal by Danish Energy Agency [14],
that from now own will be referred as ”DEA” scenario. This scenario proposes a
installed wind capacity of 5 GW by 2030 and suggests to start investing in hydrogen
technologies in 2030.
All these scenarios assume an expansion of offshore wind capacity in the energy island
up to 10 GW by 2050. This would help to meet the ”European green deal” of achieving
zero net emissions by 2050 [24], and it is supported by the research and the studies that
affirm that the North Sea can host a huge amount of wind power capacity. Therefore, the
scenarios will be modelled for a period of time between 2030 and 2050.
For an easier and proportional comparison of the scenarios, it will be considered that in
every scenario the energy island is going to be built in 2030 and the its expansion is going
to occur by 2050. Therefore the years that are going to be optimised in the model are
2030 and 2050, with the years in between them to serve for behavioral and comparison
proposes of the model and results.
The chosen countries for the model are the ones that are directly surrounding the North
Sea or are directly connected with the main involved countries. Therefore, the most rele-
vant countries to be included in the model are the following: Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Finland, Poland, Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium, France and United Kingdom. The
South European countries, East European countries and Central European are not going
to be considered in this model. Neither the Baltic countries, as including them would not
change much the outcomes of modelled results. The countries included in the model are
shown in the figure 2.1.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Included countries in the model: Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Poland,
Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium, France and United Kingdom.
The energy island is available in the energy model with the following coordinates:
• Latitude: 55°39’49.9”N
• Longitude: 7°25’48.7”E
The location of the North Sea energy island is marked in the following figure 2.2 and is
approximately 50 km from the Danish shore.
10
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Location of 55°39’49.9”N latitudes and 7°25’48.7”E latitudes for the North Sea
energy island used in the model. Source: Google Maps
The following table 2.1 outlines the scenarios that are going to be modelled with each of
their main characteristics, where scenarios 1, 2 and 3 belong to CIP, Ørsted and DEA
scenarios respectively. As it is shown in the table below, all the scenarios have in 2050
the same wind capacity installed. Therefore, the years between 2030 and 2050 are more
useful to reflect the differences between the scenarios proposed.
Scenario
Start/Expansion
Date
Installed Wind Capacity (GW)
Hydrogen Investment
Scenario 1
Start
2030
2
Yes
Expansion
2050
10
Scenario 2
Start
2030
2
No
Expansion
2050
10
Yes
Scenario 3
Start
2030
5
Yes
Expansion
2050
10
Table 2.1: Scenarios that are going to be modelled and their characteristics.
The investments in transmission lines are going to be permitted the model, however the
study will not be focused on how the energy island is going to be connected to other re-
gions and how the transmission and transport of produced goods is going to be done. The
produced wind offshore energy is going to be transmitted to other regions. The hydrogen
will be transported via hydrogen infrastructures. Here, the transmission lines, market de-
signs and balancing markets are not very important as the main importance of the study
of this thesis is to study what is produced at the North Sea energy island and not how it
will be transported to other places and regions.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Description of the model in Balmorel
Balmorel is a modelling tool for analysing the electricity and combined heat and power
sectors with a big range of available countries. Balmorel can analyze long range planning
as well as shorter time operational analysis.
The model is written in General Algebraic Modelling System (GAMS), and it is imple-
mented as a mainly linear programming optimization problem with the availability of dif-
ferent linear programming options like mixed integer programming (MIP) (the one used for
this project), relaxed integer programming (RMIP) or mixed integer linear programming
(MILP).
One of the features of Balmorel model is that it allows extensions and new additions to
the model via the so called add-ons. These add-ons are going to be used in this project
to include the grid connections of the energy island and the use of hydrogen, and they are
going to be further explained in the next section. The main elements of the optimization
model are:
• The objective function, which serves to minimize the total cost of the system. The
final energy demand is defined externally and has to be met by each time step. It
is normally used to optimise the energy system from a socioeconomic point of view,
therefore it was the chosen tool for the techno-economical analysis of this project.
• The constraints, which set a limit to the variables. For example, the wind capacity
of the energy island is a constraint that determines the size of this energy island or
”hub”.
• The inputs of the model, which set the characteristics of each scenario. For this
project, the inputs are the wind capacity of the energy island and the option to invest
on hydrogen production. Therefore, those characteristics are defined externally, and
they are the main input that is going to be analyzed later.
• The design variables, which account for the energy production from each genera-
tion center. This is closely related with the energy that is exchanged between the
countries included in the model, and also with the costs of the energy system that
are going to be minimized.
The used technologies can be classified into electricity, heat generation and storage units.
Each technology has its specific costs, which can be categorized as investment costs or
operation and maintenance costs, among the main ones. Some co-generation units can
also include the Power-to-heat ratio, and there are also environmental aspects like the
amount of emissions from each technology included in the model. This can be useful for
future optimization using another objective function, like the minimization of the carbon
emissions.
Using Balmorel, many countries can be included in the model. However, only the coun-
tries referred in the section 2.2 are going to be used in this project. These countries are
10: Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Poland, Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium,
France and United Kingdom. The reason of considering these countries is because it is
important to include the countries that share the coast of the North Sea, and also some
countries that have direct connection with the previous countries with transmission lines
and they are relevant for the optimization. The transmission lines are not changed in the
12
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:20==
model, there is no specific market configuration chosen for this thesis project.
The inputs that are going to be modified for each scenario are the installed wind capacity
on the energy island and the investment on hydrogen production. Whereas the installed
wind capacity accounts for a feature of the energy island itself, the possibility of investing
in hydrogen would allow the hydrogen to be produced in all the generation centers in the
studied countries. This is because allowing the hydrogen to be only produced in the en-
ergy island would not have sense in a realistic model, where the hydrogen is generated
based on minimizing the costs of the European energy system.
In Balmorel, there are different types of geographical features that specify where the
energy is generated.
In this way, the countries are divided in regions and these are
divided in areas. They are represented by (C), (R) and (A) respectively. The energy
island with the coordinates previously mentioned will be denominated in the model as:
DK_w_OFF_2_Hub_DK_hub.
On the other hand, the different temporal divisions in Balmorel are divided in years, sea-
sons and terms. They are represented by (Y), (S) and (T) respectively. These can work
as inputs, for different temporal representations. In the following scenarios, the years be-
tween 2030 till 2050 are going to be modelled. All the years in between 2030 and 2050
like 2035, 2040 and 2045 are going to serve for visualization purposes.
The before mentioned add-ons that the energy system Balmorel uses control the model
functionality and work as extensions. They can be changed for each scenario and in
function of the inputs that are going to be chosen. These add-ons, for this case, will
control the creation of the hubs, which in this project is the creation of the North Sea
energy island. On the other hand, they will also allow the investment in the hydrogen
technologies. The following add-ons are going to be considered for the scenarios that are
going to be modelled:
• Generation investment options: this will permit investments in generation and stor-
age capacity. The year from which endogenous decisions in generation capacities
are going to be allowed can be altered therefore it will work as an input;
• Offshore grids options: this will allow to build an offshore grid in the North Sea with
hubs. This is the most important addon extension as it will allow wind generation
and a creation of an energy island.
• Hydrogen investment options: this option allows to set demands for hydrogen con-
sumption and permits the existence of hydrogen generation in the energy island. It
also permits investments in hydrogen and, most importantly, it permits to use as in
input the year in which the endogenous decisions in hydrogen transmission capac-
ities are going to be enabled.
To allow these main addons to work properly, other features like the type of the model,
whether its linear, mixed or relaxed integer programming can be modified. Investments
in transmission lines and the economies of scale can be activated what will change the
output of the model and the scenarios.
There are also possibilities of including the solar energy and electrical vehicles (EVs).
However, for the purpose of this project these were not considered as the plans regard-
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
13
==PAGE:21==
ing these were not found in the existing plans of Ørsted´s and CIP’s projects. To study
better the impact that the installation of offshore wind energy can have in the energy is-
land, only this type of power will be modified for each scenario, and the possibility of the
investment on hydrogen production.
To allow the creation of an offshore hub the following equation 2.1 needs to be satis-
fied and constrained. The term (capacity platform
y,r
) represents the size of a hub platform
that is located in a specific area of a region that represents its electrical capacity. The
(delectrolysers
y,t,r
) represents the demand of the electrolyzers and the (∑
r′ fy,t,r,r′) represents
the sum of the electricity flows (fy,t,r,r′) to other regions (r′) from the offshore region (r).
This equation assures that for a region (r) in a year (y) and in a time step (t), the size of
the hub platform of an offshore region needs to be equal or greater than the demand of
the before mentioned eletrolysers (delectrolysers
y,t,r
). Therefore the offshore hub size depends
on the maximum electric power in that offshore region. This equation works when the
offshore grids addon is activated.
capacityplatform
y,r
≥delectrolysers
y,t,r
+
∑
r′
fy,t,r,r′
(2.1)
Therefore with the help of addons and considering all the before mentioned parameters,
the scenarios are going to be modelled with the all before mentioned inputs and con-
straints and the results are going be presented in the following chapter 3. The time step
in this project is scaled to 8 weeks that are spread in a year, it uses days like Thursday,
Friday, Saturday however with only 1 every 3 hours. This results are supposed to rep-
resent 192 time snapshopts per year. With this the the following results are going to be
modelled:
• Average prices for electricity for each region (the North Sea energy hub and other
regions) in euros per Megawatt hour (€2012/MWh) for different times steps in years
between 2030 and 2050.
• Average prices for hydrogen for each region (the North Sea energy hub and other
regions) in euros per Megawatt hour (€2012/MWh) for different times steps in years
between 2030 and 2050.
• Energy production for wind offshore turbines for each region (the North Sea energy
hub and other regions) in Megawatt hour (MWh) for different times steps in years
between 2030 and 2050.
• Energy production for hydrogen inside electrolysers for each region (the North Sea
energy hub and other regions) in Megawatt hour (MWh) for different times steps in
years between 2030 and 2050.
• Total system costs for each region (the North Sea energy hub and other regions) in
millions of euros (M€2012) for different times steps in years between 2030 and 2050.
• Total revenue (incomes) values for each region (the North Sea energy hub and oth-
ers) in millions of euros (M€2012) for different times steps in years between 2030 and
2050.
It is also important to analyze the weighted average electricity price using the data men-
tioned before. This equation presents the calculation of the weighted average between
the term wi that denominates the wind offshore energy production in (MWh) and the term
14
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:22==
Xi denominates the average electricity price. Using the weighed electricity price, the rev-
enue that it can be obtained in each scenario by producing wind energy can be more easily
compared, because it considers the energy that has been produced each timestep. As
the time steps are limited to the computational limitations of the model, and extrapolation
is made to estimate both electricity prices and production for all the time steps.
Priceelec-weighted =
∑n
i=1 wiXi
∑n
i=1 wi
(2.2)
In the same way the weighted average hydrogen price can be calculated where the term
hi that denominates the hydrogen production in (MWh) from electrolysers and the term Xi
denominates the average electricity price. In each time step. As the time steps are limited
to the computational limitations of the model, and extrapolation is made to estimate both
hydrogen prices and production for all the time steps.
PriceH2-weighted =
∑n
i=1 hiXi
∑n
i=1 hi
(2.3)
The unit for the costs and all the money parameters are euros from 2012, so to get the
real values for a certain year, it is important to consider the inflation from 2012 to the spe-
cific year. In a similar way, Priceelec-weighted and PriceH2-weighted represent the weighted
average prices for inflation from 2012.
The total profits of the energy island in each scenario are therefore going to be calculated
with the following equation 3.3 where the difference between total revenues and total
system costs of a certain scenario of a certain region of a certain year are considered.
The calculated values are in (M€2012).
ProfitsScenario X = Total RevenueScenario X −Total System CostsScenario X
(2.4)
A final way to compare the scenarios between each other is too know the average rev-
enues, average system costs and therefore calculate the average revenues for each sce-
narios using the average values of all the years. These values are therefore going to be
shown in (M€2012/year)
The following figure 2.3 represents the schematics of how the model will work, which are
the main inputs and the main outputs of the modelling of each scenario.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: Methodology of the model
16
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:24==
3
Results
In this chapter, the results that were modelled using Balmorel are going to be presented
and compared. The main goal here is to test all the methods that were discussed in the
methodology section with the goal of comparing the before mentioned scenarios.
The main results in this section are going to be related with the average electricity and
hydrogen productions and prices for the North Sea energy island. These results are go-
ing, then, to be used to analyse the weighted average price of electricity and hydrogen
production. With this, the results of revenue of each scenario are going to be known. The
modelled total system costs are then going to be compared with the revenues of each
scenario and the scenario that minimises the costs and maximizes the revenue needs to
be calculated.
3.1
Average and weighted electricity prices and electricity
production from the offshore wind
The following figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 represent the the average electricity prices and off-
shore wind energy production for the North Sea energy island (DK_w_OFF_2_Hub_DK_hub).
It can be observed in the figures 3.1 that Scenario 3, the one proposed by the Danish
Energy Agency, throughout the analysed years has the highest electricity prices, however
after 2040 the trend is for scenario 3 to have lower prices than the ones of other scenarios.
It is also the scenario that has more wind energy production, shown in figure 3.2, for the
reason that it has more installed capacity.
Using the weighted electricity prices, which also consider the amount of energy gener-
ated by each scenario to create a weighted average of the electricity prices, Scenario 3 is
again the one that has highest weighted electricity prices. This means that for one MWh
generated from wind power, Scenario 3 can get more revenue from selling that electricity.
On the other hand, Scenario 2, proposed by Ørsted and ATP, and Scenario 1, proposed
by CIP, have a very similar wind production. This is expected, because they have the
same wind energy capacity installed. However, the weighted electricity price is lower for
scenario 1 than for scenario 2 between 2030 and 2040. This can be due to the possibility
of investing in hydrogen for scenario 1.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Average electricity prices for North Sea Energy Island between years 2030-
2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (€/MWh).
Figure 3.2: Average production of electricity from offshore wind energy for North Sea
Energy Island between years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (MWh).
18
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:26==
The general trend of the electricity prices is to go down, as it is shown in the linear trends
in figure 3.1. It is also a decreasing trend for the weighted average electricity prices (figure
3.3). This means that, the cost of electricity will be decreasing in the future if the share
of renewable energy in the electricity mix is increased. As it is shown in figure 3.2, the
average production of wind energy in the energy island would be increasing for the next
years.
Having the highest installed wind capacity, as mentioned previously, explains the fact
that scenario 3 has had in general the highest weighted average electricity prices. This
however, does not necessarily mean that installing the highest amount of wind capacity
will be more beneficial for the system costs and revenues of the project.
Figure 3.3: Weighted Average electricity prices for North Sea Energy Island between
years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (€/MWh). All values in the table below the
graph are in (€/MWh)
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
19
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Average and weighted hydrogen prices and hydrogen
production from eletrolysers
Hydrogen is included in the model by activating the addon that allows investment on hy-
drogen in all the areas. Scenario 1 and 3 allow the investment on hydrogen in the island
since 2030, and therefore they have the same average hydrogen prices (figure 3.4). On
the other side, scenario 2 does not allow the investment on hydrogen until 2050, where
the prices of the three scenarios meet.
However, hydrogen is not produced in the energy island until 2050 for any of the three sce-
narios (figure 3.5). This does not mean that hydrogen is not produced, but it is generated
elsewhere to meet the demand of hydrogen in that place.
Allowing the investment on hydrogen only in 2050 (Scenario 2) has, by consequence, a
higher production on hydrogen on the island in 2050. It is also the scenario that results in
a higher weighted hydrogen price for 2050, which means that for each MWh of hydrogen
produced, the revenue is higher for the scenario proposed by Ørsted and ATP (scenario
2).
Figure 3.4: Average hydrogen prices for North Sea Energy Island between years 2030-
2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (€/MWh). All values in the table below the graph are in
(€/MWh)
20
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.5: Average production of hydrogen from eletrolysers installed at the North Sea
Energy Island between years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (MWh).
Figure 3.6: Weighted average hydrogen prices for North Sea Energy Island between
years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (€/MWh).
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
21
==PAGE:29==
The production of hydrogen is also related with the demand of hydrogen. Hydrogen is
not as easy to transport as the electricity, and in fact taking into account the weighted
average prices of producing wind offshore energy and hydrogen shown in the previous
section, that explains the reason why there was no hydrogen produced before 2050 in the
three scenarios.
It can be observed in the following 3.7 that the hydrogen production and demand are
very high in France, Norway, Poland and Sweden and on the contrary very low in other
modelled countries, specially Denmark. Therefore, very small quantities are going to be
produced in countries that have a low demand like Denmark, and are instead going to be
produced in places like France, Norway and Poland and then transported to neighbouring
countries. Hence why the hydrogen production was always low in the three scenarios
throughout the years.
Figure 3.7: Proportion of the hydrogen production (on the left) and demand (on the right)
for scenario 1 for the countries included in the model.
As it is shown in figure 3.8, for the average of the production of hydrogen in Denmark
over the years, 73% of it is produced in the land, in DK1 (Denmark West region). The
production of hydrogen in the island starts in 2050, although hydrogen investments are
allowed starting from 2030.
22
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.8: Proportion of the total production of hydrogen in Denmark for Scenario 1 for
all the years in the model.
The demand of hydrogen for scenario 2, in figure 3.9 on the right, is the same as for
scenario 1. On the other hand, the production of hydrogen of scenario 2 (figure 3.9 on
the left) shows of Germany, Poland or even Denmark. In scenario 2, the investment of
hydrogen is not allowed till 2050. It is shown in the figure below 3.10 that the hydrogen
produced in the energy island has a bigger share than for scenario 1, and hydrogen is
also produced in DK2 (Denmark East). This is because for scenario 2, as it was shown
in figure 3.5, the production of hydrogen is higher, hence the production of hydrogen in
Denmark is higher too.
Figure 3.9: Proportion of the total hydrogen production (on the left) and demand (on the
right) for scenario 2 for the countries included in the model.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.10: Proportion of the total production of hydrogen in Denmark for Scenario 2 for
all the years in the model.
The production and demand of hydrogen for scenario 3 is very similar to scenario 1, having
a very similar share of the total production of hydrogen among the countries 3.11. As in line
with the scenario 1, the figure 3.12 provides us with the data of average of the production
of hydrogen in Denmark over the years, where 87% of it is produced in the land, in DK1,
with North Sea energy island having a small fraction of hydrogen production.
Figure 3.11: Proportion of the hydrogen production (on the left) and demand (on the right)
for scenario 3 for the countries included in the model.
24
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.12: Proportion of the total production of hydrogen in Denmark for Scenario 3 for
all the years in the model.
Taking into account all the figures and data provided in 3.7, 3.9, 3.11 it can be concluded
that both the demand and the production of hydrogen in the electrolysers in Denmark
is one of the lowest in the 3 scenarios, raging between 1% and 2% for both production
and demand. Therefore it will be produced somewhere else, where the demand and
production are higher, to minimize the costs.
This will mean that the countries where the demand of hydrogen is higher, like France,
need a higher production of hydrogen.
For the case of Germany, that does not pro-
duce any hydrogen, the hydrogen can be imported from neighbouring countries (France,
Poland), always considering that the total cost of the system would be minimised.
Regarding Denmark itself, it can be observed from figures 3.8, 3.10 and 3.12, that the
production of hydrogen is mostly done in the DK1 region of the country market region, the
Denmark West part, and only the small fraction of it comes from the energy island. That
fraction is created in 2050 as shown in the previous sections, therefore this explains the
small production of hydrogen in the eletrolysers from the North Sea energy island hub, as
it is more beneficial to produce it somewhere else in Denmark, and specially in countries
like France, Sweden, Norway and Germany where it is produced in bigger and cheaper
amounts and then transferred to other regions.
Another reason that could explain the small amount produced of hydrogen in the North
Sea energy island is the fact the the hydrogen used electricity that comes from the offshore
wind energy, and therefore when the capacity of installed wind is expanded to 10 GW,
there is more capacity that can be used by the eletrolysers to produce hydrogen and
transport it.
It would be very interesting, for future work, to explore the possibility of modelling the
energy island as a refuel hub for green vessels. In this way, the production of hydrogen
in the island would increase greatly. However, this needs to be explored when there is
more available information about how green vessels would work.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
25
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Total revenue for each scenario
The following figure 3.13 represents the total revenue from the generation and the trans-
mission of the electricity and the hydrogen.
It can be observed that the general trend of the revenue is increasing for the three scenar-
ios. This is due to the fact that the production of electricity and hydrogen has a growing
trend, hence the revenue is higher. Although the three scenarios show a similar trend,
scenario 3 has a higher revenue trend than the previous two scenarios. This is because
the production of wind is higher for this scenario. The slope for scenario 2 in the last
years of the simulation is higher than for the other two scenarios. This is due to the high
production of hydrogen for scenario 2 increases highly the total revenue.
Figure 3.13: Revenue of production electricity of and hydrogen for North Sea Energy
Island between years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (M€). All values in the table
below the graph are in million euros (M€)
The following table 3.1 shows the average revenue for each scenario over the years. It is
clear from the table that the Scenario 3 has the highest average revenue out of the three
of them .
However, it is important to consider that, although Scenario 2 has the lowest average
revenue, the slope for the last years might indicate that the trend of the revenue chart
would increase significantly for this scenario.
26
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:34==
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Average Revenue (M€/year)
1794.95
1782.91
1940.54
Table 3.1: Average revenue from the 3 scenarios in (M€)
3.4
Total System Costs
Figure 3.14 shows the total system costs calculated using Balmorel model. It takes into
an account generation capital costs, generation fixed costs, generation operational costs,
transmission capital costs and transmission operational costs. Taking into account all
these costs the total system costs are calculated in millions of euros (M€).
Figure 3.14: Total system costs of production electricity of and hydrogen for North Sea
Energy Island between years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (M€). All values in
the table below the graph are in million euros (M€)
It can be observed that, similarly to the revenues calculated in the section 3.3, the trends
here are also monotonically increasing. The system costs from scenario 1 and 2 in the
beginning of the modelling years (2030) are alike, while the scenario 3, the one that has
an installed wind capacity of 5 GW has higher system costs, specially the capital costs as
a higher wind capacity installation is more expensive.
Until the year 2045, Scenario 3 is still the one with highest system costs due to having
investments in hydrogen technologies production, and still more wind capacity installed
that increase the O&M related costs. However, after 2045, Scenario 2 increases greatly
the costs. This is because for scenario 2 the hydrogen investments are activated, there-
fore there will be capital costs related with the installation of hydrogen technologies. This
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
27
==PAGE:35==
could be also due to the fact the offshore wind energy production is higher than in scenario
1.
Towards the end of the modelling, 2 has the highest system costs due to having a higher
offshore wind energy production than Scenario 1 and even scenario 3 (figure 3.2) and
due to the fact of having the highest hydrogen production from the electrolysers of all the
scenarios.
The following table 3.2 shows the average cost of the system for each scenario. From this
table, it can be concluded that scenario 3 has the highest average costs, because of the
reasons explained above. Having more wind capacity installed in the energy island has,
by consequence, more revenue and more costs in the system. However, it is needed to
check the profits from the three scenarios to have a better understanding of the profitability
of the three proposals.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Average System costs (M€/year)
872.44
874.36
979.50
Table 3.2: Average system costs from the three scenarios in (M€/year)
28
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Total profits of each scenario
The profits of each scenario per year are presented in this section. The profits are cal-
culated by subtracting the values of the total cost of the system (which account for the
generation fixed costs, the generation capital costs, the generation operational costs, the
transmission capital costs and the transmission operational costs for the electricity and
the hydrogen) from the total revenue (from generation and transmission of electricity and
hydrogen).
Figure 3.15: Total profits of production electricity of and hydrogen for North Sea Energy
Island between years 2030-2050 for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 in (M€). All values in the table
below the graph are in (M€)
Figure 3.15 presents the profits of each scenario for all the modelled years between 2030
till 2050. As it can observed, the trend shows how the profits increase in each year of
each scenario, just like in case with the revenues and system costs presented previously.
In 2030, the beginning of the modelled time steps, all the scenarios have similar profits,
with the scenario 3 that has a higher installed capacity of wind having a highers profits
until 2045 than the scenarios 1 and 2.
The trends shift at the end of the modelling years, in 2050, where the scenario 1 has the
highest profits, due to having the lowest costs of the system. Scenario 2 has, in general,
the lowest profit, due to having high system costs. As expected, scenario 3 has the high-
est profits, because it has a very high revenue from having more wind capacity installed.
Of course, the risks and uncertainties related with creating a bigger project and installing
more wind capacity in the island, are not included in the Balmorel model, but they should
be also considered and accounted for future assessment of the scenarios.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
29
==PAGE:37==
In the table 3.3, the total average profits for all the modelled years between 2030 and
2050 are presented in (M€/year).
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Average Profits (M€/year)
922.51
908.55
961.05
Table 3.3: Average profits per year for all the modelled years from the three scenarios in
(M€/year)
Considering the values of the table 3.3, it can be concluded that scenario 3 has the highest
average profits, which is also something that can be observed from figure 3.15. Scenario
2, despite the high production that it has of hydrogen, has the lowest average profit out of
the three scenarios.
30
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:38==
4
Discussion
This chapter will serve to discuss the obtained results in the section 3 and give ideas that
could be useful for future work.
It will also analyse the limitations, as after presenting the results and establishing the
scenario that minimises the total system costs and maximizes the revenues, it needs to
be said that there arise some limitations in the modelling part of the scenarios and in the
analysis of them. There also data that is still unknown either due to the lack of disclosure of
information from the bidding companies Ørsted and CIP or either because the companies
are still studying their proposals.
4.1
Analysis of results
By analysing the results of section 3 it can be said that the scenario with the highest profits
(difference between revenue and system costs) is the scenario 3 (scenario DEA) that
proposes to install 5 GW on installed capacity of wind. Danish Energy Agency dropped
that plan and instead asked for 2 GW installed capacity for when the North Sea energy
island is built. However with this study it can be concluded that that idea could actually
work. Having higher installed capacity could bring higher uncertainties related with the
operation and maintenance, therefore a broader study could be done regarding that.
Regarding the hydrogen investments, it was also shown that investing in the hydrogen
technologies in 2030 was more beneficial in therms of profits, as scenario 1 presented
by CIP had higher average profits than the scenario 2 of Ørted, with the only difference
between them being the fact that Ørsted proposed to invest in the hydrogen technologies
closer 2050 to take advantage of the wind capacity expansion works.
4.2
Limitations of the study
Some input data in this study was not known, either due to the classified information from
the companies or either due to still not being known. This study has also some limitations,
specially after analysing the results.
Input data problems could be related with the missing data from the companies regard-
ing the amount of installed hydrogen capacity in the energy island, and the exact year of
investment into the hydrogen technologies could change the results of hydrogen produc-
tion, and thus the system costs and revenues. Another set of data that is not known yet
are the exact technologies that are going to be installed at the island. Energy islands allow
the installation of solar panels and the hydrogen that is produced can be used by ships to
refuel, therefore more installed technologies could mean different amounts of production
and different costs for it.
It is expected that the tender for the exact layout and characteristics of the North Sea
energy island is going to occur in 2023, therefore by that time more information is going
to be known from the bidding companies and therefore the scenarios will have broader
set of input data.
This study has some limitations, specially after analysing the results and these could be:
• Time steps - the time steps used in this model were limited and did not account all
the yearly hours. However the year has 8760 hours, therefore the results needed to
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
31
==PAGE:39==
be extrapolated to match all the hours of the year in the calculation of hourly prices
and productions. This could create uncertainties. Another question that arises is the
fact that modelled years are 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045, 2050 with the data unknown
between outside those years. The selection of modelling years could also create
uncertainties, for example the model ends in 2050 however there is expansion of
installed wind capacity in all scenarios till 10 GW of installed wind, and therefore the
real consequences on prices and production are going to be known only after that
year.
• Country and region selection: the countries used in this model could change the
outcomes of the model. By considering a different set of countries, or by includ-
ing more countries, in this case the South European and Central European could
change the demand and therefore the supply and thus average prices and produc-
tion of offshore wind and hydrogen could be different. However for this study, the
importance was to solely analyse the North Energy island itself, therefore the cho-
sen set of countries is still valid to compare the results of scenarios between each
other.
• Unknown demand: the real demand of the electricity and hydrogen is not known for
the following decades. With the growing population for the following decades and
and social political issues, the demand for technologies like offshore wind and hydro-
gen could drastically change, and the costs of production would be affected by this.
Therefore having a better and more precise notion of demand and better notions on
volatility of new technologies would change the outcomes of the scenarios.
• Computational and complexity limitation: due to computational and complexity lim-
itation the scenarios could be more complete and precise, however the obtained
results are still valid and should provide good conclusions and comparisons, how-
ever with bigger uncertainties and errors.
• Market configuration: the market configuration and the balancing market is not con-
sidered in Balmorel therefore free market and perfect competition is present in the
model, with the goal of minimising the cost and maximing the revenues. In real life,
thins are different and therefore some uncertainties can arise from this.
• Discount rate and support schemes were not considered here, however all the sce-
narios are considered to have no supports schemes and the same discount rate in
Balmorel therefore the results are still valid to be compared with each other.
• Transmission lines and costs: the transmission lines in this study lack the real life
cost data. The results of the study are still valid and can be still comparable, however
knowing better the market configuration, the transmission lines between the North
Sea energy island and other countries and the costs of transmissions of these lines
could provide more consistent and real life results to this study.
4.3
Future work
Considering the limitations of the study and limitations on the available data, it can be said
once again that uncertainties and questions may arise after analysing the obtained results
and data. However it can be still concluded that the scenario 3 is the most efficient out
of the three scenarios as all the scenarios were modelled with the same constraints and
the only differences between them are the installed capacities and hydrogen investment
proprieties.
32
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:40==
Consequently, being proportionate between each other, the scenarios can be still com-
pared and can still be used by the Danish government to compare and chose the best bid
for the North Sea energy island.
The existing literature review regarding the North Sea energy island and other energy
islands focuses more on the market design, transmission lines and economical charac-
teristics of the energy islands, however this study was more focused on the real plans
from real companies that want to build an energy island.
These results can be used for future work and future modelling of North Sea energy island
or other energy islands. It is expected that with each model that is done, and with more
data known the models will become more and more precise. The energy island proves
to be a good asset for Denmark, and with the growing interest and investments in green
energy technologies it needs and should be studied in a better detail.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
33
==PAGE:41==
5
Conclusion
Due to the raising climate change consequences and a broader discussion that topic is
bringing to society, new solutions need to found to tackle those problems. To tackle those
challenges is easier by investing in new technologies, specially in the energy production
sector that represents around two thirds of all emissions in the world.
One of the technologies that are being debated and planned right now are energy islands,
with Denmark leading the talk and having the most ambitious plans around them. To find
the best configuration, this needs to be studied, and the best results need to be put in
practice. Therefore as presented before, there are existing tenders, where companies like
Orsted and CIP are leading the competition. Some of the ideas and island configuration
specifications are different between each other, and different between the original plans by
the Danish government. These changes are present mostly in the installed wind capacity
and hydrogen investment technologies. For this, the best configurations needs to be
found, that would reduce the costs and maximize the revenue of each bid that is going to
be presented. Each of this bids, therefore, was created in a scenario that was modelled
with Balmorel for a different time steps and different technologies.
Specific methods were discussed in the methodology to calculate with the help of Balmorel
the average prices, average production, revenue and system costs of each scenario for
the North Sea energy island. On the other hand, the weighted prices, profits were calcu-
lated exogenously. Modelling these results will help to analyse the best time to chose to
install a certain technology in a certain scenario.
The findings of this thesis project was that the DEA scenario (scenario 3 with 5 GW of
wind capacity installed in 2030) has the highest average revenue with 1940.54 M€/year
while the Ørsted scenario has the lowest total revenue of 1782.91 M€/year. Regarding
the average system costs, DEA scenario has again the highest average system costs
of 979.50 M€/year, this due to having the highest installed wind capacity between the 3
scenarios. On the other hand, the scenario with the lowest costs, is the scenario of CIP
(scenario 1) with average system costs of 872.44 M€/year.
The main conclusion of results came after knowing the total revenues and costs of each
scenario, which allowed to calculate the average revenue of each scenario that allows to
find the most economically feasible bid. The average profits of each scenario were 922.51
M€/year, 908.55 M€/year and 961.05 M€/year for scenarios 1, 2 and 3 respectfully. The
DEA scenario 3 was found to be the one that maximizes the profits the most out of three
scenarios.
In conclusion, this study serves as an initial analysis of the real proposals that exist for a
construction of an energy island that are going to be analysed. This study could provide
the Danish government and the organisations responsible for the winner bid selection with
the information that installing 5 GW of capacity of wind on the North Sea energy island
and investing in the hydrogen technology investments in 2030 would the most beneficial.
However, at moment there are only two companies that are willing to build the energy
island and therefore between them the one that maximizes the profits with its proposal is
the CIP proposal (scenario 1):
There is input data that is unknown and other data that is changing regarding the layout
of the North Sea energy island, and considering that this study comes with limitations that
34
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:42==
need to be considered in further studies for a more rigorous and broader analysis, which
can help the Danish government to chose the best bid for a possible energy island that
is going to be built in the North Sea in the following decades. On the other hand, it can
help the bidding companies to optimise their bids for a better chance of having maximum
revenues and minimal costs.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
35
==PAGE:43==
36
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
IPCC. “Climate Change 2022 Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability Summary for
Policymakers0”. In: Intergovernmental panel on climate change (2022). DOI: https:
//www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_SummaryForPolicymakers.
pdf.
[2]
Vivien Foster and Daron Bedrosyan. “Understanding CO2 emissions from the global
energy sector”. In: (2014).
[3]
Selma Atilhan et al. “Green hydrogen as an alternative fuel for the shipping industry”.
In: Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 31 (2021), p. 100668. ISSN: 2211-
3398. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2020.100668. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221133982030071X.
[4]
Kate Freeman et al. “How offshore wind will help Europe go carbon-neutral”. In:
(2018).
[5]
Matti Juhani Koivisto, Juan Gea-Bermudez, and Poul Sørensen. “North Sea off-
shore grid development: combined optimisation of grid and generation investments
towards 2050”. English. In: I E T Renewable Power Generation 14.8 (2020), pp. 1259–
1257. ISSN: 1752-1416. DOI: 10.1049/iet-rpg.2019.0693.
[6]
Andrea Tosatto et al. “North Sea Energy Islands: Impact on National Markets and
Grids”. In: (2021). arXiv: 2103.17056 [physics.soc-ph].
[7]
Carlos Rebelo and Lambis Baniotopoulos. “MODULAR ENERGY ISLANDS FOR
SUSTAINABILITY AND RESILIENCE–COST ACTION CA20109 “MODENERLANDS””.
In: 3rd Coordinating Engineering for Sustainability And Resilience (2022), p. 30.
[8]
V. Mytilinou and A.J. Kolios. “A multi-objective optimisation approach applied to
offshore wind farm location selection”. In: J. Ocean Eng. Mar. Energy 3, (2017).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40722-017-0092-8.
[9]
Matti Juhani Koivisto et al. Multi-terminal Offshore Grid for the North Sea Region for
2030 and 2050 Scenarios. English. Offshore Wind Energy 2017 ; Conference date:
06-06-2017 Through 08-06-2017. 2017. URL: http://offshorewind2017.com/.
[10]
Daniele Groppi et al. “A review on energy storage and demand side management
solutions in smart energy islands”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
135 (2021), p. 110183. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.
110183. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032120304731.
[11]
Antun Pfeifer, Pero Prebeg, and Neven Duić. “Challenges and opportunities of zero
emission shipping in smart islands: A study of zero emission ferry lines”. In: eTrans-
portation 3 (2020), p. 100048. ISSN: 2590-1168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . etran . 2020 . 100048. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2590116820300059.
[12]
“Energy Island Scheme image https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/wind-power/energy-
islands/denmarks-energy-islands”. In: ().
[13]
“Energy Island Possible Location https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/wind-power/energy-
islands/denmarks-energy-islands”. In: ().
[14]
Ture Falbe-Hansen. Denmark’s Energy Islands. English. URL: https://ens.dk/en/
our-responsibilities/wind-power/energy-islands/denmarks-energy-islands.
[15]
Ørsted and ATP. North Sea Energy Island. English. URL: https://northseaenergyisland.
dk/en.
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
37
==PAGE:45==
[16]
Julie Drewes. CIP secures world-class global contractor group for the world’s first
energy island project. English. URL: https://cipartners.dk/2021/11/30/cip-secures-
world-class-global-contractor-group-for-the-worlds-first-energy-island-project/.
[17]
Mart van der Meijden. “Future north sea infrastructure based on dogger bank mod-
ular island”. In: 15th Wind Integration Workshop (WIW), Vienna, Austria. 2016.
[18]
Martin Kristiansen, Magnus Korpås, and Hossein Farahmand. “Towards a fully in-
tegrated North Sea offshore grid: An engineering-economic assessment of a power
link island”. In: WIREs Energy and Environment 7.4 (2018), e296. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/wene.296. eprint: https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
wene.296. URL: https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/wene.296.
[19]
Malte Jansen et al. “Island in the Sea: The prospects and impacts of an offshore
wind power hub in the North Sea”. In: Advances in Applied Energy 6 (2022), p. 100090.
ISSN: 2666-7924. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adapen.2022.100090. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666792422000087.
[20]
Juan Gea-Bermúdez et al. “Optimal generation and transmission development of
the North Sea region: Impact of grid architecture and planning horizon”. In: En-
ergy 191 (2020), p. 116512. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.energy.2019.116512. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360544219322078.
[21]
Rafael Martínez-Gordón et al. “Modelling a highly decarbonised North Sea energy
system in 2050: A multinational approach”. In: Advances in Applied Energy 5 (2022),
p. 100080. ISSN: 2666-7924. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adapen.2021.100080.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S266679242100072X.
[22]
Alessandro Singlitico et al. “Optimal placement of P2X facility in conjunction with
Bornholm energy island: Preliminary overview for an immediate decarbonisation of
maritime transport”. In: (2020).
[23]
Chunjun Huang et al. “Economic model predictive control for multi-energy system
considering hydrogen-thermal-electric dynamics and waste heat recovery of MW-
level alkaline electrolyzer”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 265 (2022),
p. 115697. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2022.115697.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196890422004939.
[24]
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Cli-
mate Change 2013 – The Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, 2014, pp. 1–30. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
38
Modelling and techno economic evaluation of an energy island
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
