==PAGE:1==
Transportation Optimization for
Motorists in Metropolitan Areas
using Integrated Prediction
Models in Interactive Mobile
Interfaces
Mikkel Gallus Thang
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Lack of parking availability is a rising problem in many metropolitan cities,
causing numerous negative side effects for both individuals and the environ-
ment.
This project seeks to optimize availability tracking using application
integrated prediction models. General relevance and desired functionality are
established through a conducted feasibility study, which establish that people
do prioritize other means of transportation due to the uncertainty associated
with finding an available parking spot, in particular in regards to time, cost and
convenience. Same study also determines that trainable data should be based
of localized transactions, which can later be converted to actual street side pre-
dictions using linear averages between real measured values at certain hours.
Weekend hours are however not well accounted for. A variety of AI algorithms
and explanatory features have been investigated to determine optimal predic-
tion model and configuration, initially based on performances in related studies.
It has been found that a Random Forest Tree Regressor is significantly better at
predicting parking occupancy, compared to the likes of linear regression, support
vector regression, neural nets with more. Explanatory information on national
holidays improve performance marginally, but weather information proves to
negatively impact final results. For short step-ahead predictions, including for-
mer output in a NARX RFT model improve performance significantly, though
not directly applicable to this problem. Through a prepared prediction pipeline,
computed results are presented in an interactive mobile prototype, capable of
visually showcasing favourable streets using color indicators, based on changes
of availability. Additional knowledge based suggestions are introduced at last,
providing a glimpse of what capabilities developed service hold, including easier
and cheaper route computations. All together, it can ultimately be concluded
that public available data can in fact be leveraged to predict parking occupancy,
as well as providing meaningful suggestions based on preferences.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was completed at DTU Compute to meet the necessary require-
ments to obtain a M.Sc. degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence with
specialization in Data Science / Big Data.
Kongens Lyngby, 09-July-2022
Mikkel Gallus Thang
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would first and foremost like to thank my thesis advisor Jakob Eg Larsen for
support and directional guidance in regards to the planning and work conducted
throughout this project. I would also like to express my appreciation to Open
Data DK for providing numerous free accessible data sources, crucial to the
development and research of investigated prediction models.
Without given
data, this project could not exist.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the art
3
2.1
Data Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Mobile application development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
User Experience & Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Feasibility
15
3.1
Service summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Feasibility factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Technical assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Legal obligations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Requirements specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Forecasting
38
4.1
Data Manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Prediction models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Results & Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.4
Parking OCCR computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
5
Application
78
5.1
Focus areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.2
Occupancy information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.3
Knowledge based suggestions (KBS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.4
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6
Evaluation
90
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7
Conclusion
95
A Project files
98
B Research
100
B.1
Process Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
B.2
Car Park Interactive Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B.3
Grid cell Munich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
B.4
Feature set performances step ahead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
C Feasibility
103
C.1 Market Survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
C.2 Technical Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
D Forecasting
117
D.1 Data manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
D.2 Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
D.3 Feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
D.4 OCCR transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
E Application
125
E.1
Easypark comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
F Evaluation
128
Bibliography
129
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Despite the fact that green energy transition, new cycle routes and improved
public transportation are all high on the political agenda, an increasing amount
of vehicles travel the streets every year. This is directly causing an abundance
of associated issues, including increase in transportation time, fuel costs, pol-
lution and general lack of available parking spots. It has been estimated, that
an average motorist in Copenhagen spends approximately 54 hours a year look-
ing for available parking alone, despite available spots are often not far away
[Lundqvist, 2021]. This is not only a problem apparent in Copenhagen, as pop-
ulation density continues to rise in urban areas world-wide. According to recent
prognosis, 60% of the world’s population will live in bigger cities by 2030, an
increase of 57% compared to 2021 [Bateman, 2022]. It is clear that innovative
solutions to optimize big city transportation are in desperate need, now and in
the future. The purpose of this project is to investigate if parking occupancy
information can be predicted and leveraged in order to minimize required time
to find available parking. In particular, can certain domain knowledge in the
hands of regular users be used to optimize transportation routes and help de-
termine preferred course of action? To answer this question, a series of research
have been conducted on current state of the art, project feasibility, prediction
model development and application capabilities.
Relevant theory and technologies will be be introduced initially to lay the foun-
dation for the analytical complexity which follows. This will include extensive
==PAGE:10==
2
background research on data manipulation, forecasting and application devel-
opment in general among other things. Forecasting capabilities will in particu-
lar be based on modern AI learning algorithms and required validation hereof.
Contributing research will also be examined in regards to applied methods, in-
corporated data and performance, with the intention of providing the necessary
means to formulate and create an optimal predictor.
Feasibility will primarily be investigated in regards to market and technical vi-
ability, to determine if proposed solution is of relevance and is technical achiev-
able. To determine relevance, current state of presented problem will initially
be investigated in terms of problem impact and existing solutions, followed by a
market survey with specific focus on driving habits and use of assistance services.
The results obtained in given survey will besides concluding general importance
provide which application specific features should be pursued.
To evaluate soundness, a variety of relevant datasets will be examined based
on included features and joined potential, to determine if current available data
is capable of explaining future parking tendencies. This will include the inves-
tigation of transaction data, P-machines, measured counts with more, as well
as additional explanatory datasets. Based on all findings, a final requirements
analysis will be formulated.
Based on the previous found relevant datasets, a series of data preparation tech-
niques will be applied to create a final prediction ready time series set. This
includes cleaning, feature engineering and variable casting. On the basis of the
conducted study on related research, a selection of applicable prediction meth-
ods will subsequently be investigated and optimized to achieve the best possible
prediction results in regards to created time series set. All included methods
and additional baseline predictors will finally be compared in performance, to
which an optimal predictor will be selected. This predictor will furthermore be
tuned based on feature importance and impact.
Once actual predictions have been computed, a selection of different smooth-
ing functions will be examined, so that final predictions can be cast to actual
measured counts using defined weights. Similar technique will also be applied
to convert defined area estimates into street side predictions.
All prior computational steps will ultimately be combined in a defined prediction
pipeline, capable of forecasting parking occupancy for an arbitrary day and year.
This pipeline will be included in a demonstrational prototype capable of physical
interaction. Additional features based on the market survey findings will also
be explored, to showcase more diverse application potential.
The final solution will be evaluated on the success of developed prediction model
and presented application features, as well as the design choices which ultimately
led the way. This also includes future research deemed beneficial for the project.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
State of the art
“State of the Art is the frenetic
and relentless pursuit of doing
what its best at that time”
Da Anunciação Marco
A collection of various methods and practices must be applied in conjunction to
accomplish the goals defined for this project and develop described optimization
service (for detailed outline, refer to section 3.1). This chapter analyzes and
compares a selection of applicable techniques and technologies based on current
state and ability to harmonise with one another, with the intention of providing
the best possible prejudice to determine which practises are best suitable to fulfill
given project requirements. This also includes a literature study on relevant
research contributions regarding forecasting/predicting data alike.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Data Mining
4
2.1
Data Mining
The term Data Mining refers to the process of discovering useful pattern within
large quantities of data. The field combines tools from many areas of analytics,
including statistics, storage and artificial intelligence [Clifton, 2022]. These prac-
tises are extremely useful in all processes related to data management; initial
scraping, manipulation to fit specific needs, extraction of beneficial knowledge
and determining how to apply and model said knowledge.
2.1.1
Process management
Many methodologies have been developed to streamline the process of Data
Mining, including CRISP-DM, SEMMA, KDD and TDSP among others. De-
spite being considered poorly maintained and outdated by many [Piatetsky,
2014] [Stirrup, 2017], IBM’s CRISP-DM (Cross-Industry Standard Process for
Data Mining) still remains the most popular framework by far, according to two
independent polls performed in 2014 and late 2020, as well as based on google
search volume [J. Saltz, 2020].
Figure 2.1: CRISP-DM stages and flow
Figure 2.2 represents the six phases of CRISP-DM and how they interlink. Busi-
ness understanding focus on project goals and requirements from a business
perspective and how this perception can be transformed into a Data Mining
problem definition, while Data understanding refers to the process of finding
preliminary insights within available data [Foroughi & Luksch, n.d.].
These
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Data Mining
5
stages are connected using two-directional arrows, as new findings within either
category often affect the other; it will not be possible to achieve a goal that is
dependent on data which cannot be obtained, and new requirements will likely
be defined if valuable unforeseen patterns are present.
Data preparation covers all tasks associated with cleaning and transforming
said data into a desirable format, so that beneficial methods and optimization
techniques can be easily applied in the Modeling stage. These stages are also
connected both ways, as it is sometimes necessary to alter the format of pre-
pared data to fit a model’s specific needs. The Evaluation stage is meant to test
the performance and behavior of the model to ensure it aligns with predefined
business objectives.
Once the Deployment stage is reached, the accepted model will be published.
Note that all stages are encapsulated in a directional circle, as the methodology
encourage continuous reevaluation and further development [Stirrup, 2017].
In a recent study regarding the implications associated with applying CRISP-
DM in modern data science projects, J. S. Saltz [2021] finds that the method-
ology, in spite of providing easy to understand and efficient project workflows,
lacks several necessary aspects within the data science lifecycle, including prior-
itization and collaboration. The paper concludes that CRISP-DM could fix de-
scribed issues by adopting/combining theory with popular management frame-
works like SCRUM, which is the exact issues TDSP (Team Data Science Pro-
cess) have been praised to resolve [DSPA, 2022], [Stirrup, 2017].
Figure 2.2: TDSP stages and flow
Figure 2.2 visualizes the stages associated with TDSP, and it is clear that the
core of this framework is of close resemblance to CRISP-DM. Data acquisition
and understanding covers all tasks from CIRSP-DM’s Data understanding and
Data preparation stages except feature engineering (which is reserved for Mod-
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Data Mining
6
elling), with the addition of specifying data sources, pipeline and environment.
Besides publication, Deployment also specifies monitoring necessities, storage
and integration within intelligent applications and web-services.
One major
difference between the process frameworks is that TDSP allow all stages to in-
teract; new knowledge is meant to improve all stages simultaneously. Finally,
the model introduces an encapsulated lifecycle with start and finish, closed upon
Customer acceptance. Not to say that it is not possible to revisit a closed life
cycle, but then the business objectives will likely have changed, causing a new
change of reactions.
SEMMA (sample, Explore, Modify, Model, Assess) and KDD (Knowledge, Dis-
covery, Data) share many similarities in regards to data handling, but unlike
CRISP-DM and TDSP, these models does not incorporate business understand-
ing and deployment. SEMMA include assessment of usefulness but in an unde-
fined domain, and KDD focus solely on acquirement and usage of knowledge.
These two process structures are presented in Appendix B.1.1 and B.1.2.
2.1.2
Forecasting data
Forecasting is the technique of predicting future events as accurately as possible
based on available information. Forecasting can be based on qualitative and
quantitative methods. The former is useful when no/little data is available and
decisions must be based on indicators, whereas the latter can be applied when
historical data is available and it can be assumed that some past patterns will
continue into the future [Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018a]. In this project,
forecasting will always be associated with quantitative measurements, and it is
defined as the modeling objective in regards to the process methodology.
2.1.2.1
Machine Learning
In recent years, forecasting capabilities have improved drastically in a wide vari-
ety of industries, primarily due to the adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms. Models build on these algorithms can learn
both structures and patterns, while capable of improving automatically through
experience [Mitchell, 1999]. It is common to distinguish between Supervised and
Unsupervised learning, though both methods can be used in conjunction for so
called Semi-supervised learning.
Supervised models uses labeled data to learn and can be applied to two types
of problems: Classification and Regression. Based on input features and the
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Data Mining
7
relationship between dependent and independent variables, Classification aims
to predict a discrete category, whereas Regression seek to predict a continuous
quantity [Delua, 2021], [Browlee, 2017]. Some common well-renowned classifica-
tion algorithms include Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbors,
Decision Trees, Random Forests and Support Vector Machine. Given algorith-
mic design and functionality is extremely model dependant, individual model
theory will only be introduced when needed.
Linear regression and Polynomial fit are two common continuous regressors,
but most highlighted classification algorithms can be tailored to fit regression
problems, i.e. Random Forest Regressor, SVM regression etc. [Gong, 2022].
Prediction problems including a time component are commonly referred to as
time series forecasting, and specific tailored methods are often preferred over
regular ML algorithms, despite such problems can easily be cast to regular
ML methods by the use of feature extraction1. Common forecasting methods
include Decomposition (splitting data into several explanatory components),
Smooth-based (anomaly removal to amplify pattern), Moving-Average (MA:
linear relationship on current and former observation errors), Auto-Regressive
(AR: linear relationship on current and former observation values) and Expo-
nential smoothing (weighted averages based on past observations that decreases
exponentially). ARIMA is among the most widely used times series predictors,
which incorporates both AR and MA terms. This among many other time series
techniques also come in extended variations: SARIMA include seasonal relation
and ARIMAX incorporate explanatory exogenous variables2. Despite model of
use, shorter time horizons generally yield better prediction results than longer
[Dix, 2020] [Frost, 2021].
Unsupervised models cluster unlabeled data, with the intention of discovering
hidden patterns without supervision.
Three common use case scenarios are
Clustering (grouping based on similarities/differences), Association (relation-
ship rules between variables) and Dimensionality reduction (reduces features
while preserving data integrity) [Delua, 2021].
2.1.2.2
Deep Learning
Like ML, Deep Learning (DL) is another subset of Artificial Intelligence, which
too has gained significant traction in recent years. In short, DL is another tool
for predictive modelling (both supervised and unsupervised) based on algorithms
inspired by structures of the human brain, denoted Artificial Neural Networks
(ANN). DL is essentially automated hierarchical feature learning, where lower
1A specific point in time can be translated to several variables, e.g. hour / month
2Additional data which might explain baseline model deviation. Similar to ML features.
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Data Mining
8
level features (layers) define higher level counterparts. In NN models, nonlin-
ear transformations are applied to input neurons in each layer and iteratively
adjusted using defined accuracy measurements [Brownlee, 2019].
Different training methods exist, but Backpropagation (BP) is by far the most
commonly used.
The term is short for backward propagation of errors, and
the function is responsible for tuning hierarchical weights based on error rate of
the prior epoch3 using a gradient descent loss function. This approach is much
more efficient than direct naive computation, as multiple weights in different
layers can be computed at once, minimizing redundancy [Johnson, 2022]. The
mathematical theory behind BP is not considered relevant for this thesis, but
Nielsen [2019] provides great explanation on the regarding topic if interested.
Due to mentioned training methods, model performance generally increases
rapidly during initial epochs, but then slowly decays until a plateau state is
reached. DL models are commonly considered to outperform ML models on
large quantities of data [Burns & Brush, 2021]. ANN is the baseline NN al-
gorithms, but many different variations have evolved over the years, including
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN).
2.1.2.3
Performance tests
Unlike traditional statistical models where authenticity is determined using the-
oretical tests proving a null hypothesis, the correctness of ML and DL models
are based on validation errors when tested on a sample of unrevealed test data
[Sas, 2022].
Available data is commonly split into train, validation and test
sets. The training set is used to initially fit the model, the validation set is
used to tune hyperparameters based on intermediate model fit evaluations and
the test set provide an unbiased evaluation of the final model fit [Shah, 2017].
Proportional sizes of these sets depends on the task and data available, but it is
important that the samples are large enough to train the model accurately while
still evaluating hyperparameters and final model performance consistently, i.e.
without over/underfitting and with low variance in results [Baheti, 2022].
Validation techniques depends greatly on prediction type. In regards to clas-
sification, True Positives (TP), True Negatives (TN), False Positives (FP) and
False Negatives (FN) lay the foundation for most validation scores, including
Accuracy (overall correctness), Precision (proportion of correct positive identifi-
cations), Recall (proportion of actual positives correctly identified) and F1-score
(the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall) [Google, 2022]. For obvious rea-
sons, it is not possible to calculate accuracy for regression problems. Instead,
31 epoch = Entire dataset has passed through the NN forward & backward [Sharma, 2017]
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Data Mining
9
different error metrics like Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Squared Error
(MSE), Root MSE (RMSE) and R2 are commonly used.
For unsupervised learning, it is common to distinguish between Internal and
External validation. Internal resolves around cohesion within clusters and sep-
aration between different clusters, while external applies similar techniques to
classification problems if true labels are available [Jain, 2020].
2.1.3
Contributing research
Several research papers have conducted studies on forecasting parking occu-
pancy using many different methods and data sources. Table 2.1 showcase key
aspects and results for a selection of prominent studies utilizing a wide vari-
ety of ML and DL algorithms for occupancy prediction. Some studies compare
the performance of multiple regressors on several datasets, while others focus
on optimizing a single model for one data source. In general, increased model
complexity does not imply performance improval. This happens to be in direct
accordance with the KISS design principle4.
Both Stolfi, Alba, and Yao [2017] and Camero, Toutouh, Stolfi, and Alba [2019]
study forecasting techniques to predict car park occupancy rates in Birmingham
using the same public available data source, providing occupancy rate values
every 30 minutes from 8 am to 5 pm (18 in total) per car park a day. Due to the
use of often faulty sensors, Stolfi et al. [2017] describes the necessity of discarding
days with extremely low rates and adjusting data to fit the maximum limits of
a car park. This study utilizes a collection of more traditional statistical ML
methods to solve the problem, whereas Camero et al. [2019] focus on optimizing
a RNN using both genetic algorithms and evolutionary strategies. Polynomial
Fit and Time Series forecasting receives the best scores, but different predictors
were created for each car park and day of week, in comparison to the single
RNN model produced by Camero et al. [2019]. Note that Stolfi et al. [2017]
primarily refer to MSE scores in referred article, but that the MAE values have
been listed for comparative reasons.
Much like the solution proposed in this project, Stolfi et al. [2017] also developed
a website prototype capable of visualizing its predicted occupancy rates within
each car park for past, current and future dates (see Appendix B.2 for details).
By combining intelligent forecasting techniques with tailored user services, the
study aimed to showcase the potential of knowledge-based smart cities.
4KISS: Keep It Stupid Simple
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Data Mining
10
Title
Dataset(s)
Prediction
Method(s)
Exogenous
Variables
Performance
Metric(s)
Performance
Score(s)
Predicting Car Park Occupancy
Rates in Smart Cities
[Stolfi et al., 2017]
Birmingham car park
sensors
(37k records)
Polynomial Fitting (PF)
Fourier Series (FS)
K-Means (KM)
Time Series (TS)
None
MSE
(MAE)
PF: 6.7
FS: 7.9
KM: 10.2
TS: 6.7
Evolutionary Deep Learning for
Car Park Occupancy Prediction
in Smart Cities
[Camero et al., 2019]
Birmingham car park
sensors
(37k records)
Recurrent NN (RNN)
None
MAE
7.9
Parking availability prediction
for sensor-enabled car parks in
smart cities
[Zheng, Rajasegarar, & Leckie, 2015]
San Francisco p-sensors
(4k records)
Melbourne p-sensors
(12.2m records)
Regression Tree (RT)
Neural Network (NN)
Support Vector Regression (SVR)
F1: Day of Week,
F2: Former output,
F3: F1 + F2
MSE
MAE
R2
MSE = 0.002 (RTMelb,F3)
MAE = 0.032 (RTMelb,F3)
R2 = 0.942 (RTMelb,F3)
Predicting the Availability of
Parking Spaces with Publicly
Available Data
[Pflügler & et. al., 2016]
Custom Observations
in Munich
(3k records)
Neural Network (NN)
Time
Weather
Traffic
Events
Location
MSE
0.163 - 0.177
A Comparative Study of Parking
Occupancy Prediction Methods
considering Parking Type and
Parking Scale
[Zhao & Zhang, 2020]
4 parking lots located in
Shenzhen, Dongguan,
and Shanghai
(607k records)
Linear Regression (LR)
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
Neural Network (NN)
ARIMA
None
RMSE
MAE
PL1: 60.7 (LRFM2)
PL2: 6.1 (SVMFM1)
PL3: 15.6 (SVMFM1)
PL4: 15.7 (SVMFM2)
Predicting parking occupancy via
machine learning in the web of
things [Provoost & et. al., 2020]
Arnhem car park
transaction data
(size N/D)
Neural Network (NN)
Convolutional NN (CNN)
Random Forest (RF)
Time
Weather
Traffic
Holidays
Events
Former output
MSE
MAE
RMSE
R2
MAE = 1.91 (NN)
MSE = 7.18 (NN)
RMSE = 2.68 (NN)
R2 = 0.988 (RF)
Table 2.1: Related research (bolt metric used for highlighted score)
Zheng et al. [2015] differ from the other listed studies by introducing three
different feature sets of exogenous variables: F1 with Day of Week as categorical
variable, F2 with all former output to time t −1 as input at y(t) and F3 using
both.
All feature sets are tested on step k = [1..20] ahead predictions.
F3
provides the best results for all predictors during the first couple of steps, though
the performance boost compared to the much simpler F1 set quickly diminishes
to a neglectful value. Regression Trees turns out to be superior in all tests while
maintaining significantly lower calculation time than its competitors. Note that
listed results are based of 1 step-ahead predictions. For RTMelb,F1, i.e. without
any step-ahead dependency, MAE = 0.79 and R2 = 0.645.
Pflügler and et. al. [2016] introduces several exogenous variables when trying
to predict occupancy using a NN, including time (time of day, weekday, month,
bank holidays and vacation time), weather (temperature and rainfall), traffic
state, events (large concerts and events retrieved from discontinued api Eventful)
and location (specified as a cell within a custom created grid inside the Mittlere
Ring of Munich). The study was carried out using real world data collected
by a specifically developed mobile web application, capable of noting available
spots at current gps-position.
Based on results from a significance analysis,
the authors found that all variables except events improve model performance.
Weekday and location (grid-cell) are by far the most significant, followed by
temperature, time of day and month. All other variables have low to negligible
impact.
Provoost and et.
al. [2020] also introduced a bunch of exogenous
variables comparable to the ones used by Pflügler and et. al. [2016], with the
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Data Mining
11
addition of former output. In regards to the RF (which is a special ensemble type
of RT), the writers found that the error rate decreases the fastest using maximum
available number of features, reaching the plateau state at a significantly lower
depth value. From a significance analysis based on the NN, it was found that
previous occupancy was the most important feature by a milestone. Weekday,
time of day and traffic were of some value as well, while the rest were of low
to negligible impact as well. From presented results, it can be derived that the
NN and RF outperforms the CNN significantly, with the NN receiving slightly
better scores than the RF. These models were only tested on predictive horizons
of 15/30/45/60 minutes, but it is worth noting that a 60 minutes forecast has
an increase of 2.7x in MAE error compared to the one at 15, which does imply
clear limitations for far ahead predictions.
Zhao and Zhang [2020] evaluates two forecasting methods FM1 and FM2 for
a selection of predictors. FM1 uses weekdays and weekends in the same set,
whereas FM2 process them separately. Commercial and large scale parking lots
generally performs best using FM1, whereas office and medium scale parking
lots performs best using FM2.
SVM proves to be superior in all categories
except one, but LR is close in many instances. ARIMA was not tested on FM2
because of continuous dependencies, but it performed the worst on FM1 overall.
The presented selection of literature only regards parking occupancy, which rep-
resents merely a small fraction of available studies regarding occupancy predic-
tion in general. It was chosen to only include studies with similar goals in Table
2.1, to provide a common ground for comparison of applied methods and results
while also narrowing the scope. However, many other fields apply similar or
more advanced methods to predict comparable data. Most prominently, Kuta-
fina, Bechtold, Kabino, and Jonas [2019] used a Nonlinear Autoregressive model
with Exogenous terms (NARX) to predict hospital bed occupancy rates, a sub-
ject very similar to parking occupancy, with very promising results. The authors
found that the model, depending on the case, were in line or outperformed many
current state of the art methods, which included many of the models presented
in Table 2.1. Multiple studies seem to agree that NARX, which include former
output in its predictions, generally outperform other neural net architectures
and traditional stochastic ML models when applied on multi step ahead time
series [Menezes & Barreto, 2008a], [Mitrea, Lee, & Wu, 2009].
2.1.4
Tools for appliance
Many tools are capable of processing data using the techniques presented above.
Though not as computational advanced, Microsoft Excel is still a widely pop-
ular tool used for data manipulation and lighter modelling, despite not being
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Mobile application development
12
easily incorporated in production environments [Gillman, 2010]. While most
statistical/programming languages are capable of implementing AI algorithms,
some are undeniably better suited than others, providing significantly better
support. Many data scientist rely on R for explanatory statistical modelling,
but Python is generally considered better suited for AI modelling and web appli-
cation implementation [C, 2021]. Other statistical/programming languages like
Matlab and Julia also offer much of the same functionality. These technologies
are merely a snippet of applicable available tools, but have been included based
on popularity and editorial knowledge.
2.2
Mobile application development
Mobile, desktop and web applications represent the intelligent applications de-
scribed in section 2.1.1, i.e. what developed AI models can be incorporated
within. Traditional mobile applications differ from regular programs in various
ways, but for simplicity, let’s compare it to a frontend application that runs on
a mobile system and has the ability of utilizing device specific features. Four
major development categories currently exist: Native mobile apps (written in
the native platform language and framework), Cross-platform apps (written in
non-native language but compiled to native code), Hybrid-web apps (built with
web technologies and run in container environment) and Progressive web apps
(Web app utilizing mobile browser capabilities).
Native apps generally outperforms the rest in terms of speed and responsiveness,
but multiple code bases are needed to work on different platforms (Java/Kotlin
and Swift). In contrast, cross-platform apps work on both IOS/Android at close
to similar experience, though some device features are limited. Many languages
support cross-platform deployment, but React Native and flutter are among the
most popular. Web based applications allow for similar code bases between web
and mobile environments, but usually performs a bit worse [AWS, 2022a].
2.2.1
Backend
A frontend application is often not worth much without backend connectivity.
The backend server is responsible for providing data upon request, including
business logic and database management.
While other alternatives do exist,
RESTful API is today the industry standard for server communication and
HTTP requests.
An API (Application Programming Interface) defines com-
munication rules between software systems, and REST (Representational State
==PAGE:21==
2.3 User Experience & Prototyping
13
Transfer) is simply a software architecture that imposes a specific set of condi-
tions. These conditions include Uniform interface, Statelessness, Layered sys-
tem, Cacheability and optionally Code on demand [AWS, 2022b].
2.2.1.1
Alternatives
It is worth noting that not all applications require a backend; simple apps using
limited amount of data and processes, like calculators, recorders, notepads etc.,
often run solely on local memory and cpu power [OS system, 2020].
Applying AI models is often not considered a simple task though. Tradition-
ally, these practices were solely reserved for powerful servers and would not be
possible to carry out on a mobile device. However, due to increasing cpu and
gpu power combined with vastly improved storage capabilities, it has in recent
years become possible to utilize AI models on-device, meaning that input data
is processed directly at hand and not transmitted back and forward through
a traditional backend server. Most noticeable advantages include low latency,
increased privacy and offline support. This is often beneficial for applications
that utilizes instant predictions and/or handles sensitive information; common
use cases include live object detection/tracking with the use of built-in cameras
and face/fingerprint recognition [Google, 2021].
Google’s cross-platform ML-kit and open-source Tensorflow Lite initiatives are
perhaps the most versatile on-device frameworks, given they both work on native
iOS and Android applications, including support for flutter and React Native.
Apples’ Core ML library share many similarities, though only available on their
ecosystem.
All libraries offer support to convert models from Tensorflow to
their own standard, whereas Core ML also allow PyTorch conversion [Apple
Inc., 2021].
Sklearn is not natively portable to listed ecosystems, but some
libraries like sklearn-porter transpile developed models into natively supported
languages [Nok, 2019].
2.3
User Experience & Prototyping
It is important that developed applications, regardless of platform and purpose,
provide meaningful and relevant value to its customer segment. The term User
Experience (UX) relates to the design process that ensures these criteria are met.
In its broad definition, UX involves all processes associated with relevant infor-
mation acquisition, product integration, design and functionality [IDF, 2022].
While UX is considered an umbrella term for these and many more categories,
==PAGE:22==
2.3 User Experience & Prototyping
14
usability testing is a focused subset of UX which solely focus on ease of use in
regards to accomplishing specific goals. These terms are often used interchange-
ably however, as it is rarely the case that the design process of usability does
not incorporate other UX aspects and vica verca [Fitzgerald, 2020].
It is extremely common to develop application prototypes to showcase function-
ality and design, while also collecting constructive feedback with the intention
of validating user experience. While pen & paper sketching used to be the norm
for prototyping, modern tools such as Figma and Adobe XD allow rapid devel-
opment of interactive prototypes capable of tracking usage during testing, also
called click through prototypes. It is common to distinguish between low and
high fidelity prototypes. The higher fidelity, the closer resemblance of detail,
look and behavior of a final product. Prototypes can even incorporate system
functionality [Hartson & Pyla, 2012]. Prototyping commonly affect the business
understanding, and it must therefore be considered a vital part of modern data
science projects, also insinuated by Stolfi et al. [2017].
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Feasibility
“Ideas are worth nothing unless
executed. They are just a
multiplier. Execution is worth
millions”
Steve Jobs
This chapter will investigate the practicality of the service introduced in section
3.1 by studying strengths and weaknesses from a set of defined factors, with
the intention of determining the project’s overall viability. In other words, is it
feasible to carry out proposed service, and what is the associated complications?
3.1
Service summary
The imagined service will consist of a user platform, on which one can receive
information about estimated parking availability. This information should be
available any time a day, preferably using an interactive map. In practise, a
user can through this service either in real time or e.g., a few days in advance,
investigate if parking should be considered a problem for an arbitrary destination
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Feasibility factors
16
within mentioned city. Based on this information, the service should provide
detailed recommendations on different transportation options and estimated
duration times. For instance, one might choose to park merely a few minutes of
walking distance away, if it is estimated to be considerably easier to find a free
parking spot. Optionally, another might choose to park even further away take
the bus/subway back and forward, as this might be both faster and cheaper
overall based on parking zones and public transportation fees.
3.2
Feasibility factors
A comprehensive feasibility study include assessment of technical, economical,
legal and operational factors, as well as the projected time frame [Bridges, 2021].
Given this project primarily focus on the study and development of integrated
prediction models in a user-friendly mock-up service, the following assessment
will predominately focus on market and technical feasibility, with the intention
of investigating if proposed service is of substantial relevance and if the required
level of functionality necessary to adhere to said goals is possible to implement.
Financial and operational projections are generally considered out of scope for
this project; the former concerns economical projections in regards to business
ventures and the latter refers to how well given ventures conforms with current
business objectives [Bridges, 2021], which a personal non-profit thesis study like
this project typically does not comply with.
For these reasons, said factors
will not be investigated thoroughly in the following sections. It is worth noting
however, that in case all other factors are feasible and the project succeeds in de-
livering promised service, the implications of these factors should be considered
before a potential launch of service.
3.3
Market
Market feasibility is closely related to economical considerations, as industry,
market and competition analysis generally lay the foundations for anticipated
market potential, sources of revenue and sales projections [Wolfe, 2020]. How-
ever, as it has been decided not to focus on financial projections, this section
will predominately address potential value for users. From a UX perspective,
application value is often considered the most important aspect; without im-
pact, there is no need for existence. Results will be based on a market research
conducted on the premise of motivational background.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Market
17
3.3.1
Market background & Motivation
The overall market can be divided into two segments: Metropolitan transporta-
tion is the domain, whereas parking optimization is the solution space. While
this paper primarily focus on the latter, it is important to understand the back-
ground in order to determine its necessity. As population density continues to
increase in metropolitan areas worldwide, so does the amount of motorised ve-
hicles on roads [Adriazola-Steil, 2013]. Many cities promote more sustainable
alternatives like public transportation and cycling, but the use of private motor-
ized mobility continue to rise, leading to increasing issues associated with traffic
congestion. A collection of side-effects hereof, including transport time, costs
and pollution, was briefly discussed in chapter 1, but to boil it down: As of
today, it is estimated that the average motorist spends 54 hours a year looking
for available parking in Copenhagen alone [Lundqvist, 2021]. This is problem-
atic in itself, but it has furthermore been proven that a significant portion of
urban traffic is actually caused by search of parking [Pflügler & et. al., 2016],
causing a chain effect of reported issues. According to recent prognosis, 60% of
the world’s population will live in urban areas by 2030, an increase of 57% com-
pared to 2021 [Bateman, 2022]. It can hence be concluded that these problems
are not going away by themselves, and that motorized mobility is in desperate
need for innovative solutions to optimize big city transportation.
3.3.1.1
Competition
Many different services are currently offering solutions to optimize driving ex-
perience.
Physical GPS navigation systems have been commonly available
for decades, allowing for directions, time estimations and highway alternatives
among other things. However, as modern applications such as Google and Ap-
ple Maps incorporate many of these features and more, many have switched to
rely on mobile services. Currently, 2/3 smartphone owners use their devices for
navigation [He, 2019]. Because these applications are used by so many people
connected to the internet, they are capable of live detecting traffic volume with
very high accuracy, providing second to none expected transportation time pre-
dictions [Stewart, 2021]. They do however not focus intensively on other issues
related to traffic congestion like parking availability.
The current closest competitor is Easypark’s beta feature Find & Park, which
has the ability of showing estimated change of finding a parking spot at var-
ious streets using color indication.
However, the service is only available in
Copenhagen, only provides a snapshot at time of usage and does not provide
suggestions on preferred travel means and destinations. It is worth noting that
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Market
18
the author of this paper was not aware of given feature at the start of this
project, which could indicate that given service is not particularly well-known
or used. Interestingly, EasyPark’s underlying model happens to be build on
several of the datasets presented in section 3.4. It has unfortunately not been
possible to gain information on model architecture or performance for future
comparison.
3.3.2
Market survey
To investigate the actual need of described service, it is first and foremost nec-
essary to establish if and why people would use it. Reason for usage and general
devotion to a specific service can vary greatly between users, and it is important
to validate what triggers certain needs, if any. Therefore, to verify value and
impact of proposed solution, a market survey has been conducted. This survey
includes various questions on driving habits, parking experiences, technology in
practise and general considerations on the regarding topic.
3.3.2.1
Apparatus & Participants
The survey consist of a questionnaire developed in Google Forms, published
through social media and hereby openly available to everyone of interest within
the author’s social network.
Given the subject regards driving habits, it is
however a requirement that all participants hold a valid driver’s license.
A
total of 74 people with varying demographics in regards to gender and age
completed the questionnaire, despite the vast majority of participants are in
their twenties.
Only 1 participant did not comply with the requirement of
having a valid driver’s license. This individual could potentially have sufficient
driving experience through former/other means, but to streamline results, all
answers from this participant have been omitted.
3.3.2.2
Questions and results
The first three questions of the survey regards participant specific information
(gender, age and driver license status) to provide the details listed above. For
simplicity, only a selection of informative diagrams will be showcased directly in
this chapter, but all information obtained in the survey is available in Appendix
C.1.
Because of this, appendix referencing will be omitted in the following
section in favour of direct references to figures displayed in given appendix.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Market
19
In regards to the overall topic, it is important to investigate driving habits in
order to determine relevance of participant answers. It does not really mat-
ter if participants hold a valid driver’s license if they practically never use it,
which is fairly common among younger people and hereby the majority of the
test subjects. Despite initial concerns, Figure 3.1 regarding driving frequency
demonstrates that approx. 44% drive multiple times a week, with up to 81%
driving a few times a month. From Figure C.5 it can furthermore be obtained
that more than 2/3 of active drivers predominately drive in densely populated
urban areas. It can hereby be concluded that survey participants does represent
potential future customer segments.
Figure 3.1: Frequency of driving among participants
To determine product value, it is first and foremost necessary to verify that the
problem exist. Therefore, it was decided to subsequently investigate occupancy
experiences and general parking considerations. In line with the current and
future market conditions described in section 3.3.1, over 90% of participants
consider parking to be an issue in densely populated areas, as visualized in
Figure C.6. Moreover, approx. 73% occasionally decide not to drive somewhere
because of parking associated uncertainty, as showcased in Figure 3.2.
The
reasoning behind this is explained in Figure C.12, where deciding factors can be
summarized to time, cost and availability.
Figure 3.2: Influence of occupancy uncertainty on driving habits
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Market
20
Impact is dependent not only on solution creation, but also customer’s desire
to adopt it. Current application habits and common will to wield new tech-
nologies must hence be analyzed as well. Questions on application usage were
divided into general transportation assistance apps like Google Maps, and con-
crete parking apps like EasyPark. In regards to the first option, 97% of partic-
ipants answered that they use a mobile application to assist in transportation,
of which Google and Apple Maps presumably dominate the market with more
than 90% of combined usage. These findings are based on the results showcased
in Figure C.14 and are also in line with projected market conditions.
Figure 3.3: Reason for usage of assistance application
General usage of assistance applications are displayed in Figure 3.3, with direc-
tions and duration being favoured by most. Traffic updates and public trans-
portation options are also commonly used. These results align with the fact
that over 82% of the participants decide which transit method to use based on
comparative factors, as presented in Figure 3.4.
These findings substantiate
the beliefs that the expert decision making possibilities presented in section 3.1
would actually provide value and impact for potential customers. Besides time
and cost, convenience and sustainability are also common deciding factors in
decision making of transit method. Refer to Figure C.10 for specific ratios.
Figure 3.4: Participants choosing transit method based on expert knowledge
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Market
21
In regards to parking application usage, it can be derived that approx. 80% of
the participants use a specific service to control parking, of whom 92% rely on
EasyPark. Usage is however solely reserved for payment (despite one participant
choosing zone price information retrieval). In fact, not a single user seem to
use the incorporated predictive features, at least not according to the results
showcased in Figure 3.5. All other listed findings are based on the summarized
results presented in Figure C.13, C.14 and C.15.
Figure 3.5: Participants aware of EasyPark’s Find & Park feature
Based on these responses, there is a clear indication that EasyPark act as a
monopoly on the current market for parking payment. However, given not a
single participant was comfortably aware of the features in Find & Park, it
seems safe to assume that the assumption about its impact being low to none
is correct. This might seem to contradict earlier findings on value and impact
of proposed service, but the reason for this must lie elsewhere.
Figure 3.6: Participants willing to use predictive features i new environment
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Market
22
Upon asked, 92% of the participants answered that they are willing to use a new
predictive parking application, if results are accurate. If this functionality were
to be incorporated into the existing choice of assistance application, the amount
rises to 96% (see Figure 3.6 above and C.16 in Appendix). All participants were
asked to provide a reason on why they would benefit from predictive features,
and many interesting findings came along. Security (in regards to availability),
time and cost are among the most popular reasons.
Many participants also
indicate that general frustrations associated with relentless search would be
minimized, leading to more comfortable driving experiences.
A few answers
stood out, providing additional feedback on service implications.
The most
prominent are listed below, but for more examples refer to Appendix C.1.4.1.
1. "Pros: it can take a long time finding a parking spot, so it would ease the
process. Cons: parking spots often get occupied in a very short amount
of time, so maybe it would just make you drive somewhere and when you
arrive, there is a great possibility that the parking spot would be taken"
2. "The reliability of using the car as transportation to and from CPH. Get-
ting some of the benefits of living in the city combined with the parking
benefit of housing in the countryside."
3. "Currently driving an electric vehicle, but would be nice to be 100% sure.
I am using the EON electricity provider who has an app where you can
see if the charger is being used - but people can still park there without
charging and then you can no longer rely on the information."
4. "Even if the results are not accurate down to each parking space, but more
general: "This area has a high probability of a parking space now" - it
would be nice to be guided in that direction"
Unlike the rest, answer 1 focus on not just benefits, but also potential drawbacks.
A valid point is made in regard to availability certainty, as states can indeed
change quickly.
Because of this, decisions should not be based on singular
spots, but rather average likelihood on an entire street or neighborhood. There
will however always be uncertainty involved, and it is important to include
associated magnitude in the decision making process. Answer 4 substantiates
these beliefs by pointing out that complete accuracy is not a necessity, and
that even basic guidance could be of substantial impact. Answer 2 is one of
many examples showcasing direct impact and value, while also implying sudden
superior reliability compared to other means of transportation. The third answer
describes an existing competitive service for electrical vehicles, but includes
current limitations and provide an open mind to adopt proposed service.
Overall, it seems that most participants would benefit from proposed service
and are open to jump onboard, in case the technical foundation is adequate.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Technical assessment
23
3.4
Technical assessment
Given the functionality of intended service solely relies on the authenticity of de-
veloped prediction models, the underlying datasets providing the necessary data
to develop said models must contain substantial information regarding parking
occupancy. To act in accordance with the methodology presented in section
2.1.1, it is necessary that the business understandment comply with the data
acquisition and understandment. For these reasons, the following technological
assessment will first and foremost focus on the preliminary study of a collection
of handpicked datasets, each deemed relevant to the regarding topic. The in-
tention is to extract sufficient knowledge to make informed decisions on what
is achievable and should be pursued in regards to defined business objectives -
and what is not.
All reviewed datasets that relates to parking are public available and distributed
by Open Data DK (OD), a union between danish municipalities and regions
which serves many purposes, including data transparency, businesses and re-
search foundation and higher yield of existing collected data [OpenDataDK,
2022]. This project could not exist in its current context without the availabil-
ity and integrity of parking related data provided by OD. It is on behalf of all
examined data determined to focus on the municipality of Copenhagen (CPH)
in regards to parking optimization. For details on project files in regards to
data fetching, exploration, modelling etc., refer to Appendix A.
3.4.1
Transactions
To find and exploit temporal1 parking patterns, it seems logical to start with
issued tickets. Dataset parkomat-transaktioner [2016]2 contains information on
all issued P-machine transactions from January 2010 to March 2016 in CPH.
However, due to multiple changes of format, many different csv files with varying
time horizons and associated information currently exist.
As municipality borders and areas within are constantly changing, it is initially
assumed that the most recent data will project today’s parking with highest
accuracy. The newer formats also provide additional information on location,
payment type, p-zone etc. However, the newest format only contains monthly
records from November 2015 to marts 2016, which is insufficient to map out
potential seasonal patterns for all months of the year. The information provided
1Time-related
2English Translation: P-machine Transactions
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Technical assessment
24
Figure 3.7: Monthly transactions Dtran15/16. Green=2015, Blue=2016
in this dataset is equivalent (formatting aside) to what exist in the second newest
format though, which provides records for all the same months and the rest
of 2015 as well.
Upon closer investigation though, it is clear that this data
is inadequate as well.
Figure 3.7 visualizes total amount of transactions for
January, February and March in the first and second year, and it is clear that
the data is either incomplete or strongly misleading; monthly data should not
vary so significantly. Based on the results of the market research, there seem to
be a strong indication that most people tend to pay using mobile applications
nowadays. EasyPark’s current wheel payment functionality was first released in
2013 [Our story - EasyPark Group, 2022], so it is possible that various parking
applications quickly gained market shares around this point in time, but this is
merely speculations. Nonetheless, a sufficient amount of data is clearly needed
to account for monthly development over longer periods of time.
Figure 3.8: Monthly transactions Dtran
Compared to the data available using the oldest format from 2010 to 2014, yearly
development is much more realistically correlated with only minor differences,
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Technical assessment
25
as presented in Figure 3.8. For this reason, the oldest format is considered most
optimal, despite lacking useful information. This is a trade-off necessary to rely
on data accuracy, but fortunately dataset Dpmachine and Dzones introduced in
section 3.4.2 and 3.4.3 respectively accommodate most of these issues. It could
be interesting to see if payment type had any influence on parking length, as
cash are fixed amounts and many probably don’t rely on changes back using
flat coins, resulting in potential overhead time. Unfortunately, this is not be
possible to include with chosen standard. The dataset will be defined Dtran,
and the information available is described in Table 3.1.
Column Name
tlRecordID
tlPDM
tlPayDateTime
tlExpDateTime
Definition
Transaction ID
P-machine ID
Start time
End time
Example
26068710
3892
2010-01-01T00:02:00
2010-01-02T08:04:00
Table 3.1: Dataset Dtran structure
In order to determine distinguishable temporal parking pressure, Dtran must
contain varying summarized counts. Otherwise, predicted OCCR will be static.
Figure 3.9 showcase hourly transactions, and there seems to be a clear Gaussian
distribution3 (perhaps slightly skewed to the right), which does indicate hourly
patterns. The median is not centered in the plot, but as time is cyclic, this is
merely due to choice of interval boundaries. Be aware that all transaction sums
are based on payment time, not active transactions. This problem is addressed
in section 4.1.2.2.
Figure 3.9: Hourly transactions Dtran
From a weekly perspective (based on the results in Figure 3.10), weekdays seem
to follow a correlated distribution. Sunday transactions are close to non-existing
3Probability function symmetric about the mean. Also referred to as a Normal Distribution
[Chen, 2021]
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Technical assessment
26
relative to other days of the week. This is expected, as parking is free in CPH on
Sundays and public holidays. The small amount can be explained by long lasting
tickets, meant for covering parking on the following payable days, or wrongfully
purchased tickets. Saturdays also have lower variance (more closely distributed
around the mean: 132 mod 24 = 12 o’clock). Figure C.19 in Appendix C.2.1
substantiates these findings based on daily sums, where it is also clear that
fewer tickets are issued on Saturdays in general. It can based on these findings
be concluded, that day of week clearly impacts amount of issued transaction,
which should affect OCCR. In regards to other and/or substantiating temporal
patterns, Figure 3.8 demonstrates monthly variation detectable over the course
of multiple years.
Dates does not appear to have a meaningful impact (see
Figure C.20 in Appendix C.2.1 for reference).
Figure 3.10: Weekly hourly transactions Dtran
3.4.2
P-machines
Dataset parkomater [n.d.]4, defined as Dpmachine, contains information on all P-
machines located in CPH. The dataset has many included columns, but Table
3.3 illustrates the ones of interest to this project. In relational database terms,
the entry tlPDM in dataset Dtran is a foreign key to parkomat_id. By combining
the information in these datasets, it is possible to map out all P-machines and
associated transactions, which can be used to determine relative spacial quanti-
ties of issued tickets. Figure 3.11 visualizes the location of all P-machines, and
it is clear that the outer areas are less densely populated. opret_dato5 and
p_zone explains the age and price area of located machine. However, given that
it is the location of a street that determine price zone, and existing transac-
tions are linked to machines (which must exist if tickets have been issued), this
information can be neglected by incorporating other sources of information.
4English translation: P-Machines
5English translation: Creation date
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Technical assessment
27
Figure 3.11: P-Machine locations
Column Name
parkomat_id
type
p_zone
opret_dato
wkb_geometry
Definition
ID
Machine type
Zone type
Installment date
Positional coordinate
Example
153
Betalingsautomat
Rød
2010-03-01T00:00:00
POINT (12.57... 55.67...)
Table 3.2: Dataset Dpmachine partial structure
3.4.3
Payment zones
One of the other sources of information referred to in section 3.4.2 is dataset
kbh-parkering-zoneinformation [n.d.]6, denoted Dzones. This datasets too con-
tain many columns, but only few are of interest.
Table 3.3 showcase a few
handpicked. Using geometry properties and zone sub-type (price is determined
by color), it is possible to allocate all locations (street or area) within the mu-
nicipality of CPH to a p-zone using vector calculus, i.e. intersection between
polygon shapes. Figure 3.12 showcase the different zone colors, but note that
some areas are missing. More information on this matter is available in section
3.4.5. Prices vary differently within each zone depending on hour and day. This
problem is investigated further in section 5.3.2.
Column Name
id_x
wkb_geometry
kategori
navn
beskrivelse
Definition
ID
Polygon Shape
Zone type
Subtype
Area
Example
11
MULTIPOLYGON (...)
Betalingszone
Blå
Vesterbro
Table 3.3: Dataset Dzone partial structure
6English translation: CPH-Parking-Zone-Information
==PAGE:36==
3.4 Technical assessment
28
Figure 3.12: P-zones colors. Light-blue is free.
3.4.4
Street counts
Transaction data explains issued parking tickets, but parking permits7 and ille-
gal parkings, which also has significant influence on parking conditions, cannot
be accounted for using dataset Dtran. There’s also no way of testing how pre-
dicted transactions correlate with actual street-side OCCR. At first glance, it
might seem logical to find issued parking permits in various districts, and allo-
cate the amounts to the same streets/areas referred to in section 3.4.3, e.g. using
Parkeringspladser [n.d.]8, which contain locations on all legal parking spots in
CPH. However, it turns out that there exist more active issued parking permits
than spots available in the city [Johansen, Helkov, & Reenberg, 2021]. This
means that if all permits were used at once, not a single transaction would be
usable. More importantly however, it ratifies that such data cannot be applied
to given problem, and hence it does not make sense to acquire. On the same
note, issued parking fines could help explain some illegal parking, but paid trans-
actions and/or parking permits can still lead to fines, which will be infeasible
to account for.
Column Name
x_id
lovlig_p_kl_12
parkerede_biler_kl_12
belaegning_kl_12_pct
bemaerkning
aar_mdr
wkb_geometry
Definition
ID
Legal spots
Parked cars
OCCR
Remark
Year /Month
Line shape
Example
2
38
46.0
121
1 P spærret
af skurvogn
201809.0
MULTILINE...(..)
Table 3.4: Dataset Dstreet partial structure
7Danish translation: Beboerlicenser
8English Translation: Parking spots
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Technical assessment
29
Fortunately, dataset parkeringstaellinger [2022]9, defined Dstreet, contains records
of half-yearly counts at nearly all parkable streets in CPH, carried out in Marts
and September. Table 3.4 showcase a snippet of relevant columns, including
available/occupied spots, record time and line shape (street coordinates). Le-
gal spots, measured counts (Parked cars) and OCCR are available at 12, 17
and 22 o’clock. The latter is a simple computation of the former two, and not
necessarily needed for the modelling process. Nonetheless, using it out of the
box allows for direct visual representation of street side OCCR, as presented in
Figure 3.13. Compared to same OCCR at 17 and 22 o’clock (see Figure C.21
and C.22 in Appendix C.2.2), there is a clear difference between street occu-
pancy in various districts, indicating that hour does in fact influence OCCR.
Color scale is inspired by the Danish Authoritie’s own color schema used to ex-
plain traffic tendencies [BYCP, 2020]. However, for production use cases, traffic
light color indicators (green, yellow and red) are probably better suited for clear
interpretation. Similar color schema is also used by EasyPark.
Figure 3.13: Street side snippet of OCCR Marts 2014, 12 o’clock
The dataset provides information on available spots at the time of recording,
accessible through lovlig_p_kl_n for n ∈[12, 17, 22]. The values for these ac-
cessors occasionally differ, and traffic rules (allowed parking intervals) combined
with associated remarks (e.g. "construction occupies 2 spots") are expected to
explain these variations. However, written values often differ by a few integers,
9English Translation: Parking counts
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Technical assessment
30
despite no present remark. It is hence clear, that this data is subject to some
collection barriers. By investigating the hourly difference on the same day, the
average MAE = 0.26, whereas the deviation on different years at similar hour
is MAE = 1.66. In other words, the yearly noted spots available fluctuates at
a much higher error rate, than what potential street side traffic rules impose.
Based on these findings, and to simplify data manipulation, remark informa-
tion has been omitted and street side spots will be static and based on rounded
statistical mean. Another option could be to simply choose the listed amount
from newest available dataset to most accurately represent today’s conditions,
but this has not been deemed necessary. Such an approach would also have to
be adjusted for in post-processing modelling.
3.4.4.1
Occupancy/Availability rate
Availability and occupancy are two sides of the same coin, as both terms refer
to the amount of available parking spots currently or estimated to be occupied
by vehicles. These terms will therefore be used interchangeably to discuss given
matter throughout this paper. However, to avoid any misunderstandings, OCCR
(as already introduced) will in regards to the percentage of spots in use be used
for calculations and results. The decision to prefer spots in use rather than
unoccupied spots is based on the premise that OCCR must be able to exceed
100%, as more cars can potentially be parked than what a fixated number of
available spots allow, whereas a higher number of free spots does not magically
appear in the same scenario with respect to percentage of available spots.
3.4.4.2
Transaction allocation
If street counts were available in adequate quantities for all distinctive seasonal
values, e.g. hours, weekdays and months, transaction data would not be needed.
This is the case for most of the related research studies analyzed in section 2.1.3,
where exact parking garage OCCR is accessible at all times. In this project
however, multiple data sources must be used in conjunction to achieve defined
goals, as transaction data is the only adequate seasonal data input. Based on
this premise, transaction data of local P-machines must somehow be mapped to
nearby streets, and weighted against the counts presented in dataset Dstreet.
This can be accomplished using a few different methods. One option is to com-
pute shortest distance between all streets center points and P-machine locations,
and simply allocate every issued transaction from associated P-machine to near-
est neighboring street. It does seem reasonable to assume that people will choose
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Technical assessment
31
the option closest by. Unfortunately, many streets will likely not be issued any
tickets using this method, as many P-machines handle small residential areas
with multiple associated streets.
A better approach would be to work the other way around, and assign a P-
machine to each street using similar distance calculations. Then, for each P-
machine, transactions can be allocated to all associated streets based on relative
street sizes and counts. This idea actually inspired the final solution presented
in section 4.4.2, but unfortunately imposes some issues in its current form.
First, some streets cover huge distances relative to others, and the center point
would be insufficient to explain transaction behavior far away (where many
other P-machines would be encountered before). This would lead to big im-
balances between larger and smaller streets. Of course, multiple anchor points
can be imposed based on street length to accommodate this issue, but calcula-
tions would suddenly become far more complicated; many streets would receive
transactions from multiple P-machines, and all allocations would need to be ad-
justed for, so that maximum capacity is not exceeded. Secondly, streets close to
district borders could potentially receive transactions from P-machines located
within different payment zones, leading to ambiguous results.
A third and prioritized option is to group P-machines together in smaller ar-
eas of CPH and allocate transactions to streets positioned within, similar to
what Pflügler and et. al. [2016] created using a custom defined grid. Grid cells
are problematic too however, as streets and p-zone areas will be cut unevenly:
How many percent of a street is suddenly located in each grid? Where does
the p-zone cut? Opportunely, multiple datasets containing polygon boundary
borders exist for CPH; kvarter [n.d.], Roder [2014] and bydele [n.d.] all repre-
sent districts at different scales, each acting in accordance with street sides and
p-zones. By assigning streets to their rightful area based on location, all trans-
actions issued within same area can be allocated using relative street sizes and
counts, as introduced in option 2. Some streets next to area borders will likely
receive parkings issued from P-machines at both sides in real world scenarios,
but this exchange back and forward is assumed to even somewhat out over time.
Fortunately, dataset Darea presented in section 3.4.5 withholds all necessary in-
formation to carry this out, with summarizing counts and OCCR in defined
areas. Sizes are equivalent to something in between Kvarter and Roder. This
dataset was not known upon initial investigation, which is why all described
approaches was studied thoroughly. Based on provided considerations, similar
results could however be developed using explained reverse-engineering method,
in case future cities lacks given data.
==PAGE:40==
3.4 Technical assessment
32
3.4.5
Area counts
As introduced in section 3.4.4.2, dataset parkeringstaelling-i-zoner [n.d.], de-
noted Darea, contains similar records as Dstreet, but for summarized districts.
Database structure is presented in Table 3.5. Similar to Dstreet, legal spots,
measured counts and OCCR are available for hour h ∈[12, 17, 22]. Note that
column accessor names differ slightly from Dstreet, month has no preceding zero,
and geometry object is for obvious reasons of polygon type and not line.
Column Name
omraade
lovlige_p_pl_kl_12
optalte_pladser_kl_12
belaegnings_pct_kl_12
mdr_aar
wkb_geometry
Definition
ID
Legal spots
Parked cars
OCCR
Year/Month
Polygon shape
Example
1
328
315
96
20219
MULTIPOLYGON((...))
Table 3.5: Dataset Darea partial structure
Area sizes and positions are visualized in Figure 3.14. ID’s are positioned at
computed centroids to identify origin. Using showcased boundaries, all records
in dataset Dpmachine can be assigned an area based on their positions presented
in Figure 3.11. These allocations can subsequently be summarized, to get an
overview of P-machine distributions. Figure 3.15 visualizes the amount of allo-
cated P-machines per area, and it is clear that these are not equally distributed.
Amounts will naturally fluctuate due to position and size, but area 7, 15 and 21
stands out among its neighbors. Upon closer investigation, it can be seen that
area 7 and 23 covers Nyhavn and Fælledparken, areas primarily consumed by
water and grass fields. Additionally, from the street side OCCR presented in
Figure 3.13, only a limited amount of streets are parkable in area 7. It therefore
makes perfect sense, that fewer P-machines are available in given areas. These
results are further substantiated by the lower amount of available streets for
same areas presented in Appendix C.2.3, Figure C.23.
Figure 3.14: Darea zone borders
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Technical assessment
33
Figure 3.15: P-machine count post area allocation
Based on same figures, it can however be deducted that the areas in 40-68 have a
significant lower amount of P-machines, despite having higher average parking
spot counts than the norm.
This is mainly due to the fact that P-Machine
density is much lower in the outskirts of CPH (see Figure 3.11).
Figure 3.16 visualizes area OCCR at the same time as its street view counter-
part in section 3.4.4, and while general relative occupancy magnitude between
districts persists, much information is lost in regards to out of the ordinary
busy streets. Figure 3.17 displays same OCCR but at 22 o’clock, and it can
be deducted that much of the traffic/parking that occupies the inner city at
noon retreats to the outer parts at night. This makes sense, as more businesses
are positioned close to the center, where people generally work during the day.
This could imply an imbalance in late hour area transactions, e.g. due to active
parking permits. For OCCR at 17 o’clock, see Figure C.21 Appendix. C.2.2.
Figure 3.16: OCCR 12 o’clock
Figure 3.17: OCCR 22 o’clock
==PAGE:42==
3.4 Technical assessment
34
As already introduced, dataset Parkeringspladser [n.d.] include all legal parking
spots in CPH. Using this dataset, it would be possible not only to divide area
OCCR into street OCCR, but furthermore divide it into spot specific rates.
However, these predictions would be even more prone to uncertainty errors, as
it would be impossible to predict which spots are free and which are not on the
street of interest. Because of this, it is assumed that consumers, provided some
usage experience, would automatically summarize amount of free spots per street
before making informative decisions, indirectly scaling occupancy rate back to
street level. Based on this, with the addition of the feedback on uncertainty
concerns listed in section 3.3.2.2 regarding feature benefits and drawbacks, such
implementation is not considered beneficial.
3.4.6
Weather
Several of the studies examined in section 2.1.3 include weather information
in its predictors with positive results. Many weather data resources exist, but
few are freely available in regards to historic data. Meteostat [2022] is one of
such resources, providing easy API requests on hourly historic data in selected
interval for a wide selection of weather conditions, with information based on
specific station measurements. This dataset will be denoted Dweather. The only
station within the perimeter of Copenhagen is at Landbohøjskolen, but this
station does unfortunately not support hourly information. Luckily, a station in
Kastrup, merely a few kilometers away, does support this feature (it is expected
that weather conditions are identical). Table 3.6 showcase a snippet of relevant
data resources. Record time is defined by index, which for the presented example
equals the value "2010-01-01 00:00". Rainfall information is unfortunately not
available before the year of 2018, which none of the previous introduced data
sources exceeds. Upon investigation, this happens to be the case for the closest
10 weather stations, which means that is is infeasible to include such data with
presented dataset, as other stations are considered too far away to resemble
accurate weather conditions.
Column Name
temp
dwpt
rhum
prcp
snow
wdir
wspd
Definition
Temperature
Dew point
Humidity
Rain
Snow
Wind direction
Wind speed
Example
-5.8
-7.0
91.0
NaN
NaN
360
22.3
Table 3.6: Dweather partial structure
Studies have shown that rainfall causes humidity levels to rise [sf, 11]. Upon
investigation, a weak but noticeable correlation of 0.2410 was found between
10Based on Pearson’s correlation method
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Legal obligations
35
these variables. Based on these results, and the lack of other opportunities,
it was decided to include given datasets. In particular, including temperature,
humidity and wind speed. The latter is included, as it is believed that some
people will favor motorized transportation over cycling in strong windy weather.
3.4.7
Holidays
Other commonly incorporated variables include Holiday information, which
Pflügler and et. al. [2016] proved to be of positive impact in regards to model
performance. On public holidays, all parking happens to be free within CPH,
so impact is expected. Such information can be retrieved from a wide variety
of sources, but for this project it was chosen to fetch the information using the
API provided by salling group [2022]. Their holiday API include both public
and non-public holidays. Non-public holidays cover events such as Fastelavn11,
Valentines and Black Friday, which does affect everyday behavior and hereby
likely parking availability. For this reason, it was decided to include both types.
Table 3.7 showcase general structure. The dataset is defined Dholiday.
Column Name
date
name
nationalHoliday
Definition
Date
Holiday name
If it is a public holiday
Example
2010-01-01
Nytårsdag
True
Table 3.7: Dholiday structure
3.5
Legal obligations
The technologies and resources necessary to develop presented service are all
commercially usable, which includes both software and data sources.
Open
Data DK specifically states, that all sources can be used both for both personal,
educational and commercial usage. Same applies to the included APIs, which
was also part of the reason why these were chosen in the first place. Given no
personal data is acquired, GDDPR regulations are not of any concerns.
11Danish Halloween tradition
==PAGE:44==
3.6 Requirements specification
36
3.6
Requirements specification
Based on the results acquired from the market survey conducted in section
3.3.2, there is a clear indication that parking predictions provide both value and
impact for a customer segment with proven demand, despite the existence of
recognisable competitors. Furthermore, the technical assessment conducted in
section3.4 provide substantial evidence to the assumption that available data
sources are sufficient to explain parking tendencies and capable of predicting
occupancy rates, despite the problem being of slightly more difficult nature
than the related research studies presented in section 2.1.3.
Based on these
conclusions, the proposed service is deemed feasible in regards to both current
and future market conditions, as well as technical foundation.
It was in section 3.3.2.2 indicated by a participant that occupancy scale does not
necessarily need to be spot or street side specific. However, given it has been
established that area occupancy fail to explain specific street side tendencies
occasionally contradicting area OCCR, and that available data which allow for
street side predictions in fact exist, it has been decided to incorporate street side
predictions if area forecasting work. Only weather and holiday information was
extensively investigated as additional explanatory data sources, despite many
other possibilities exist. Major events such as concerts and soccer matches are
generally believed to have substantial impact on nearby parking conditions,
but how to distinguish between major and minor events can be difficult. Both
Provoost and et. al. [2020] and Pflügler and et. al. [2016] incorporates event data
for large venues, but results were either negligible or in fact negative. Moreover,
all events at e.g. Parken Sport & Entertainment, one of the biggest venues in
Denmark, primarily operates during weekends, most of which where parking is
free and no transaction data is available. For these reasons, and the fact that
simplicity tends to outperform complexity, additional resource data like event
information will not be included.
To clarify not just occupancy scale but all service features intended to be pur-
sued, it has been deemed beneficial to outline a requirements specification. This
will be based on the MoSCoW12 principles and should serve as a guidance tool
for model and application development/prototyping in the following chapters. A
variety of potential expert knowledge features have sporadically been discussed
with the intention of providing meaningful transportation suggestions based on
predicted occupancy rates. Based on the market survey findings, it is clear that
general uncertainty in regards to required search time and high p-zone prices
are among the most common reasons for choosing other means of transportation
than driving. Because of this, information on the fastest obtainable and cheap-
12MoScOw: Must-have, Should-have, Could-have and Won’t-have
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Requirements specification
37
Must have
Area OCCR predictions
Visual feedback
Should have
Street OCCR predictions
Incorporation of explanatory variables
Could have
Direct option
Fastest option
Cheapest option
Adjustable search filters
Directions
Won’t have
Spot OCCR predictions
Public transportation knowledge
Navigation
Table 3.8: Prediction service MoSCoW table
est available spot within an acceptable distance (based on OCCR and p-zone
price), is considered to be of the highest influential value.
This information
should be relative comparable to a direct option, similar to what is commonly
provided by existing map direction services. To narrow the scope in regards to
prediction necessities, none of these options are however included as part of the
MVP13 in Table 3.8. It is common practise that a MoSCoW table only include
beneficial features, but spot predictions has been included in the table’s Won’t
have section despite described concerns. This is based on the premise that in
case street side predictions work and new data sources emerge with accurate
spot records, then such a feature could potentially be deemed favorable.
3.6.1
Process management
To streamline workflow and stay aligned with chosen objectives presented in
table 3.8, it has been deemed beneficial to continue following the methodology
of a process model applicable to this project, in particular TDSP. KDD and
SEMMA were only momentarily introduced in section 2.1.1, because despite
possessing valuable data management actions, they both lack the incorporation
and adjustment of business understandment. Many of the findings presented
in this chapter, both in terms of market and technical feasibility, have changed
the perception of the problem, its magnitude and implementation possibilities.
Similar realisations will occur in the following chapter, and these will based
on the methodology be incorporated in and occasionally change the modelling
process and business perspective.
13MVP: Minimum Viable Product / Must have features
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4
Forecasting
“Predicting the future isn’t magic,
it’s artificial intelligence”
Dave Waters
On the basis of the technical discoveries outlined in section 3.4, this chapter
will cover the process of turning presented raw data into a fully functional AI
model capable of predicting which areas and streets has the highest change of
providing available parking spots. This include but is not limited to preliminary
data manipulation, creation and adjustment of feasible predictors, comparison
of results and post process management.
4.1
Data Manipulation
Data Manipulation cover many of the processes associated with Data acquisition
and understanding and Modelling in regards to TSDP methodology. The former
stage was already investigated and prepared to fit the technical exploration, but
later discoveries proved to require new alterations. Some highlighted necessities
are defined below, followed by associated feature engineering.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Data Manipulation
39
4.1.1
Cleaning & Preparation
To carry out the feasibility analysis, preliminary data cleaning in the form of
type standardisation, date casting, missing value removal and column/format
alignment was initially conducted. Detailed information on this can be found
in appended project files listed in Appendix A. Many of the OD data sources
provide the option of retrieving either Geojson or WKT1 formatted geometry. It
was ultimately decided to incorporate both, as the latter is considered easier to
manipulate in the development process, while some deployment platforms only
support the former (included the one used for prototyping in section 5.2.2).
The allocation of areas to P-machines introduced in section 3.4.5 laid the foun-
dation for the manipulation of transaction data presented in section 4.1.2.2.
Using this information, it can be deducted that several areas2 feature no active
transactions. Some areas are simply not part of the registered parking zones in
CPH prior to 2015, which can also be proven by comparing boundaries of areas
and OCCR zones in Figure 3.14 and 3.16. More importantly however, none of
the P-machines listed in the remaining areas existed prior to 2017 (see Appendix
D.1, Figure D.2), which means that no transactions can be allocated to given
districts. Even if Dtran contains transactions conducted in these areas using
older machines, there is no way of determining place of origin, as the records do
not match any entries in Dpmachine. This is one of the drawbacks of using the
old transaction format without area info. Unfortunately, this happens to be the
only remotely feasible data source, as described in section 3.4.1.
Remarks on street parking were initially omitted for the reasons explained in
section 3.4.4. However, it was during street side OCCR translation realized that
unrealistically low legal spot values were causing drastic OCCR errors. Recall
that these values are based on the statistical mean of all counts. It turns out that
another column denoted straekning3, otherwise reserved for additional area in-
formation and initially deemed of no relevance, occasionally features the remark
"TÆLLES IKKE"4. Despite containing multiple records of parked vehicles, all
streets with given remark have been assigned zero legal spots (see Appendix D.1,
Figure C.23). This results in drastic drops of the mean amount of spots, causing
OCCR to skyrocket. These records were hence removed from the dataset, but
the problem still consisted in some cases without any information out of the
ordinary. It was ultimately decided to assign the mean column value in cases
of such strong deviations, which did prove to provide better prediction accu-
racy. It is however worth noting that such an implementation decision can lead
1WKT: Well-Known Text representation of geometry
2Areas without allocated transactions: [40, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 68, 69, 70]
3English translation: "Stretch" (in regards to parent street)
4English translation: "Is not counted"
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Data Manipulation
40
to ambiguous results, potentially directing consumers to streets without actual
legal parking spots present. This is a trade-off necessary to compute any valu-
able predictions on given streets though, and since proposed service is merely
meant for assistance (meaning that the driver should be capable of interpreting
potential on-site parking regulations), the downsides are not considered to be
of great negative impact.
The above presented adjustments are two of many examples on how obtained
information in one TDSP stage, in these examples feature engineering and model
evaluation, affect the course of action in others. The data cleaning & preparation
process was altered because of this knowledge to fit given needs, causing a new
business perspective with defined limitations and noted potential caveats.
4.1.2
Feature Engineering
The datasets defined in section 3.4 contain various features relevant to the overall
subject, but only a selection is needed to compute the preliminary area count
predictions. This include Dtran, Dpmachine, Darea, Dweather and Dholiday. The
following sections will describe why and how these datasets are of importance.
4.1.2.1
Time importance
If date and time were of no importance in the prediction of parking availability,
a singular static result for each street composed of the statistical mean would
be sufficient. However, given the exact premise of proposed solution is to pre-
dict occupancy based on differentiating time of usage, datetime manipulation is
considered the most important feature engineering aspect.
As explained in section 2.1.2.1, ML variables can be categorized as either con-
tinuous or discrete. Time itself must be considered continuous, given it can take
an infinite number of values within an interval, in our case life itself. For ev-
eryday purposes however, most people tend to imagine time as a discrete value
with a finite set of values, as the common everyday date system in use consist
of hours, days, and months, all restricted to a finite amount of possible values.
For the purposes of predicting parking occupancy, it certainly makes sense to
maintain this categorical approach when manipulating time. For instance, it is
often more important what happens during week days in contrast to weekends,
rather than what happens before or after an absolute point in time. All plot
figures presented in section 3.4.1 and the information derived hereof are already
based on the categorization of time variables as well.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Data Manipulation
41
4.1.2.2
Time Series creation
To validate transaction predictions for an arbitrary area at a specific point in
time, the exact amount of active parkings in given area must be known before-
hand. The time explaining plots in section 3.4.1 are based on payment time.
While this was deemed adequate for preliminary investigation, it is however
not for modelling purposes. Only transactions that predate a given point in
time in regards to payment, and exceeds same point in regards to expiration,
can be defined as active at that exact point in time. Such information must
be computed for the entire available period, at a defined interval. Transaction
data allows for any given interval, e.g. 15, 30 or 60 minutes intervals, but given
Darea is restrained to specific hour counts at 12, 17 and 22 (which realistically
is probably collected within a loose error margin in regards to minutes), it does
not make sense to use anything less than hourly steps. Same also applies for
weather data. Assigning active transaction data happens to be a tedious op-
eration though, which requires tremendous processing time and resources, as
dataset Dtran contains more than 43 million parking records. These operations
ultimately had to be split up into several chunks. Table 4.1 showcase a snippet
of the final output from first to last hour for every valid area.
Dts =
1
2
3
· · ·
50
51














0
0
0
· · ·
0
0
2010-01-01 00:00:00
4
0
4
· · ·
0
0
2010-01-01 01:00:00
7
0
4
· · ·
0
0
2010-01-01 02:00:00
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
118
66
129
· · ·
0
6
2014-12-31 22:00:00
108
74
140
· · ·
0
6
2014-12-31 23:00:00
(4.1)
It can from above results be seen that initial values are victims of the exact
issue regarding activeness, i.e. no former transactions are included in the initial
sums. Furthermore, outskirt areas [42, 43, 48, 50, 51] have extremely low area
counts, most often zero. Based on this knowledge, it must in regards to model
accuracy and real world resemblance be considered beneficial to leave out the
initial 48 hours and presented low count areas, despite loosing an even greater
amount of areas and interfering with otherwise perfectly balanced counts (leap
year aside). This realization was however not made until after the modelling
process, and based on the negligible accuracy differences presented in section
4.3.1.1, it has not been deemed necessary to change the course of action.
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Data Manipulation
42
Figure 4.1: One week sample of Dtshota, for a ∈[1, 10]
Figure 4.1 visualizes the associated time series for the first week in march,
2013, starting Monday the 4th, for area a ∈[1, 10].
While the magnitude
of transactions differ significantly between areas (which is expected, since p-
spots and population density also varies significantly), there seems to be two
clear seasonal tendencies: During weekdays, transactions plummet at night,
while reaching an individual high point at either mid-day or early evening.
In weekends, transactions do however not plummet, as they steadily increase
from Saturday evening until Monday morning. Figure D.3 in Appendix D.1.1
provides a close-up look at same sample with hourly ticks, where seasonality is
more easily separable among areas. From here, it can be interpreted that area
5, 7 and 10 spikes at around 1 o’clock, while area 1, 2, 3 and 4 spikes at around
19-20 o’clock. Many of the areas, including 2, 3, 5 6 and 7, also experience a
smaller mid-day plummet around 17 o’clock. This indicates that some model m
should be capable of predicting area specific tendencies based on time alone.
For most areas, presented seasonality persist over a longer period of time. This
is clearly visualized in Figure 4.2 for area 1. For some areas however, daily
fluctuation is more random, like area 15 presented in Figure 4.3. Despite this,
weekends are still easily recognisable though.
If you look closely on both plots, a weekend relatable pattern seems to emerge
on the 28th to 30th, right before yet another weekend pattern.
By manual
calendar investigation, it turns out that the 28th and 29th of March 2013 were
public holidays5, i.e. where jobs are closed and parking is free. In such cases,
time itself will not be capable of predicting parking occupancy alone. Additional
explanatory features can however accomplish this.
5Easter dates: Skærtorsdag & Langfredag
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Data Manipulation
43
Figure 4.2: A1: Marts14 sample TS Figure 4.3: A15: Marts14 sample TS
4.1.2.3
Explanatory variables
As earlier mentioned, many related studies have included different sets of ex-
planatory variables with varying results. It is common to distinguish between
endogenous and exogenous variables. The former is explained by the dependent
variable itself, whereas the latter origins from another source.
In regards to endogenous variables, multiple categorical features can be ex-
tracted. It is expected that hour, day of week, if given day is a weekday, month
and year will have an impact on occupancy. These features are hence included,
and will be referred to as Dendogtime.
Exogenous features include the information described in section 3.4.6 and 3.4.7
regarding Dweather and Dholiday, which can potentially help describe specific
pattern causalities, like the time series pattern in Figure 4.2.
Equation 4.2
showcase the union of Dts with all explanatory datasets, denoted Dtsx.
Dtsx = Dts ∪Dendogtime ∪Dholiday ∪Dweather
(4.2)
4.1.2.4
One-hot encoding & Normalization
As of now, Dtsx include all indented features. The dataset is however not entirely
ready yet, as some variables poses minor limitations.
The endogenous time
variables are currently defined in intervals, e.g. 0 to 23 for hours. These numbers
do however not represent a mathematical scale, and it is crucial that a potential
model does not interpret it like so. To accommodate this issue, one-hot encoding
has been applied to the columns hour, dayOfWeek and month. This method
feature extracts a categorical variable into a new set of binary features equal
to the length of possible values, with only one active element, as showcased in
Equation 4.3. In regards to hour, one-hot encoding causes the creation of 24
features, with only the active hour set to 1. String representation could achieve
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Data Manipulation
44
similar results, but integer values tend to train much faster. Additionally, some
models, especially NN, often require integer state neurons to work.
Onehotencode(x) ⇒
n
X
i=0
xi = 1,
for i ∈[0, n]
(4.3)
Despite the arguments made in section 4.1.2.1, an absolute point in time can
have a substantial impact on availability. If a new parking garage opens up,
it is plausible to assume that nearby OCCR will decrease.
How much will
obviously depend on a set of factors, including size of garage, price of parking
and general area OCCR. Similar tendencies can be expected for new housing
projects, company establishments etc.
In more general terms, section 3.3.1
describes how parking related issues continue to rise globally, indicating that
a yearly positive increase should be apparent. For these reasons, year will be
included as a continuous variable.
Normalization(xi) =
xi −xmin
xmax −xmin
(4.4)
Standardization(xi) = xi −µ
σ
(4.5)
Besides one-hot encoding, it has further been decided to normalize the 3 con-
tinuous weather features. These variables range at different sized scales, and
normalization ensures that higher scale variables, in this case rhum, does not
impose a higher relative impact because of this.
Equation 4.4 showcase the
formula for normalization. Another option is to standardize the data using the
described procedure of Equation 4.5, with µ = mean and σ = standard devia-
tion. However, it is a requirement that such data follow a Gaussian distribution
(for meaningful results at least). Figure 4.4 and 4.5 showcase associated density
histograms of temp and rhum, and while the former option could be considered
to be of Gaussian type, the latter does clearly not follow a random distribution.
Figure 4.4: temp histogram
Figure 4.5: rhum histogram
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Prediction models
45
On the basis of presented alterations, Figure 4.6 illustrates the final structure
of Dtsx, defined Dtshot, including value intervals for defined features. X denotes
input features and Y denotes output. Overall, Dtshot contains 44 multivariate
output columns (area specific parking counts), 24 + 7 + 12 = 43 binary time
associated columns, 1 continuous year column, 2 binary holiday columns and 3
normalized weather columns.
Figure 4.6: Dtshot with explanatory variables
4.2
Prediction models
The literature study on related research in section 2.1.3 provides detailed in-
formation on a broad collection of applied AI models used to predict parking
occupancy.
Given most studies are based on different premises, results and
optimal predictors naturally vary. Some forecasting methods do however tend
to perform better than others, and popularity is rarely misplaced: Regression
Trees, Support Vector Machines and basic Neural Nets generally outperforms
its competitors cross study. A single optimal predictor cannot simply be chosen
with certainty however, as it was also shown that different models accelerate
at different tasks, i.e. in regards to included features and look ahead window.
Based on these findings, multiple models will be tested and compared to one
another, in hopes of finding the best suitable fit for the data available in Dtshot.
Dtrain := Dtshoti,
for iyear ∈[2010, 2013]
(4.6)
Dtest := Dtshoti,
for iyear = 2014
(4.7)
Training and test sets are defined by Equation 4.6 and 4.7. This is equivalent
to a 80/20 test split.
Accuracy scores will be computed using the formulas
defined in Equation 4.8, 4.9, 4.10 and 4.11, where ˆy is the predicted value and
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Prediction models
46
y is the mean.
SSE stands for sum of squared errors, and SST stands for
sum of squared totals. MSE/RMSE penalizes larger errors due to the order
of square (and average), but given this problem regards OCCR prediction, i.e.
relative sized rates, MAE will be used for primary comparison. R2 evaluates
the proportion of output dependant variation predictable by input features, i.e.
the percentage of output explainable by the model [Ektamaini, 2020].
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=0
|yi −ˆy|
(4.8)
MSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=0
(yi −ˆy)2
(4.9)
RMSE =
√
MSE
(4.10)
R2 = 1 −SSE
SST = 1 −Σn
i=0(yi −ˆy)2
Σn
i=0(yi −y)2
(4.11)
All data mining processes showcased so far have been conducted in IPython
notebooks, which will remain to be the framework of choice due to great AI
support along with easy production environment setup. ML models are devel-
oped using SciKit-Learn (SKL) and StatsModels, while DL models are developed
in PyTorch, primarily due to editorial experience and documentation support.
4.2.1
Baseline
To provide a common ground for model evaluation, it has been deemed beneficial
to include a baseline model. Many different types of baseline models exist, but
Hyndman and Athanasopoulos [2018b] focus on 4 simple yet effective forecasting
tools: Average, Naïve, Seasonal näive and Drift. The first consist of simply
predicting the average historical mean, which could be based of either all or
individual areas.
Such a model will fail to detect any form of development
though, and is here regarded as the bare minimum baseline. While Naïve simply
predicts the last observed value, Seasonal näive bases it forecast on the last
observed value in same season, i.e. similar month and date. Drift is a special
case of basic Näive prediction, incorporating average change over time, allowing
increase/decrease over time. Many of these models could easily be extended
to incorporate more features, but complexity would quickly increase to a level
outside the scope of a baseline model.
ˆyt = yt−m
(4.12)
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Prediction models
47
In regards to this problem, Seasonal näive has been deemed adequate to provide
a baseline for minimum expected prediction accuracy. The formula for chosen
baseline is defined in Equation 4.12, where m denotes seasonal frequency. For
given training and test sets, seasonal frequency is defined as the same date and
month the year prior, which means that m = 365 · 24 = 8760. The results of
applying described algorithm to given test data is presented in Table 4.1.
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
48.0
9181
95.8
-0.5
Table 4.1: Baseline results
4.2.2
Linear Regression (LR)
Despite Zhao and Zhang [2020] found SVM/SVR to be optimal in most scenar-
ios, LR came in close on many occasions. Given LR is also much simpler to train,
and that it generally produces high accuracy for a wide variety of problems, it
was decided to include this model in the comparison.
It is common to distinguish between Linear Regression (multiple input variables)
and Simple Linear Regression (one input variable). Given formulated prediction
problem contains many features, the following theory will regard regular LR.
The basic formula for multivariate linear regression with n output variables and
m features is displayed in equation 4.13, where y is the dependant variable, X
is the input variables, w is the slope and ϵ is the intercept.
y = wX + ϵ =





w0
w1
...
wm




·





1
x11
· · ·
x1m
1
x21
· · ·
x2m
...
...
...
...
1
an1
· · ·
xnm




+





ϵ0
ϵ1
...
ϵm





(4.13)
Many methods exist to estimate w and ϵ, but Least-Square estimation is the
most common one. This is also the estimation method used for this model.
The method computes the line that best fits the observed data by minimizing
SSE, i.e. vertical deviations from the graph. Squares are applied to prevent
negative/positive cancellations [Yale, 1998].
Given this is a multiple feature multivariate output model, presented estimation
method is applied to all associated variable weights in a multidimensional space.
Final results are presented in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Prediction models
48
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
33.9
3385
58.2
0.41
Table 4.2: LR results
4.2.3
Random Forest Tree Regressor (RFT)
Zheng et al. [2015] found Regression Trees to be optimal for all included feature
sets. In this project, RT will be implemented using ensemble optimization, i.e.
Random Forests Trees, to further prevent over-fitting and instability.
Same
method was also applied by Provoost and et. al. [2020] with good results.
Figure 4.7: RFT structure
The basic structure of RFT is visualized in Figure 4.7 for m estimation trees
with depth d. Trees are created using bagging ensemble, also known as bootstrap
aggregation. Based on input data X, bagging creates m new random samples
with replacement, denoted X′
i for i ∈m. A Regression Tree is subsequently
trained on each bootstrapped sample, with maximum n randomly selected fea-
tures at each split. This produces an optimal regressor for input X′
i with output
ˆyi. For classification trees, f will usually choose the most frequent output, but
given this is a regression problem, f will compute the mean of all estimations,
as defined in Equation 4.14 [Brownlee, 2021] [LT, 2022].
ˆy = f(X) = 1
m
m
X
i=0
RTi(X′
i)
(4.14)
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Prediction models
49
A variety of measurements can be used to determine node split quality, includ-
ing MSE and MAE. Given MAE is the preferred choice of score measurement,
it makes sense to use this criterion for the RFT. However, MAE estimation hap-
pens to take significantly longer than MSE in SciKit-Learn, making it infeasible
in current environment6. Therefore, MSE criterion is applied.
4.2.3.1
Hyperparameter tuning
All the RFT features, including n, m and d, can be tweaked to optimize perfor-
mance. The preferred method is usually trial and error, where different hyperpa-
rameter values are tested using sub-sampled training and validation sets. This
can be done using a fixed cutoff, similar to how Dtrain and Dtest were split. Such
technique can however be prone to over-fitting, which is why cross-validation is
often preferred. Different cross-validation methods exist, but this project will
primarily apply shuffled k-fold. Here, k different validation sets are tested with
similar parameters, visualized in blue in Figure 4.8. The final score is computed
as the average of the k folds.
Figure 4.8: k-fold Cross Validation
In regards to tree depth d, Figure 4.9 (left) visualizes average train and validation
MAE score for d ∈[2, 39]. Note that test error refers to the validation set, and
that a smaller subset has been used due to high computation time. For the first
d < 15 test cases, the validation error decreases proportional to the size of d.
Afterwords it start to slowly diminish, until reaching a plateau state at approx.
d = 22.
For the training error, this doesn’t happen until approx.
d = 31,
indicating that the model slightly over-fits, despite no recognisable test impact.
It is however still favorable to keep the model as simplistic as possible to avoid
any potential future over-fitting. Deviations from the mean is showcased on the
6For same parameters: time(MSE) ≈10s, time(MAE) > 5h
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Prediction models
50
right plot using box-plots. Like the general error, deviation margins decreases
with tree depth, reaching a plateau state with no outliers at around 18. Based on
given findings, the optimal tree depth value is considered to be d = 25 (allowing
for slight wiggle-room).
Max tree depth
Max split features
Amount of estimators
Min samples leaf
Min samples node
Parameters
d ∈[20, 30, 40]
n ∈[all, sqrt]
m ∈[50, 100, 200, 500]
sl ∈[1, 2, 4, 8]
sn ∈[2, 4, 8, 16]
Optimal #1
d = 30
n = sqrt(all)
m = 200
sl = 1
sn = 2
Table 4.3: RFT Grid Search Parameters
Figure 4.9: Optimal tree depth 10-fold cross-validation
Similar procedure can be applied to the amount of estimators and features, but
changes in one parameter might cause a chain reaction, leading formerly optimal
values to be the opposite. In other words, to assure optimal performance, all
combinations of relevant values must be compared. This procedure is defined as
Grid Search (GS), which allow iterative multiple parameter tuning. Table 4.3
showcase all tested parameters and optimal combination, with included criteria
for minimum samples on nodes and leafs. Final test scores using given param-
eters are presented in Table 4.4. In comparison to standard implementation
(d = ∞, n = all, m = 200, sl = 1 and sn = 2), the modified RFT perform
marginally better in regards to MAE. The performance boost is relatively higher
in regards to RMSE, indicating that the basic model is particularly worse at pre-
dicting larger trafficked areas. In terms of R2 score, the model is estimated to be
5% better at explaining the output. The biggest difference is however measured
in included fitting and prediction time, with significantly faster performance.
Based on these notes, the hyperparameter tuning is considered beneficial.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Prediction models
51
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
tfit
tpredict
optimal #1
19.11
1403
37.46
0.65
10.3s
161ms
standard
19.44
1585
39.81
0.60
52.1s
340ms
Table 4.4: RFT results for standard and optimal parameters
A higher amount of distinct values could be tested using randomized GS with
dropout, but be aware that a potential best fit combination is likely to be left
out. A better procedure would be to use both methods in conjunction, with the
randomized search providing preliminary insights. For this problem however,
the initial cross-validation test was deemed as adequate prior knowledge.
4.2.4
Support Vector Regressor (SVR)
While SVR performed great for Zhao and Zhang [2020], Zheng et al. [2015] found
the model to be inferior in performance compared to RT. Moreover, the model
proved to be infeasible for the Melb dataset due to extremely long computation
time, which is a frequent reported issue of SVMs, caused by O(n3) complexity7.
Despite these issues, it was ultimately decided to try and fit a SVR model due
to the extremely positive results obtained by Zhao and Zhang [2020].
Figure 4.10: SVM clustering with ϕ mapping
To understand how SVR perform its predictions, one must first understand
basic SVM. SVM classifies data by defining hyperplanes in higher dimensional
space, which distinctively cluster associated records. Figure 4.10 illustrates how
a problem in input space R2 is solvable by computing a hyperplane in R3. Data
is mapped to higher dimensional space using kernel K for inputs xi, xi ∈X:
Kij = k(xi, xj) = ϕ(xi)T · ϕ(xj), where ϕ : x →ϕ(x) ⇒RM →RM+1 (4.15)
7Big O notation: Worst case computation time
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Prediction models
52
Explicit ϕ-mapping of higher dimensional linear functions to non-linear decisions
boundaries in lower input space is referred to as the primal problem.
The
objective is to seek minimal model flatness/complexity, which can be achieved
by minimizing the norm, i.e. ||w||2. The complete optimization problem over
w adjusted to SKL’s squared L2 penalty is defined in Eq. 4.16, with output f
defined in Eq. 4.17 [Smola, Schölkopf, & Schölkopf, 2003] [WP, 2022c].
min
w∈Rd
||w||2
2
+ C
2
M
X
i
max(0, 1 −yif(xi)), where w =
M
X
j
ajyjxj
(4.16)
f(X) = wT ϕ(X) + ϵ
(4.17)
Presented technique is however computational hard, and a better approach is
to implicitly compute basis expansion using any of the kernel functions defined
in Eq. 4.21. This is referred to as the dual problem, with enhanced output and
penalty computation defined in Eq. 4.18 and 4.19 [Zisserman, 2015].
f(X) =
M
X
i
aiyik(xi, xj) + b
(4.18)
max
ai≥0
M
X
i
ai −1
2
M
X
j
M
X
k
ajakyjykk(xi, xj)
where 0 ≤ai ≤C for ∀i, and
M
X
i
aiyi = 0
(4.19)
For regular SVM, the optimal hyperplane will separate distinctive classes with
maximum margin. For SVR however, the hyperplane line will be used to predict
continuous output for all data points within the decision boundaries. This is
achieved by minimizing squared loss, also known as ridge regression. Unlike
SSE, the cost function E(w) also includes a regularization term, as displayed in
Eq. 4.20. f refers to previously defined output function with defined k .
E(X) = 1
2
N
X
i
(f(xi, w) −yi)2 + λ
2 ||w||2
(4.20)
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Prediction models
53
4.2.4.1
Hyperparameter tuning
The variables w, b and all derivations hereof are tuned by the model in regards
to defined optimization problem. Regularization Parameter C and Kernel Coef-
ficient γ can however be set manually. The size of C determine the estimator’s
decision boundaries, i.e. the error margin for classifications - also implied by Eq.
4.19. Larger values will cause narrower decision boundaries, as the strength is in-
versely proportional to C. γ defines the accepted distance to variables included
in the hyperplane computation [Sethi, 2020] [Patel, 2017]. Like with hidden
layers in NN, these values are hard to predict as they are extremely problem
dependant. A randomized grid search was therefore conducted to investigate
various values for both hyperparameters, including optimal kernel function.
klinear(xi, xj) = xT
i xj
kpoly(xi, xj) = (γxixj + r)d,
for d > 0
krbf(xi, xj) = e−γ||xi−xj||2
ksigmoid(xi, xj) = tanh(γxT
i xj + r)
(4.21)
Due to the large amount of features and relative many records, it was unfor-
tunately not possible to test the hyperparameters on all of Dtrain. Instead, a
subset of three months was chosen for the GS train/val set, and a full year for
final training. This still took many hours to train on DTU’s HPC8 server, so
the reported complexity issues are definitely recognizable. In SKL, the basic
value of C = 1.0 and γ = 1/(N · ˆ
Var(X)), where N = amount of features and
ˆ
Var is the input feature variance. These values will be defined as C and γ and
serve as baseline values for all possible combinations, as listed in Table 4.5.
Kfunction
C
γ
timefit
timepredict
Parameters
[linear, rbf, poly, sigmoid]
[ C
10, C
2 , C, 5C, 10C, 50C, 102C]
[10γ, 5γ, γ, γ
5 , γ
10]
Optimal #1
poly
10
10γ
4.85s
1.84s
Optimal #2
poly
1
10γ
4.90s
1.85s
Optimal #3
poly
0.1
10γ
4.84s
1.84s
Optimal #4
rfb
10
γ
7.70s
6.30s
Table 4.5: SVR GS ordered results
Based on given results, it is clear that polynomial kernels outperform its com-
petitors, while still performing significantly faster. Given C = 10 for optimal
#1 is the middle value of C in the randomized GS search, found optimality is
assumed accurate. On the contrary, 10γ, which proved optimal for all presented
polynomial kernels, is the biggest possible value of γ. For this reason, a second
8HPC: High Performance Computer
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Prediction models
54
GS search was conducted with larger multiplications of γ, as well as polynomial
degrees 2, 3 and 4 (the prior kernel was fixed to 3). The exact same combination
proved to be optimal yet again however, and given values were hence deemed
optimal. Final results with given parameters are displayed in Table 4.6.
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
41.77
5498
74.15
0.23
Table 4.6: SVM results
4.2.5
ARIMAX
Despite performing sub-optimal for Zhao and Zhang [2020], ARIMA is by many
considered one of the best tools for time series forecasting, partially because
of the incorporation of both AR and MA terms as explained in section 2.1.2.1.
Given Dtshot is thoughtfully implemented as a continuous time series, this model
had to be included in the performance comparison.
The I in ARIMA stands for integrated, which refers to the process of observation
differencing, i.e. investigating the difference between subsequent data points
rather than actual values. In a simple ARMA model, it is a requirement that
input data is stationary. For this to be true, given series must not have a trend,
have constant variance and autocorrelation over time and no repeating periodic
fluctuations, i.e. seasonality. This is however not true for many real world data
samples, but applying described differencing can accomplish this [NIST, 2022].
The formula notation for AR and MA models are presented in equation 4.22
and 4.23 respectively, where the model orders p and q refer to the number of
included lag variables. All other parameters are model computed values, but in
particular, µ is the expected value of yt and ε is white noise. Combined, these
models constitute the ARMA model presented in Eq. 4.24, where c′ = c + µ.
AR(p) :
yt = c + ϵt +
p
X
i
φiyt−1
(4.22)
MA(q) :
yt = µ + ϵt +
q
X
i
θiϵt−1
(4.23)
ARMA(p, q) :
yt = c′ + ϵt +
p
X
i
φiyt−1 +
q
X
i
θiϵt−1
(4.24)
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Prediction models
55
To make a fair comparison to the other predictors, results will be based on the
extended ARIMAX model including explanatory features. The final equation of
this model is written in Eq. 4.25. Note that in contrast to common literature,
yt has been substituted for Xt to comply with the notation used for the other
models and to distinguish between output and explanatory features (denoted Xt
here). The ARIMAX formula is also simplified by introducing the differencing
function f, but a more common notation in regards to lagged variables and
polynomial factorization is written in Appendix D.2.1 [WP, 2022b].
ARIMAX(p, d, q) :
f(yt, d) = c+ϵt +
p
X
i
φif(yt−1, d)+
q
X
i
θiϵt−1 +
f
X
i
ηiXt−1
(4.25)
None of the ARIMA variations support multivariate output, so individual mod-
els need to be trained and fit for each area. The following preliminary analysis
will therefore primarily focus on the best fit for area 1, but the implementation
of automated techniques applicable cross area is explained in section 4.2.5.2.
4.2.5.1
Semi-automated hyperparameter tuning
To find the appropriate I -order, it must first be established if Dtshot is stationary
or not. Based on the daily and weekly patterns presented in section 4.1.2.2, this
is not initially expected. A quick way to get an indication on stationarity is by
examining summary statistics and distributions. Without a trend or seasonal
patterns, mean and variance should remain constant over time and ya should
follow a Gaussian distribution [Brownlee, 2016]. Table 4.7 and 4.8 list computed
mean and variance grouped by year. Based on these numbers, there are some
indications on non-stationary: both the mean and variance gradually drop for
area 1, 2 and partially 4, whereas they both gradually rise for area 5.
1
2
3
4
5
2010
152
188
168
238
261
2011
148
188
169
236
277
2012
144
162
183
241
297
2013
138
160
174
212
284
2014
132
157
162
212
297
Table 4.7: Yearly mean area 1-5
1
2
3
4
5
2010
9367
13005
11735
17703
49980
2011
8176
13218
12148
16679
56035
2012
8525
10703
14957
18536
66627
2013
7722
10156
13985
13214
63853
2014
7257
10434
12036
13762
63462
Table 4.8: Yearly variance area 1-5
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Prediction models
56
By investigating the distributions presented in Figure 4.11 and 4.12, it is clear
that the data generally does not follow a clear Gaussian distribution.
It is
however common to distinguish between weak and strong/strict stationarity,
and the distribution for area 4 in Figure 4.12 could imply the former due to its
somewhat random partitioning around the mean, long tail aside. However, even
if this was the case, it would only apply to some specific areas.
Figure 4.11: Area 1 y distribution
Figure 4.12: Area 4 y distribution
Trend, seasonality and residuals9 can also be automatically decomposed from
a time series using the statsmodels library. Such decompositional results are
visualized in Figure 4.13 in regards to a 1 month observed sample for area 1.
The decomposition clearly recognize periodic trend over weekends. Optimally,
this data should probably be removed, as it would likely improve results for all
predictors, not just this one. Some important information would however be lost
in regards to Saturdays and early Mondays, and it has been deemed sufficient to
simply proclaim model instability during Sundays and the surrounding hours.
However, in case it was decided to omit given data, data injection would be
necessary to comply with the requirement of continuous sampling. More detailed
information on the regarding topic can be found in section 4.3.1. It can obviously
not be concluded if a long time trend is present using given sample, but seasonal
and residual components were not recognisable for a longer period of time.
Because of this, the trend for all of Dtrain is displayed in Fig. D.4, App. D.2.1,
and despite noisy output, it is overall steady around the mean. There is however
undeniably clear seasonality present, and the residual noise does not appear
random. Strict stationarity is hence not assumed, indicating that optimal I > 0.
9Noise: Difference between observed and predicted values
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Prediction models
57
Figure 4.13: Seasonal decomposition of TS area 1
To predict the appropriate value of I, autocorrelation examination will be con-
ducted for different orders of differencing. Autocorrelation refers to the corre-
lation between current and past/lagged variables, and stationarity is assumed
when the autocorrelation function (ACF) is steady and random around the
mean, quickly approaching constant value [Korstanje, 2022]. Figure 4.14 dis-
plays a 4-weekday sample of I ∈[0, 3] with associated ACF. Seasonality is
clearly detectable at i = 0 and slightly at i = 1. Both series do however slowly
approach a static state equal to the mean, so weak stationarity could be present
despite prior findings. Strict stationarity is assumed at i = 2 and i = 3.
Figure 4.14: Differencing order and autocorrelation, Area 1
==PAGE:66==
4.2 Prediction models
58
The AR-term should be based on the amount of initial lagged variables outside
the ACF Confidence Interval10 (CI) in regard to applied differencing order, as
this defines significant observation correlation, i.e. explanatory behavior. Given
the MA-term is explained by lagged error/noise, the appropriate values can here
be deducted from residual/partial correlation, also known as PACF. Figure 4.15
and 4.16 showcase both ACF and PACF plots for I = 0 and I = 3. In regards
to zero order differencing, the values AR = 3 and MA = 2 can be interpreted
as optimal. On the contrary, AR = 1 and MA = 3 are interpreted as optimal
for third order differencing. Figure D.6 and D.7 in App. D.2.1 showcase similar
plots for second and third order differencing, and based on all of these graphs,
the following hyperparameter combinations are chosen for comparison:
ARIMAX(p, d, q) ∈[(3, 0, 2), (0, 1, 0), (0, 2, 0), (1, 2, 1), (1, 3, 3), (1, 3, 1)] (4.26)
Figure 4.15: ACF + PACF for I = 0 Figure 4.16: ACF + PACF for I = 3
In presented set of parameters, multiple options appear for the same order of
I. This is to accommodate potential over/under-fitting of lagged variables close
to the CI borders of significant importance. All hyperparameter values will be
tested using rolling cross-validation, visualized in Figure 4.17, as regular K-fold
CV does not meet the continuous sample requirements.
Figure 4.17: Rolling (k-1)-fold cross-validation
10Blue shadow in ACF/PACF plot
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Prediction models
59
Table 4.9 present the final computed MAE-scores. Unexpectedly, (p, d, q) =
(3, 0, 2) is proven optimal with quite a big margin, despite zero order differencing.
Preliminary analysis and visual aids are generally good for exploration and basic
guidance, but presented results are a great example on why one should always
rely on exact test results, as some findings can be misleading.
In this case,
weak stationarity was simply better than strongly differenced. By applying the
automated parameter tuning process described in section 4.2.5.2, given terms
did however prove to be optimal among all tested variations, which means the
ACF/PACF analysis did provide the correct solution in vacuum.
It is also
worth noting that first and second order differencing performs reasonable with
1 lagged AR/MA term, but it is clear that third order over-differentiates the
data, receiving extremely poor performance results.
(p,d,q)
(3,0,2)
(1,0,1)
(0,2,0)
(1,2,1)
(1,3,3)
(1,3,1)
MAE
43.29
60.84
3345
69.45
291.4
16212
Table 4.9: 4-fold rolling CV scores Area 1
While feature importance is generally reserved for section 4.3.1, it was nonethe-
less decided to test if the ARIMAX extension using defined explanatory vari-
ables caused any significant performance increase. Based on the results listed in
Table 4.10, the inclusion of X clearly improves performance. What is however
more interesting, is that the models perform nearly identical without it, actually
slightly favouring the differenced model.
(p,d,q)
(3,0,2)
(1,2,1)
MAEARIMA
72.69
72.03
MAEARIMAX
54.16
63.63
Table 4.10: Test results with/without explanatory variables, Area 1
4.2.5.2
Fully-automated hyperparameter tuning
The prior procedure of semi-automated hyperparameter tuning based on manual
ACF/PACF investigation is a tedious process proven to be extremely problem
dependant. Despite providing good initial results, it has not been deemed fea-
sible to carry out given technique for all remaining areas. Luckily, the python
library pmdarima provides auto.arima, an otherwise R-exclusive statistical tool
beloved among data scientists, which allow fully automated ARIMAX hyper-
parameter optimization using CV. Using this functionality, optimal parameters
==PAGE:68==
4.2 Prediction models
60
and associated test results are computed for all areas. Like with SVM mod-
elling, this process is extremely time consuming, clocking in at approx.
8.5
hours. Optimal order of differencing is exclusive to I ∈[0, 1], whereas lagged
variables AR and MA differ greatly between 0 and 5. 22 different combinations
proved optimal, which is the equivalence of every other area requiring specific
hyperparameters. Final results are presented in Table 4.11.
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
49.72
5986
77.37
-1.73
Table 4.11: ARIMAX results
Given time series generally perform better on shorter look-ahead windows, it
was tested if one month ahead prediction results were significantly different than
the norm of 1 year. The difference proved to be insignificant however (actually
marginally worse). It was furthermore tested if a SARIMAX extension could
improve model performance, but the GS results showcased better performance
without the additional seasonal terms. Hence the model remain unchanged.
4.2.6
NARX & ANN
Last but not least, it was was based on the positive results obtained by Provoost
and et. al. [2020] decided to also train and measure the performance of a neu-
ral network. A MLP11 network is preferred over a CNN and/or regular RNN,
primarily based on the findings provided by Provoost and et. al. [2020] and
Camero et al. [2019], where simplicity generally outperforms complexity. How-
ever, as the NARX model has proved to be superior in a wide field of studies,
compared to both other types of NN and some of the ML algorithms applied
in this project, A NARX implementation was initially deemed more lucrative
[Kutafina et al., 2019] [Menezes & Barreto, 2008b] [Mitrea et al., 2009].
Two architectural NARX configurations exist: serial-parallel (open-loop) and
parallel (closed-loop). In an open-loop system, both observation values y and
input features X are fed to the system in parallel. For closed-loop systems,
model output, i.e. estimated observations, is fed back to the model as input,
as opposed to recurrent NN where feedback neurons exist only in hidden layers.
This functionality is somewhat equivalent to the lagged variables of the ARIMA
model. The serial-parallel architecture is usually applied for training purposes,
while the parallel structure is applied for production predictions. Figure 4.18
11MLP: Multilayer Perceptron, i.e. basic ANN
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Prediction models
61
Figure 4.18: NARX architecture for serial-parallel and parallel systems
visualizes the general flow of data for both types, where TDL stands for Tapped
Delay Line, which allow for potential process dead-time. The general formula
for serial-parallel and parallel NARX systems are written in Equation 4.27 and
4.28 respectively, where f is the mapping function of the neural net and k is the
TDL delay term. In this problem however, k is statically assumed 0 and can
hence be omitted. Note that in common literature, Xt is often replaced with
u(t), and output is computed in regards to yt+1 [Boussaada, Curea, Remaci,
Camblong, & Bellaaj, 2018] [MW, 2022].
ˆyt = f(yt−1−k, · · · , yt−ny−k, Xt−1−k, · · · , Xt−nx−k)
(4.27)
ˆyt = f(yt−1−k, · · · , yt−ny−k, Xt−1−k, · · · , Xt−nx−k)
(4.28)
The basic architecture of a Feed Forward NN (FFNN) is visualized in Figure
4.19 for m input features, n outputs and 2 hidden layers. The P and f signs
at each node refers to the initial sum of all in-going weight, and the subsequent
activation function. As earlier stated, a neural net is commonly trained using
Backpropogation, which also applies for a NARX model incorporating an ANN.
Refer to section 2.1.2.2 for a more detailed description on BP.
Figure 4.19: Basic MLP ANN. Inspired by [Melcher, 2021].
==PAGE:70==
4.2 Prediction models
62
4.2.6.1
Hyperparameter tuning
Unfortunately, not many statistical libraries include NARX predictors. PyNeur-
Gen [2022] and SysIdentPy [2022] are perhaps the only ones providing somewhat
well-documented python implementations. Unfortunately, the first option is not
supported in recent versions of python, and the second only support single out-
put architecture. Given this model is merely one of many possible types capable
of solving the overall parking prediction problem, it has not been deemed feasi-
ble to manually develop a multivariate version. Therefore, it was decided to go
with the second option, and simply implement individual predictors like with
the ARIMAX model. In case of superior performance however, this could be
investigated as future research.
Nh2
Nh1
32
42
52
62
32
71.62
70.74
72.13
71.00
42
71.47
71.25
70.66
71.18
52
70.63
71.24
70.57
70.34
62
71.18
70.82
70.45
71.78
Table 4.12: MAE HL neuron score
xlag
ylag
2
4
8
12
2
71.51
70.82
70.77
71.14
4
71.02
70.37
71.38
71.07
8
71.41
70.93
70.76
70.52
12
71.24
71.14
70.46
70.42
Table 4.13: MAE HL lag score
In regards to adjustable hyperparameters, the amount of neurons between input
and output, hidden layers, activation function and lagged variables can all be
manipulated in the hopes of achieving better results. It can however be difficult
to determine which values to begin with, but Heaton [2017] suggest that the
amount of neurons in hidden layers should be between the boundaries of input
and output, and that no more than two layers are usually needed. Based on
this information, different amount of neurons have been tested in a basic setup
including two hidden layers. Table 4.12 showcase validation GS results for area
1, but differences are surprisingly neglectable.
Same applies for the amount
of lagged X and y variables presented in Figure 4.13. Different manual tweaks
were tried as well, including switching the activation function and applying more
layers, but it was simply not possible to improve performance using any hyper-
parameters. A basic setup was therefore chosen purely on intuition and some
trial and error: (Nh1, Nh1, ylag, Xlag, f) = (40, 20, 12, 2, tanh). Final results are
showcased in Figure 4.14.
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
51.59
6730
82.04
-0.17
Table 4.14: NARX results
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Prediction models
63
4.2.6.2
MLP ANN
The final NARX results are relatively poor compared to other model perfor-
mances, which was not initially expected. This could be due to the implementa-
tion framework, lack of interrelated output dependency or something completely
different. Results are nonetheless disappointing, and it was on these grounds
decided to implement and measure the performance of a simple MLP, acting
as a sort of neural net baseline model. This model was developed from scratch
using the same modular buildup as the FFNN in the NARX model, with the
addition of supporting multivariate output, i.e. including multiple neurons in
the output layer. Figure 4.20 showcase both training and validation error per
epoch training round. The network seems to learn at a descent rate initially,
but unfortunately reaches a validation plateau state at around 135. The final
MLP baseline test performance is measured at MAE = 51.01, i.e. merely a
marginal improvement over the NARX.
Figure 4.20: MLP ANN error rate in regards to epoch
4.2.6.3
NARX RFT
While rare, the FFNN modules in Figure 4.18 can actually be replaced with an
arbitrary regressor model. Given the positive results obtained from the Random
Forest Tree Regressor implementation in section 4.2.3, it was decided to test if
NARX, presumably like NN, is simply unfit for given problem, or if it lagged
variable information can actually improve predictions.
Initial hyperparameter tuning of lagged variables show similar results to the
ANN NARX model, with little to no difference in validation performance. Long
term predictions does not perform particularly well either, though better than
the NN-based. What is interesting however, is that short step-ahead predictions
perform incredibly well. For a single step-ahead predicting, i.e. yt+1, the test
==PAGE:72==
4.3 Results & Discussion
64
error is down to an all time low MAE = 5.28 and R2 = 0.99. Figure 4.21
presents both NARX RFT and regular RFT results for area a = [1, 2, 3] at a 72-
hour look-ahead window. The regular value is presented as a static horizontal
line, as lagged variables are not incorporated, making steps irrelevant. In terms
of results, all three NARX RFT predictors are actually superior during the
first 12 hours. Unfortunately, the error rate clearly increases as the step-ahead
window enlarges. Despite area 2 remains optimal in given timeframe, the regular
RFT is measured to perform better on average after only 24 hours.
Figure 4.21: NARX RFT vs regular RFT at step-ahead t ∈[1, 72]
4.3
Results & Discussion
While most performance results are listed in the preceding sections in regards
to hyperparameter tuning, the purpose of this section is to compare results
based on both error/accuracy and implementation feasibility among all trained
predictors. For this reason, all major findings are summarized in Table 4.15.
Based on initial LR and RFT results, the seasonal naive BL did not prove hard
to beat, even without hyperparameter tuning.
For the remaining predictors
however, this was not the case.
The final SVR configuration does perform
noticeably better as well, but only due to extensive hyper parameter tuning;
initial results including a basic setup with RBF-kernel received an MAE score
of just above 47. Neither ARIMAX, NARX or a basic MLP ANN were capable
of outperforming the BL model - at least not with any derivable configurations.
Due to yearly calendar differences, the BL model is (only) one weekday off.
Given mid-day Monday to Saturday tend to follow a highly correlated pattern,
results will only differ significantly around weekends. On top of that, all holidays
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Results & Discussion
65
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
Baseline (BLseas)
48.0
9181
95.8
-0.5
Linear Regression (LR)
33.9
3385
58.2
0.41
Random Forest Tree Regressor (RFT)
19.11
1403
37.46
0.65
Support Vector Regressor (SVR)
41.7
5498
74.15
0.23
ARIMAX
49.72
5986
77.37
-1.73
NARX ANN
51.59
6730
82.04
-0.17
MLP ANN
51.01
6812
82.54
-0.03
Table 4.15: Predictor results
will line up perfectly. On these notes, it is reasonable to assume that what was
supposed to be a simple baseline predictor, perhaps performed a bit too well,
neglecting otherwise potentially descent model performances. Because of this, it
was decided to check the error rate of an even simpler baseline model BLmean,
which simply computes the area specific mean. The final MAE-score of this
model is computed to MAE = 51.6. While results are higher than BLseas, the
difference is smaller than expected. What is more interesting however, is that
these results are practically indistinguishable from the NARX model’s. Based on
this, it can be concluded that the NARX model is relatively poor at identifying
temporal patterns, as results are not noticeably better than the statistical mean.
Same can more or less be said about the MLP ANN and ARIMAX model.
The differences between top and bottom predictors are quite substantial, but be
aware that results are generally affected by interpretation. For instance, while
the final SVR performs significantly better than the ARMIAX model in regards
to MAE score, the relative difference is much less apparent based on RMSE.
As earlier described, RMSE penalizes larger deviations, which means that the
SVR is relatively more off in larger quantities, i.e. on bigger streets.
R2 scores are generally measured in the interval between 0 and 1 for explained fit,
but there are no computational restrictions on potential negative values. This
happens to be the case for multiple of the predictors, which simply imply very
poor performance.
Intermediary grid search results were not shown in prior
sections based on relevance, but note that the SKL implementation compare
configurations based on R2-scores by default. For the RFT-regressor, this is
not considered an issue due to generally high R2 scores. However, for the SVR
model where R2 scores are relatively low, and configuration has proven to be of
noticeably impact in regards to both training time and error rate, MAE based
scores could potentially have yielded better final results. It was based on these
thoughts initially deemed beneficial to change the scoring function, but similar
to the issues described in section 4.2.3 computation time increased significantly,
making proposed solution infeasible.
==PAGE:74==
4.3 Results & Discussion
66
4.3.0.1
Optimal model
Ultimately, there can be no dispute in regards to optimal predictor.
The
Random Forest Regressor outperforms every other model by a milestone with
MAE = 19.11, producing more or less the only results comparable to the likes
of the related studies in section 2.1.3. Note that most of these studies are based
on accurate car park measurements though, not transactions for an entire city.
Still, results are on par with the 4 independent car park predictors created by
Zhao and Zhang [2020], even outperforming one. Given only Zheng et al. [2015]
and Pflügler and et. al. [2016] focus on street side availability, it makes the most
sense to compare results with these studies. However, despite the prediction re-
sults produced by Pflügler and et. al. [2016] also reflect area counts, the grid
sizes used to divide parking spots are significantly smaller than the ones offered
by Dzone (see Appendix B.3 for reference). Moreover, as Pflügler and et. al.
[2016] does not provide any other performance metric than MSE, it is simply
not possible to compare prediction results on any common ground. Fortunately,
this is not true for Zheng et al. [2015].
While the presented MAE-scores in Table 2.1 for Zheng et al. [2015] are much
lower than here, recall that those values are based on 1 step-ahead prediction
for a 15-minute interval in regards to street side deviations, which are obviously
much lower than for combined areas. For this reason, R2 scores will be used
for comparison to describe overall model fit. Zheng et al. [2015] were able to
achieve R2 = 0.94 for a 1 step-ahead lagged RFT model, and R2 = 0.645 for
a general RFT. In regards to the latter model, which directly translates to this
RFT, results are practically identical. This means that despite general differ-
ences in observation magnitude, both models are equally good at approximating
observations using input features. The functionality of the former model, i.e.
lagged RFT, is more or less similar to the NARX RFT developed in section
4.2.6.3, so why not compare these models as well? Interestingly, the NARX
RFT actually outperforms given model by a noticeably amount, with close to
perfect R2 = 0.99 score. Moreover, a single step-ahead refers to 1 hour here, but
only 15 minutes for Zheng et al. [2015]. For a similar 4-step ahead prediction
interval, the error rate increases significantly (see Appendix B.4 for visual de-
tails). On these notes, it seems that despite being unfit for the current problem
at hand, a noteworthy good performing step-ahead prediction model has been
developed unintentionally. Finally, in regards to relative performances between
trained predictors, Zheng et al. [2015] found RFT to be optimal in almost every
scenario, generally outperforming ANN with more than 3 times lower error rate
scores. That difference is even more substantial than the ones reported in Table
4.15 between this RFT and MLP, which further supports the findings of ANN
being inferior to RFT for street side parking predictions.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Results & Discussion
67
For a better understanding of area specific error produced by the RFT, Figure
4.22 displays the mean amount of parked cars per area, with the average MAE-
error stacked on top. Area size and error rate are generally proportional, i.e.
larger areas tend to over/under-fit more than smaller ones.
A few areas do
stand out however. For instance, the error rate of area 22 is unproportionally
big compared to its size, meaning that the model is relatively poor at predicting
transaction counts within this area. The opposite can also be said about area
12, but for the majority of areas, error rate is somewhat evenly balanced. Note
that error is displayed both negatively and positively, meaning that the height
of the black error bars are equal to 2 times the amount of the MAE-error.
Figure 4.22: Mean error per area in contrast to mean amount
4.3.1
Feature importance & impact
It was in section 4.2.5.2 regarding the ARIMA model showcased that the in-
clusion of input features improve model performance significantly. How much
different features contribute to both decision making and final performance has
however not been established for any model. In this section, the importance of
the included features will hence be investigated in regards to the RFT model.
One method to achieve such knowledge in a tree structure is by investigating
feature importance based on mean impurity decrease12, i.e. the sum of splits
including a particular feature proportional the number of samples it splits [Lee,
2017].
Figure D.8, Appendix D.3 displays individual feature importance for
all included variables. These scores are based of the one-hot-encoded features
however, and hence refer to specific value importance. Not surprisingly, Sunday
is considered the most decisive feature of all. Subsequently follows Monday (also
12Also referred to as Gini Importance
==PAGE:76==
4.3 Results & Discussion
68
influenced by Sunday), whereafter all non hot-encoded variables are listed (and
weekday - also associated with Sunday). All values must however be summed in
regards to the original features to showcase actual relative importance, especially
given some variables are split into a considerably higher amount of encoded
features than others. The results of such computation is presented in Figure
4.23, where the addition of 24 distinctive hour weights has placed given feature
at the top. DayOfWeek comes in at a close second, which can be explained
by the heigh weekend related weights. From this plot, temperature seems to
have quite a substantial importance as well, which indicates that the inclusion
of given parameter is beneficial.
Figure 4.23: Normalized
Another method is to train and test a set of different predictors, each includ-
ing all but one of the original features. This way, the exact performance in-
crease/decrease can be measured for any variable. Same method was applied
by [Pflügler & et. al., 2016], where it was found that event information was
actually of negative influence. Some variables might perform better/worse in
different settings, but for the problem at hand, it has not been considered nec-
essary to exploit such relationships. Table 4.16 showcase the results of creating
and measuring performance of predictors without a specific feature. Similar to
the prior method, Hour and DayOfWeek are by far of the highest importance.
Without just one of these, the MAE-error more or less doubles. Based on this, it
seems safe to assume that Hour and DayOfWeek are biggest influence in regards
to parking OCCR, which does correlate with the findings from related studies.
Month, Year, NationalHoliday and IsWeekday also proves to be of noticeable
influence, presented in the order of descending impact. All remaining features
however prove to be of negative impact. Holiday is clearly to broad of a cate-
gory to provide any meaningful consistent information, but it was not expected
that weather information, in particular Temp, would not provide any positive
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Results & Discussion
69
contributions. From what it is worth, this is a great example on why method 1
can be extremely misleading, as big model influence does not directly correlate
with positive outcome.
Hour
DayOfWeek
Month
Year
IsWeekday
Holiday
NationalHoliday
Temp
Wspd
Rhum
MAE Score
38.21
38.66
20.02
19.96
19.29
19.08
19.55
18.85
18.82
18.78
Difference To Optimal
-19.10
-19.54
-0.91
-0.85
-0.18
0.03
-0.44
0.26
0.29
0.33
Percentage Change
-49.99
-50.56
-4.56
-4.26
-0.94
0.16
-2.26
1.40
1.52
1.74
Table 4.16: RFT results of leaving specific features out
Given the modeling objective is to minimize the error rate, it does simply not
make sense to incorporate any of the variables proven to be of negative im-
pact.
For this reason, a new RFT model was trained using the new set of
features.
Such changes can cause differences in regards to optimal hyperpa-
rameters though, so the initial steps of RFT tuning was reapplied. The final
model configuration and performance scores are displayed in Table 4.17, with a
decrease of ∆MAE = −0.81 and increase of ∆R2 = +0.03. With this, the R2
score is even better than what Zheng et al. [2015] accomplished.
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
RFT(d = 30, n = sqrt, m = 250, sl = 2, sn = 4)
18.30
1332
36.49
0.68
Table 4.17: Final RFT model with new feature set
To provide a visual understandment of the final RFT capabilities, Fig. 4.24
showcase the computed predictions next to actual observations for area 1 in Jan,
2014. Clearly, the model is more than capable of detecting temporal patterns.
Figure 4.24: RFT predictions vs actual observations, area 1
==PAGE:78==
4.3 Results & Discussion
70
This method of exclusion can easily be applied to the other models as well,
likely resulting in somewhat comparable performance increase. However, given
the RFT outperformed all other models significantly, and that the performance
gain is relatively small, it has not been deemed necessary to compute new results
for all other trained predictors. However, for good measure it was decided to
try and test the new features on the NN, as the continuous weather input might
have distorted general relevance. The relative decrease in error rate proved to
be even smaller for the ANN though.
4.3.1.1
Removal of noisy data
As explained in section 4.1.2.1, initial data might influence the predictor neg-
atively due to misleading transaction information. A few tests were run, and
by removing the initial 72 hours, the model actually improved performance by
a marginal amount. See results in Table 4.18 for reference. Moreover, some
outer areas with low to little parking might influence performance as well. By
removing the areas of interest, i.e. [42, 43, 48, 50, 51], the error rate increases
to MAE = 20.5 this time around. This does makes sense in terms of error
metrics, as these outer areas are often assumed 0, meaning no error deviations
are reported. Given these findings were not made until very late in the process,
it was decided not to incorporate them in the final version. The purpose of these
tests were purely to investigate if former less optimal decisions (or lack hereof)
had noticeably influence on model performance.
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
RFT(Dtshot2i, for i ≥72)
18.18
1320
36.33
0.68
Table 4.18: RFT model without initial 72 hours
It was moreover tested what the implications would be of completely removing
the noise of free parking from mid Saturday to early Monday. Given the finale
model does not base its prediction on continuous time series, this is no longer
considered an issue. Despite free parking only affect certain hours on Saturday
and Monday, it was for given explorational purposes decided to simply remove
these days all together, as the phenomenon will obliviously affect some surround-
ing hours as well. Interestingly, this does improve both model performance and
fit quite significantly, with MAE = 15.78 and R2 = 0.51 (efer to Table 4.19
for additional results). What is even more interesting, is that the input feature
DayOfWeek has significantly less model influence in regards to Gini importance
(see Fig. D.9, App. D.3). This basically means that weekdays do not differ by
much in general. Note that these results are based on the original feature set.
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
71
MAE
MSE
RMSE
R2
RFT(Dtshot2day, for day /∈[0, 1, 6])
15.78
1169
34.20
0.51
Table 4.19: RFT model without Saturday/Sunday/Monday
4.4
Parking OCCR computation
It was in section 3.4.4.2 described why transaction data cannot directly explain
parking availability due to unaccounted for parking permits and/or illegal park-
ing. While the latter might not seem significant at first, many or the records
provided by Darea and Dstreet contain OCCR values well above 100%. Figure
4.25 presents active transaction (orange) in regards to actual counts (blue) for
the first 10 areas over a full week. Counts have been sampled over 7 consecutive
years for the 3 available time stamps in Darea, which is why there is a trend
present in some cases. The red line is the limit of 100% OCCR.
Figure 4.25: Active transactions vs consecutive sampled parking counts
==PAGE:80==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
72
Weekends and trend aside, active transaction are clearly below the actual mea-
sured parking counts. How much depend greatly on area. Given actual counts
are only tracked at 12, 17 and 22 o’clock, proportional differences can only be
compared at given hours (white vertical lines). As it can be hard to identify cor-
relation on given graph due to continuously changing data, Figure 4.26 showcase
similar information, but based on consecutive active weekday transactions and
constant mean measured counts at similar sampled hours. From here, individual
proportionality can more easily be deducted. For instance, area 5 and 7 follow a
clear positive linear correlation at all reported hours, while area 8, 9 and 10 on
the other hand follow a negative linear relationship. This basically means that
for the latter areas, other defined types of parking rightfully assumed dominate
the streets when transaction counts are low at night, and the relative opposite
at mid-day. For other areas, it depends more on the specific day. The mid-day
plummet referred to in section 4.1.2.2 is e.g. apparent for area 6 at day 4, 5 and 6
in regards to both measured counts and transactions, but not for the remaining
days. All this information can be leveraged to model the proportional weights
between active transactions and measured counts, so that predicted transaction
counts can be used to estimate the amount of all combined types of parking.
Figure 4.26: Active transactions at 12/17/22 vs mean parking counts
==PAGE:81==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
73
4.4.1
Area weights
Given the proportional weights are different at certain hours, individual distinc-
tive weights must be computed for all hours and areas. This could beneficially
also be done for each day of the week, but for given research purposes this has
not been deemed necessary. Measured counts can be based of several values,
as data is available for multiple years. While the latest records could help ex-
plain new parking tendencies, which by the results of Figure 4.26 is believed
to exist given some areas have an upward/downward trend, singular, or even
a set of, recent values could be prone to collection barriers and/or specific ab-
normal behavior. For these reasons, it was ultimately decided to base results
of the total mean. While the weights at measured hours (12, 17 and 22) can
easily be obtained using standard division, the remaining hours will have to
be approximated. Different methods can be applied to obtain such approxima-
tions. The initial approach was based on a fitted cosine function due to its cyclic
capabilities, given weight fluctuation is fixed to a 24-hour cycle.
cos y = a sin(b(y + c)) + d
(4.29)
Eq. 4.29 presents the formula for a cosine function, where a is the amplitude,
b = 2π/period, c is the horizontal shift and d is the vertical shift (see Fig. D.10,
App. D.4 for visual explanation). A basic setup was implemented with the
variables defined in Eq. 4.30, with c adjusted so that the graph intersect with the
first computed weight. Figure 4.27 showcase the fit based on given parameters.
Unfortunately, the 17 and 22 o’clock weights does not line up perfectly with
selected parameters. A second cosine function was hence computed with slightly
different parameters, and the final fit is visualized in Figure 4.28.
a = max y −min y
2
= 0.41
b = 2π
24 = 0.26
c = −3
d = max y + min y
2
= 2.42
(4.30)
Despite the weights line up decently to the cosine graph with adjusted parame-
ters, the function over-fits by quite a large margin at night. For this reason, a
second approach using automated B-spline13 fit was tested. Results were gen-
13Smooth curve based on control points
==PAGE:82==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
74
erally better with clean cut intersections, but drastic over-fit persisted in many
areas. App. D.4.1 showcase the fit for area 2 and 3 using given method.
Figure 4.27: Cosine fit 1, area 1
Figure 4.28: Cos fit 2, area 1
Based on the fact that it is impossible to predict any evolvement between mea-
sured hours, and that both cosine and B-spline clearly over-fits when trying to
smooth weight differences around the static values, it was ultimately decided
that only a linear relationship would provide fair assumptions in regards to ap-
proximated weights. This implementation still poses obvious issues for hours
outside the 3 static ones, e.g. during morning traffic. This is unfortunately one
of the draw-backs of the limited data available, and it is simply not possible to
do any better. Figure 4.29 and 4.30 showcase final fit and averaged weights at
all hours of the day using described linearly computed averages.
Figure 4.29: Linear fit 1, area 2
Figure 4.30: Linear fit 2, area 3
Table 4.31 displays a snippet of the final computed weights by applying said
method for the complete dataset; column represent hour, row represent area.
The difference between area weights are immense, with more than 500x between
area 3 and 51 at late night hours. These differences decrease during mid day
though, with the weight of area 50 being almost 10 times lower in a matter of 12
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
75
hours. This is primarily due to earlier described issues with low to none transac-
tion allocations. For central areas however, values are pretty consistent during
all hours of the day. It was in section 3.4.5 insinuated that outskirt areas are
more likely to have higher imbalances at night, which these results undoubtedly
showcase. The lack of P-machines does clearly not cause less parking, simply
fewer transactions. Unaccounted for parking permits are believed to be the main
reason behind this seasonal difference.
Dareaw =
0
1
· · ·
12
· · ·
23














2.26
2.31
· · ·
2.82
· · ·
2.21
1
2.76
2.77
· · ·
2.88
· · ·
2.75
2
1.92
1.97
· · ·
2.50
· · ·
1.88
3
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
662
613
· · ·
65.0
· · ·
712
50
1015
986
· · ·
663
· · ·
1044
51
(4.31)
Final transaction results multiplied by computed weights are visualized in Figure
4.31 for area 1-10 over a 4-day period. Blue dots illustrate measured counts at
given hour, selected at random to demonstrate natural deviation. Results line
up fairly well in general, which means that predicted transaction data can in
fact be used to estimate parking occupancy.
Figure 4.31: Active transactions with weights.
==PAGE:84==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
76
4.4.2
Street weights
Based on the results presented above, dataset Dstreet can in conjunction with
computed counts be used to provide predictions at street level instead of area.
Given all entries in the dataset contains the same properties as Darea (legal
spots, actual counts at 12/17/22 and polygon/linestring coordinates), it can
easily be determined which streets belongs to which areas, and what percentage
of total spots available are allocated to each street. Using this simple formula,
one could distribute estimated amount of parked cars proportional to street sizes,
but would fail to recognize individual street tendencies, which were proven to
be quite substantial in section 3.4.4. A better approach would be to compute
the amount of parked vehicles at each street within an area, proportional to
the total amount of all parked vehicles within given area, at all hours of the
day. In other words, out of all the currently parked cars, how many percent
is positioned at a specific street at a certain hour. Computed predictions can
then be allocated accordingly. By following this approach, all street counts are
initially grouped by mean value. Based on these computed averages, individual
area shares are computed at the static hours 12, 17 and 22 o’clock. From here, a
similar procedure to the one used in section 4.4.1 can be applied to approximate
street shares linearly between the static hours. Appendix D.4.2 visualize the
results of applying said technique to the first two streets of Dstreet.
Dstreetw =
0
1
· · ·
12
· · ·
23














0.010
0.101
· · ·
0.125
· · ·
0.097
0
0.118
0.118
· · ·
0.122
· · ·
0.117
1
0.101
0.101
· · ·
0.101
· · ·
0.101
2
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0.012
0.015
· · ·
0.050
· · ·
0.009
886
0.025
0.024
· · ·
0.016
· · ·
0.026
887
(4.32)
Table 4.32 illustrates the final structure of computed street weights, denoted
Dstreetw, where columns and rows represent hours and streets respectively. Note
that values are rounded to 4 integers for clarification purposes. Overall, the cal-
culated weights vary greatly in size, but this is expected due to big differences in
regards to both available spots and general OCCR. By combining found weights
with the computed results of Dareaw, actual street side OCCR predictions can
now be computed. It is unfortunately impossible to compare exact results with
any measured values found in Dstreet, as it is not known when exactly these
counts were recorded. However, a simple visual comparison should be able to
identify if developed model can actually produce meaningful results. Figure 4.32
showcase the final predictions of street OCCR of a randomly selected weekday
in March (05/03/2014 - 17:00). These results are accompanied by the measured
values of an arbitrary day in the same month and year, presented in Figure 4.33.
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Parking OCCR computation
77
While differences are noticeable, highly occupied areas tends to correlate quite
significantly and vica verca. The predicted counts are somewhat lower around
the city centre (area 1), but this could just as well be due to the day of recording.
In general, results seem to represent reality quite well. The complete pipeline
of all included steps taken to acquire given results is described in section 5.2.1.
Figure 4.32: Predicted OCCR
Figure 4.33: Actual OCCR
Note that not all streets available in Dstreet are included in the final predictions
visualized in Figure 4.32. This is due to the fact that several streets are po-
sitioned outside the perimeters of the valid areas, as displayed in Figure 4.34.
However, by comparing the derived OCCR values of applicable streets based on
values in Darea, with the exact street side values available Dstreet, the difference
is only MAE = 0.22. This proves that the conversion between areas and streets
are accurate. Street accuracy is hence solely dependant on area accuracy.
Figure 4.34: Positioning of all streets not allocated area shares
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 5
Application
“Knowledge is useless without
consistent application”
Julian Hall
To fully exploit the potential of developed prediction model, it is necessary to
analyze how predicted output can and should be channelled to potential end
users. Like the proof of concept user service produced by [Stolfi et al., 2017],
the solution examples presented in this chapter will include minimal yet powerful
tools to optimize parking exploration for all types of users, not only scientifically
interested. Based on given conception, the following chapter will outline how
given tools could work and behave in practise using simple prototyping tech-
niques, while still adhering to the set of established features listed in section
3.6. The underlying business logic, architectural design choices and general in-
formation flow will also be discussed, as this is the foundation for any arbitrary
application implementation.
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Focus areas
79
5.1
Focus areas
A selection of limited focus areas crucial to the perception and operation of
described service has been hand-picked for investigation. These areas include
general deliverance of occupancy information, search criteria and knowledge
based suggestions.
As indicated by the title to this project, the focus is on
integrated prediction models in mobile applications. This is based on the belief
that people will generally benefit the most from parking prediction at hand.
However, developed functionality could just as well be integrated in a web plat-
form, or simply as an extension to an existing mobile application like Google
Maps. Based on the market research results provided in section 3.3.2.2, specific
application environment shouldn’t matter much in general either. All computa-
tional information acquired to perform any of the actions presented below can
be found in predict_parking.ipynb.
5.2
Occupancy information
A lot of information on various topics regarding the creation of an optimal
OCCR predictor has been delivered up until this point. The purpose of this
section is to clearly outline how exactly all these different modules fit together
in practise, and how given information can be leveraged.
5.2.1
Prediction pipeline
To provide a graphical overview of all major processes, Fig. 5.1 visualizes the
complete computational pipeline from initial request to final street side OCCR
predictions. Feature Extraction creates all the necessary endogenous variables,
whereas Creation of Xdatetime fetches the included exogenous variables and com-
bines them all together, with the addition of One-hot Encoding all non-binary
categorical variables. Notice that only Dholiday is included as external dataset in
the creation of Xdatetime, as it was decided to exclude Dweather due explained
negative impact. If the holiday information fetch fails, the value is assumed 0.
OCCRareai = ˆyi · Dareawi(hour)
(5.1)
OCCRstreetj = OCCRareai · Dstreetwj(hour)
nspotsj
· 100,
for streetj ⊂areai
(5.2)
==PAGE:88==
5.2 Occupancy information
80
The estimated amount of parked vehicles per area are computed by multiplying
the output of the prediction model with the computed weights defined in section
4.4.1 to the hour of interest. Using this information, the total amount of parked
vehicles per street can be estimated by multiplying the street share weights
defined in section 4.4.2 with found area results (in regards to the same hour).
From here, final street side OCCR can easily be computed using elementary
percentage calculation. Exact formulas are displayed in Eq. 5.1 and 5.2.
Figure 5.1: Major components of Prediction Pipeline
5.2.1.1
Relative available spots
The output in Figure 5.1 contains either OCCR or AS (Available Spots) predic-
tions. The latter has not been discussed yet due to lack of relevance in regards
to developed prediction model, but might very well provide more meaningful
results than the former. Because while percentage results are useful, they are
not always considered sufficiently explanatory. For instance, 80% OCCR on a
street with 100 legal parking spots is likely more favorable than 66% on a street
limited to 3. Clearly, size and ratio should both be taken into account.
EasyPark bases its color indication on number of available spots pr. 100 meter.
Anything below 1 is red, anything above 2 is green and in between is yellow
[Hovgaard, 2018]. To mimic this functionality, individual street length must
first be computed and added to Dstreet. While this is somewhat easily obtain-
able using basic linear algebra, map coordinate distances are generally not a
perfect representation of actual measurable distances due to the earth’s curva-
ture. For this reason, street coordinates need to be projected onto a plane that
is representational accurate in regards to earth’s dimensions. These computa-
tions are performed using the library pyproj. Once accurately projected street
lengths have been computed, Relative Available Spots (RAS) can be derived
using Equation 5.3, where Lprojj is the projected street distance.
==PAGE:89==
5.2 Occupancy information
81
RASstreetj = ASj
Lprojj
·100 =
nspotsj −OCCRareai · Dstreetwj
Lprojj
·100, for streetj ⊂areai
(5.3)
Figure 5.2 and 5.3 visualizes the differences between applying ARS and OCCR,
but note that both metrics are highly dependant on scale of use. Red coloured
OCCR streets tend to be of the same ARS color, which is expected due to
low/none available spots. There are however quite a few green OCCR streets
that are coloured orange in the ARS plot, indicating that the changes of finding
a free parking spot are low despite descent occupancy level. To suit everyone’s
needs, both functionalities are ultimately supported by the API however.
Figure 5.2: Predicted ARS
Figure 5.3: Predicted OCCR
For comparison, Figure E.5 and E.6 in Appendix E.1 showcase the exact dif-
ferences between this model and EasyPark’s computed ARS at the same point
in time.
Despite clear variation in exact street results, there is surprisingly
high correlation in area tendencies. For instance, the center of both map are
primarily coloured red, but more north most of the same streets are coloured
green and orange. General deviations in areas persist as well, despite the exact
colors might differ. Based on this, and EasyPark’s self proclaimed extremely
high accuracy, results are believed to be somewhat reliable.
==PAGE:90==
5.2 Occupancy information
82
5.2.1.2
Backend prototype
In regards to described advantages of choosing on-device forecasting listed in
section 2.2.1, higher latency does not pose a noticeable drawback. Figure 5.4
displays waiting time and payload size for an average OCCR request, and both
are of rather insignificant size. Moreover, running exclusively on-device predic-
tions is simply not possible at scale. For a single city with one active model local
storage might be sufficient, but to process individually modelled data for every
major city would require an abnormal amount of storage space not suitable
for mobile devices. Small adjustments to improve general performance would
likewise obligate manual updates. Based on these considerations, it has been
deemed favourable to implement a traditional REST API server, which any ap-
plication type can communicate with. On-device forecasting will hence not be
available out of the box, but could be implemented as code on demand.
Figure 5.4: OCCR HTTP request time and payload size
The focus of this chapter is however not to implement a fully-fledged predic-
tion API, but rather to investigate the advantages/disadvantages of available
options - hence the focus on server side vs on-device logic above. Therefore,
only a rapidly developed backend prototype has been developed, with the sole
purpose of suiting the needs of the front-end prototype introduced in section
5.2.2.
Regardless of this, the easily runnable implemented Flask server is a
great example of how developed prediction pipeline can be incorporated in an
intelligent backend application.
5.2.2
Mobile prototype
To really showcase the potential of implemented prediction pipeline, a high-
fidelity front-end mobile application prototype has been developed, featuring all
of the Must have and Should have MoSCoW requirements specified in Table 3.8.
Could have features are preserved for the lower fidelity prototypes presented in
section 5.3. Figure 5.5 and 5.6 displays developed prototype in action, featuring
datetime variable assignment and visual street occupancy information. With
this prototype, users can physically interact with server-side provided data by
the use of recognisable finger gestures, e.g. pinch to zoom, drag to reposition
etc. The prototype supports automatically updating street values on request,
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
83
i.e. when pressing ’OK’ for a selected date and time. For comparison, this is a
feature not even supported by EasyPark’s Find & Park. Note that prediction
colors are based of OCCR values and formerly introduced scale. While presented
prototype is developed in Flutter, any cross-platform environment supporting
potential on-device computations is generally considered sufficient. This topic
is further discussed in section 6.1. It should be emphasized that the current
implementation is only a prototype and not by any means production ready, as
most modules have been developed rapidly without proper testing. The purpose
of this application is purely demonstrational.
Figure 5.5: Choosing datetime
Figure 5.6: Interactive OCCR map
5.3
Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
The Could have MoSCoW functionalities deemed infeasible to include in the
flutter prototype presented above will in this section be discussed in regards
to required business logic and imagined front-end implementation.
Because
while most of the server-side logic has already been implemented to investigate
behavior in practise, it has not been considered beneficial in regards to the
scope of this project to setup the necessary program code capable of handling
computed data at hand. Visual prototypes are therefore constructed using the
same tools applied throughout this paper, in particular folium maps, with the
addition of Figma content overlays, i.e. static UI components.
==PAGE:92==
5.3 Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
84
5.3.1
Search criteria
To compute any form of suggestions, additional case specific data is required.
Besides already introduced date and time, initial and final desired location must
also be acquired. Radius of interest based on personal preferences is also con-
sidered necessary to provide any form of useful results, because while some
individuals won’t mind a 1 km walk, other’s physical ability might restrict them
to much less. Figure 5.7 visualizes how explained data could be acquired by
extending the prior prototype solution with additional adjustable search filters.
Figure 5.7: Search parameters (potential implementation)
5.3.2
Business Logic
Fig. 5.9 visualizes the KBS pipeline for computing the optimal Direct, Fastest
and Cheapest option to a desired location.
Based on the search parameters
defined in Fig. 5.7, input contains initial/final location, datetime and radius.
Parameter validation ensures that the input addressees can be located and trans-
formed into latitude and longitude coordinates, and that the destination is posi-
tioned within the perimeters of available prediction areas. A complete boundary
object containing all areas has been created to optimize this process, so that
merely one check needs to be performed. This area is visualized in Figure 5.2.2
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
85
Figure 5.8: CPH area boundary
Radius of interest is implemented by computing a circular polygon surrounding
the final destination with defined radius. Using the boundary borders of the pro-
jected polygon, a sub-sample of Dstreet containing all streets positioned within
given radius can be collected. OCCR/RAS street values can subsequently be
computed using the prediction pipeline presented in section 5.2.1.
Figure 5.9: KBS Pipeline
As briefly described in section 3.4.3, street price depend not only on Pzone,
but also hour and day of week. Dzprice presented in Table 5.4 represent the
hourly computed price for each p-zone district. These values have been manually
retrieved from Københavns Kommune [2022], and must be updated in case of
==PAGE:94==
5.3 Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
86
new regulations. In case all other requirements are met upon request, a scalar
index value is retrieved from Dzprice based on Pzone and hour.
The logical
decision tree for given requirements are represented in Figure 5.10.
Dzprice =
red
green
blue
yellow


















5
5
5
3
0
...
...
...
...
39
23
15
11
8
...
...
...
...
16
16
16
11
18
...
...
...
...
5
5
5
3
23
(5.4)
Figure 5.10: P-zone price decision tree
5.3.3
Direct option
When all prior computations have have succeeded, optimal options can be deter-
mined. The optimal direct option is computed by simply sorting street output
by distance. Table 5.1 present the top 5 results, where dd denotes projected
Distance to Destination. Specific street directions and estimated time can be
requested using Google Map’s Direction API. Driving information is fetched be-
tween origin and optimal street in Table 5.1, followed by walking information
from given street to final destination. Fig. 5.11 showcase final plotted results.
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
87
Figure 5.11: Directly computed option
area
street_spots
p_zone
price
dd
OCCR
831
1
4
Red
39
19
79
7
1
13
Red
39
88
89
6
1
4
Red
39
113
75
9
1
2
Red
39
135
83
879
1
44
Red
39
149
13
Table 5.1: Direct option top 5 results
5.3.4
Fastest option
The fastest option is unlike the direct option sorted by chosen occupancy method.
In case two values are similar, options are sorted by distance. Note that fastest
refer to the street with highest predicted opportunity of finding an available
parking spot, as searching time should be minimal1. Table 5.2 presents the top
5 computed results. Interestingly. the best rated option is the fifth option in
Table 5.1. 120 extra meters of walking shouldn’t be a big issue for most, but the
current OCCR value is not considered too bad at the desired location either.
Visualization of optimal fastest option is displayed in Figure E.1, Appendix E.
1Naming conventions are not considered fixed.
==PAGE:96==
5.3 Knowledge based suggestions (KBS)
88
area
street_spots
p_zone
price
dd
OCCR
879
1
44
Red
39
149
13
877
1
44
Red
39
430
24
21
2
14
Red
39
391
31
14
1
44
Red
39
316
33
757
1
44
Red
39
205
33
Table 5.2: Fastest option top 5 results
In real world use case scenarios, it is considered beneficial to include both OCCR
and DD in the decision making. A simple solution would be to multiply the
computed OCCR by a fraction of DD based on a defined weight. This way,
close to indistinguishable OCCR values would be chosen based on DD and not
potential model over-fit. A study should preferably be conducted on desired
decision making to determine the optimal value of such weight. An even simpler
option would be to round OCCR values to closest five or tens, as much more
results would rely on DD then. However, to stay within the scope of this project,
neither of presented implementation ideas have been implemented.
5.3.5
Cheapest option
The cheapest option simply sort by computed price followed by chosen occu-
pancy method and finally DD. Visualization of optimal solution is displayed in
Figure E.2, Appendix E. The need for a decision making algorithm becomes
much more apparent when this option is investigated though. As showcased
in Table 5.3, no street within the provided radius of 500 meters has an OCCR
value lower than 100, meaning that all cheaper streets are expected to be over-
occupied and that finding a free parking spot will be extremely difficult.
area
street_spots
p_zone
price
dd
or
812
9
15
Green
23
495
142
193
9
26
Green
23
500
181
158
9
30
Green
23
427
191
811
9
8
Green
23
440
244
879
1
44
Red
39
149
13
Table 5.3: Cheapest option top 5 results
By expanding the radius perimeter, better results can indeed be found however.
Table E.3, Appendix E showcase current example but with 850 meters of radius
(an increase of 350 meters), providing a green p-zone street with a price of
==PAGE:97==
5.4 Prototype
89
23 crowns per hour and an extremely low OCCR value of 27%. This means
that merely a few extra 100 meters of walking can provide both fast and cheap
parking. Table E.4 in same appendix also showcase the differences of choosing
ARS as occupancy method over OCCR, but while the rank of some streets move
up or down a spot or two, the overall recommendations remain.
5.4
Prototype
From the findings presented in section 5.3.3, 5.3.4 and 5.3.5, it stands clear that
the simple yet powerful implemented KBS tools can in fact provide meaning-
ful recommendations on optimal transportation method in regards to defined
objective, whether it is the direct, fastest or cheapest solution.
Figure 5.12
demonstrates how given functionality could be implemented using simple and
modern UI techniques. Here, it is imagined that different options could be in-
vestigated by simply swiping through available option cards. This way, more
KBS options could also easily be added in the future.
Note that all information except the overlaying selector cards are computed
using currently implemented business logic.
Figure 5.12: KBS options (potential implementation)
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
“If I have seen further than
others, it is by standing upon the
shoulders of giants”
Isaac Newton
Many decisions have been made throughout the course of this project with the
intention of improving not just forecasting performance, but to accomplish the
best and most valuable foundation for an integrated prediction model service.
The most influential decisions will in the following chapter be evaluated in re-
gards to reasoning, impact and outcome among other things.
The preliminary projection of workload and report structure presented in Figure
F.1, Appendix F served as a great guidance tool throughout the course of this
project, despite several parts were altered significantly. It was initially planned
to thoroughly investigate all aspects associated with the implementation of a real
world prediction model, including feasibility, data acquisition and modelling, UX
prototyping and application development. However, as hinted in section 3.4.4.2,
the chosen problem proved to require much more pre/post-process modelling
than initially expected, especially in comparison to the majority of the related
studies included in section 2.1.3. As the project moved forward, it quickly be-
came clear that the scope was too wide to fully exploit the potential within each
==PAGE:99==
91
category. It was therefore decided to focus thoroughly on feasibility and mod-
elling, which laid the foundation for chapter 3 and 4. Application usability and
development was on the other hand limited to the demonstrational prototypes
and associated business logic presented in chapter 5.
The feasibility study in chapter 3 laid the foundation for all subsequent work
while also establishing project relevance. Because despite the technical analysis
would have been sufficient in providing required modelling information, a piv-
otal part of this project was also to investigate and examine solution impact.
It was in this project decided to focus on parking availability issues, primarily
because no current service was known to offer any solutions to given problem,
and that is was assumed many people would benefit from it. These assump-
tions were initially based purely on personal experiences, but the background
research and market survey conducted in section 3.3.1 and 3.3.2.2 proved that
not only is the problem apparent and rising on a global scale, it is directly af-
fecting people’s preferred means of transportation. It was expected that the
problem would be apparent for some, but not in the reported magnitude. The
discovery of EasyPark’s Find & Park feature did twist initial beliefs on relevance
and expected impact slightly, but the results obtained form the market survey
fortunately proved otherwise. Given EasyPark is a big company with estab-
lished monopoly, it was not expected that developed feature would remain so
well-hidden and featureless. It did nonetheless prove to be a great comparison
metric. Based on the acquired knowledge and prove of assumptions, the market
research is overall considered a success. It is however not considered perfect,
as it failed to conclude how exactly given KBS options would provide the most
meaningful impact. Direct questions on the regarding matter should preferably
have been included, instead of indirectly deriving it of general complaints and
remarks. Final functionality would likely not deviate much, but it is considered
good practise to test the perception of all included features. As UX research was
ultimately omitted, this was not considered vital to further investigate though.
While the process methodology could have been omitted in respect to devel-
opment, it generally provided a language and basic terminology usable in all
included modelling phases. Because while the report structure may indicate
somewhat linear development, it should be made clear that numerous changes
were made along the way in terms of both data acquisition, preparation and
modelling, which ultimately changed not only development processes, but also
the final business perspective. These changes were often caused by explanatory
data visualisations, which also happens to be the reason why so many different
graphs are included throughout this paper, especially in the technical analysis.
Swapping the entire Dtran dataset for an older standard is likely the most influ-
ential decision made, as most of the subsequent modelling procedure had to be
revised and additional datasets needed to be incorporated to account for sudden
lack of data. Some areas ultimately had to be excluded from the prediction pro-
==PAGE:100==
92
cess as well, but this was a necessary mean to accomplish any useful predictions.
However, while this decision may have caused slightly more limited application
capabilities and required some extra amount of work, the final model perfor-
mance scores described in section 4.3.0.1 could not have been achieved without
it. For this reason alone, it was and still is considered the right decision to make.
It was initially not determined if Chapter 2 should include a study on related
research or simply summarize current state of the art technologies. Conducting
the literature study described in section 2.1.3 was however one of the decisive
decision on omitting many of the application related studies in favor of more
thorough model background investigation, which ultimately provided extremely
useful information on both pre-processing and modelling of data alike.
For
instance, the division of transactions into areas was inspired by Pflügler and et.
al. [2016], and the optimal RFT model would perhaps not have been included if
it weren’t for the extremely positive results obtained by Zheng et al. [2015]. The
study also provided significant insight into explanatory features and evaluation
hereof. The introductory quote by Isaac Newton is included for this exact reason;
not to proclaim superiority, but to acknowledge that the conducted work in this
project could not have been accomplished to similar extend on its own. For
these and many other reasons, the decision of including said study is without
doubt believed to be for the better outcome in retro-perspective.
In regards to explanatory features, it is overall disappointing that almost none
of the exogenous variables improved model performance. Actual precipitation
information could potentially have provided better (positive) influential impact,
but given Pflügler and et. al. [2016] found that temperature had close to 40x
higher impact than rainfall, which too was found to have negative influence in
regards to this problem, this is considered highly unlikely. Generally low/lack of
influence from exogenous variables seem to be a persistent problem among the
included research studies though. Fortunately, the endogenous time dependent
variables proved to be of great importance to the developed predictor, which
ultimately provided satisfactory results on par or better than what most of the
related research studies could accomplish.
In hindsight, fewer AI algorithms could likely have been tested with close to
similar results, which would have saved tremendous amount of time. However,
even despite the ARIMAX implementation provided relatively bad predictions
while requiring perhaps the most comprehensive hyperparameter tuning, many
of the results obtained in the required pre-processing stage provided fundamen-
tal insights to undiscovered data characteristics. Also, AI algorithms have a
tendency to act as black box for predictions, but the more straight forward sta-
tistical approach applied in the training process of the ARIMA model proved
to be optimizable based on simple techniques and visual characteristics alone.
==PAGE:101==
6.1 Future work
93
6.1
Future work
The final conversion of predicted transaction counts into parking OCCR esti-
mates could unfortunately not be tested between measured hours or at specific
days due to lack of available data. Results are generally considered reasonably
accurate based on the findings in chapter 4, but it would definitely be beneficial
to acquire more specific data on actual street counts, which include the exact
date and time of recording to more precisely adjust the weights of Darew and
Dstreetw.
This is especially true for weekends, where neither transactions or
street counts are representational. Until such data is included, parking estima-
tions during weekends and holidays are not considered trustworthy.
Section 2.3 describes the importance of UX design despite only a handful of
untested medium to high fidelity prototypes are presented in Chapter 5. As
earlier stated, these prototypes are solely developed to showcase application po-
tential and intended usage. The UX section has however remained included
in the report to act as a stepping stone for what comes next, in case devel-
oped prototypes are to be fully implemented in the future (which of course is
future work in itself).
It is crucial for the success of developed service that
the included features provide meaning and behave as expected. The inclusion
of public transportation options were omitted for simplicity, but such data is
based on the market survey results also expected to be of substantial impact.
Most of the related studies in section 2.1.3 pursue to predict car park occupancy,
which is a highly related subject not examined in this project. It is however
believed that the location and OCCR of nearby car parks influence street condi-
tions, as filled garages will evidently provoke more cars onto the streets and vice
versa. The positioning and size of all active car parks within Copenhagen can be
obtained through the dataset parkeringshuse [n.d.]1, but this does unfortunately
not include OCCR information. Most of these car parks are privately run and
such data isn’t publicly distributed. Some do however provide live information
on number of available spots, indicating that such data does exist internally.
Perhaps this data could be achieved in benefit of all parties, i.e. not just for
given research purposes, but also to lure more customers in. If a user cannot
find available parking anywhere close by, it must be considered beneficial and to
many indulging to receive information on a free parking garage merely around
the corner. The service introduced in this project would ideally contain informa-
tion on all types of parking, acting as an information hub for public and private
parking alike. Specifically, all car parks could pop-up on the interactive proto-
type map presented in Figure 5.6 with available information on internal OCCR.
If such information eventually were to be predicted as well, it would likely make
1English Translation: Parking Garage
==PAGE:102==
6.1 Future work
94
sense to investigate the opportunities of incorporating the NARX RFT model
presented in section 4.2.6.3, given its surprising superior performance on short
step-ahead predictions, as most car parks contain accurate current sensor-based
information.
It might seem logical to try and scale implemented service to include data from
other metropolitan cities, but such data is required to be translated into sim-
ilar format to reuse the construction pipeline created for this project. If not,
each included city would require individual technical analysis and a tailored
data modelling process. For this reason, it is not considered feasible to scale
given service before the weekend/holiday issues have been resolved and a specific
format standard has been decided upon.
Despite on-device predictions are deemed infeasible as the sole source of data,
downloadable code-on-demand content could beneficially be incorporated once
initial application development has finished. Many backend-driven applications
relying on location specific services nowadays implements downloadable content
to sustain core functionalities while being offline. This service is generally be-
lieved to create the largest impact for people with little/no prior knowledge,
i.e. users looking for parking in unfamiliar settings. Provided the opportunities
to migrate and perform ML operations on-device listed in section 2.2.1.1, im-
plementing offline parking OCCR predictions could benefit people who travel
abroad without an active data plan. Despite given feature is considered to be of
much lower impact than the other listed possibilities in regards to the current
state of the project, the already introduced on-device prediction capabilities
should be sufficient to implement described functionality.
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This project aims to improve parking related issues in metropolitan areas by the
use of incorporated prediction models in modern applications. As population
density continues to rise in bigger cities, motorized transportation faces many
new difficulties in general, especially in regards to parking availability. Increase
in transportation time, costs and pollution are merely a snippet of the associated
problems known to be caused by lack of availability parking. However, more
often than not, available spots do exist close by, but the general motorist is
simply not aware of where and when to look. The purpose of this project is
to investigate how given information can be predicted using historical patterns,
and how it should be channelled to actual users.
A combination of different prediction techniques have been investigated by ex-
amining the results of related research studies. This investigation focused on pre-
process modelling, prediction methods, included variables, performance metrics
and scores. Based on included studies, different methods generally prove optimal
for different tasks, but random regression trees (RFT), support vector regres-
sion (SVR) and artificial neural nets (ANN) tend to perform better than others.
Additionally, while many explanatory features are often included, weather and
holiday information tend to provide the biggest impact. The inclusion of for-
mer output, i.e. the dependant variable, also proves to be of substantial impact
for many models, in particular in regards to the specifically tailored NARX
predictor. In most cases however, simplicity is found to outperform complexity.
==PAGE:104==
96
A feasibility study with focus on market and technical opportunities was con-
ducted to determine project relevance and prediction capabilities. In regards
to relevance, a market survey was carried out specifically focusing on driving
habits and the use of assistance applications, which provided profound details
on common concerns and limitations in regards to explained difficulties. It was
found that the vast majority of participants have in fact favoured other means
of transportation, solely due to the uncertainty associated with finding an avail-
able parking spot at their desired location. Here, time, cost and convenience
are generally the most influential deciding factors. Given most participants al-
ready acquire said knowledge on given factors through existing mobile services,
it is considered beneficial to provide additional knowledge based suggestions
(KBS) as well. No service is worth much without users, but a total of 91% of
participants would gladly adopt introduced prediction service based of OCCR
capabilities alone. Even though these results were based on the premise of accu-
rate predictions, multiple people noted that merely a representational estimate
would provide substantial impact as well. Based on these findings, it can be
concluded that the intended service would indeed provide customer value.
In regards to technical feasibility, multiple datasets related to parking condi-
tions in Copenhagen were evaluated based on summarized data and graphical
visualizations. It was ultimately decided to base parking estimates of active
transactions and account for lacking data, i.e. issued parking permits and ille-
gal parking, by scaling computed transaction estimates up to actual measured
values using defined weights. These weights are based on average measured dif-
ferences at 12, 17 and 22 o’clock and linearly fitted for all hours in between, as
no such data is available. Predictions at hours far away from given values are
hence more prone to errors than the ones up close. This is definitely not optimal,
but so is real life data collection rarely. Parking estimates are first computed in
divided areas, and then subsequently distributed to streets within to mimic real
spacial patterns. This conversation proved to be the best imaginable solution
with minimal information loss, but some areas could unfortunately not be incor-
porated due to lack of records associated to existing P-machines. This is one of
the clear disadvantages of including such a high amount of diverse datasets not
directly tailored for each other. However, as the vast majority of chosen outlined
areas are well-represented in regards to local available transactions, this is not
considered to be a big issue.
A variety of lucrative models were implemented and tested to find the most
optimal predictor. This include already listed RFT, SVR and NARX, as well as
linear regression (LR) and ARIMAX. All models were investigated thoroughly
to achieve optimal configuration, but despite relative improvements, no model
surpassed another based on hyperparameter tuning alone.
All models were
compared to a seasonal naive baseline predictor, which proved hard to beat for
many. ARIMAX and NARX generally performed the worst despite extensive
==PAGE:105==
97
model tuning, with close to indistinguishable results from a mean naive predic-
tor. As the NARX results were significant higher than expected, the internal
ANN structure was tested on its own as an additional baseline. Similar results
were obtained for a variety of configurations, strongly indicating that ANN
structure is simply unfit for given problem.
While LR and SVR performed
better, the RFT model proved optimal in all test cases, where fewer random
features and more sample trees tend to improve performance marginally. A spe-
cial implementation of a NARX RFT did provide extremely high accuracy rates
for short step-ahead predictions, but given these predictions require current ac-
curate values, implementation is considered unfit for the current state of the
project. These predictions could however provide meaningful value for parking
garage estimates, if such functionality is to be implemented in the future.
In regards to explanatory variables, weather and holiday information was ini-
tially included in combination with time dependent features, of which most
were either one-hot-encoded or normalized. However, in regards to the exoge-
nous variables, only public holidays actually provide positive impact. All other
exogenous should hence be omitted. Endogenous variables are on the other hand
extremely important, with hour and day of week providing the highest impact.
A prediction pipeline was finally implemented using developed RFT model for
multiple application prototypes, showcasing how computed OCCR could be
leveraged in practise.
Besides intractable street side predictions, these pro-
totypes feature KBS options capable of computing not only straight directions,
but also directions to the cheapest and fastest (highest change of availability)
streets within a defined radius, with additional walking information.
These
options are based on the market survey results believed to provide the biggest
impact, but if any future work were to be conducted, such functionalities should
alongside general UX investigation be considered of high influential importance.
Specifically in regards to future work, early morning and weekend predictions
cannot currently accurately be accounted for due to lack of descriptive data.
As collection and implementation of such data would improve accuracy signifi-
cantly, this work is considered to be of the highest importance in the future.
Based on all collected findings, it can ultimately be concluded that public avail-
able data can in fact be leveraged to predict parking occupancy, with RFT
predictors performing most optimal. By converting results to street estimates
presented using color indication in interactive maps, people can easily obtain
information on specific occupancy rates to make informed decisions. Computed
predictions can also be leveraged to provide meaningful suggestions based on
preferences to optimize both parking experience and transportation in general.
==PAGE:106==
Appendix A
Project files
A variety of different program files have been created to both acquire, inves-
tigate and compute data. Figure A.1 presents a summarized overview of all
important files used to create the results presented throughout this report.
data_downloader and data_explorer are responsible for acquisition and initial
investigation. transactions_stats and transactions_timeseries handle all
visualization and data manipulation associated with transactions data, as well
as the creation of used time series data and incorporation of exogenous vari-
ables. parking_counts_areas and parking_counts_streets handle and visu-
alize measured counts for areas and streets, as well as computation of p-zones,
area to streets weights, general statistics and more. optimal_model is the final
creation of the RFT predictor, and predict_parking act as the prototype API
incorporating KBS options.
All files within the model folder are different variations of researched predictions
models, including hyper-parameter tuning.
Note that the nn model (neural
net), also has an _opt extension. This is the model used to compare perfor-
mance with the optimal found features in model_random_forest. The folder
notebooks_2015 contains all files based on the most recent transaction format,
which were ultimately scraped for the older preferable format. All computed
datasets are positioned within the datasets folder.
==PAGE:107==
99
Figure A.1: Prediction notebooks file overview
Figure A.2 presents a simplified overview of the frontend and backend prototype
implementations created in flutter and flask, including which files interact with
each other over HTTP requests.
Figure A.2: Prototype frontend and backend diagram
==PAGE:108==
Appendix B
Research
B.1
Process Management
B.1.1
KDD
Figure B.1: KDD stages and workflow [Alnoukari & El Sheikh, 2011]
==PAGE:109==
B.2 Car Park Interactive Prototype
101
B.1.2
SEMMA
Figure B.2: SEMMA stages and workflow [Zhu, n.d.]
B.2
Car Park Interactive Prototype
Map capable of showing occuapncy at car parks [Stolfi et al., 2017].
Figure B.3: Circles represent total number of parking spaces proportional to
its size. Color represent occupancy rate based on provided color
scale. Black means no data.
==PAGE:110==
B.3 Grid cell Munich
102
B.3
Grid cell Munich
Figure B.4: Mittlere grid cell modelling by [Pflügler & et. al., 2016]
B.4
Feature set performances step ahead
Figure B.5: Performance scores for feature sets F1, F2 and F3 by [Zheng et
al., 2015]
==PAGE:111==
Appendix C
Feasibility
C.1
Market Survey
C.1.1
License & Demographics
Figure C.1: Participants with valid driver’s license
==PAGE:112==
C.1 Market Survey
104
Figure C.2: Participants age diagram
Figure C.3: Participants gender diagram
C.1.2
Driving habits
Figure C.4: Participant’s frequency of driving
==PAGE:113==
C.1 Market Survey
105
Figure C.5: Participant’s driving frequency in urban areas
C.1.3
Parking considerations & Assistance application
Figure C.6: Participant’s opinion on parking issue
Figure C.7: Participant’s preferred assistance application
==PAGE:114==
C.1 Market Survey
106
Figure C.8: Participant’s reason for usage of assistance application
Figure C.9: Participants choosing transportation method based on expert
knowledge
Figure C.10: Participant’s deciding factor for transportation method
==PAGE:115==
C.1 Market Survey
107
Figure C.11: Participants choosing not to drive based on uncertainty of occu-
pancy
Figure C.12: Participant’s reasoning for not driving
C.1.4
Parking application usage
Figure C.13: Participants using parking application
==PAGE:116==
C.1 Market Survey
108
Figure C.14: Participant’s preferred parking application
Figure C.15: Participant’s usage of parking application
Figure C.16: Participants willing to use occupancy information features in
current environment
==PAGE:117==
C.1 Market Survey
109
Figure C.17: Participants willing to use occupancy information features i new
environment
C.1.4.1
Benefits from participants perspective
Question:
If you answered ’Yes’ to any of the two previous questions, please
describe why (E.g. what are the benefits from your perspective).
• Pros: it can take a long time finding a parking spot, so it would ease the
process, cons: parking spots often get occupied in a very short amount of
time, so maybe it would just make you drive somewhere and when you
arrive, there is a great possibility that the parking spot would be taken
• then I would not have to drive around myself to find a parking space, it
would save time and money
• The reliability of using the car as transportation to and from CPH. Getting
some of the benefits of living in the city combined with the parking benefit
of housing in the countryside.
• It’s a big concern to not be able to park the car anywhere and have to
drive around in order to find a spot (and eventually have to walk back to
the desired location). Hence, if I knew in advantage that there were a lot
of free spots in the area, I would be more likely to go by car.
• that would be convenient
• Saved time
• Convenience
==PAGE:118==
C.1 Market Survey
110
• I would (presumably) spend less time on my transit, because: A; I would
spend less time looking for a parking spot. B; I could pick the best parking
spot and walk less.
• Parking is the biggest issue with driving for me. Knowing live updates on
the parking situation i could better schedule my day
• Fordi det vil være nemmere
• Relative certainty about the parking opportunities at my destination
• Ville spare mig tid, og man ville tage bilen i situationer hvor man ellers
er usikker på om man kan få en plads
• It can be quite stressful to find a parking spot while navigating to your
destination. So it makes it very convenient for me.
• Preparedness
• Nemmere at finde en parkering
• It would be much easier to go certain places if you could be somewhat
sure that you would be able to park. It would make me take the car more
often to places where I usually never find a spot.
• Convenience and time saving on finding a spot
• All of the previous mentioned difficulties of parking
• Savning time to look for a parking spot
• Saves time
• More time to other thinks
• Check and ensure spots so you don’t waste time and money by driving
around to find one!
• Would be a lot easier to take the car into the central area
• Could Be a nice feature - and would maybe make my descision to take or
not take The var easier
• Saves time
• Time and convenience
• Tidsbesparelse og parkering tættest mulig på lokalisation
• Time is money
==PAGE:119==
C.1 Market Survey
111
• If I know there is an amount of parking spots where I am going or in
walking distance from my destination, I would be alle to plan for parking.
It could also guide me to a parking spot in the near facility, in case there
is no parking space at my destination when I get there
• I just want to find a parking spot without circling for an hour
• Currently driving an electric vehicle, but would be nice to be 100% sure.
I am using the EON electricity provider who has an app where you can
see if the charger is being used - but people can still park there without
charging and then you can no longer rely on the information.
• You would always be sure where to find parking and then spare some time
looking for parking
• Less chaos, driving in city streets (especially with one way streets) makes
navigating difficult
• The time it saves it tremendous
• Time saving
• Easier to choose which type of transportation to use, and finding a parking
spot if you drive
• Finding parking spots and determining wether it’s possible to leave your
car for the night, close to my final destination
• To be sure to find a parking spot and not drive around the city to find a
spot
• Sikkerhed for at finde en plads
• I live in a very populister area (Nørrebro) with few parkingspots, so it
would be to not waste time driving around
• Even if the results are not accurate down to each parking space, but more
general: "This area has a high probability of a parking space now" - it
would be nice to be guided in that direction
• It would be convenient, however, a new app for it would be overkill for
me, personally, as I rarely even attempt parking in very crowded areas.
• You could save so much time. Also it would be a good indication to the
parking situation at the place you want to drive to. Then you could see
before leaving, if you should take the car.
==PAGE:120==
C.1 Market Survey
112
C.1.5
Awareness of EasyParks’s Find & Park feature
Figure C.18: Participants aware of EasyPark’s Find & Park feature
==PAGE:121==
C.2 Technical Assessment
113
C.2
Technical Assessment
C.2.1
Transactions
Figure C.19: Daily transactions Dtran
Figure C.20: Dates transactions Dtran
==PAGE:122==
C.2 Technical Assessment
114
C.2.2
Street counts
Figure C.21: Street side OCCR Marts 2014, 17 o’clock
Figure C.22: Street side OCCR Marts 2014, 22 o’clock
==PAGE:123==
C.2 Technical Assessment
115
C.2.3
Area counts
Figure C.23: Legal street spots per area
Figure C.24: Area side snippet of OCCR Marts 2014, 17 o’clock
==PAGE:124==
C.2 Technical Assessment
116
Figure C.25: Area side snippet of OCCR Marts 2014, 22 o’clock
==PAGE:125==
Appendix D
Forecasting
D.1
Data manipulation
Figure D.1: Rows with no denoted legal spots
==PAGE:126==
D.1 Data manipulation
118
Figure D.2: Origin dates for all p-machines within areas with no allocated
transactions
==PAGE:127==
D.2 Modelling
119
D.1.1
Time Series
Figure D.3: Close up on daily seasonality
D.2
Modelling
D.2.1
ARIMA
A common notation of the ARIMA model in respect to lagged variables L with
a unit root of multiplicity d [WP, 2022a]:
 
1 −
p
X
i=1
φiLi
!
(1 −L)dXt = δ +
 
1 +
q
X
i=1
θiLi
!
εt.
(D.1)
==PAGE:128==
D.2 Modelling
120
Figure D.4: Long term trend area 1 (all of Dtrain
Figure D.5: Area 5: Differencing order and autocorrelation
==PAGE:129==
D.2 Modelling
121
Figure D.6: ACF + PACF for I = 1 Figure D.7: ACF + PACF for I = 2
==PAGE:130==
D.3 Feature importance
122
D.3
Feature importance
Figure D.8: Feature importance one-hot encoded variables
==PAGE:131==
D.4 OCCR transformation
123
Figure D.9: Feature importance summarized no free parking days
D.4
OCCR transformation
Figure D.10: Cosine formula explained [MIF, 2022]
==PAGE:132==
D.4 OCCR transformation
124
D.4.1
B-spline transformation
Figure D.11: B-spline fit, area 2
Figure D.12: B-spline fit, area 3
D.4.2
Street linear weights
Figure D.13: Linear fit, street 0
Figure D.14: Linear fit, street 1
==PAGE:133==
Appendix E
Application
Figure E.1: Fastest computed option
==PAGE:134==
126
Figure E.2: Cheapest computed option
Figure E.3: OCCR cheapest option Radius = 850m
==PAGE:135==
E.1 Easypark comparison
127
Figure E.4: RAS direct option results
E.1
Easypark comparison
These results are computed/fetched for the 21. of June, 14:00.
Figure E.5: EasyPark ARS
Figure E.6: RFT ARS
==PAGE:136==
Appendix F
Evaluation
Figure F.1: Initial project plan
==PAGE:137==
References
Adriazola-Steil, C.
(2013, 2).
More Urbanites, More Cars:
The Chal-
lenge of Urban Road Safety and Health | World Resources Institute.
Retrieved from https://www.wri.org/insights/more-urbanites-more
-cars-challenge-urban-road-safety-and-health
Alnoukari, M., & El Sheikh, A.
(2011, 10).
Knowledge Discovery Process
Models. , 72–100. doi: 10.4018/978-1-61350-050-7.CH004
Apple Inc.
(2021).
Machine Learning - Apple Developer.
Retrieved from
https://developer.apple.com/machine-learning/
AWS. (2022a, 6). Mobile Application Development. Retrieved from https://
aws.amazon.com/mobile/mobile-application-development/
AWS. (2022b, 6). What is RESTful API? - RESTful API Beginner’s Guide
- AWS.
Retrieved from https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/restful
-api/
Baheti, P. (2022). Train, Validation, and Test Set: How to Split Your Machine
Learning Data.
Retrieved from https://www.v7labs.com/blog/train
-validation-test-set
Bateman,
K.
(2022,
2).
5
cities
trying
innovations
with
their
public
transport
|
World
Economic
Forum.
Retrieved
from
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/02/cities-mobility-urban
-public-transport-challenges/
Boussaada, Z., Curea, O., Remaci, A., Camblong, H., & Bellaaj, N. M. (2018,
2). A nonlinear autoregressive exogenous (NARX) neural network model
for the prediction of the daily direct solar radiation. Energies, 11(3). doi:
10.3390/EN11030620
Bridges, J.
(2021, 10).
What Is a Feasibility Study?
How to Conduct One
for Your Project.
Retrieved from https://www.projectmanager.com/
training/how-to-conduct-a-feasibility-study
Browlee, J. (2017, 12). Difference Between Classification and Regression in
==PAGE:138==
REFERENCES
130
Machine Learning.
Retrieved from https://machinelearningmastery
.com/classification-versus-regression-in-machine-learning/
Brownlee, J.
(2016, 12).
How to Check if Time Series Data is Stationary
with Python.
Retrieved from https://machinelearningmastery.com/
time-series-data-stationary-python/
Brownlee, J. (2019, 8). What is Deep Learning?
Retrieved from https://
machinelearningmastery.com/what-is-deep-learning/
Brownlee, J. (2021, 1). Bagging and Random Forest for Imbalanced Classifi-
cation. Retrieved from https://machinelearningmastery.com/bagging
-and-random-forest-for-imbalanced-classification/
Burns, E., & Brush, K.
(2021, 3).
What is Deep Learning and How
Does It Work?
Retrieved from https://www.techtarget.com/
searchenterpriseai/definition/deep-learning-deep-neural
-network
BYCP, B. A. C. f. P. (2020, 3). Skybrudsprojekt og cykelsti på Strandboule-
varden Nord, parkeringsbelaegning. Retrieved from https://kbhkort.kk
.dk/spatialmap?
bydele.
(n.d.).
Retrieved
from
https://www.opendata.dk/city-of
-copenhagen/bydele
C, I. (2021, 11). Python Vs R: Know The Difference - InterviewBit. Retrieved
from https://www.interviewbit.com/blog/python-vs-r/
Camero, A., Toutouh, J., Stolfi, D. H., & Alba, E.
(2019).
Evolutionary
deep learning for car park occupancy prediction in smart cities. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 11353 LNCS, 386–
401.
Retrieved from https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.cvt
.dk/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-05348-2_32
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030
-05348-2{\_}32/TABLES/7
Chen, J. (2021, 10). Normal Distribution Definition. Retrieved from https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/n/normaldistribution.asp
Clifton, C. (2022). data mining | computer science | Britannica. Retrieved from
https://www.britannica.com/technology/data-mining
Delua, J. (2021, 3). Supervised vs. Unsupervised Learning: What’s the Dif-
ference?
| IBM.
Retrieved from https://www.ibm.com/cloud/blog/
supervised-vs-unsupervised-learning
Dix, P. (2020, 6). Time Series Forecasting Methods, Techniques & Models |
InfluxData. Retrieved from https://www.influxdata.com/time-series
-forecasting-methods/
DSPA. (2022, 5). Team Data Science Process (TDSP). Retrieved from https://
www.datascience-pm.com/tdsp/
Ektamaini. (2020). Python - Coefficient of Determination-R2 score - Geeks-
forGeeks.
Retrieved from https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python
-coefficient-of-determination-r2-score/
Fitzgerald, A. (2020, 10). Usability vs. User Experience: What’s the Differ-
==PAGE:139==
REFERENCES
131
ence? Retrieved from https://blog.hubspot.com/website/usability
-vs-user-experience
Foroughi, F., & Luksch, P. (n.d.). DATA SCIENCE METHODOLOGY FOR
CYBERSECURITY PROJECTS.
Frost, J. (2021). Exponential Smoothing for Time Series Forecasting - Statistics
By Jim. Retrieved from https://statisticsbyjim.com/time-series/
exponential-smoothing-time-series-forecasting/
Gillman, L. (2010). Is Excel necessary for data science? - CompSuccess. Re-
trieved from https://www.compsuccess.com/is-excel-necessary-for
-data-science/
Gong, D.
(2022, 2).
Top 6 Machine Learning Algorithms for Classi-
fication
|
by
Destin
Gong
|
Towards
Data
Science.
Retrieved
from
https://towardsdatascience.com/top-machine-learning
-algorithms-for-classification-2197870ff501
Google.
(2022, 5).
Classification:
Precision and Recall
|
Machine
Learning
Crash
Course
|
Google
Developers.
Retrieved
from
https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/
classification/precision-and-recall
Google, D.
(2021).
Advantages and limitations of on-device ML
|
Google
Developers.
Retrieved from https://developers.google.com/learn/
topics/on-device-ml/learn-more
Hartson,
R., & Pyla,
P. S.
(2012).
Prototyping.
Elsevier.
Re-
trieved
from
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
B9780123852410000117 doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385241-0.00011-7
He, A.
(2019, 7).
Maps and Navigation Apps Are Still Essential to
Smartphone Experience, and User Penetration Continues to Grow -
Insider Intelligence Trends, Forecasts & Statistics.
Retrieved from
https://www.emarketer.com/content/people-continue-to-rely-on
-maps-and-navigational-apps-emarketer-forecasts-show
Heaton, J.
(2017, 6).
The Number of Hidden Layers | Heaton Research.
Retrieved from https://www.heatonresearch.com/2017/06/01/hidden
-layers.html
Hovgaard,
L.
(2018,
3).
Easypark:
Algoritme slår realtidsovervågn-
ing i kampen om at finde ledige P-pladser | Version2.
Retrieved
from https://www.version2.dk/artikel/easypark-algoritme-slaar
-realtidsovervaagning-i-kampen-om-finde-ledige-p-pladser
Hyndman, R. J., & Athanasopoulos, G.
(2018a).
Forecasting:
Princi-
ples and Practice (2nd ed). Retrieved from https://otexts.com/fpp2/
Hyndman, R. J., & Athanasopoulos, G.
(2018b).
Forecasting:
Princi-
ples and Practice (2nd ed). Retrieved from https://otexts.com/fpp2/
IDF, I. D. F. (2022, 5). What is User Experience (UX) Design? | Interaction
Design Foundation (IxDF). Retrieved from https://www.interaction
-design.org/literature/topics/ux-design
Jain, P.
(2020, 1).
Unsupervised Machine Learning: Validation Techniques
==PAGE:140==
REFERENCES
132
- Guavus - Go Decisively.
Retrieved from https://www.guavus.com/
technical-blog/unsupervised-machine-learning-validation
-techniques/
Johansen, R., Helkov, J., & Reenberg, S.
(2021, 12).
Københavnere må
lede i timevis:
Hvorfor er der ikke parkeringspladser til alle med
en p-licens?
Retrieved from https://kobenhavnliv.dk/artikel/
k%C3%B8benhavnere-m%C3%A5-lede-i-timevis-hvorfor-er-der-ikke
-parkeringspladser-til-alle-med-en-p-licens
Johnson, D.
(2022, 5).
Back Propagation Neural Network: What is Back-
propagation Algorithm in Machine Learning?
Retrieved from https://
www.guru99.com/backpropogation-neural-network.html
kbh-parkering-zoneinformation. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.opendata
.dk/city-of-copenhagen/kbh-parkering-zoneinformation
Københavns Kommune.
(2022, 5).
Priser og parkeringszoner | Køben-
havns Kommunes hjemmeside.
Retrieved from https://www.kk.dk/
parkeringszoner
Korstanje, J. (2022, 5). How to Select a Model For Your Time Series Prediction
Task [Guide] - neptune.ai. Retrieved from https://neptune.ai/blog/
select-model-for-time-series-prediction-task
Kutafina,
E.,
Bechtold,
I.,
Kabino,
K.,
&
Jonas,
S.
M.
(2019,
3).
Recursive neural networks in hospital bed occupancy forecast-
ing.
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 19(1), 1–10.
Retrieved from https://bmcmedinformdecismak.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s12911-019-0776-1
doi: 10.1186/S12911-019-0776
-1/FIGURES/5
kvarter.
(n.d.).
Retrieved
from
https://www.opendata.dk/city-of
-copenhagen/kvarter
Lee,
C.
(2017,
10).
Feature
Importance
Measures
for
Tree
Mod-
els
—
Part
I
|
by
Ceshine
Lee
|
Veritable
|
Medium.
Re-
trieved from https://medium.com/the-artificial-impostor/feature
-importance-measures-for-tree-models-part-i-47f187c1a2c3
LT. (2022, 6). Bagging and Random Forest in Machine Learning. Retrieved
from https://learnetutorials.com/machine-learning/bagging-and
-random-forest
Lundqvist, L. (2021, 9). Dårlige parkeringsforhold i København giver erhvervs-
livet problemer.
Retrieved from https://smvdanmark.dk/analyser/
temaanalyser/d%C3%A5rlige-parkeringsforhold-i-k%C3%B8benhavn
-giver-erhvervslivet-problemer
Melcher, K.
(2021, 8).
A Friendly Introduction to [Deep] Neural Networks
| KNIME.
Retrieved from https://www.knime.com/blog/a-friendly
-introduction-to-deep-neural-networks
Menezes, J. M. P., & Barreto, G. A. (2008a, 10). Long-term time series predic-
tion with the NARX network: An empirical evaluation. Neurocomputing,
71(16-18), 3335–3343. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2008.01.030
==PAGE:141==
REFERENCES
133
Menezes, J. M. P., & Barreto, G. A. (2008b, 10). Long-term time series predic-
tion with the NARX network: An empirical evaluation. Neurocomputing,
71(16-18), 3335–3343. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2008.01.030
Meteostat.
(2022, 6).
Meteostat Developers.
Retrieved from https://dev
.meteostat.net/
MIF. (2022). Amplitude, Period, Phase Shift and Frequency. Retrieved from
https://www.mathsisfun.com/algebra/amplitude-period-frequency
-phase-shift.html
Mitchell, T. M.
(1999).
Machine Learning (Vol. 1) (No. Pt 1-2).
Machine
Learning V2.
Retrieved from http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/mlbook/
NBayesLogReg.pdf doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq112
Mitrea, C. A., Lee, C. K., & Wu, Z.
(2009, 9).
A Comparison between
Neural Networks and Traditional Forecasting Methods: A Case Study:.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/6777, 1(2), 19–24. Retrieved from https://
journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.5772/6777 doi: 10.5772/6777
MW.
(2022,
6).
Design Time Series NARX Feedback Neural Net-
works
-
MATLAB
&
Simulink
-
MathWorks
Nordic.
Re-
trieved
from
https://se.mathworks.com/help/deeplearning/ug/
design-time-series-narx-feedback-neural-networks.html
Nielsen, M.
(2019, 12).
Neural networks and deep learning, Chapter 2:
How the backpropagation algorithm works.
Retrieved from http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap2.html
NIST. (2022, 5). 6.4.4.2. Stationarity. Retrieved from https://www.itl.nist
.gov/div898/handbook/pmc/section4/pmc442.htm
Nok. (2019, 12). nok/sklearn-porter: Transpile trained scikit-learn estimators
to C, Java, JavaScript and others. Retrieved from https://github.com/
nok/sklearn-porter
OpenDataDK. (2022, 5). Hvad er Open Data DK? Retrieved from https://
www.opendata.dk/hvad-er-open-data-dk
OS system.
(2020).
Mobile App Backend:
How to Choose the Best One
for your Application.
Retrieved from https://os-system.com/blog/
what-is-backend-and-how-to-choose-the-best-mobile-app-backend
-for-your-application/
Our story - EasyPark Group.
(2022,
5).
Retrieved from https://
easyparkgroup.com/our-story/
parkeringshuse.
(n.d.).
Retrieved from https://www.opendata.dk/city-of
-copenhagen/parkeringshuse
Parkeringspladser. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.opendata.dk/city-of
-copenhagen/parkeringspladser
parkeringstaellinger. (2022). Retrieved from https://www.opendata.dk/city
-of-copenhagen/parkeringstaellinger
parkeringstaelling-i-zoner. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.opendata.dk/
city-of-copenhagen/parkeringstaelling-i-zoner
parkomater.
(n.d.).
Retrieved from https://www.opendata.dk/city-of
==PAGE:142==
REFERENCES
134
-copenhagen/parkomater
parkomat-transaktioner. (2016). Retrieved from https://www.opendata.dk/
city-of-copenhagen/parkomat-transaktioner#resource-parkomat
-transaktioner.csv
Patel, S.
(2017, 5).
Chapter 2 :
SVM (Support Vector Machine) —
Theory | by Savan Patel | Machine Learning 101 | Medium.
Re-
trieved from https://medium.com/machine-learning-101/chapter-2
-svm-support-vector-machine-theory-f0812effc72
Pflügler, C., & et. al. (2016). Predicting the Availability of Parking Spaces with
Publicly Available Data. , 361.
Piatetsky, G. (2014, 10). CRISP-DM, still the top methodology for analytics,
data mining, or data science projects - KDnuggets.
Retrieved from
https://www.kdnuggets.com/2014/10/crisp-dm-top-methodology
-analytics-data-mining-data-science-projects.html
Provoost, J. C., & et. al. (2020, 12). Predicting parking occupancy via machine
learning in the web of things. Internet of Things, 12, 100301. doi: 10.1016/
J.IOT.2020.100301
PyNeurGen.
(2022, 5).
PyNeurGen.
Retrieved from http://pyneurgen
.sourceforge.net/
Roder.
(2014).
Retrieved
from
https://www.opendata.dk/city-of
-copenhagen/roder
salling group.
(2022, 6).
Salling Group developer website.
Retrieved from
https://developer.sallinggroup.com/api-reference
Saltz, J. (2020, 11). CRISP-DM is Still the Most Popular Framework for Execut-
ing Data Science Projects - Data Science Process Alliance. Retrieved from
https://www.datascience-pm.com/crisp-dm-still-most-popular/
Saltz, J. S. (2021). CRISP-DM for Data Science: Strengths, Weaknesses and
Potential Next Steps. Proceedings - 2021 IEEE International Conference
on Big Data, Big Data 2021, 2337–2344. doi: 10.1109/BIGDATA52589
.2021.9671634
Sas.
(2022).
Machine
Learning:
What
it
is
and
why
it
mat-
ters | SAS.
Retrieved from https://www.sas.com/en_us/insights/
analytics/machine-learning.html
Sethi,
A.
(2020,
3).
Support Vector Regression In Machine Learn-
ing.
Retrieved from https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/
03/support-vector-regression-tutorial-for-machine-learning/
sf.
(11, 17).
How Rain and Humidity Connected?
| Smart Fog.
Retrieved
from https://www.smartfog.com/how-rain-and-humidity-connected
.html
Shah, T.
(2017).
About Train, Validation and Test Sets in Machine
Learning | by Tarang Shah | Towards Data Science.
Retrieved
from https://towardsdatascience.com/train-validation-and-test
-sets-72cb40cba9e7
Sharma, S. (2017, 9). Epoch vs Batch Size vs Iterations | by SAGAR SHARMA
==PAGE:143==
REFERENCES
135
| Towards Data Science. Retrieved from https://towardsdatascience
.com/epoch-vs-iterations-vs-batch-size-4dfb9c7ce9c9
Smola, A. J., Schölkopf, B., & Schölkopf, S. (2003). A Tutorial on Support
Vector Regression *.
Stewart, L.
(2021, 1).
How accurate is Google Maps Journey time?
Re-
trieved from https://www.ancoris.com/blog/accurate-google-maps
-journey-time
Stirrup, J. (2017, 7). What’s wrong with CRISP-DM, and is there an alterna-
tive? – Jen Stirrup. Retrieved from https://jenstirrup.com/2017/07/
01/whats-wrong-with-crisp-dm-and-is-there-an-alternative/
Stolfi, D. H., Alba, E., & Yao, X. (2017). Predicting Car Park Occupancy Rates
in Smart Cities. Retrieved from http://leafletjs.com/
SysIdentPy. (2022, 6). Building NARX Neural Network using Sysidentpy —
NARMAX models. Retrieved from https://sysidentpy.org/examples/
narx_neural_network.html
Wolfe, L.
(2020, 2).
How to Write a Market Feasibility Study.
Retrieved
from
https://www.thebalancesmb.com/how-to-write-a-market
-feasibility-study-in-4-easy-lessons-3515137
WP,
W.
(2022a,
5).
Autoregressive
integrated
moving
average
-
Wikipedia.
Retrieved
from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Autoregressive_integrated_moving_average
WP, W.
(2022b, 5).
Autoregressive–moving-average model - Wikipedia.
Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive%E2%
80%93moving-average_model
WP, W.
(2022c).
Kernel method - Wikipedia.
Retrieved from https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel_method
Yale. (1998). Linear Regression. Retrieved from http://www.stat.yale.edu/
Courses/1997-98/101/linreg.htm
Zhao, Z., & Zhang, Y. (2020). A Comparative Study of Parking Occupancy
Prediction Methods considering Parking Type and Parking Scale. Journal
of Advanced Transportation, 2020. doi: 10.1155/2020/5624586
Zheng, Y., Rajasegarar, S., & Leckie, C. (2015, 5). Parking availability predic-
tion for sensor-enabled car parks in smart cities. 2015 IEEE 10th Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Informa-
tion Processing, ISSNIP 2015. doi: 10.1109/ISSNIP.2015.7106902
Zhu, X. (n.d.). AGILE MINING-A NOVEL DATA MINING PROCESS FOR
INDUSTRY PRACTICE BASED ON AGILE METHODS AND VISU-
ALIZATION.
Zisserman, A. (2015). Lecture 3: SVM dual, kernels and regression.
