==PAGE:1==
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Lo­
gistic Validation Framework
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Jón Ágúst Hannesson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With the mass adoption of GPS over the years, a number of applications dependent on the
user’s location have become available. In some cases, like location­based games, users
can benefit from being in an exact location. This has led to the emergence of location
spoofing attacks. Malicious users falsify their reported location to gain certain benefits.
The author wants to investigate whether it is possible to validate GPS data over time using
sensors commonly found on modern smartphones. A mobile app will be designed and
implemented to collect GPS and inertial data from a smartphone. Data will be collected
with a series of journeys, and the data will be analyzed to see if there is a correlation be­
tween the two sets of data. This resulted in a potential correlation. However, the quality
of the data makes it difficult to confidently validate the GPS data using information from a
phone’s inertial sensors.
Jón Ágúst Hannesson ­ s202057
Signature
Date
ii
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Jón Ágúst Hannesson, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
I want to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Christian Damsgaard Jensen, for his input
and direction during this thesis. His perspective on the project proved extremely valuable
for the process. Also, I would like to thank my friends and family for their unwavering
support during the process.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background and related work
3
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Global Navigation Satellite Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
GPS Spoofing attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Inertial navigation systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Proposed detection methods in literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Other location verification schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Requirements and analysis
11
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Usage scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Methodology and Design
13
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
System overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Mobile App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
Back end architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.5
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Implementation
17
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Mobile app
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3
Web service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.4
Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.5
Hosting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.6
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.7
Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.8
Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.9
Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.10 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Findings
26
6.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2
Testing device
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.3
Sample journeys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
v
==PAGE:8==
6.4
Analysis of journeys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.5
Takeaway from analyzes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7
Conclusion
36
8
Appendix
37
Bibliography
44
vi
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Goals
The Global positioning system (GPS) has become a critical part of many modern systems,
from agriculture to financial markets and power grid regulation. The system allows users
to pinpoint their position anywhere on Earth. Modern smartphones are typically equipped
with GPS modules, allowing users to find their location or track their movement over time.
The widespread availability of location information has enabled developers to create appli­
cations heavily reliant on the users’ position. From location­based games, like Pokemon
Go [1], to fitness apps, like Strava [2]. This mass availability of location information has
enabled Apple to create a network from their mobile devices to locate lost items [3]. Users
can place Airtags to valuable items they do not want to lose, and the airtags transmit their
identification number via Bluetooth. Other Apple devices pick up this transmission and
relay it to Apple, attached with the location.
As the civilian part of GPS is not encrypted, there is no way for users to authenticate
whether the signal they are receiving is legitimate or not. As more and more systems rely
on GPS positioning, navigation, and timing, the incentive to cheat the system becomes
greater.
In Stilling and Budsted [4], a logistical framework is proposed, and a ride­sharing appli­
cation is presented. As users can gain financial benefits from sharing a car ride, users
are incentivized to cheat the system using a cyber­attack called GPS spoofing, which the
application is vulnerable to. The vulnerability of GPS and the incentive to spoof location­
dependent systems leads to the research question of:
Can mobile phones validate GPS data over time, using information available to them ?
This thesis will answer the research question. To achieve this, previous research on
location spoofing must be reviewed and examined. Requirements for data collection must
be presented, and methods to evaluate that data must be implemented.
Alongside a GPS module, modern smartphones are typically outfitted with movement
sensors. These sensors include a gyroscope, used to measure the phone’s rotational
orientation and an accelerometer used to measure the phone’s acceleration in three di­
mensions. In this thesis, a system will be designed and implemented to collect data from
the phone’s movement sensors and GPS data. This is done to investigate if the move­
ment sensors can validate GPS data collected over time. The findings will be evaluated
by measuring the correlation between the two sets of measurements and how much they
deviate from each other.
This research leads to the conclusion that there is potential in validating GPS data in
this manner. However, further research must be done in order to validate the GPS data
confidently.
1.2
Overview
The structure of this thesis is as follows:
Chapter two introduces the scope of this thesis and it’s systems and concepts. Previous
research in the field of spoofing attack mitigation is reviewed and lessons drawn from it.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter three details the usage scope of this thesis and analyses the requirements needed
to answer the research question. The data that needs to be collected, to answer the re­
search question is identified.
Chapter four presents a design of the system needed to meet the requirements stated in
chapter three. The system consists of a mobile app, a web service and a database.
Chapter five describes how the mobile app, web service and database presented in chap­
ter four will be implemented. The necessary data analysis needed to answer the research
question is also presented.
Chapter six presents the findings from the data analysis described in chapter five and
investigates whether the proposed solution works.
Chapter seven concludes the thesis and summarizes the project.
Chapter eight is the appendix, where plots for all experiments can be seen.
2
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and related work
2.1
Overview
Before moving on, it is crucial to be familiar with this project’s scope. In this chapter,
navigational concepts are introduced, and satellite navigational systems are examined.
Threats facing satellite navigation will be presented, and what malicious actors stand to
gain from fooling these systems.
Inertial navigation systems will also be presented. Their composition will be explained,
and what inertial components are present in modern smartphones.
Finally, previous literature on location verification will be examined, and what research
has been done to mitigate threats to satellite navigation spoofing.
2.2
Navigation
Navigation is the process of knowing where you are. Navigation has been used by hu­
mans, in some form or other, for thousands of years.
To find their position, a navigator must compare their position to a known location, com­
monly called a reference point [5]. On land or close to it, these reference points can be
landmarks. Celestial bodies, such as the sun and star constellations, can be reference
points. This method of navigation is called celestial navigation [6]. A navigator must cal­
culate the angle between their horizon and the celestial body to calculate their position.
This can be done with a device called a sextant.
Should a navigator want to know in which direction they are facing, they can use a com­
pass. A compass indicates the direction from 0° to 360° relative to the Earth’s magnetic
poles. The angle between the Earth’s north pole (magnetic or true) and the direction the
navigator is facing is called the absolute bearing.
If a navigator knows their starting position, speed, direction, and travel time, they can
estimate their new position. This method is known as Dead reckoning. Dead reckoning
uses the starting position as the refrence point.
With the introduction of radio technology, the possibility of using radio waves for navigation
emerged. A navigator listens for radio signals from transmitters with know locations. They
can calculate their position by measuring how long the signal takes to reach them. These
radio transmitters can be on land or aboard satellites in Earth’s orbit [5], can be used as
refrence points.
2.3
Global Navigation Satellite Systems
A Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) is a navigation system that provides posi­
tioning, navigation, and timing services, using a constellation of satellites. Currently, there
are several deployed GNSS systems, for example, Galileo, operated by the European
Union, the BeiDou Navigation System, operated by The People’s Republic of China, and
the Global Positioning System (GPS) operated by the United States Space Force. GPS is
the most prevalent GNSS and most widely used [7]. This section will provide an overview
of current GNSSs and how they work.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
3
==PAGE:12==
2.3.1
GPS
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a GNSS owned and operated by the U.S. Space
Force. It provides positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) services [7]. The system was
originally launched in 1978, and a complete constellation of 24 satellites was achieved
in 1994. Initially, the system was only available for military use. However, civilian use of
the system was allowed in the 1980’s [8]. The system is free to use for anyone with a
compatible GPS receiver.
2.3.2
How GPS works
The system consists of three segments. These are the space segment, control segment,
and user segment. These segments work in harmony to provide services to civilian or
military users.
The space segment consists of at least 24 operational satellites. For redundancy reasons,
the U.S. Space force flies 30 satellites as of April 12, 2022 [9]. Each satellite transmits its
location, status information, and a precise timestamp. To ensure accurate timekeeping,
each satellite carries multiple atomic clocks onboard. Each GPS satellite transmits two
signals, an unencrypted signal for civilian use and an encrypted one reserved for military
use.
The control segment consists of various ground stations scattered worldwide, with a Mas­
ter Control Station located in Colorado. From these bases, operators can monitor satel­
lites and send commands to them.
The user segment of the system consists of GPS receivers. To calculate their position,
a receiver must obtain signals from at least four satellites [10]. GPS is used in various
industries, from aviation and agriculture to financial markets and power grid management.
The satellite messages are comprised of three pieces, a Pseudorandom code, Ephemeris
data and Almanac data. The pseudorandom code is a unique identifier for each satellite.
The ephemeris data contains information about the satellite’s position, the health of the
satellite, and the current time and date. The almanac data contains information about the
position of other GPS satellites and where they should be located at any time during the
day [8].
GPS receivers calculate their distance from each satellite they pick up. As the signals
travel at the speed of light from the satellite to the receiver, their distance can be calcu­
lated by using the offset of the receiver’s internal clock and the timestamp of the satellite
signals. To determine their position in 3­D, receivers need at least four satellite signals.
2.3.3
GLONASS
GLONASS is a GNSS owned and operated by Roscosmos, the Russian state space cor­
poration. The system currently has 25 satellites in the constellation, with 22 operational
[11].
Flight tests began in 1982, with the system being declared operational in 1993 and fully
operational two years later. Starting in 1990, the program saw a reduction in funding, and
the system degraded as a result, and in 2002 the system only had seven satellites in its
constellation. Subsequently, the system’s coverage was very limited and unable to cover
all of Russia’s territory.
The Global Navigation System for 2002­2011 program, adopted in 2002, led to improve­
ments in the system. The number of satellites increased, getting the system back to full
4
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:13==
operational status and modernizing the system in general [12].
2.3.4
Galileo
Galileo is the GNSS owned by the European Union. It is operated by the European Union
Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA). With plans of up to 30 satellites, with 24
operational and six spares, the system currently has 22 operational satellites [13]. The
first test satellite was launched in 2005, with the first operational satellite being launched
in 2011.
Claiming to offer improved accuracy to location based services, thanks to adding another
constellation, Galileo also mitigates the risk of other GNSS being made unavailable [14].
The system also provides Search and Rescue (SAR) services, allowing people in distress
to broadcast their location, which is relayed to search and rescue crews [15]. Unlike GPS
and GLONASS, Galileo is under civil control.
2.3.5
Beidou Navigation Satellite System
The BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (BDS) is a GNSS owned and operated by the
People’s Republic of China. The system started with regional coverage in China and
gradually added global coverage. [16].
Like other GNS systems, Beidou consists of three segments: the space segment, the
ground segment, and the user segment. The space segment consists of 35 satellites in
various orbits [17]. The ground segment consists of ground stations, and the user seg­
ment consists of BDS receivers.
BDS can provide a short messaging service, thanks to satellites in geosynchronous orbits
[18]. Messages up to 120 characters long can be through receivers to seek help in case
of emergencies [19].
2.3.6
Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System
The Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) is a regional satellite navigation
system being developed by the Indian state. Contrary to the systems mentioned above,
IRNSS does not have global coverage as the system only services areas around the In­
dian subcontinent [20].
The space segment of the system consists of 7 satellites [21]. The system offers two
types of services: The standard positioning service (SPS) and the restricted service (RS).
SPS is open for use and unencrypted, while RS is encrypted and only allowed to be used
by authorized parties [22].
2.3.7
Quasi­Zenith Satellite System
The Quasi­Zenith Satellite System (QZSS) is a regional satellite system owned and op­
erated by Japan. [23]. The system was developed to get more precise positioning in
mountainous and urban areas, where GPS signals were not strong enough to get accu­
rate readings. QZSS satellite signals can be integrated with GPS receivers to combat this
problem.
The system currently consists of 4 satellites in the Quasi­Zenith geostationary orbit. In
the coming years, the system is planned to reach a total number of seven satellites [24].
2.3.8
Future GNSS
Following the United Kingdom’s departure from the European Union, the country lost ac­
cess to Galileo’s secure signal. This raised some concerns within the UK government
and as a result, in 2018, a government program was started to investigate whether the
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
5
==PAGE:14==
UK should implement its own GNSS. The program concluded that the UK should not pur­
sue implementing their full­fledged GNSS [25].
In 2020, the Space­Based Positioning Navigation and Timing Programme was established
to investigate alternatives to a global constellation. Those alternatives could include satel­
lites in a lower orbit than traditional GNSS or the possibility of two­way communication
between satellite and receiver. The program is still investigating the UK’s options [26].
2.4
GPS Spoofing attacks
GPS spoofing is a type of cyber attack where malicious actors either: broadcast fraudulent
GPS signals designed to alter reporting on GPS receivers [27] or falsify their reported
location on mobile phones [28].
2.4.1
GPS signal spoofing
As GPS signals have a very low signal strength on the surface of Earth (1x10−16 watts),
[29], they can be easily overpowered by other transmitters. This can be done to jam the
signal, making it unusable by nearby receivers. This kind of jamming attack can be disrup­
tive for the user. However, users will notice it immediately, as their GPS receiver cannot
determine its position. Spoofing attacks, on the contrary, can go unnoticed by the user.
During a spoofing attack, fraudulent GPS signals are transmitted with a higher signal
strength than authentic signals. This can cause nearby receivers to stop tracking the
weaker authentic signal and start tracking the stronger fraudulent signal. This can result
in the GPS receiver reporting wrong positional data. A prevalent case in related literature
was in 2013 when researchers at the University of Texas at Austin were able to spoof a
yacht’s navigational system, and as a result, the yacht steered off course [30].
2.4.2
Spoofed GPS reporting on mobile phones
GPS spoofing is also possible using dedicated spoofing applications on mobile phones.
On Android devices, users download spoofing apps and configure their operating system
to use the reported location from these apps as the phones’ position. An example of such
an app can be seen in figure 2.1, where the blue circle indicates the authentic position
of the device and the flag (Marker 1) shows the spoofed position that is reported to the
operating system.
On Apple’s iOS, GPS spoofing is not as easy as on Android. To spoof their location, users
must either ”jailbreak” their iPhone or install third­party software on their computer and
configure the software to change their location [31]. Jailbreaking is the process of gaining
unauthorized access to an electronic device to install applications that the manufacturer
has not approved. Malicious actors exploit flaws in the device’s implementation to gain
this access [32].
To ease the process of location spoofing on iOS, the company Gfaker sells an external
module capable of location spoofing. The module is connected to an iPhone via the
charging port and controlled by a companion app on the phone. Once connected, the
external module provides location information instead of the phone’s internal module [33].
2.4.3
GPS spoofing cases
GPS spoofing has been theorized and implemented in research [30] and real­world sce­
narios. Ride­hailing drivers have used GPS spoofing to gain financial benefits [34] and
the Russian military is suspected of systematic GPS spoofing, both inside and outside
Russia’s borders [35] [36] [37]. Prior research has been done testing efforts to mitigate
GPS spoofing and this research will be further examined in section 2.6.
6
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Spoofing application on Android
2.5
Inertial navigation systems
An inertial navigation system (INS) uses accelorometers and gyroscopes to calculate a
body’s angular velocity. Additionally, an INS can be equipped with magnetometer and a
barometer to measure magnetic field and air pressure respectfully [38]. Inertial navigation
systems are widely used in the aviation and marine industry.
An accelerometer is a device used to measure the vibration or acceleration of an object. A
weighted mass inside the accelerometer moves if the device vibrates or accelerates. This
movement creates an electrical force proportional to the force acting upon it. Accelerom­
eters can be found in many devices, from airplanes to smartphones [39]. A gyroscope is
a device used to measure changes in a device’s orientation in space. They can either be
Mechanical, where a spinning disc is used to detect changes in orientation, or Ring laser
Gyroscopes, which use lasers to detect orientation changes. Ring laser gyroscopes are
much smaller than mechanical gyroscopes and have no moving parts [40].
Using orientation, velocity, and the initial position (provided by an external source, e.g.,
GNSS), an INS can estimate a body’s position using dead reckoning. While in motion, an
INS can continuously update the body’s position based on its measurements.
One drawback of INS is the accumulating error of the measurements over time [41]. Small
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
7
==PAGE:16==
differences from the actual trajectory add up over time and can lead to drastic errors.
This limits how long an INS can operate independently. Modern mobile phones are more
often than not equipped with an onboard INS. These include an accelerometer, gyro­
scope, magnetometer, and barometer. These sensors are used to track a user’s move­
ment, count steps, measure which way the phone is orientated, and provide a compass,
amongst other things [42]. The INS on mobile phones will be further examined in section
5.2.2.
2.6
Proposed detection methods in literature
2.6.1
Signal Analysis
In Johnston and Warner, [29], several methods are proposed to detect fraudulent sig­
nals in GPS receivers. In their paper, seven methods are proposed to detect GPS signal
spoofing. Three methods analyze the signal strength for abnormalities, while others ex­
plore the satellite identification codes, timing of the signals, or the receiver’s movement.
These methods will now be inspected in more detail.
1) Monitor the absolute GPS signal strength: To spoof GPS receivers, malicious actors
broadcast fraudulent GPS signals. These signals are often orders of magnitude stronger
than authentic signals. This method involves measuring the signal strength and informing
the user if it exceeds some predetermined threshold.
2) Monitor the relative GPS signal strength: This method involves measuring and
recording the GPS signal strength. If the signal strength increases suddenly, this could
indicate an inauthentic signal, and the receiver would alert the user.
3) Monitor the signal strength of each received satellite signal: As spoofed signals
tend to be of equal strength, monitoring signal strength consistency could be useful in
detecting fraudulent signals. This method is an extension of method 1) and 2), where both
the relative and absolute signal strength is analyzed. As authentic signals are transmitted
from moving satellites, they vary in strength over time. If the receiver monitors for signal
consistency, it could alert the user that the signals are too perfect.
4) Monitor satellite identification codes and the number of satellite signals received:
As GPS spoofing devices often imitate multiple satellites simultaneously. This often ex­
ceeds the number of authentic satellites visible to a receiver. Monitoring the number of
visible satellites and keeping track of their identification codes over time could help deter­
mine whether spoofing is likely. If the number of visible satellites drastically differs from
historical data, it could indicate a spoofing attack, and the user alerted.
5) Check the time intervals: When broadcasting inauthentic signals, spoofing devices
can broadcast signals with constant time intervals. As authentic signals come from dif­
ferent satellites at different distances from the GPS receiver, they do not arrive simulta­
neously. If signals from all satellites arrive simultaneously, this could indicate a spoofing
attack, and the user is alerted.
6) Do a time comparison: This method requires the GPS receiver to be outfitted with an
accurate onboard clock. By comparing the timestamp of the GPS signal to the accurate
internal clock, the receiver could monitor for spoofing attacks. If the timestamp of the
signal deviates too much from the accurate onboard clock, the user could be alerted.
7) Perform a sanity check: This method involves equipping the GPS receiver with an
onboard INS. This will be examined further in section 2.6.2.
Methods 1) to 5) do not require additional hardware to be equipped on GPS receivers,
8
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:17==
only changes to the firmware. Method 6) and 7), however require additional hardware
modules to be equipped on the receiver. They only propose these methods to detect
GPS spoofing but do not implement or evaluate any of these methods.
In Ragnanathan, Ólafsdóttir and Capkun [43], the SPREE GPS receiver is introduced. It
is claimed that SPREE can detect all known GPS spoofing attacks.
Typically, GPS receivers have multiple channels to track satellites. Each channel is dedi­
cated to a single satellite. The more channels a receiver has, it is thus able to track more
satellites simultaneously. When it can track more satellites, it can acquire a positional fix
quicker (compared to a receiver with fewer channels.)
Typical GPS receivers only track a satellite on one channel. If they receive multiple sig­
nals claiming to be the same satellite, they will only track the strongest signal and ignore
weaker ones as noise. This is vulnerable to GPS spoofing attacks, as ground­based
fraudulent transmitters can easily overpower legitimate signals from satellites.
SPREE allocates more than one channel to each satellite. SPREE can track the fraudulent
spoofed signal and the weaker authentic signal on different channels in the case of a GPS
spoofing attack. A received transmission is called a peak, and this method of tracking on
multiple channels is called Auxiliary peak tracking (APT) and is the responsibility of the
APT module of the SPREE receiver. If the receiver successfully detects more than one
peak, it calculates the difference in arrival times. A spoofing attack is detected if the
difference is more than the maximum acceptable difference. The maximum acceptable
difference can be set in a configuration file.
In addition to auxiliary peak tracking, SPREE uses Navigation message inspection (NAVI),
which is the responsibility of the NAVI module. This module inspects navigation data for
consistency and sanity. The module records navigation data for each satellite and per­
forms checks each time new navigation from a satellite is received. The checks include a
comparison of the message’s timestamp and the internal clock and a discrepancy com­
parison to previous transmissions, among other checks. If any of these checks fail, a
spoofing attack is detected.
2.6.2
Acellorometer and Gyroscope
An alternative to performing signal analysis to detect GPS spoofing is performing a san­
ity check using an INS. This method is proposed in Johnston and Warner [29] as one of
two methods that do not investigate the properties of the incoming signal. This method
involves comparing measurements from an INS to the recorded journey of the GPS re­
ceiver.
Modern smartphones are typically equipped with an onboard INS so this method could be
implemented on them. In Li and Wu, [34], a sanity check for GPS journeys is presented,
implemented, and tested. As they claim that smartphones’ GPS modules are too poor to
perform signal analysis, a sanity check using the INS is executed instead. They conclude
that INS on mobile phones can potentially detect GPS spoofing attacks.
Wong and Yiu [44] investigate the possibility of using a phone’s onboard INS to perform
a sanity check. Their method involves recording the phone’s coordinates provided by
the GPS module and the rotation orientation provided by the phone’s INS. Both measure­
ments are recorded every 5 seconds of a journey. The recorded data is analyzed once the
journey is over, and the travel direction over the length of the journey is examined. They
concluded that this method successfully detects spoofing attacks and will be explored
further in this thesis.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
9
==PAGE:18==
2.7
Other location verification schemes
As GPS spoofing revolves around changing one’s location or fooling the receivers of oth­
ers, methods for localization using other methods than GPS have emerged. Both Apple
and Google offer location services on their iOS and Android operating systems [45] [46].
These services try to locate the device using publicly known broadcast WiFi information
for public hot spots, alongside cell tower information in the device’s range. This approach
follows the MECE principle, where each method of localization is mutually exclusive, and
together they are collectively exhaustive.
Public repositories, like Wigle [47], allow users to record their location to a database,
alongside information about cell towers and WiFi networks in the device’s range. They
also offer an API where IP addresses and cell towers id’s can be entered, and a location
estimation is returned.
2.8
Summary
Navigation is the process of determining one’s position. Navigators must compare their
position to the known location of reference points. These reference points can be in the
form of satellites orbiting the Earth that transmit information via radio waves. GPS is the
most widely used satellite navigation system today. However, there are many different
systems in operation from various countries or organizations.
The civilian part of GPS is unencrypted, and as a result, it is vulnerable to location spoofing
attacks. Attackers transmit fraudulent signals designed to mimic authentic signals. This
can cause GPS receivers to miscalculate their position.
Inertial navigation is invulnerable to such attacks, as they do not rely on external informa­
tion to calculate their position. Inertial navigational components can be found in modern
smartphones, and research shows that information from inertial systems can be used to
validate GPS data.
Previous research on positional spoofing mitigation has been done, with promising results.
These methods do not rely on inertial navigation but require the modification of a GPS
receiver’s firmware. As firmware modification is not possible in general mobile application
development, the development of GPS verification using inertial data has been proposed.
The method of location verification, using a phone’s inertial sensor will be investigated in
this thesis.
10
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:19==
3
Requirements and analysis
3.1
Overview
In chapter 1 of this thesis, a research question was proposed, whether it is possible to
verify a mobile phone’s location using information available to it. In chapter 2 satellite
and inertial navigation were introduced, along with GPS spoofing and previous research
on how to mitigate spoofing attacks. Wong and Yiu [44] proposed a method of validating
GPS data by comparing it to recorded data from the inertial module of a smartphone.
In this chapter, the scope of this usage scope of this thesis will be presented, and the
requirements of investigating GPS and INS data correlation will be identified.
Note: The following assumption is made about the data collection of the mobile device.
Orientation of the device while collection data: It is assumed that the mobile device is
orientated in the same matter during the entirety of a journey. Specifically, that the screen
of the device is facing the sky and the back of the device is parallel with the ground, while
the top of the device is pointed in the direction of travel.
3.2
Usage scope
In Budsted and Stilling [4], a ride sharing application is proposed, where users gain finan­
cial benefits, such as free parking or no congestion charges, by sharing a ride, opposed
to having one person in a car during a journey.
The application must be able to run on mobile devices and users must be able to start
and stop the recording of a journey. During the journey, the app collects crumbs at certain
intervals, which contain the coordinates of the device. These crumbs can be used to map
the journey of the user.
There are a few optional methods to determine whether two people shared a car ride. One
method would involve determining whether the two phones of the users are in proximity
to each other during the length of the journey. This would not be too different from the
COVID­19 exposure notification system implemented by Apple and Google [48].
The exposure notification system uses a phone’s Bluetooth capability to communicate with
all other mobile phones in the proximity. The phones exchange identifying information for
each device and log the time and date of the proximity. The technology behind this system
is however not openly available to civilian developers, and as such can only be used by
government agencies.
Another way to determine whether two users shared a car ride would be to verify that
their recorded GPS data of that journey is legitimate. If the GPS data can be trusted and
two users report the same journey at the same time, the system can be sure that they
travelled together.
Wong and Yiu [44], claim that it is possible to use a smartphone’s INS to verify the authen­
ticity of GPS data. These claims are promising as their method can potentially be used to
verify journeys in the ride­sharing application described in Budsted, and Stilling [4]. As a
result, this method will be investigated further.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
11
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Requirements
In order to investigate whether inertial sensors on mobile phones are capable of validating
GPS data, GPS and inertial sensor data will be collected and analyzed in a similar matter
presented in Wong, and Yiu [44].
As no applications were found that can record these sets of data simultaneously, an ap­
plication must be implemented. This application must be able to record both the location
data from the GPS module and data from the inertial sensor.
The application must be able to get frequent updates from the GPS and INS modules.
This ensures that the recorded data better represents the journey of the user.
The recorded data must be sent from the device to a governing entity, saving it for later
analysis. The user must be able to control whether data collection is active.
To allow testing of the application on as many different devices, it should be able to run on
both iOS and Android. As of June 2022, these two operating systems make up 99,28%
of the global smartphone market [49].
3.4
Summary
In order to investigate whether GPS data can be verified using a phone’s INS, data from
both these modules must be collected. As no current mobile applications were found
capable of doing this, a mobile app must be developed.
To gather data throughout a journey, the app must record both GPS and INS data, at cer­
tain time intervals. To cover most of the world’s smartphones, the app must be available
on Android and iOS.
12
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:21==
4
Methodology and Design
4.1
Overview
In chapter 3, it was identified that to collect GPS and INS data to investigate the research
question, a mobile app must the developed. In this chapter, an overview of the data
collection system will be presented, and a design of the mobile app,and a web service and
a database will be proposed in sections 4.3, 4.4 and 5.4 respectively. The data models
reacquired will be identified, and how this data will be analyzed is covered.
4.2
System overview
The collection of data will work as follows:
1. The user opens the mobile app and starts recording journey
2. The app sends a request to the web service in order to create a new session
3. The web service creates a new session in the database, retrieves the id for that
session and sends back to app
4. The app collects positional and orientation data and sends to the web service with
the session id
5. The web service saves the data in the database, with the session id and sends the
app an acknowledgement
6. Step 4 and 5 are repeated throughout the journey
7. The user stops the journey and request the web service to end the session
8. The web service ends the journey by saving the time of ending to the database
This sequence can also be viewed in the sequence diagram in figure 4.1.
4.3
Mobile App
As stated in the requirements in section 3.3, the mobile app should allow users to record
their positional data and orientation. The app must also be able to send this data to a web
service, where it can be saved and analysed.
The mobile app can be simple, as the requirements only call for limited functionality. A
single view app, displaying the user’s positional data and orientation, and allowing them
to start and stop recording data. A design of the app was made and can be seen in figure
4.2.
4.4
Back end architecture
A web service must be constructed to collect the recorded data from the mobile app. This
is done to minimize the amount of data stored on the mobile device and minimize analysis
on the device. As mobile devices vary in computing power, some devices might struggle
to analyze much data.
The web service must allow users to start and end a journey and save crumbs. As the
analysis of the data is not automated in this version of the system, there is no need for the
ability to view historical data. As a result, the REST API should offer these three services:
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.1: Sequence diagram of data collection
• Creation of a journey
• Ending a journey
• Saving a crumb
Once the web service receives data from the mobile app, it saves it in the database. The
database needs two tables, one for information about journeys and another to save the
crumbs. In figure 4.3, a class diagram describing the data objects needed for the system
can be seen. A journey is represented by the class ”Session,” and each session can have
many crumbs.
A session has an id, a start date and and end date. A crumb has an id, a session id,
coordinates and measurements from the INS. In the class diagram the INS measurements
a grouped together, but they can be split apart when implementing this system.
4.5
Data analysis
Once data has been gathered, it will be analyzed to check for potential GPS spoofing.
Data will be collected from the database and investigated with appropriate methods. This
process does not have to be automated, as the analyses of journeys are not needed right
away for this thesis.
14
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: Mock up design of mobile app
4.6
Summary
The data collected from the mobile device must be sent from the mobile device and saved
in a database. This process is described by a sequence diagram in figure 4.1. As the app
requires limited functionality, it only has to offer a single view. A mock design of the mobile
app can be seen in figure 4.2.
The back­end of the system consists of a web service and a database. The web service
receives data collected from the app and saves it to the database. The web service must
offer the functionality of creating a journey, ending a journey, and saving data belonging
to a journey, called a crumb.
The database must have two tables, one representing journeys and the other crumbs.
The data structure of the system can be viewed in figure 4.3. The collected data must be
extracted from the database to analyze.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.3: Tables needed in database
16
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:25==
5
Implementation
5.1
Overview
In this chapter, the implementation of the data collection system will be introduced. Using
the design laid out in chapter 4, the mobile app, web service, and database are imple­
mented. The hosting platform for the web service and the database will also be presented.
Additionally, the methods of data analysis will be presented and the environment in which
the analysis is done. Various libraries required for the data analysis are listed as well.
Finally, multiple algorithms needed for the analysis are presented and explained.
5.2
Mobile app
As described in section 4.3, the mobile app should contain a single view, presenting lo­
cational and orientation information. The app should also allow the user to start and stop
recording data. The app was implemented using Expo, which is presented in section
5.2.1. A screenshot of the mobile app can be seen in figure 5.1. The mobile app consists
Figure 5.1: Screenshot of data collection app
of three components, a GPS component, an INS component, and the main component.
The GPS component (gps.js), gathers location data, using the library Location, described
in section 5.2.3. The INS component (gyro.js) gathers orientation data, using the library
Device Motion, described in section 5.2.2. The main component (main.js) creates the
app’s visuals and gathers data from the other two components to send to the web ser­
vice.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
17
==PAGE:26==
5.2.1
Expo framework
The development framework Expo is used to develop the mobile app. The framework
allows for simultaneous development on both iOS and Android. The framework acts as
a development platform for mobile apps, written in the React Native framework. React
Native is a Javascript framework for mobile app development, developed by Meta [50].
React Native allows developers to write source code for mobile apps that run on both iOS
and Android. Developers write the apps in Javascript, which React Native then compiles
in the native programming language for each operating system.
During development, the companion app Expo Go can be used. It allows developers
to test their applications on real devices instantly. Developers must start a development
server on their machine. Every time a file is saved, the server compiles the app so that it
can be instantly downloaded to the companion app and run. If the development server is
not live, the app can not be downloaded to the testing device and, as a result, can not be
run.
Expo can also build apps so that they can run without the aid of the development server.
For Android, Expo generates an apk of the app, that can be installed on devices immedi­
ately. For iOS, the developer must be enrolled in the Apple Developer Programm to be
able to build apps. This was not the case for the author, and as a result, the companion
app was used with iOS throughout the project. Aside from being required to have the
development server running while the app was in use, no problems occurred as a result
of not building the iOS app.
5.2.2
Device Motion
To detect the movement of the mobile phone, the library Device motion will be used [51].
The library provides, among other things, the device’s rotational vector with alpha, beta,
and gamma values. The rotational vector describes the rotation of the device coordinate
frame around the earth coordinate frame.
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) defines the Earth coordinate frame as [52]:
East, North, Up’ frame at the user’s location. It has the following 3 axes, where
the ground plane is tangent to the spheriod of the World Geodetic System 1984
[WGS84], at the user’s location.
• East (X) is in the ground plane, perpendicular to the North axis and pos­
itive towards the East.
• North (Y) is in the ground plane and positive towards True North (towards
the North Pole).
• Up (Z) is perpendicular to the ground plane and positive upwards.
And the device coordinate frame as:
• x is in the plane of the screen or keyboard and is positive towards the
right hand side of the screen or keyboard.
• y is in the plane of the screen or keyboard and is positive towards the top
of the screen or keyboard.
• z is perpendicular to the screen or keyboard, positive out of the screen
or keyboard
The device coordinate frame can also be seen in figure 5.2.
18
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5.2: The device coordinate frame [53]
The rotation vector is comprised of the values alpha, beta, and gamma, as mentioned
earlier, and describes the number of degrees between the device’s coordinate and the
earth coordinate frame. The rotations are described as follows [53]:
• Alpha: Rotation around the z axis. Is 0° when top of the device is pointed directly
toward the Earth’s north pole.
• Beta: Rotation around the x axis causes the beta rotation angle to change. Is 0°
when the device is laying on a flat surface, so the top and bottom of the device are
the same distance from the Earth’s surface.
• Gamma: Rotation around the y axis causes the gamma rotation angle to change. Is
0° when the device is laying on a flat surface, so the left and right side of the device
are the same distance from the Earth’s surface.
Figure 5.3 visualizes the rotations.
Figure 5.3: Rotation of the device visualized [53]
The library uses the device’s gyroscope, accelorometer and the magnetometer to deter­
mine the rotation vector. As the device is rotated, the rotation values change as follows
[54]:
• Alpha: The alpha value increases as the top of the device is rotated counter clock­
wise from North.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
19
==PAGE:28==
• Beta: The beta value increases as the top of the device is tipped towards Earths
surface.
• Gamma: The gamma value increases as the right hand side of the device is tipped
towards Earths surface.
Device motion is available in the Expo framework and will be used in the implementation
of the app to collect orientation data. In Expo’s documentation on device motion [55],
it is not stated in which units the rotation is described or the orientation of the rotation.
After inspecting the values provided by the library during development, it is clear that the
rotation is expressed in radians, from −π to π, with a positive counterclockwise rotation.
5.2.3
Location
The library Expo location was used to get the phone’s location. The library provides meth­
ods to get a phone’s location asynchronously, geofencing capabilities, and location up­
dates, among other navigational information.
The library offers two methods of getting location updates, either through listeners or
polling. During the app’s development, the location update capability was tested but found
to be unstable, as various attempts to configure the listener failed. The author was also
unable to get the location updates working on iOS. An alternative method of retrieving
location updates was implemented as a result. The method getCurrentPositionAsync was
invoked at a 5 second interval. When the method was resolved, the phone coordinates,
along with a timestamp, were collected. Retrieving location updates in this manner proved
successful and worked on both iOS and Android and was used in the implementation of
the app as a result.
5.2.4
Data collection
During a journey, the orientation of the device is updated every second. As mentioned
in section 5.2.3, the device’s location is updated every 5 seconds. As the orientation of
the device can change faster than the location, it needs to be updated more frequently.
The intervals of one second and five seconds was chosen as suggested by Wong and
Yiu [44].
Once the orientation and location of the phone have been updated, they are sent to the
main component of the app. The main component stores the latest info for both measure­
ments in discrete data objects. If a journey is being recorded, every time the location of
the phone is updated, the main component sends it and the orientational data to the web
service.
5.3
Web service
The web service is a Representational State Transfer Application Programming Interface,
commonly known as a REST API. The web service’s purpose is to allow the mobile app
to store its recorded data in a database. The API consists of endpoints, each having a
specified purpose. The web service consists of a REST API, written in Javascript (JS),
using the Express JS framework. The web service receives data from the mobile devices
and saves it to a database. The Express JS framework was chosen for its simplicity in
configuring and development. Express JS is a Node.js application, owned by IBM. It offers
all the capabilities needed to implement the design, described in chapter 4.
5.4
Database
The database stores the data recorded by the mobile app and keeps it for later analyses.
To implement the data objects described in the design, a relational database will be used,
20
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:29==
where each data object is represented by a table. Postgresql was chosen to implement the
database, as it offers a variety of tools and the vast amount of resources available online
to use during development. Postgresql is an open­source object­relational structured
query language (SQL) database system with over 30 years of development [56]. The
system offers both a command­line and graphical interface to developers. Most of the
SQL standard supported by Postgresql. It has all the capabilities needed to implement
the design described in chapter 4.
5.5
Hosting
Once the web service and database have been implemented, they will need to be hosted
to be accessible online. This can be achieved by either configuring a web server or using
an online hosting platform. The latter option was chosen as it is less time consuming and
reduces the complexity of implementation.
There are several online hosting platforms, many of which offer use free of charge. Both
Amazon and Google offer these kinds of platforms with their Amazon Web Services and
Google Cloud respectively. Of all the available platforms, Heroku was chosen for the im­
plementation. It offers support for all the systems needed in the implementation of this
project, and the author has previous experience with that platform. Heroku is a cloud
hosting platform owned by Salesforce [57]. It allows developers to deploy their web appli­
cations online quickly. The platform supports many programming languages, for example,
Node.js, in which the web service is written. As well as offering the hosting of web appli­
cations, Heroku is capable of hosting databases. It has support for postgresql, which is
used in the implementation of this project.
5.6
Data Analysis
To analyze the data recorded by the mobile device, data will be gathered from the database
and saved to .csv files, where each journey represents a journey. A Python Jupyter Note­
book will be used to perform the necessary calculations for the analysis.
Jupyter is an open­source application, allowing the development of python code and data
in notebooks. It is widely used in data science, and computational journalism [58]. It
supports the use of Python and its vast amount of packages and libraries. Jupyter Note­
books were chosen to perform the analysis because they are capable of performing all
tasks needed, and the author has previous experience with them.
5.7
Libraries
To perform the analysis of the data, several python libraries will be used. They range
from libraries focused on Geo spatial calculations, numerical analysis and visualization.
A further explanation and what the libraries will be used for will now be examined.
5.7.1
Geographical libraries
Pyproj [59] is a python interface of the PROJ software. PROJ is a generic coordinate
transformation software [60]. Using PyProj the bearing can be calculated from one coor­
dinate point to another.
5.7.2
Visualization
To visualize the recorded GPS data, the python library folium [61] is used. To create
various plots of the data the library matplotlib [62] will be used.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
21
==PAGE:30==
5.7.3
General
To load the data from .csv files and manipulate the data, the library Pandas [63] is used.
Pandas is an open­source library that offers tools and methods to handle data. The library
is widely used in data science projects in Python. The dataframe object that Pandas
offers is used throughout the analyses to easily access data instead of creating complex
data objects using Python’s native data types. Pandas is also used to generate some
visualizations, which are generated with the help of the matplotlib library.
To convert degrees to radians, and vice versa, and calculate means, standard deviation,
and correlation coefficients, the math [64] and statistics [65] libraries from python are used.
To calculate the circluar mean of two angles on a circle, the function circmean() from the
scipy [66] library was used.
To use these all libraries listed in this section, they need to be installed on the machine
and imported as such:
import pandas as pd
import folium
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
import math
from scipy.stats import circmean
import pyproj
import statistics
5.8
Units
As the collected data varies in units and rotation orientation, this has to be carefully con­
sidered to perform the correct calculations. The orientation data from the INS is recorded
in radians, ranging from −π to π. The library used to calculate the bearing between two
coordinates returns an angle in degrees ranging from 0° to 360°. As a result, conversions
have to be made to compare these two angles.
In this analysis, angles will be presented in degrees, in the range of 0° to 360°, and angles
increase when rotated clockwise. In this section, methods are presented that ensure
all angles follow these criteria. First, a method to convert angles from positive counter­
clockwise rotation to positive clockwise rotation is presented. Secondly, the conversion
from radian to degrees, and vice versa, is presented, and finally, a method to normalize
the degree range of all angles is discussed.
5.8.1
Clockwise and counter­clockwise rotation
As stated in section 5.2.2, the rotation of alpha is zero when the top of the device is pointed
north and increases when rotated counter­clockwise. This is opposite to a compass,
whose bearing increases when it rotated clockwise.
Let θcounter describe the rotation around a fixed reference point, where it increases when
rotated counter­clockwise. Let θ describe the rotation around the same reference point,
but it increases when rotated clockwise. To convert θcounter to the corresponding θ, the
following calculations must be performed:
θ = (−θcounter + 360)
mod 360
(5.1)
5.8.2
Radians and degrees
As the device orientation is recorded in radians, and the bearing calculated from GPS
coordinates is represented in degrees, they need to be represented in the same unit to
22
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:31==
be compared. To perform the conversion, the degrees() and radians() methods from the
math package in python are used.
5.8.3
Degree range
As the recorded angles from the sensors are presented in the ­180° to 180° range and
a compass typically is in the 0° to 360° range, special consideration must be taken in
regards to the degree range. All angles in the analysis will represented in the range 0° to
360°.
Let θnegative be an angle from ­180° to 180°and let θpositive be the corresponding angle in
the range of 0° to 360°. To convert θnegative to θpositive the following formula must be used:
θpositive = (θnegative + 360)
mod 360
(5.2)
5.9
Calculations
As the collected data is comprised of coordinates and orientation, calculations must be
done to find the travel direction, known as the bearing. The phone’s orientation information
(provided by the INS) is a bearing measurement. It describes the angle between the top
of the phone and true north. Every crumb holds one coordinate point, which does not
provide information about a user’s direction of travel. A second coordinate point is needed
to calculate the travel direction. To get a second point, the consequent crumb is found,
and the coordinates are extracted. Then the bearing between these two points can be
calculated. This calculation is covered in section 5.9.2. When the bearing over time has
been calculated for a journey, the INS bearing and GPS bearing can be compared. This
comparison provides insight into whether the INS can validate the recorded GPS data of
a journey.
5.9.1
Average bearing
As two crumbs are needed to calculate the GPS bearing, two measurements of the de­
vice’s orientation are present. These measurements are represented as angles on a
circle. To get an estimation of the INS bearing during travel between two crumbs, the
mean of the measurements is used.
#Input angles in degress
#Out average angle, from 0 to 360 degrees
def avgOrientaion(angle1, angle2):
#Converting negative angles to positive angles
angle1 = (angle1 +360)%360
angle1 = (angle1 +360)%360
#Get angle mean
tmp = math.degrees(circmean([math.radians(angle1),math.radians(angle2)]))
return tmp
Listing 1: Algorithm for calculating average bearing
To calculate the average of two angles on a circle, the algorithm in listing 1 is used. The
algorithm uses the circmean() method from the scipy package to calculate the circular
mean.
5.9.2
Bearing calculation
To calculate the bearing from the recorded GPS coordinates the algorithm in listing 2 was
implemented. The algorithm calculates the bearing for each pair of sequential GPS points,
going from the earlier one to the latter, using the .inv() function of the geodesic object from
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
23
==PAGE:32==
the pyproj library. The function’s arguments are a set of coordinates and it returns the
bearing (in terms of forwards, or backwards azimuth) and the distance between the two
points.
To calculate a bearing, there must be two coordinate points, the origin, and the destination.
Each crumb from the mobile device contains the phone’s coordinates and orientation at a
given moment. Two crumbs are needed to collect two coordinate points, and as a result,
two orientation measurements are present. In order to get one orientation measurement to
compare to the bearing from the two coordinate points, the circular mean of the orientation
is calculated. This is done by using the avgOrientation function, described in section 5.9.1.
#Input: dataframe of data points
#Output: dataframe with gps and sensor headings
def bearingComparison(data):
tmp = pd.DataFrame(columns=['Gps bearing','Sensor bearing'])
geodesic = pyproj.Geod(ellps='WGS84')
for i in range(0, len(data) -1):
#Extracting coordinates
startLat = data.iloc[i+1]['lat'].astype(float)
startLon = data.iloc[i+1]['lon'].astype(float)
endlat = data.iloc[i]['lat'].astype(float)
endlon = data.iloc[i]['lon'].astype(float)
#Convert from counter clockwise to clockwise rotation
bearing1 = ((-1*math.degrees(data.iloc[i+1]['alpha'])+360)%360)
bearing2 = ((-1*math.degrees(data.iloc[i]['alpha'])+360)%360)
#Calculate average bearing
avgBearing = avgOrientaion( bearing1, bearing2)
#Getting bearing
fwd_azimuth,back_azimuth,distance = geodesic.inv(startLon, startLat, endlon, endlat)
#add to return dataframe
tmp.loc[i, 'Gps bearing'] = (fwd_azimuth+360)%360
tmp.loc[i, 'Sensor bearing'] = avgBearing
return tmp
Listing 2: Algorithm for bearing calculation
This algorithm is an implementation of the one proposed in Wong and Yiu [44]. The
algorithm saves each pair of calculated bearings, one derived from the GPS data and the
other from the INS, to a dataframe. Once it has finished iterating over all pairs of crumbs,
the algorithm returns a dataframe with all the calculated bearings.
5.9.3
Bearing delta calculation
The following algorithm was implemented to calculate the difference between two angles
in degrees. As the angles are on a circle, the naive approach of subtracting the smaller
angle from the larger one does not work. As a result, consideration must be taken on
how much the angles differ. If the difference between the two angles is less than 180
degrees, the shortest angle between the two is found by subtracting the smaller angle
from the larger one. If the difference is larger than 180°, the distance between the two
can be found by subtracting the larger angle from 360° and adding the smaller angle to
24
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:33==
the result. The algorithm can be seen in listing 3.
#Input: two angles, from -180 to 180, or 0 to 360
#Output: shortest distance in degrees
def angleDistance(angle1, angle2):
#Change to 0 to 360
angle1 = (angle1 +360) % 360
angle2 = (angle2 +360) % 360
#Find which angle is bigger
bigger = max(angle1,angle2)
smaller = min(angle1,angle2)
#Find shortest distance between
if bigger -smaller > 180:
return (360 -bigger) + smaller
else:
return bigger - smaller
Listing 3: Algorithm for angle delta calculation
The distance between angles is useful when comparing the GPS bearing to the INS bear­
ing. The distance between the two is a valuable insight into the accuracy of the INS
bearings.
5.10
Summary
Using Expo, a mobile app was implemented, capable of running on Android and iOS.
The expo libraries Device Motion and Location are used to collect data on the phone’s
orientation and location. Using the device motion library, the phone’s orientation relative
to the north pole can be found. This library makes use of the phone’s onboard INS.
The orientation and the phone’s location were updated throughout a journey, with the
orientation being updated once every second and the location updated every five seconds.
Every time the location was updated, the location and the phone’s orientation were sent
to the web service to save in a database.
The backend of the system was hosted using Heroku. The web service was implemented
using the Express JS framework, and the database was implemented using Postgresql.
The data analysis was done using Jupyter Notebooks, using several Python libraries.
To normalize the bearing data, algorithms were presented to convert counter­clockwise
rotation from the phone’s INS to clockwise rotation, convert radians to degrees and vice
versa, and ensure all angles in the analysis are in the range of 0° to 360°.
Algorithms were implemented to calculate the circular mean of two angles and derive the
bearing from coordinates recorded by the mobile app. Once the bearings throughout a
journey have been calculated, they can be compared using algorithm described in listing
3.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
25
==PAGE:34==
6
Findings
6.1
Overview
This section will provide insight into the collection of data and analysis. To determine
which mobile device should be used for data collection, an experiment is performed, and
the results are discussed.
To determine whether the INS on mobile phones can be used to verify locational data,
sample journeys will be conducted, and data from the phone’s INS and GPS modules will
be recorded. This data will be analyzed by checking the difference of the bearing provided
by the phone’s INS and calculated bearing from the GPS data. The difference between
the two will be examined by calculating the mean difference and standard deviation. The
correlation coefficient of these two bearings will also be calculated and discussed.
Finally, the quality of the recorded data will be investigated by examining the travel direc­
tion with line and scatter plots. A possible factor of influence on the data will be investi­
gated as well.
6.2
Testing device
As two different mobile phones were available to record data, sample journeys were taken.
This was done to determine which phone has better GPS accuracy, as the coordinates’
accuracy is crucial when calculating the direction of travel. The test was performed by
taking two sample journeys on two different phones and examining the accuracy of the
GPS data. The phones in question were a Motorola Nexus 6 [67] and an Apple iPhone
XR [68]. The journeys were conducted on DTU’s campus, at street level. On the iPhone,
apple’s location services were enabled, as were Google’s location services on the Nexus
6, as they offer greater accuracy than using only the GPS modules of the phones.
Journey A consisted of a straight path on the DTU campus. Specifically, from building 101
to Brovej, following Knuth­Winterfeldts Allé. Journey B consisted of a walk from Brovej
to building 101, following Knuth­Winterfeldts Allé, with a detour around Bygningstorvet.
The plotted data for journey A can be seen in figure 6.1 and journey B can be seen in
figure 6.2.
As can be seen in figures 6.1 and 6.2, data collected from the iPhone is more accurate
and a closer representation of the walks. In both walks the data collected from the Nexus
6 is inaccurate. Thus the iPhone XR will be used to collect data from now on. A possible
explanation for the iPhone’s greater GPS accuracy is the age disparity between the two
phones. The iPhone was released in 2018 and the Nexus 6 in 2014, and therefore the
iPhone could have a more advanced GPS module. This was, however, not investigated.
6.3
Sample journeys
To test whether a phone’s INS can be used to validate GPS data, data from both modules
must be collected. The collection was done by taking sample journeys and using the
mobile app to record data. These journeys consisted of walks of varying lengths and
directional changes. The sample journeys cover traveling in a straight line and with many
directional changes. During all the journeys, the mobile phone was held in the same
manner, as described in the assumption in section 3.1. During the entirety of all the
26
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.1: Journey A, iPhone on left, Nexus 6 on right
journeys, the user was moving and never stopped. The journeys were plotted and shown
in figure 6.3.
Journey 1 and 2 followed the same circular path, with journey 1 following a clockwise
rotation of the circle and journey 2 a counter­clockwise rotation. These journeys followed
a path on the roof of an apartment building.
Journey 3 to 6 were all conducted on DTU’s campus. These journeys were all performed
at street level. Journeys 3 and 4 are the same as journeys A and B in section 6.2.
6.4
Analysis of journeys
Once all the data from journeys was collected, it was loaded to a Jupyter Notebook to ana­
lyze. The the traveling direction over the journeys was calculated using the bearingcomparison
function, described in section 5.9.2.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.2: Journey B, iPhone on left, Nexus 6 on right
6.4.1
Metrics and correlation
Using the calculated bearings for each journey, the deltas of the GPS bearings and INS
bearing were calculated using the function described in section 5.9.3. With the deltas
for each journey calculated, the mean and standard deviation of the deltas can be in­
vestigated.The correlation coefficient for the two sets of bearings of a journey was also
calculated. The coefficient ranges from ­1 to 1 and indicates correlation for sets of data. ­1
indicates a perfect negative correlation, 1 a perfect correlation, and 0 no correlation. The
mean delta shows how much, on average, the INS bearing deviated from the calculated
GPS bearing. This gives insight into how closely the two follow each other. The standard
deviation of the delta shows how much, on average, the deltas deviate from the mean
delta. This gives insight into how spread the bearings are. The correlation coefficient
gives an indication of how much the two bearings are correlated. If they are correlated,
that would indicate that a phone’s INS can be used to validate GPS data.
28
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:37==
(a) Journey 1
(b) Journey 2
(c) Journey 3
(d) Journey 4
(e) Journey 5
(f) Journey 6
Figure 6.3: Plots of sample walks
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
29
==PAGE:38==
Journey
Delta Mean
Delta Standard deviation
Correlation coef.
1
30.76
26.95
0.514516
2
26.39
20.46
0.663865
3
117.30
10.51
0.043041
4
125.86
27.32
­0.317328
5
106.30
28.73
­0.467439
6
148.68
37.42
­0.224675
Table 6.1: Analytical metrics of the the sample journeys
In table 6.1, the results of these calculations can be seen. For journeys 1 and 2, the
mean and standard deviation of the delta are similar, and both journeys have a positive
correlation coefficient, ranging from 0.5145 to 0.6639. This indicates the is some positive
correlation between the two sets of bearing measurements.
However, the metrics for journeys 3 to 6 paint a different picture. The mean delta for all
of them is over a hundred degrees, and the correlation coefficient varies greatly. They
range from 0.0043 to ­0.4673, which is drastically different from walks 1 and 2.
Journey 3 has a high mean delta, but the standard deviation is the lowest of all the jour­
neys. As the journey is a walk in a straight line, this could indicate that the sensor bearing
was drastically different from the GPS bearing at the beginning of the journey and stayed
consistently different throughout the journey, making the standard deviation so low.
Journey 4, 5, and 6 have some directional changes. However, not as much as journeys
1 and 2. Their mean deltas are vastly greater than the ones from journeys 1 and 2,
ranging from 106.30° to 148.68°. Their correlation coefficients are also drastically different
compared to journeys 1 and 2. They are closer to 0 than ­1 or 1, indicating that the GPS
and sensor bearings are not correlated at all.
6.4.2
Plots
To investigate the data more thoroughly, line and scatter plots are created. The line plots
show the changes in the GPS bearing and the INS bearing over the length of the journey.
The GPS bearing is represented by a blue line and the INS bearing by an orange one.
The line plots show quite clearly if the two bearings are similar over the length of a journey.
The scatter plots have the GPS bearing on the x­axis and the INS bearing on the y­axis.
The scatter plots show well if the GPS and INS bearing measurements are spread far
from each other. Journeys 2 ­ 5 will be investigated closer later in this section, as they
represent distinct characteristics. The plots for journeys 2 ­ 5 can be seen in figures 6.4,
6.5, 6.6 and 6.7. The plots for all the journeys can be seen in the appendix, chapter 8.
In figure 6.4, the line and scatter plots for journey 2 are shown. The line plot shows that
the two bearings follow each other quite closely over the length of the journey. The scatter
plot shows that most points roughly follow a linear curve. However, some points on the
scatter plot do not follow a linear curve. Most of the points not following the linear curve
are located where the GPS bearing is around 0°, but the INS bearing is around 360°. This
is expected as an angle on a circle represents the bearings, so when they exceed 360°,
they wrap around and become 0°. Another consequence of the values wrapping around
can be seen in the line plot, where the bearing sharply increases or decreases from low
degrees to high ones or vice versa.
In figure 6.5, the line and scatter plots for journey 3 are shown, and the results are very
different from the ones from journey 2. The line plot shows that while the GPS bearing
30
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.4: Journey 2
Figure 6.5: Journey 3
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.6: Journey 4
Figure 6.7: Journey 5
32
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:41==
jumps around a bit throughout the journey, the INS bearing stays relatively consistent.
However, there is quite a difference between the two over the length of the journey. The
scatter plot shows that most of the points are clustered together. This is expected, as the
journey follows a straight line and there are no major directional changes, resulting in a
similar value for all points.
Figure 6.6 shows the line and scatter plots for journey 4. This journey consisted of four
patches of straight line travel, with sharp 90° turns between them. The INS curve of the line
plot highlights these characteristics well. The curve is flat for each of the straight patches
of the journey, with decreases or increases when cornering, depending on the directional
change. The GPS bearing curve is not as representative of this journey. There are flat
parts of the curve, that represent the patches of straight line travel, but the curve also has
sharp jumps during the time of straight line travel, indicating that some coordinates are not
in the line of travel. The scatter plot shows clusters of points which represent the stability
of the INS bearings, as they are close to each other on the y­axis (which represents the
sensor bearings.)
Figure 6.7 shows the line and scatter plots for journey 5. Journey 5 consisted of stretches
of straight­line travel with directional changes between them. The line plot’s GPS curve
represents the journey’s characteristics quite well, at the earlier parts of the journey. The
GPS curve begins with a relatively stable bearing and changes drastically after the first
turn of the journey is made. The next straight stretch is also relatively stable, but after the
second turn of the journey, the GPS bearing changes drastically and is unstable for the
rest of the journey. The INS bearing curve is quite similar to the GPS curve, to begin with,
but at a certain point, it becomes vastly different. It has sharp jumps, indicating it hovers
around the tipping point of 360° and is crossing that point often. Both bearing curves are
never close to each other during the entirety of the journey, resulting in a large mean delta
of the bearings. This can be seen in the scatter plot, where points form some clusters but
are generally very spread apart.
6.5
Takeaway from analyzes
As discussed in section 6.4 the results of each of the journeys are quite different. The
journeys varied in directional changes and the surrounding environment, as journeys 1
and 2 were conducted on a rooftop, and journeys 3 to 6 were conducted on DTU’s campus,
at street level.
Journeys 1 and 2 showed the most promising results, as the GPS and INS bearings were
close to each other throughout the entirety of the journeys, their mean bearing delta was
relatively low, and their correlation coefficients were closest to 1. These results show
promise that the INS on mobile phones can be used to verify GPS data of a journey.
The results from journeys 3 to 6 told a different story. The GPS and INS bearings for all
of those journeys were not correlated. In fact, their correlation coefficient was closer to
0, indicating no correlation. The INS curves of the line plots for journeys 3 and 4 were
consistent with the directional changes, but it was hard to make sense of the one for
journey 5. The GPS curves were, however, not consistent with the directional changes of
journeys 3 ­ 5.
The biggest difference between the first two journeys and the rest was where they were
performed. Journeys 3 to 6 were conducted at street level, in the vicinity of buildings.
It is possible that the surrounding buildings in these journeys had an effect on the GPS
accuracy. If the accuracy of the GPS is affected, the recorded coordinates can fall off the
line of travel. This can drastically change the calculated bearing from the GPS.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.8: Signal traveling directly and bouncing off building [69]
Figure 6.9: Inaccurate coordinates of journey 6
Kos, Tomislav, and Markezic [69] demonstrated that building in the vicinity of a GPS re­
ceiver can affect the receiver’s accuracy. This is caused by radio waves from the satellite
bouncing off buildings and reaching the receiver. If the receiver picks the signal directly
from a satellite, and again when it bounces off a building, it can lead to errors in the cal­
culated signal. This effect is known as Multipath reception and is illustrated in figure 6.8.
A suspected example of mulipath reception happened during journey 6. The journey was
conducted outdoors, never stepping inside a building. The journey started in a square
surrounded by buildings (Kemitorvet on DTU’s campus.) Several coordinate points col­
lected appear inside a building, which was not the case. If the recorded coordinates are
not accurate, the calculated bearing will no longer represent the direction of travel, as
stated earlier. In figure 6.9, the inaccurate data points can be seen, highlighted by a red
circle.
6.6
Summary
To investigate whether INS data can be used to validate GPS data, experiments were
conducted by taking sample journeys. But first, the device to record the data had to be
chosen. The iPhone XR was chosen to record data after comparing its location accuracy
to a Motorola Nexus 6.
34
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:43==
Six sample journeys were conducted, using the mobile app to record data from the GPS
and INS modules at regular intervals. The data from these journeys were collected and
analyzed in a Jupyter Notebook. The analysis would calculate the bearings derived from
GPS and INS data, and those bearings were compared.
The results of the analysis varied greatly between the journeys. Journey 1­2 showed
promising results, as the GPS and INS bearing followed each other closely and had a
mean difference below 30°, and the correlation coefficient between the bearings indicated
a positive correlation.
Journeys 3­6 did not have similar results. Their mean delta of the bearings was in the
range of 106° to 149°, and their correlation coefficients indicated no correlation. The
correlation coefficient of these journeys was very spread, ranging from 0.04 to ­0.46.
The data from journeys 2­5 was investigated more closely, as they offered a broad range
of characteristics (directional changes, location, and results). The investigation showed
data from journey 2 was representative of the journey, but data from journeys 3­5 was not
as accurate.
As journey 2 was conducted on a rooftop of an apartment building and journeys 3­5 were
conducted at street level, it is suspected that the buildings in the vicinity of the mobile
phone during journeys 3­5 affected the GPS accuracy. If the accuracy of the GPS data
is not good enough, the bearing calculated from that data is not representative of the
journey.
These results show that the INS onboard a mobile phone can not be used to confidently
validate positional data from the GPS module by calculating the bearing and comparing it
to the INS’s bearing. Greater accuracy is needed from the phone’s GPS module to derive
a bearing representative of the phone’s movement.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
35
==PAGE:44==
7
Conclusion
With the mass adaption of GPS­enabled smartphones, the availability of location­based
applications has increased dramatically. If the users can gain benefits from being at a
specific location from the apps, users have an incentive to cheat the system and falsify
their location. In this thesis, I wanted to investigate whether it is possible to validate GPS
data over time using the information available to them.
As modern smartphones typically come equipped with an accelerometer, a gyroscope,
and a magnetometer, these sensors could potentially be used to validate GPS data. To
see if this was the case, I designed and implemented a system capable of recording data
from a phone’s GPS and inertial modules over the length of a journey. This system was
comprised of a mobile app, a web service, and a database.
The collected data was used to calculate the travel direction (bearing) between sequential
GPS points. This bearing was compared to the bearing recorded by the phone’s inertial
sensors. To compare the two sets of bearings of a journey, the delta between the two
was compared by calculating the mean delta, the standard deviation of the deltas, and
the correlation coefficient of the two sets of bearings.
A total of six journeys were performed. While two journeys showed promising results with
mean deltas below 30° and a correlation coefficient that indicated that the measurements
were positively correlated, the other four journeys did not go as well. The mean delta for
these four journeys was never less than 100°, and the correlation coefficient indicated
that the two sets of measurements of each journey were not correlated.
The data for journeys 2­5 was investigated more closely. This was done by plotting the
data for these journeys on a line plot and a scatter plot. These plots highlighted the differ­
ence in results. The plots for journey 2 showed the two bearing measurements following
each other, but the plots for journeys 3­5 did not exhibit the same results. Their plots
highlighted how far the measurements were from each other and showed that the GPS
data was not accurate enough to calculate a bearing representative of the journeys.
These results show that there is potential to use a phone’s INS sensors to validate GPS,
but further work is needed to do so confidently. During this thesis, the assumption was
made that the mobile phone would be orientated in a specific way during data collection.
If this method of validating GPS data should be used en masse, it could be difficult to get
users to keep their phone in this position throughout a journey, as it would limit how they
can use it.
This future work includes finding ways to improve the GPS accuracy of smartphones,
especially in urban environments. Also, work must be done to determine whether the
phone’s INS can measure bearing while in a user’s pocket or being moved around by the
user during regular usage. If the two problems listed above are resolved, more data must
be collect to determine a threshold of bearing deviation, to validate the GPS data.
36
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:45==
8
Appendix
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 8.1: Journey 1
38
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:47==
Figure 8.2: Journey 2
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 8.3: Journey 3
40
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:49==
Figure 8.4: Journey 4
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 8.5: Journey 5
42
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:51==
Figure 8.6: Journey 6
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
43
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1]
Pokemon Go Homepage. Online, accessed 29­06­2022. URL: https://pokemongolive.
com/.
[2]
Strava Homepage. Online, accessed 29­06­2022. URL: https://www.strava.com/.
[3]
CONNOR JEWISS. Strava Homepage. Online, accessed 29­06­2022. URL: https:
//www.makeuseof.com/apple-find-my-network-explained/.
[4]
Kasper Lindegaard Stilling and Sebastian Lindhard Budsted. “Logistics Validation
Framework”. MA thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark,
Aug. 2021.
[5]
Navigation. Online, accessed 28­06­2022. URL: https://education.nationalgeographic.
org/resource/navigation.
[6]
Celestial Navigation. Online, accessed 28­06­2022. URL: https://skybrary.aero/
articles/celestial-navigation.
[7]
U.S. Space Force. Official U.S. government information about the Global Position­
ing System (GPS) and related topics. Online, accessed 2­05­2022. 2022. URL:
https://www.gps.gov/.
[8]
What is GPS? Online, accessed 22­06­2022. URL: https://www.garmin.com/en-
US/aboutgps/.
[9]
U.S. Space Force. Space Segment. Online, accessed 3­05­2022. 2022. URL: https:
//www.gps.gov/systems/gps/space/.
[10]
“Poster: How GPS Works”. In: National Coordination Office for Space­Based Po­
sitioning, Navigation, and Timing. 2013. URL: https://www.gps.gov/multimedia/
poster/.
[11]
Roscosmos. GLONASS constellation status. Online, accessed 11­05­2022. URL:
https://www.glonass-iac.ru/en/sostavOG//.
[12]
Roscosmos. About GLONASS. Online, accessed 11­05­2022. URL: https://www.
glonass-iac.ru/en/about_glonass/.
[13]
EUSPA. SAR/Galileo Satellites Information. Online, accessed 11­05­2022. URL:
https : / / www . gsc - europa . eu / system - service - status / sar - information / sargalileo -
satellites-information.
[14]
EUSPA. Benefits. Online, accessed 11­05­2022. URL: https://www.gsc-europa.eu/
galileo/benefits.
[15]
EUSPA. Search and Rescue (SAR) / Galileo Service. Online, accessed 11­05­2022.
URL: https://www.gsc-europa.eu/galileo/services/search-and-rescue-sar-galileo-
service.
[16]
CNSA. System. Online, accessed 31­05­2022. URL: http : / / en . beidou . gov . cn /
SYSTEMS/System/.
[17]
BBC. BeiDou: China launches final satellite in challenge to GPS. Online, accessed
31­05­2022. URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-53132957.
[18]
Andrew Jones. China Launches Beidou, Its Own Version of GPS. Online, accessed
31­05­2022. URL: https://spectrum.ieee.org/final-piece-of-chinas-beidou-navigation-
satellite-system-comes-online.
[19]
Cang Wei and Song Wenwei. Beidou to help safeguard fishermen on high seas.
Online, accessed 31­05­2022. URL: https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2014-
05/26/content_17539874.htm.
44
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:53==
[20]
INDIAN SPACE RESEARCH ORGANIZATION. Indian Regional Navigation Satel­
lite System (IRNSS) : NavIC. Online, accessed 1­06­2022. URL: https://www.isro.
gov.in/irnss-programme.
[21]
IRNSS ­ Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System. Online, accessed 1­06­2022.
URL: https://www.ursc.gov.in/navigation/irnss.jsp.
[22]
INDIAN SPACE RESEARCH ORGANIZATION. “INDIAN REGIONAL NAVIGATION
SATELLITE SYSTEM”. In: (2017). URL: https://www.isro.gov.in/sites/default/files/
irnss_sps_icd_version1.1-2017.pdf.
[23]
Quasi­Zenith Satellite System Services Inc. Overview of the Quasi­Zenith Satellite
System (QZSS). Online, accessed 1­06­2022. URL: https://qzss.go.jp/en/overview/
services/sv01_what.html.
[24]
Quasi­Zenith Satellite System Services Inc. What is the Quasi­Zenith Satellite Sys­
tem (QZSS)? Online, accessed 1­06­2022. URL: https://qzss.go.jp/en/overview/
services/sv02_why.html.
[25]
Jeff Foust. Britain charts a new course for satellite navigation. Online, accessed
20­06­2022. URL: https://spacenews.com/britain-charts-a-new-course-for-satellite-
navigation/.
[26]
UK Space Agency. Space Based PNT Programme. Online, accessed 20­06­2022.
URL: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/space-based-pnt-programme.
[27]
Jonathan A. Larcom and Hong Liu. “Modeling and characterization of GPS spoof­
ing”. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Technologies for Homeland Secu­
rity (HST). 2013, pp. 729–734. DOI: 10.1109/THS.2013.6699094.
[28]
Joe Fedewa. How to Spoof Your Location on Android. Online, accessed 2­06­2022.
URL: https://www.howtogeek.com/795277/how-to-spoof-your-location-on-android/.
[29]
Ph.D. Jon S. Warner and CPP Roger G. Johnston Ph.D. GPS Spoofing Counter­
measures. 2003.
[30]
University of Texas. UT Austin Researchers Successfully Spoof an $80 million Yacht
at Sea. Online, accessed 7­06­2022. URL: https://news.utexas.edu/2013/07/29/ut-
austin-researchers-successfully-spoof-an-80-million-yacht-at-sea/.
[31]
Lee Stanton. How To Spoof A GPS Location On An IPhone. Online, accessed 7­
06­2022. URL: https://www.alphr.com/fake-gps-location-iphone/.
[32]
What is Jailbreaking – Definition and Explanation. Online, accessed 29­06­2022.
URL: https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-center/definitions/what-is-jailbreaking.
[33]
FAQ. Online, accessed 7­06­2022. URL: https://www.gfaker.com/faq/.
[34]
Da­peng Li and Hai­tou Wu. “The Ride­hailing Spoof Detection based on the Sensor
Measurement Consistency”. In: Satellite Division of the Institute of Navigation. 2017.
[35]
BBC. Study maps ’extensive Russian GPS spoofing’. Online, accessed 22­06­2022.
URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-47786248.
[36]
Judah Ari Gross. GPS jamming affecting Israel comes from Russian base in Syria:
US researcher. Online, accessed 22­06­2022. URL: https://www.timesofisrael.com/
gps-jamming-affecting-israel-comes-from-russian-base-in-syria-us-researcher/.
[37]
Luke Harding. Finland reports GPS disturbances in aircraft flying over Russia’s
Kaliningrad. Online, accessed 22­06­2022. URL: https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2022/mar/09/finland-gps-disturbances-aircrafts-russia.
[38]
Andreea Bitar. 4 Interesting Facts About Inertial Navigation Systems. Online, ac­
cessed 8­06­2022. URL: https://aerospace.honeywell.com/us/en/learn/about-
us/blogs/four-facts-about-inertial-navigation-systems.
[39]
How to Measure Acceleration? Online, accessed 29­06­2022. URL: https://www.
omega.com/en-us/resources/accelerometers.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
45
==PAGE:54==
[40]
Andrea Bitar. How does a ring laser gyroscope work? Online, accessed 29­06­2022.
URL: https://aerospace.honeywell.com/us/en/learn/about-us/blogs/how-does-ring-
laser-gyroscope-work.
[41]
Sashank Narain, Aanjhan Ranganathan, and Guevara Noubir. “Security of GPS/INS
Based On­road Location Tracking Systems”. In: 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP). 2019, pp. 587–601. DOI: 10.1109/SP.2019.00068.
[42]
David Nield. All the Sensors in Your Smartphone, and How They Work. Online,
accessed 8­06­2022. URL: https://gizmodo.com/all-the-sensors-in-your-smartphone-
and-how-they-work-1797121002.
[43]
Aanjhan Ranganathan, Hildur Ólafsdóttir, and Srdjan Capkun. “SPREE: A Spoofing
Resistant GPS Receiver”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International Con­
ference on Mobile Computing and Networking. MobiCom ’16. New York City, New
York: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 348–360. ISBN: 9781450342261.
DOI: 10.1145/2973750.2973753. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2973750.2973753.
[44]
Shing Ki Wong and Siu Ming Yiu*. “Location spoofing attack detection with pre­
installed sensors in mobile devices”. In: Journal of Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiq­
uitous Computing, and Dependable Applications (2020).
[45]
Apple. Turn Location Services and GPS on or off on your iPhone, iPad, or iPod
touch. Online, accessed 23­06­2022. URL: https : / / support . apple . com / en - us /
HT207092.
[46]
Google. Control access point inclusion in Google’s Location services. Online, ac­
cessed 23­06­2022. URL: https://support.google.com/maps/answer/1725632?hl=en.
[47]
Wigle. Frequently Asked Questions. Online, accessed 23­06­2022. URL: https://
wigle.net/faq.
[48]
Google. Get alerted to COVID­19 exposure. Online, accessed 23­06­2022. URL:
https://www.google.com/covid19/exposurenotifications/select/.
[49]
Mobile Operating System Market Share Worldwide. Online, accessed 23­06­2022.
URL: https://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/mobile/worldwide.
[50]
React Native Homepage. Online, accessed 29­06­2022. URL: https://reactnative.
dev/.
[51]
Expo. Device Motion. Online, accessed 8­06­2022. URL: https://docs.expo.dev/
versions/latest/sdk/devicemotion/.
[52]
W3C Devices and Sensors Working Group. DeviceOrientation Event Specification.
Online, accessed 8­06­2022. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/orientation-event/#def-
deviceorientation.
[53]
Mozilla Developer Network. Orientation and motion data explained. Online, ac­
cessed 9­06­2022. URL: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events/
Orientation_and_motion_data_explained#about_rotation.
[54]
Pete Lepage. Device Orientation Motion. Online, accessed 10­06­2022. URL: https:
//web.dev/native-hardware-device-orientation/.
[55]
Expo. DeviceMotion. Online, accessed 25­06­2022. URL: https://docs.expo.dev/
versions/latest/sdk/devicemotion/.
[56]
Postgresql. PostgreSQL: The World’s Most Advanced Open Source Relational Database.
Online, accessed 25­06­2022. URL: https://www.postgresql.org/.
[57]
Heroku Homepage. Online, accessed 25­06­2022. URL: https://www.heroku.com/
home.
[58]
Jupyter Homepage. Online, accessed 25­06­2022. URL: https://jupyter.org/.
[59]
pyproj 3.3.1. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL: https://pypi.org/project/pyproj/.
[60]
PROJ. Online, accessed 21­06­2022. URL: https://proj.org/.
46
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
==PAGE:55==
[61]
Folium. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL: https://python-visualization.github.io/
folium/.
[62]
Matplotlib: Visualization with Python. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL: https :
//matplotlib.org/.
[63]
pandas. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL: https://pandas.pydata.org/.
[64]
math — Mathematical functions. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL: https://docs.
python.org/3/library/math.html.
[65]
statistics — Mathematical statistics functions. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/statistics.html.
[66]
SciPy. Online, accessed 30­06­2022. URL: https://scipy.org/.
[67]
Motorola Nexus 6. Online, accessed 19­06­2022. URL: https://www.gsmarena.com/
motorola_nexus_6-6604.php.
[68]
Apple iPhone XR. Online, accessed 19­06­2022. URL: https://www.gsmarena.com/
apple_iphone_xr-9320.php.
[69]
Tomislav Kos, Ivan Markezic, and Josip Pokrajcic. “Effects of multipath reception on
GPS positioning performance”. In: Proceedings ELMAR­2010. 2010, pp. 399–402.
Positional spoofing attack mitigation for a Logistic Validation Framework
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
