==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Maritime object classification using few-shot
learning
Rian Leevinson Jayakumar
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Elektro
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tel (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Maritime object classification using few-shot
learning
Author:
Rian Leevinson Jayakumar - s202540
July 2022
Supervisors:
Lazaros Nalpantidis
Jonathan Binner Becktor
A thesis presented for the degree of:
Masters in Autonomous Systems
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
July 2022
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This masters thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical En-
gineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Autonomous Systems.
Kongens Lyngby, July 15, 2022
Rian Leevinson Jayakumar
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Lazaros Nalpantidis for providing me with the
opportunity to take up this interesting project and providing very im-
portant advice, guidance and constructive feedback during the project.
I would like to thank Jonathan Binner Becktor for introducing me to
the world of few shot learning and motivating me to explore my area of
interest and for continuous help and technical clarifications throughout
the project.
I would also like to extend my thanks to my friends and family who have
continuously supported and motivated me.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Pytorch and EasyFsl libraries that
significantly helped with the implementations in this few-shot learning
project.
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
In maritime navigation, it is essential for vessels to know the position
and identity of other vessels in its immediate vicinity. Object classifica-
tion is a possible option to identify the type of object that is detected.
However, training such classifiers often require large training datasets for
the model to suﬀiciently generalize for real-world scenarios.
This is a major challenge, especially in the case of maritime scenario,
where there is a lack of suﬀicient good quality training data. Another
challenge is the fact that it is diﬀicult to develop a comprehensive model
that can account for all the objects a vessel could encounter in the ocean,
especially classes that the model was not trained on.
This project explores few shot learning with prototypical networks as a
possible solution for this problem. Prototypical Networks with a ResNet18
backbone and euclidean distance metric is used for predicting and iden-
tifying maritime objects. The model is further generalized and improved
with episodic training. 1-shot, 2-shot and 5-shot scenarios are evaluated
by building respective models for each and the models are evaluated on
maritime data which also includes image samples from unseen classes.
The experiments conclude that a simple prototypical network with a
ResNet18 backbone and an euclidean distance metric can perform well,
especially with 5 shots. The model also exhibited satisfactory perfor-
mance while predicting unseen classes.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
iv
Contents
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Works
4
3
Design choices
6
4
Theory
8
4.1
AIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Prototypical Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5
The Data
16
5.1
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2
Image Resizing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.3
Task Sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
6
Methodology and Experimentation
22
6.1
Experiment Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.2
General framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Training the feature extractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.4
Episodic training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.5
Prototype computation and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.6
Probable classes prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7
Results and Discussion
28
7.1
Backbone ResNet18 training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.2
Episodic training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.4
Probable classes prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8
Conclusion
36
9
Future Outlook
38
A
More Experiments
41
A.1 SGD vs Adam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Bicubic vs Bilinear interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.3 Training plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
References
46
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
4.1
Illustration of an AIS network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Illustration of a simple perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
A basic multi-layer perceptron neural network . . . . . . . . . 10
4.4
Illustration of convolution operation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.5
A residual block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.6
Architecture of ResNet18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.7
2-dimensional illustration of prototypical network . . . . . . . 14
5.1
Sample images from each class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Sample support images in a 9-way, 5-shot scenario . . . . . . . 21
7.1
Training and validation loss of the backbone ResNet18 . . . . 28
7.2
Training and validation accuracy of the backbone ResNet18
. 29
7.3
Accuracy during episodic training for a 5-way, 5-shot scenario
30
7.4
Loss during episodic training for a 5-way, 5-shot scenario . . . 30
7.5
Confusion matrix of 9 way 5 shot scenario . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7.6
Top-3 class prediction for some example images . . . . . . . . 34
9.1
Two-dimensional illustration of euclidean distance vs Maha-
lanobis distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.1 5-way, 5-shot with Bilinear interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A.2 5-way, 5-shot with Bicubic interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A.3 Training accuracy of the ResNet18
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.4 Episodic training of 2-shot prototypical network with Adam
. 44
A.5 Episodic training of 2-shot prototypical network with SGD . . 44
A.6 Episodic training of pre-trained 5-shot model with Adam . . . 45
A.7 Episodic training of custom 5-shot model with Adam . . . . . 45
A.8 Episodic training of custom 5-shot model with SGD . . . . . . 45
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
7.1
Accuracy of the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Class accuracy across different shots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
A.1 Performance of the models with SGD vs Adam
. . . . . . . . 41
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Adam Adaptive Moment Estimation
CNAPs Conditional Neural Adaptive Processes
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
CPU Central Processing Unit
CUDA Compute Unified Device Architecture
GAN Generative Adversarial Networks
GPU Graphics Processing Unit
KNN K Nearest Neighbours
MLP Multi Layer Perceptron
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
ResNet Residual Network
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
YOLO You Only Look Once
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Historically, ships have been an important means of transportation and
exploration for humans. Modern ships continue to play a major role in
transportation, global freight movement and scientific research.
Over
90% of all the freight traﬀic in the world is in the water [28].
With tens of thousands of vessels navigating around in the water, it is
essential for them to be spatially aware of their surroundings and of the
location of other vessels. Among other things, marine traﬀic surveillance
is usually performed through the Automatic Identification System (AIS)
which was initially developed as a collision avoidance system. The on-
board AIS system transmits information about the ship, such as speed,
location, weight and heading, to other vessels. Due to international ma-
rine regulations established in 2002, AIS is widely used on passenger
ships and ships which weigh over 300 gross tons on international voy-
ages. However, the AIS system is itself relatively outdated and is prone
to errors, especially since some data carried in the AIS signal is man-
ually entered by the crew. Moreover, not all ships, boats and vessels
are equipped with AIS transceivers and even if they do, the ships have
options to turn off their AIS transponder and maintain radio silence.
Having so many drawbacks in a system playing such a critical role
in marine traﬀic surveillance is a major problem, especially with the
emerging market of autonomous ships. Moreover, traditional radar based
object detection techniques are not suﬀiciently qualified for near and
small vessel detection [5]. There is an immediate and imperative need
for more robust and reliable systems to aid in marine traﬀic management
and navigation. This is essential, especially in near-shore scenarios and
narrow areas with high traﬀic density where small vessels such as rafts,
kayaks, fishing boats, yachts may be present in close vicinity to larger
vessels.
Deep learning based object detection and image classification based
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Objective
2
on video surveillance systems have been proposed and explored for mar-
itime object detection, especially for autonomous vessels. Such a system
onboard a vessel will aid in identifying other vessels and objects of inter-
est in the vicinity. However, due to the lack of availability of suﬀicient
real-world image samples of maritime objects for training, the effective-
ness of these models is limited. Various techniques have been used to
address this issue, such as synthetic data generation using Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) [5] and data augmentation. With few-shot
learning being an area of active research, it is gaining popularity in solv-
ing challenges where there is not enough training data or the quality of
the data is not suﬀicient. The various types of few-shot learning, their
scope and applications are explored in the subsequent sections.
This
project intends to explore the possible use of few shot learning to classify
maritime objects, thereby tackling the data limitation problem.
1.1
Objective
The main objective of this project is to investigate the viability of the
use of few-shot learning as an effective technique to classify maritime
objects.
The objective is more specifically defined as follows:
• Explore the possibility and scope of the use of Prototypical net-
works for few-shot learning.
• Experiment with different shots and with unseen classes.
• Investigate whether a suﬀiciently satisfactory model performance
can be achieved, to implement the solution in practical real-world
applications.
1.2
Structure
The subsequent sections in this report are structured as follows:
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Structure
3
Section 1 - Introduction: This section provides a brief introduction
into the report and the problem this thesis is attempting to address. It
also provides a general overview about surveillance of maritime traﬀic
and new technologies being used to address the shortcomings of legacy
systems, especially with the advent of autonomous ships.
Section 2 - Related works: This section provides a review of rel-
evant literature surrounding few shot learning and provides a glimpse
into the ideas that influenced and inspired the adopted design choices.
It explains the rationale behind the chosen approach, methodology and
model selection.
Section 3 - Design choices: This section elaborates about the design
considerations and choices made in this project.
Section 4 - Theory: Provides a brief theoretical walk-through of few
shot learning, elaborates on some related terminologies and provides an
overview of other relevant theoretical concepts.
Section 5 - The data: Provides an overview of the different datasets
used in the different stages and experimental configurations.
Section 6 - Methodology and Experimentation: This section ex-
plains the implementation of the few shot learning model and experi-
ments conducted in detail. It describes the experimental setup, training
of the backbone model, episodic training and validation.
Section 7 - Results and Discussion: The results are presented with
the relevant performance metrics and visualizations and the achieved
results are interpreted and discussed.
Section 8 - Conclusion: Provides an overall summary of the important
findings and results in the experiments conducted.
Section 9 - Future Outlook: Presents a look into potential future
scope and subsequent works that can follow the work done in this thesis.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Related Works
The literature on few shot learning is vast, covering various techniques
and implementations across different experimental settings. This section
covers the most relevant works and methods that directly influenced and
drove design considerations in this project.
Object detection and classification in the maritime sector has been
an area of active research. It is gaining traction, especially due to the
increasing interest in autonomous ships. Deep learning is widely being
used, especially for object detection. YOLO v2 has been explored as
an effective option to perform detection and classification of ships, even
under low visibility conditions. This study also observed that a model
trained on domain specific data ie, shipping data peformed better than
a model trained on a more generic dataset, even if the later had lesser
training samples [15].
GANs have been used to generate artificial synthetic data to aid in
training[10] [16]. The generated data which is similar to the original data
population, is used as the training data. data-oriented solutions involve
the use of artificial data synthesis or additional data from external data
sources or data augmentation to induce noise into the training dataset.
Hybrid models that utilize GANs and CNNs with a Gausian Mixture
Model (GMM) have been used for ship detection. The synthetic data
generated to compensate for limited available data provides promising
results with a modified YOLO object detector. The authors of this study
[12] propose that this technique can be used for ship navigation, safety
and for identifying other ships, boats and obstacles near the shore.
Synthetic data generation with unreal engine 4 is also a viable tech-
nique, to inject more training examples to the training dataset [4].
Within few-shot learning, the support set is a labelled embedding of
labelled examples while the query set consists of unlabelled data sam-
==PAGE:16==
2 Related Works
5
ples that have to be predicted [25].
Moreover, most metric learning
approaches use episodic training [29] [27] [14] to further enhance the per-
formance of the model.An episode consists of a few-shot learning task
with support and query images sampled from a larger data pool.
in
episodic training and meta learning, the model is trained over multiple
episodes to generalize better.
Metric learning is a technique where algorithms learn to compare be-
tween data samples, usually with a distance function [17]. Conventional
CNN models often train on a specific set of classes, generalizing on them
and learning the features of each class. These trained models are then
tested on validation data samples from the same pool of classes.
In the case of few shot learning, the models are trained on episodes of
samples from different classes. Since classes are different in each training
episode, few shot learning models learn to distinguish and discriminate
between classes, rather than learning the characteristics of the classes
themselves.
Matching Networks [29] are metric learning algorithms that work by
determining the cosine similarity between feature vectors of images from
different classes. Matching Networks are predominantly used for one-shot
learning tasks because of their inherent design to compare the feature
embeddings of images from the support set and the query set.
Siamese Networks [13] are also a type of metric learning algorithm
that classify query images based on their similarity to the nearest support
image. It uses CNNs as feature extractors that are trained to discrim-
inate between image pairs of different classes. The model performs a
pair-wise comparison to determine whether both the images belong to
the same class.
Relational Networks [27] not use a pre-defined linear metric to classify
the images, but rather learn a non-linear metric in the form a MLP
architecture, leading to a learned convolutional relation network.
Prototypical Networks were proposed for few shot learning in 2017
[25]. Prototypical Networks learn a metric space where classification is
performed by computing distances to prototypes of each class. These net-
works compute class prototypes by creating a mean vector of the embed-
ded support points in each class. Then the query images are compared
with the class prototypes using a distance function, usually euclidean
distance.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Design choices
The approach towards few shot learning in this project was predomi-
nantly designed with emphasis on practical application. Such that the
methods and techniques can be used to solve real-life problems with rel-
ative ease. Hence ease of implementation, simplicity of the model and
model performance were some of the main considerations for the design
choice.
Prototypical Networks were chosen as the choice of few-shot
learning model based on the following aspects:
• They are relatively simple in design and are more eﬀicient, com-
pared to other meta-learning algorithms
• Since they compute class prototypes, the problem of overfitting is
significantly reduced. (where number of shots > 2)
• The use of euclidean distance as the distance metric offers better
performance than cosine distance [25].
• The use of non-parametric learners considerably reduce complexity
and pave way for a better experimental design.
• They are very popular and are already being used in applied ma-
chine learning applications [9] [23].
The choice of a Deep Residual Neural Network [11] as the baseline
feature extractor is based on the fact that they consistently perform well
on few shot learning tasks. ResNet18 for its simplicity, offers excellent
performance as a feature detector amidst other residual networks and
dense networks [6]. Although other dense networks such as DenseNet161,
DenseNet201 and residual networks such as ResNet152 and Resnet101 of-
fer better performance in some cases, the added complexity of the model
==PAGE:18==
3 Design choices
7
architectures and need for additional computational resources and time,
make ResNet18 the favourable option.
Moreover, the choice of a Deep residual network, enables the use of
transfer learning, with the model pre-trained on large, diverse datasets.
This is one of the prime design considerations on the backbone model,
with the choice being a ResNet18 that is pre-trained on imagenet data
[8].
The linear distance metric is chosen based on the results from [25].
Cosine distance has had a long history of usage and has been used pre-
dominantly in matching networks [29] [21]. It is well established that
for prototypical networks, euclidean distance offers better performance
over cosine distance. This is due to the fact that cosine distance is not a
Bregman divergence [25] [1].
The use of episodes as a form of mini-batch sampler that samples
support and query images, forming few-shot learning tasks was first con-
ceived by Vinyals et al. [29]. This episodic training paves for a meta-
learning approach for few-shot learning. The backbone neural network
is trained over multiple episodes so that it can generalize better to the
test environment.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
4.1
AIS
AIS is an automated, autonomous tracking system that tracks the lo-
cation of vessels anywhere they are in the world.
In addition to the
location, AIS also transmits a plethora of other information, that are
broadly classified as dynamic data and static data.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of an AIS network
Figure from [12]
The dynamic data consists of information that is transmitted every
2-10 seconds. This usually entails information that is changing rapidly,
==PAGE:20==
4.2 Neural Networks
9
such as the heading, bearing at own position, rate of turn, speed over
ground, position coordinates, etc.
The static data is manually entered by the ship’s crew and is trans-
mitted every 6 minutes. It consists of the name of the vessel, call sign,
type, dimensions, draught, destination, etc.
AIS is a legacy system that does not have data security or satellite
reception capabilities. Moreover, onboard AIS can be turned off with
manual intervention, making it diﬀicult to track the vessel.
4.2
Neural Networks
Neural networks are a group of inter-connected Artificial Neurons that
are used to extract information from data. Their design was inspired
from biological neurons, to try and mimic how the brain works. The ba-
sic building blocks of Neural Networks are called Neurons or Perceptrons
(In this case, the terms neurons and perceptrons are used interchange-
ably). Perceptrons work by taking multiple inputs and producing a single
output. A simple perceptron is depicted in figure 4.2
Figure 4.2: Illustration of a simple perceptron
The perception assigns importance to the inputs it receives with
weights w. The output of the perceptron is decided by the bias of the neu-
ron b. The output of a sigmoid neutron with inputs x1, x2, . . . , weights
w1, w2, . . .and bias b is then given by:
==PAGE:21==
4.2 Neural Networks
10
y =
1
1 + exp(−∑
j wjxj −b)
(4.1)
Figure 4.3 depicts how the change in the weights or biases of one of
the neurons correspondingly influences change in the output of a basic
multi-layer perceptron neural network. The left-most layer is called the
input layer and the right-most layer of the network is called the output
layer. All the layers in-between, are called hidden layers.
Figure 4.3: A basic multi-layer perceptron neural network
Figure from [18]
On a high level, neural networks train by passing the data through
the network and evaluating the output on a cost function, often called
the loss function. The error is then backpropagated through the network,
thereby updating the parameters (weights and biases) of the network.
4.2.1
CNN
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are a class of neural networks that
are specifically designed for images. They are different from MLP neural
networks described above, as they are more tailored towards capturing
spatial and temporal information from the data. Images are essentially
matrices of pixels that can be flattened into a 1-dimensional vector. This
can then be used as the input for a CNN. A CNN consists of different
components and layers that are as follows:
==PAGE:22==
4.2 Neural Networks
11
A convolutional layer is one of the most important components of a
CNN and this layer is used to extract features from the input image. A
convolutional layer consists of a kernel that is moved across the pixels
of the image, to extract low-level features. The stride length determines
how much the kernel moves over the image. The output of moving the
kernel over the image is called the feature map.
Convolution operation leads to reduction in dimensionality of the feature
map, compared to the input image. This can be prevented by the use of
padding around the image.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of convolution operation
Figure from [22]
Figure 4.4 depicts a 5x5x1 image, that undergoes padding, to be
formulated as a 6x6x1 image. This is done to ensure that the dimension
of the subsequent feature map produced from the kernel with a stride of
1 is the same as the original image.
The pooling layer is used to extract more information from the feature
maps. It extracts dominant features that are rotational and positional
invariant [22]. Similar to convolutional layers, they reduce the spatial
size of the image (and subsequently the feature maps). Max pooling and
average pooling are the two predominantly used pooling techniques.
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Neural Networks
12
4.2.2
Resnet18
ResNet is a deep ANN that was one of the first very deep feed-forward
neural network, some variants of which have hundreds of layers. Unlike
conventional CNNs, ResNets utilize skip connections that are used to
jump over some layers. The intuition behind the introduction og skip
connections to the network is to mainly tackle the vanishing gradient
problem and the accuracy saturation/ degradation problem where adding
more layers to deep models, leads to higher training error [11]. With
ResNets, the gradients can flow directly through the skip connections
backwards from later layers to initial filters.
Figure 4.5: A residual block
Figure from [11]
Figure 4.5 depicts a residual block, a characteristic feature of ResNet18
(and other ResNet architectures). It shows an identity connection that is
skipping weight layers. Hence unlike conventional deep neural networks,
residual networks learn the residual R(x).
The ResNet18 is a 18 layer deep variant of the ResNet model series
and it has over 11 million trainable parameters. The ResNet18 model
is pre-trained on Imagenet data that consists of more than 1.2 million
images from 1000 classes. The architecture of ResNet18 is illustrated
in 4.6. The figure shows the skip connections and the stacked convnet
blocks.
==PAGE:24==
4.3 Prototypical Network
13
Figure 4.6: Architecture of ResNet18
Figure from [19]
The original ResNet18 architecture is designed for 3 channel RGB
images of 224x224 dimension.
The layers in the ResNet are stacked into blocks.
The ResNet18
consists of 4 blocks (Also called basic blocks). Each basic block consists
of two layers of 3x3 convolution, batch normalization and ReLU layers.
Deeper ResNet architectures also bottleneck blocks that are intended
to keep the parameter size low as the depth of the model increases. These
blocks consists of 1x1, 3x3 and 1x1 convolutions. Here, the first 1x1
convolution layer decreases the dimension of the input and the last 1x1
convolution layer increases the dimension of the input. The middle 3x3
layer acts as the bottleneck as it operates on smaller dimensions.
4.3
Prototypical Network
Prototypical Network [25] is a type of few-shot learning model that uses
the Support set to compute a prototype for each class and classifies each
image in the query set to the nearest prototype, based on a distance
function, usually euclidean distance.
In few-shot classification we are given a small support set of N labeled
examples S = {(x1, y1), . . . , (xN, yN)} where each xi ∈RD is the D-
dimensional feature vector of an example and yi ∈{1, . . . , K} is the
corresponding label. Sk denotes the set of examples labeled with class k.
The class prototypes are computed through an embedding function
fϕ: RD =⇒RM, where ϕ refers to the learnable parameters.
==PAGE:25==
4.3 Prototypical Network
14
The prototypes are given as the mean of the embedded support points
of the class, as given below:
Ck =
1
|Sk|
∑
(xi,yi)∈Sk
fϕ(xi)
(4.2)
The distribution over classes for a query point x, based on a softmax
over distances to the class prototypes in the embedding space is given
as:
pϕ(y = k|x) =
exp(−d(fϕ(x), ck))
∑′
k exp(−d(fϕ(x), c′
k))|Sk|
(4.3)
The euclidean distance between two points z and z’ is given as:
d(z, z′) = ||z −z′||2
(4.4)
Figure 4.7 shows a two dimensional illustration of how query images
are classified, in a 5-way, 5-shot scenario.
Figure 4.7: 2-dimensional illustration of prototypical network
In episodic training, training episodes are formed by randomly sam-
pling N support images Sk and query images Qk from a larger datapool.
The pseudocode to compute the loss J(ϕ) is given by Algorithm 1:
==PAGE:26==
4.3 Prototypical Network
15
Algorithm 1 Training episode loss computation for prototypical net-
works. N is the number of examples in the training set, K is the number
of classes in the training set, NCK is the number of classes per episode,
NS is the number of support examples per class, NQ is the number of
query examples per class. RANDOMSAMPLE(S, N) denotes a set of N
elements chosen uniformly at random from set S, without replacement.
Algorithm adopted from [25]
1: Input: Training set D = {(x1, y1), . . ., (xN, yN)}, where each yi
∈{1, . . . , K}. Dk denotes the subset of D containing all elements
(xi, yi) such that yi = k
2: Output: The loss J for a randomly generated training episode.
3: V ←RANDOMSAMPLE ({1, . . . , K}, NC) ▷Select class indices for
episode
4: for k in {1, . . . , NC} do
5:
Sk ←RANDOMSAMPLE (DVk, Ns) ▷Select support examples
6:
Qk ←RANDOMSAMPLE (DVk, Sk, Nq)
▷Select query
examples
7:
ck ←
1
Nc
∑
(xi,yi)∈Sk fϕ(xi)
▷Compute prototype from support
examples
8: end for
9: J ←0
▷Initialize loss
10: for k in {1, . . . , Nc} do
11:
for (x, y) in Qk do
12:
J ←J +
1
NcNq [d(fϕ(x), ck) + log[∑′
k exp(−d(fϕ(x), Ck))]]
▷
Update loss
13:
end for
14: end for
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 5
The Data
The original dataset is introduced by Stets et al. [26]. This dataset con-
tained 51,000 RGB images with 32,000 annotations separating the images
into boats and buoys. The data was collected onboard a small commer-
cial vessel, operating along the coast of the southern Funen archipelago,
Denmark. The images were originally 2560 x 2048 pixels, downsized to
1920 x 1080 pixels.
These images contained multiple maritime objects and hence object
detection was performed with YOLOv5 algorithm to detect and segregate
the objects [3]. The resultant data consisted of images of objects that
were cropped based on the YOLO bounding boxes drawn around them.
The subsequent dataset thus obtained, consists of 26657 images that
consist of 9 classes of objects:
Red Buoys:
Refers to buoys that are a distinct red in colour, usually referring to
navigational markers that are used to guide vessels. The Red buoy should
be on the left port side of the vessel when it is returning from open water,
according to the IALA system.
Green Buoys:
Refers to green buoys that are usually used as navigational aids. The
data was collected from Denmark hence the green buoys should be on
the right starboard side of the vessel when it is entering port. This is in
accordance to the IALA system.
Random Buoys:
This class consists of all other buoys that cannot be visually segregated
into either a red or green buoy.
==PAGE:28==
5 The Data
17
Humans:
This is a relatively broad class of images that generally refer to small
vessels with humans prominently present in the image. This generally
refers to kayaks and canoes.
(a) Green buoy
(b) Red buoy
(c) Buoy
(d) Sailboat(D)
(e) Large commercial vessel
(f) Leisure craft
(g) Sailboat(U)
(h) Human
(i) fishing boat
Figure 5.1: Sample images from each class
Large commercial vessels:
This class of images refers to large vessels such as bulk carriers, oil
tankers, utility vessels, multipurpose vessels, etc. Generally images of
==PAGE:29==
5.1 Data preprocessing
18
these vessels are taken from a greater distance and there are usually of
poorer quality.
Leisure crafts:
There are small vessels that are used for leisure purposes such as yachts,
personal vessels, luxury vessels and other small boats.
Sail boat(D):
These are sailing boats and sailing ships that have their sails lowered
completely. The images of these vessels often show only the mast and
the hull, with their sails down.
Sail boat(U):
These are sailing vessels that have their sails up. It consists of images of
both sailing vessels and smaller sailing boats.
Small medium fishing boats:
This class of images are of fishing boats and small fishing vessels.
5.1
Data preprocessing
Data preprocessing refers to the cleaning, manipulation and removal of
data to ensure a more consistent dataset. This is an essential step that
is used to enhance the quality of the dataset and improve the perfor-
mance of data models. In our dataset, some images are too small to
contain meaningful and useful information. Hence, extremely small im-
ages, lesser than 16x16 pixels are discarded. Resizing and resampling
very small images may be counterproductive and could lead to deprecia-
tion in performance. Following this approach, 8685 images are discarded
from further analysis and usage. Hence the processed dataset contains
17972 images of at least one of their dimensions more than 16 pixels.
5.2
Image Resizing
Image resizing and image resampling are different techniques to change
the dimensions of images. Image resizing in general refers to the change
==PAGE:30==
5.2 Image Resizing
19
in size of an image, without a change in the number of pixels in the image.
In the context of image analysis, resampling is the more relevant term.
Image resampling is the process of changing the size of an image while
also changing the number of pixels in the image. If the size of the image
is decreased, it is called downsampling and if the size of the image is
increased, it is called upsampling. All the images are re-sized to 224x224
pixels to ensure optimal working of the backbone ResNet18 model. The
images are also preserved as 3 channel RGB images.
5.2.1
Resampling
Image resampling is the process of using interpolation to either down-
sample or upsample an image. It involves the use of data from known
nearby pixels to create new pixels. In image processing, the main types
of interpolation used are bilinear interpolation, nearest neighbour inter-
polation and bicubic interpolation.
5.2.2
Bilinear interpolation
Bilinear interpolation is a simple resampling technique that generates
the value of a pixel by only considering the 4 closest diagonal pixels to
compute the value. A weighted average of these 2x2 pixels is then used
to determine the final interpolation value. Bilinear interpolation is the
default technique used by PyTorch [20].
5.2.3
Nearest neighbour interpolation
Nearest neighbour interpolation uses the nearest neighbouring pixel to
determine the value of a the pixel of interest. This is a simple and fast
method but it is not often used for image resampling, as it performs
poorly when upsampling to large sizes.
==PAGE:31==
5.3 Task Sampler
20
5.2.4
Bicubic interpolation
Bicubic interpolation is a technique used for image resampling that is
similar to bilinear interpolation but it uses the nearby 4x4 pixels instead
of 2x2 pixels to determine the value of the pixel of interest. This ensures
that more information is taken into account to generate the pixel value.
This technique is relatively slower and computationally more expensive
but it preserves more finer details.
5.3
Task Sampler
The Episodic training involves a random sample of support images Sk
and query images Qk sampled from a large data pool. This requires a
specific sampler that can sample the required images and form a few-shot
learning task, that can be fed as input to the prototypical model. Figure
5.2 shows sampled support images Sk in a 9-way, 5-shot scenario.
==PAGE:32==
5.3 Task Sampler
21
Figure 5.2: Sample support images in a 9-way, 5-shot scenario
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6
Methodology and
Experimentation
This section entails the methodology adopted and various experimental
settings and configurations adopted. It also explains in detail about the
experiments conducted in python and the results produced thereof. The
training of the model is broadly divided into 3 distinct stages:
• Training the backbone ResNet18 model
• Episodic training ie, Meta learning
• Validation and class prototype generation
These stages are covered in detail, for experiments conducted for all
the different shots.
6.1
Experiment Reproducibility
Reproducibility is an integral part of scientific research and experimen-
tation. It enables other researchers and investigators to draw the same
conclusion drawn by the original author, by recreating the original steps
and experimental settings. In computational and statistical sciences, re-
producability can be achieved by documenting the experimental settings,
environments, code and making the data available, enabling execution
with identical results.
==PAGE:34==
6.1 Experiment Reproducibility
23
6.1.1
Reproducibility in Python
Python has pseudo-random number generators which if not regulated,
may induce randomness into the experiments. Such a generator can be
made deterministic by setting a seed value, that is preserved throughout
the scope of the experiment. When generating random sequences using
the random function in Python, reproducability is guaranteed unless
it is a multi-thread operation. Furthermore, Python also guarantees a
backwards compatible seeder that ensures reproducibility is upheld, even
in future versions.
6.1.2
Reproducibility in Numpy
The Numpy library in python has its own algorithms to generate random
numbers. It is essential that these sequence generators are also regulated
to ensure that the same sequence is generated, for a given seed number.
However, even in instances where Python and Numpy use the same algo-
rithm to generate the sequences, the generated sequences might not be
identical. This is due to the fact that the internal states of the generators
might be different. Hence the internal states of the generators are also
manually set to ensure they are indexed identically.
6.1.3
Reproducibility in Pytorch
The Pytorch library in Python does not guarantee reproducible results
across different releases, versions and platforms.
Moreover, code exe-
cuted in CPU and GPU may not produce identical results. However,
a reasonable level of reproducibility can be achieved by limiting the en-
tropy and controlling the sources of randomness throughout the experi-
ment environment. Moreover, by default Pytorch uses non-deterministic
algorithms for certain operations. This is changed and Pytorch is config-
ured to use deterministic algorithms as much as possible, at the cost of
performance and execution time. Similar to the case of random number
generators in Python and Numpy, it is essential to control the setting of
the random number generators by manually seeding them.
==PAGE:35==
6.2 General framework
24
6.1.4
Reproducibility in CUDA
CUDA, a parallel computing and GPU API is extensively used to train
the deep learning models. CUDA’s cuDNN library could serve as a po-
tential source of nondeterminism due to the way it select convolution
algorithms. When CUDA is invoked to perform convolution operations,
it runs multiple convolution algorithms to benchmark them and select
the fastest one. This bench marking technique induces nondeterminism
as different convolution algorithms may be selected on subsequent model
runs, even on the same machine with the same experimental setup [7].
Moreover, the algorithm selected to perform the convolution itself could
be non-deterministic by design.
Hence CUDA’s convolutional bench-
marking is disabled and it is explicitly made to use deterministic algo-
rithms for computations. The listing below shows the implementation in
Python:
1 random_seed = 0
2 np.random.seed(random_seed)
3 torch.manual_seed(random_seed)
4 random.seed(random_seed)
5 torch.backends.cudnn.deterministic = True
6 torch.backends.cudnn.benchmark = False
7
8 def seed_worker():
9
worker_seed = torch.initial_seed() % 2**32
10
np.random.seed(worker_seed)
11
random.seed(worker_seed)
12
13 g = torch.Generator()
14 g.manual_seed(0)
Listing 6.1: Reproducibility in Pytorch
6.2
General framework
The models and methods used were developed using Python 3.10 and
predominantly using the PyTorch library. PyTorch is a deep learning
library which aided in the design and implementation of the models.
The models were trained on a CUDA supported Nvidia RTX2060 6GB
==PAGE:36==
6.3 Training the feature extractor
25
GPU. The use of CUDA to train over CPU led to considerable speed up
of computation time.
A variety of libraries were used for the project, including but not
limited to the following:
• PyTorch - Deep Learning library with pre-trained models
• Numpy - Numerical computation and processing tools
• Easyfsl - Few shot learning library
• Matplotlib - Visualization and plotting tools
6.3
Training the feature extractor
The feature extractor is a ResNet18 that was pre-trained on ImageNet
data. Two scenarios are evaluated, one where a pre-trained ResNet18
model is used and another scenario where transfer learning is performed
by re-training the model with our training data that consists of two
classes, ships and buoys. While re-training, the last layer of the ResNet18,
namely layer 4 is unfrozen and all the other layers are frozen, preserving
the pre-trained parameters. This achieves two things. First, it reduces
the trainable feature space to a small subset. This reduces computation
time and speeds up training. Moreover, it is usually the bottom layers of
the CNN that detect prominent features and general patterns in images.
The higher layers are usually towards more finer details. Hence freezing
the bottom layers and training on the top layers, helps preserve the
model’s knowledge about images and feature detection [24]. The model
was trained on 13945 images of ships and buoys that were obtained by a
80 - 20 split of the combined training data. And the model was validated
on the remaining 20%, which constituted 3487 images. The images used
were 224 x 224 and were normalized to the dataset’s mean and standard
deviation. The images were loaded as a batch of 32 and the model was
trained over 100 epochs.
==PAGE:37==
6.4 Episodic training
26
6.4
Episodic training
The last layer of the backbone ResNet18 is flattened giving an 512-
dimensional feature vector as the output. These feature vectors are fed
into the function that computes the distance between the vectors, based
on euclidean distance.
The episodic training defines the stage where
the model learns to learn. From understanding feature extraction, the
model now trains itself to find similarity of images, based on their dis-
tances. The training is performed on the episodic training dataset, that
consists of 6510 images across 5 classes. The images are again resized
to 224 x 224 using bicubic interpolation. Episodes are constructed as
individual few-shot learning tasks, consisting of N-support images and
N-query images, sampled from the dataset. Class prototypes are com-
puted by taking the mean of the 5 support images for each episode. The
query images are classified by finding the distance from the query image
to the class prototypes and selecting the nearest prototype. The mod-
els are trained on 500 episodes and evaluated on 100 episodes. It is to
be noted that in the case of 1-shot learning, the prototypical network
functions similar to a matching network where it classifies and pairs the
query image to the nearest support sample.
6.5
Prototype computation and
evaluation
The trained prototypical model is evaluated by sampling images from the
validation pool, similar to training as tasks that comprise of N support
images and N query images each, where N refers to the number of shots.
The model’s prediction on the query images are compared with the true
labels of the query image to assert its performance. The validation data
consists of 3727 images from 9 classes. 4 of these classes are unseen and
have not been exposed to the model while training. This is designed as a
test for the model to quickly generalize to new classes without training.
Moreover, to better replicate real-life usage, the trained prototypical
model is used to sample support images from the validation pool and
==PAGE:38==
6.6 Probable classes prediction
27
used to generate the class prototypes. These class prototypes are then
saved along with the model. This can then be used to classify unlabelled
real-time images.
6.6
Probable classes prediction
In addition to finding the closest class prototype to the query image, it is
also of interest to find the second and third closest classes. In practical
applications, information about top 3 most probable classes than a single
class prediction could help in estimating the detected object as a part of
a group of classes. This helps with better decision making and taking
more effective actions.
After the feature vector is obtained from the
model during evaluation, the euclidean distance to the top 3 closest class
prototype tensors are determined and ranked.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 7
Results and Discussion
7.1
Backbone ResNet18 training
Transfer learning with the pre-trained ResNet18 was formulated as a 2-
class classification task. The model performed well on the validation set,
yielding an accuracy of 99.99 % and a validation loss of 0.0024. The
training and validation accuracy of the model are depicted in figure 7.2,
showing a fairly rapid convergence during training.
Figure 7.1: Training and validation loss of the backbone ResNet18
The training and validation accuracy of the model are shown in figure
7.2. This shows a fairly consistent improvement in model performance
but also shows signs of overfitting, where the training loss falls much
below the validation loss.
Although this does not directly affect the
few-shot learning model performance, it is nevertheless an undesirable
scenario. However, this is circumvented by the fact that the model is
==PAGE:40==
7.2 Episodic training
29
saved only when there is an improvement in the loss value from the
previous epoch. So if the validation loss worsens due to overfitting, the
model is not saved.
Figure 7.2: Training and validation accuracy of the backbone ResNet18
7.2
Episodic training
Episodic training was performed on the model with 1-shot, 2-shot and 5-
shot scenarios. During the training for an N-shot scenario, each episode
consists of samples of N support images and N query images, on a N-way
problem. 7.3 shows the accuracy of the model through the episodes. The
model achieves a training accuracy of 94.3172%.
==PAGE:41==
7.2 Episodic training
30
Figure 7.3: Accuracy during episodic training for a 5-way, 5-shot sce-
nario
Figure 7.4 shows the loss during episodic training. An immediately
noticeable feature are the rapid fluctuations in the loss value. This can
be explained by the episodic sampling where different N-support and N-
query images are sampled as few-shot tasks. These are sources of high
variability due to the very small sample size. This erratic behaviour is a
characteristic of episodic training in few shot learning.
Figure 7.4: Loss during episodic training for a 5-way, 5-shot scenario
==PAGE:42==
7.3 Evaluation
31
Table 7.1 shows the accuracy of the models in 1-shot, 2-shot and
5-shot scenarios.
Custom trained ResNet18 refers to the model that
was trained with Transfer learning while the pre-trained ResNet18 is
the model trained on ImageNet data. In general, the custom trained
ResNet18 performs better than the pre-trained ResNet18 model, with
the 2-shot and 5-shot models attaining an accuracy of 90.1787% and
46.2208%.
In the case of 1-shot learning, the pre-trained ResNet18
performs better than the custom trained model, with an accuracy of
31.5018%.
Model
1-shot
2-shot
5-shot
Pre-trained ResNet18
31.5018%
43.7728%
87.4105%
Custom trained ResNet18
28.6932%
46.2208%
90.1787%
Table 7.1: Accuracy of the models
This curious behavior can be attributed to the fact that smaller-shot
numbers are associated with more variability as the model is learning
from lesser number of samples for each episode. This leads to the scenario
where the model’s accuracy fluctuation is high enough to safely presume
that both the models have similar performance.
7.3
Evaluation
Figure 7.5 shows a confusion matrix of the predicted labels vs true la-
bels in the 9-way, 5-shot scenario. It is evident that there is ambiguity
between the small medium fishing boats class and the leisure crafts class,
with a fair amount of misclassifications. The small medium fishing boat
has a class accuracy of 74% relatively. There is some minor overlap and
misclassifications between the buoys classes well but overall the model is
able to generalize well over the test objectives.
==PAGE:43==
7.3 Evaluation
32
Figure 7.5: Confusion matrix of 9 way 5 shot scenario
Table 7.2 shows the class accuracy of the different object classes,
across different shots. The model used here is the custom trained ResNet18
prototypical model with episodic training.
Class
1-shot
2-shot
5-shot
Green Buoy
27.6%
36.5%
88.4%
Red Buoy
39.8%
20.30%
92%
Buoys
24.2%
43.5%
90.32%
Leisure boat
35.2%
55%
89.2%
Small medium fishing boat
38.6%
63.4%
70.4%
Large commercial vessel
28.6%
71.1%
95.72%
Sailboat(U)
35.6%
65.1%
96.28%
Sailboat(D)
20.4%
41.7%
96.8%
Human
28.6932%
25.6%
93%
Table 7.2: Class accuracy across different shots
==PAGE:44==
7.4 Probable classes prediction
33
7.4
Probable classes prediction
In practical applications, it is more important to classify distinct classes
of objects clearly rather than objects that are similar to each other. For
example, a ship using a visual classifier to navigate, it is more important
to distinguish between a dry bulker and a small fishing ship rather than
to distinguish between small fishing boats and sailboats. This is because,
the necessary action that has to be taken post identification of the object
varys drastically, with different vessels.
This may involve an evasive
maneuver, use of signals or establishing communication.
Hence it might practically be more acceptable for the model to mis-
classify a leisure boat as a sailboat, than to misclassify a large commercial
vessel as a fishing boat, as the latter can have severe consequences.
Instead of associating the query image to the closest class prototype,
the top 3 closest class prototypes are considered, based on the euclidean
distance. This presents a more holistic picture of the way the model
classifies the images and potentially serving more useful practical uses.
The episodic trained 5-shot prototypical network was used to com-
pute class prototypes for the classes in the validation set. The computed
prototypes were then used to classify the validation images to the near-
est classes. Here, the second closest and third closest classes are also
investigated.
Figure 7.6 shows the top 3 predicted classes for a few selected vali-
dation images. Figure 7.6 a), shows a Leisure craft, which was correctly
predicted as a leisure craft, by the 5-shot model. The second closest class
prototype was small medium fishing boat and the third closest class is
human. This sample represents a fair amount of ambiguity as the vessel
is zoomed in and it is diﬀicult to perceive the size and scale of the object
in focus. The prominence of the orange colour could also potentially ex-
plain the third probable class - humans, as most human class examples
in the validation set were humans on bright coloured kayaks and canoes.
Figure 7.6 b) is a fishing boat that is wrongly classified as a leisure vessel.
This again, represents a possible class overlap as small fishing boats and
leisure boats are often very similar to each other. The second closest
class is the small medium fishing boat class, which is as expected. The
third class is a sailboat(D). This is an interesting observation as the ver-
==PAGE:45==
7.4 Probable classes prediction
34
(a) True class: Leisure craft
(b) True class: Fishing boat
(c) True class: Green Buoy
(d) True class: Sailboat(U)
Figure 7.6: Top-3 class prediction for some example images
==PAGE:46==
7.4 Probable classes prediction
35
tical features in the image are strikingly similar to the masts of sailboats
whose sails are down.
Figure 7.6 c) shows a green buoy that is correctly classified as a green
buoy by the model. The second and third closest classes are buoy and
buoy red. These results are as expected. It is imperative to distinguish
between the green and red buoys clearly in real-life applications, as these
buoys dictate the direction of movement of the vessel. Misclassification
can have serious consequences. The red buoy is distinct from the green
buoy, as the model as predicted but compared to the other classes, it
still has features that are similar to the green buoy and hence shows up
in the top 3 closest classes.
Figure 7.6 d) shows an image of a sailboat with its sails up. It is
correctly classified as a sailboat(U). The second closest class is large
commercial vessel. Large vessels are of course, very different in character-
istics from sailboats. Hence this is an indication of the model struggling
to perceive the scale of objects. The third closest class is a sailboat(D)
which is a prediction that is as expected.
These examples illustrate some scenarios where the model confuses
when encountering classes that have similar features to each other. This
sort of soft misclassifications have less serious consequences compared to
misclassifying an image to a drastically different class of object.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The main objective of this project was to explore the use of few-shot learn-
ing as a feasible method of classifying maritime objects. Subsequently,
few shot learning with prototypical networks was experimented with and
evaluated as a suitable method for this classification scenario. With the
lack of data quality and volume acting as a formidable challenge, meta
learning with episodic training was also evaluated to enhance the perfor-
mance of the model. The methods were evaluated with different experi-
mental settings and shots: 1-shot, 2-shot and 5-shot. The performance
of the 1-shot and 2-shot variants were relatively poor, but the 5-shot
model offered commendable performance. Moreover, with the compu-
tation of prototypes in the evaluation phase, real-world implementation
and generalization is relatively easy and flexible.
The choice of models, methodology and experimentation were per-
formed with practical usage and feasibility into careful consideration.
Paving way for a fast, light and general solution, whose scope can be
expanded for new scenarios with relative ease. This is especially the case
with the prediction on unseen classes, where the model classifies objects
that it was not trained on. In such scenarios, the model was only pre-
sented with a few support images as samples, forming class prototypes
and generalizing to new scenarios.
Since the prototypical network uses a euclidean distance function to
determine the distance between the classes, the model performs well
when introduced to new classes that are visually different from existing
trained classes.
This could be of great significance in the context of
navigation with autonomous ships. When the predictions are used to
take navigational decisions, objects that are similar to each other, for
example, sailboats and fishing boats often require a similar maneuver.
==PAGE:48==
8 Conclusion
37
While it would be more important to identify objects that are distinct
from the existing classes, for example coral reefs, rocks or submarines.
The nature of these models to be relatively independent of the ini-
tial training data, enables this methodology to be applied outside the
maritime field to other applications and scenarios.
Moreover, object classification technique is not meant to replace ex-
isting maritime navigational technologies but rather to compliment them
to function as an additional layer of security.
Summarizing, few shot learning with Prototypical networks is a vi-
able technique to classify maritime objects, when the quality of the data
is poor and there is a lack of suﬀicient training data for conventional
classification. Satisfactory results were achieved, especially with 5-shot
learning, even while predicting on unseen object classes.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 9
Future Outlook
This project explored the use of few shot learning (2-shot and 5-shot)
with prototypical networks for maritime object classification.
The re-
sults indicate that with a suﬀiciently high shot, such as 5-shot, the per-
formance is satisfactory and worthy of practical applications.
The simple design and lightweight nature of the model, enables the
computation and storage of class prototypes. The model does not have
to be re-trained with the injection of new classes, unlike conventional
CNN classification models. If the class prototypes are pre-computed for
a variety of different classes that could be potentially encountered during
voyage, unlabelled objects, in the form of real-time input can be directly
classified by the model, almost instantly.
This has wide-reaching practical applications as it is often diﬀicult
to train deep learning models that can satisfactorily account for all the
classes of objects that can be encountered by the system in real-life.
This is especially true in the case of maritime voyages as new types of
vessels, terrain and objects could be encountered by the vessel. If the
system is used to aid in navigational decision making, it is essential that
encountered object is classified to initiate appropriate action or maneuver
of the vessel.
The few shot learning model by itself can be used as a part of a larger
system that encompasses the detection, identification and action stages,
as shown in figure.
Such a few-shot learning based classification model can compliment
existing maritime navigation technologies such as AIS, GPS and radar.
It could especially hold potential with autonomous ships as they should
be able to navigate without human intervention. In such scenarios, the
vessel should be able to detect, identify and take necessary action about
objects ahead. The few-shot learning model demonstrated in this thesis
==PAGE:50==
9 Future Outlook
39
fits in the ’identify’ stage where, once the object is detected with an ap-
propriate object detection technique, it has to be identified and classified
so that necessary action can subsequently be taken.
The model architecture used in this project is a simple prototypical
network that is based on a ResNet18. The design consideration, as stated
earlier was to have a light weight, simple and practically implementable
model. However, more sophisticated models and techniques can be used
to attain better performance.
This approach entails a regularized Mahalanobis-distance-based soft-
k-means clustering approach combined with a modified neural adap-
tive feature extractor, called Conditional Neural Adaptive Processes -
CNAPs.
Figure 9.1: Two-dimensional illustration of euclidean distance vs Ma-
halanobis distance
Two-dimensional illustration of embedded support image features
output by a linear distance metric based model (Euclidean distance)
such as Prototypical Networks (Left) vs class-covariance based metric -
Mahalanobis distance (Right). The figure is adopted from [2].
A modified ’Simple CNAPs’ architecture has also yielded promising
results with fewer trainable parameters than conventional CNAPs with
better performance. A significant difference from prototypical networks
in terms of the metric function is the use of class-covariance based metric
- Mahalanobis distance [2]. This could potentially lead to better perfor-
mance when handling ambiguous and overlapping classes of objects.
==PAGE:51==
9 Future Outlook
40
However, the implemented prototypical network itself, could find ex-
cellent applications in maritime navigation, especially with autonomous
ships. Moreover, the flexibility and the lack of need of large training
dataset ensures that this model can be generalized to other domains as
well. This could be for example, defect detection, autonomous driving,
medical imagery, etc.
Overall, few-shot learning is an area of active research and the tech-
nique itself has shown good potential, covering the shortcomings of con-
ventional classifier models.
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIX A
More Experiments
A.1
SGD vs Adam
The performance of the models with different hyperparameters was in-
vestigated. More specifically, the performance between Adam vs SGD
optimizers was of great interest as they are some of the most commonly
used optimizers in metric based few-shot learning.
Model
1-shot
2-shot
Custom ResNet18 with Adam
28.6935%
46.2208%
Custom ResNet18 with SGD
30.5272%
45.1685%
Table A.1: Performance of the models with SGD vs Adam
SGD gives a marginally better performance in the case of 2-shot learn-
ing and a worse performance for 1-shot learning, compared to Adam.
However, for practical reasons, it can be presumed that the difference is
not extremely significant.
A.2
Bicubic vs Bilinear interpolation
The images in the 5-class few-shot learning dataset are of different di-
mensions each. Since the ResNet18 was designed to take input images
with dimensions 224 x 224, there was an imperative need for a way to
resample (In most cases, upsample) the image from a smaller size, up to
224 x 224 pixels.
==PAGE:53==
A.2 Bicubic vs Bilinear interpolation
42
Two of the most powerful and popular techniques in image analytics
to resample images are bilinear interpolation and bicubic interpolation,
that were explained earlier in section 5.2.1.
To compare the two techniques, a smaller, representative sample was
used from the main dataset. This was formulated as a 5-way, 5-shot
problem, with a pool of 50 images with 10 per class.
Figure A.1: 5-way, 5-shot with Bilinear interpolation
Figure A.2: 5-way, 5-shot with Bicubic interpolation
==PAGE:54==
A.3 Training plots
43
From figures A.1 and A.2, it can be seen that the model achieves bet-
ter performance with bicubic interpolation over bilinear interpolation.
This can be explained by the fact that bicubic interpolation estimates
pixel value based on 4x4 pixels, instead of bilinear interpolation’s 2x2
pixels. This preserves more information in the image and is more repre-
sentative of the actual image. Subsequently, bicubic interpolation was
used throughout the project.
A.3
Training plots
Figure A.3 Training accuracy of the ResNet18 with early-stopping at 25
Epochs.
Figure A.3: Training accuracy of the ResNet18
Figure A.4 shows the accuracy of episodic training of the prototypical
network in 2-shot scenario, with Adam optimizer over 5000 episodes.
==PAGE:55==
A.3 Training plots
44
Figure A.4:
Episodic training of 2-shot prototypical network with
Adam
Figure A.5 shows the accuracy of episodic training of the prototypical
network in 2-shot scenario, with SGD optimizer over 5000 episodes.
Figure A.5: Episodic training of 2-shot prototypical network with SGD
Figures A.6 A.7 show the model accuracy during episodic training
in 5-way, 5-shot scenarios with the pre-trained ResNet18 and with the
custom trained ResNet18, respectively.
Figure A.8 show the accuracy of the model during episodic training
with the custom trained ResNet18 in a 5-way, 5-shot scenario.
==PAGE:56==
A.3 Training plots
45
Figure A.6: Episodic training of pre-trained 5-shot model with Adam
Figure A.7: Episodic training of custom 5-shot model with Adam
Figure A.8: Episodic training of custom 5-shot model with SGD
==PAGE:57==
References
[1]
Arindam Banerjee, Inderjit Dhillon, and Joydeep Ghosh. “Cluster-
ing with Bregman Divergences.” In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 6 (June 2004). doi: 10.1137/1.9781611972740.22.
[2]
Peyman Bateni et al. “Improved Few-Shot Visual Classification.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2020.
[3]
Jonathan Becktor et al. Bolstering Maritime Object Detection with
Synthetic Data.
[4]
Tomas Bubenicek. Using Game Engine to Generate Synthetic Datasets
for Machine Learning. 2020. url: https : / / cescg . org / wp -
content/uploads/2020/04/Bubenicek-Using-Game-Engine-
to- Generate- Synthetic- Datasets- for- Machine- Learning-
1.pdf.
[5]
Zhijun Chen et al. “Deep learning for autonomous ship-oriented
small ship detection.” In: Safety Science 130 (2020), page 104812.
issn: 0925-7535. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2020.
104812. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/artic
le/pii/S0925753520302095.
[6]
Arkabandhu Chowdhury et al. Few-shot Image Classification: Just
Use a Library of Pre-trained Feature Extractors and a Simple Clas-
sifier. 2021. doi: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2101 . 00562. url: https :
//arxiv.org/abs/2101.00562.
[7]
Pytorch contributors. Pytorch reproducibility. url: https://pyto
rch.org/docs/stable/notes/randomness.html.
[8]
Jia Deng et al. “ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.”
In: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition. 2009, pages 248–255. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
==PAGE:58==
REFERENCES
47
[9]
Gabriel García et al. Circumpapillary OCT-Focused Hybrid Learn-
ing for Glaucoma Grading Using Tailored Prototypical Neural Net-
works. 2021. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2106.13551. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2106.13551.
[10]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014.
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1406.2661. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1406.2661.
[11]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.
2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1512.03385. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1512.03385.
[12]
Bin Hu et al. “Statistical Analysis of Massive AIS Trajectories Us-
ing Gaussian Mixture Models.” In: 2017 2nd International Confer-
ence on Multimedia and Image Processing (ICMIP). 2017, pages 113–
117. doi: 10.1109/ICMIP.2017.57.
[13]
Gregory R. Koch. “Siamese Neural Networks for One-Shot Image
Recognition.” In: 2015.
[14]
Steinar Laenen and Luca Bertinetto. On Episodes, Prototypical
Networks, and Few-shot Learning. 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
2012.09831. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.09831.
[15]
Sung-Jun Lee et al. “Image-based Ship Detection and Classification
for Unmanned Surface Vehicle Using Real-Time Object Detection
Neural Networks.” In: June 2018.
[16]
Claire Little et al. Generative Adversarial Networks for Synthetic
Data Generation: A Comparative Study. 2021. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.2112.01925. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01925.
[17]
Vladimir Lyashenko. Understanding Few-Shot Learning in Com-
puter Vision: What You Need to Know. 2022. url: https : / /
neptune.ai/blog/understanding- few- shot- learning- in-
computer-vision.
[18]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. 2015.
[19]
Xianfeng Ou et al. “Moving Object Detection Method via ResNet-
18 with Encoder-Decoder Structure in Complex Scenes.” eng. In:
Ieee Access 7 (2019), pages 108152–108160. issn: 21693536. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2931922.
==PAGE:59==
REFERENCES
48
[20]
Pytorch Transforms.Resize. url: https://pytorch.org/vision/
stable/generated/torchvision.transforms.Resize.html.
[21]
Sachin Ravi and H. Larochelle. “Optimization as a Model for Few-
Shot Learning.” In: ICLR. 2017.
[22]
Sumit Saha. A Comprehensive Guide to Convolutional Neural Net-
works — the ELI5 way. 2018. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com / a - comprehensive - guide - to - convolutional - neural -
networks-the-eli5-way-3bd2b1164a53.
[23]
Asif Salekin and Natalie Russo. “Understanding Autism: The Power
of EEG Harnessed by Prototypical Learning.” In: Proceedings of
the Workshop on Medical Cyber Physical Systems and Internet of
Medical Things. MCPS ’21. Nashville, Tennessee: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2021, pages 12–16. isbn: 9781450383271.
doi: 10.1145/3446913.3460317. url: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3446913.3460317.
[24]
Tim Sennett. Unfreezing the Layers You Want to Fine-Tune Using
Transfer Learning. 2020. url: https://medium.com/@timsenne
tt/unfreezing-the-layers-you-want-to-fine-tune-using-
transfer-learning-1bad8cb72e5d.
[25]
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard S. Zemel. “Prototypical
Networks for Few-shot Learning.” In: CoRR abs/1703.05175 (2017).
arXiv: 1703.05175. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.05175.
[26]
Jonathan D. Stets et al. “Comparing Spectral Bands for Object De-
tection at Sea using Convolutional Neural Networks.” In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series 1357.1 (October 2019), page 012036.
doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1357/1/012036. url: https://doi.
org/10.1088/1742-6596/1357/1/012036.
[27]
Flood Sung et al. “Learning to Compare: Relation Network for
Few-Shot Learning.” In: CoRR abs/1711.06025 (2017). arXiv: 1711.
06025. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06025.
[28]
Vejen mod en mere klimavenlig skibsfart. 2019. url: https://em.
dk/media/13475/det-blaa-danmark.pdf.
==PAGE:60==
REFERENCES
49
[29]
Oriol Vinyals et al. “Matching Networks for One Shot Learning.”
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Edited
by D. Lee et al. Volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. url:
https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2016 / file / 90e
1357833654983612fb05e3ec9148c-Paper.pdf.
