==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
The influence of ancillary service requirements 
in variable renewable energy investments
Evangelia Iliopoulou 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0541 
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This report was submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the graduation in Msc­
Sustainable Energy with specialization in the Wind Energy at the Technical University of
Denmark.
Evangelia Iliopoulou ­ s200690
Signature
Date
ii
15/7/2022
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Energy markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The ancillary service in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Sizing the operating reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Renewables and impact on ancillary service requirements . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Sector coupling and energy systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methodology
7
2.1
Energy system modelling in Balmorel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
General description of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Simulation of the ancillary services in the Balmorel model . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Ancillary services add­on
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Modelling of the reserve requirement in the model
. . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Strengths and limitations of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Development of the model ancillary service requirements based on the
available renewables on the system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4.1
VRE impact the reserve requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4.2
VRE impact the provision of the reserve requirements . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Optimization perspective in the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Scenario creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6.1
1st scenario: VRE impact requirement ­ without sector coupling . . . 13
2.6.2
2nd scenario: VRE impact the provision of the requirement ­ without
sector coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.6.3
3rd scenario: VRE impact requirement ­ sector coupling . . . . . . . 14
2.6.4
Summary of scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Results
16
3.1
VRE impact requirement­without sector coupling (1st scenario) . . . . . . . 16
3.1.1
Electricity demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.1.2
Electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.1.3
Generation capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.4
Upward reserve requirement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.5
Technologies covering the upward reserve requirement . . . . . . . 23
3.1.6
Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.1.7
Conclusions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
VRE impact the provision of the requirement ­ without sector coupling (2nd
scenario)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2.1
Electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2.2
Generation capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.2.3
Technologies covering the upward reserve requirement . . . . . . . 29
3.2.4
Conclusions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3
VRE impact requirement ­ sector coupling (3rd scenario) . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3.1
Electricity demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
iii
==PAGE:4==
3.3.2
Electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3.3
Generation capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.4
Upward reserve requirement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3.5
Technologies covering the upward reserve requirement . . . . . . . 34
3.3.6
Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3.7
Conclusions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4
Discussion
37
5
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
42
A Time representation in the simulation
45
B Additional graphs from the simulations
46
B.0.1
1st Scenario­ VRE impact the reserve requirement without sector
coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
B.0.2
2nd Scenario ­ VRE impact the provision of the reserve requirement
­ without sector coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
B.0.3
3rd Scenario ­ VRE impact the reserve requirement ­ without sector
coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
iv
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Climate change requires future initiatives from humanity to preserve a viable planet. The
energy sector contributes to the emissions to a high degree, thus its decarbonization is
of utmost importance. The variable renewable energy investments are the foundation of
that alteration. Hence, it is vital to consider their unpredictability when planning an energy
system. In this project, the synergies of the VREs on the ancillary service requirements
were studied, by simulating investment optimizations in the Balmorel energy model. The
simulations were including France, Germany, Norway, and Denmark and it was studied
in the years 2025, 2035, and 2045 with a two­year rolling horizon and limited time rep­
resentation of 8 weeks of the year and 24 time steps each week due to computational
tractability. In the scenarios created it was studied the impact of VREs on the reserve re­
quirement in a system with and without sector coupling and the influence of VREs on the
provision of the requirement without sector coupling. In both the systems that considered
the influence of VRE’s uncertain production, similar results were attained in the system’s
response to that influence. The results showed, that as the trust on VREs to the expected
electricity production decreases, the system’s cost is increased, driven by the increased
activation of more producing units in order to provide the higher reserves. The increased
uncertainty of VREs is leading both wind and solar to be ’curtailed’ in the low trust cases,
being available for the case of the reserve requirement. However, wind has a greater part
in the reserves and solar on the electricity production. Storage together with hydrogen in
the sector coupling scenario seems to constitute a key technology in the system provid­
ing reserve needs by loading the excess renewable energy production which increases
its presence towards 2050. When studied the influence of the VRE’s in the provision of
the reserves, it was shown that as the trust decreases, wind energy increases its share
in the electricity production while it only results in the increase of solar in 2045 and after
the 70% trust case. As VREs become less reliable to provide the ancillary services, it
is more optimal to increase their share on the electricity production and decrease it from
the ancillary services, especially in the low trust cases. Overall, assumptions on the input
data and on the modeling of the ancillary services in Balmorel could affect the realistic
perspective of the results. Nonetheless, it is highlighted the importance of considering
the impact of VREs on the reserve requirement as it was shown the high influence on the
system’s optimal planning.
v
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the ever­increasing renewable energy investments penetration to the
power system leads to a more sustainable energy system. This phenomenon necessi­
tates for precautionary measures to be taken for a better management of renewables
generation variability and uncertainty, as well as to ensure power system security. The
current master thesis deals with the impact that ancillary service requirements have on
power system planning, when they depend on variable renewable energy share on the
system. With aim of performing a more comprehensive analysis, fundamental terms will
be introduced regarding ancillary service requirements and their relationship with variable
renewable energy (VRE) systems.
1.1
Energy markets
In the past three decades, liberalization of the energy markets took place in Europe. Be­
fore this occurs, the European electricity sector was a monopoly, with fully state­owned
vertically integrated companies being responsible for generation, transmission and sup­
ply of electricity. The liberalization of the electricity markets resulted in unbundling the
vertically integrated power systems into generating units, transmission system operators
(TSO), and distribution system operators (DSO). [1] This change allowed for more com­
petition in the sector, no market entrance barriers, transparent prices, shift to renewable
energy production, allowance for customers to choose energy supplier, as well as eco­
nomic growth on different countries. [2]
The representation of the energy markets before and after the liberalization can be seen
in the Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Schematic representation of the energy markets before and after their liberalization.
[3]
The European union’s vision is to create an integrated electricity market, which will serve
the energy policy goals for security, affordability and sustainability.Moving towards this
target, a united market for the whole European network has been and is continuing to
be built. This achievement started with the aforementioned energy markets liberalization
and continued with the concurrent European day­ahead clearance, design of various mar­
kets responsible for managing the intra­day and balancing market, and the enforcement
of capacity mechanisms design guidelines. The unbundled electricity market has to fulfill
specific rules in order to satisfy the European electricity market’s goals. More specifically,
1
==PAGE:7==
these goals concern the cross­border trading of electricity among the European countries
while optimizing the use of interlinks. The way to put in practice these rules is by en­
forcing framework guidelines and being developed by the European Commission (EC),
the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators, the National Regulatory Authorities
(NRAs), and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity in a
cooperative process. [4]
This structure of the current electricity markets has efficiently served the needed consump­
tion so far as well as the safe operation of the power system. Nonetheless, the emerging
climate changes make necessary the precautionary measures in order to decrease the
greenhouse gas(GHG)emissions which result to the energy system’s alteration. Accord­
ing to the global GHG emissions arising by each sector, the energy sector is the highest
emitter accounting for 70.3% of the total emissions. Thus, the electricity sector is antici­
pated to play a major role on the energy savings also after the sector coupling by electri­
fying the transport, industrial and heating sector. The energy system is already in need of
more flexibility and modification in its structure as the penetration of the intermittent VREs
and the use of storage have already increased in the energy production. What is needed
now is the development of the wholesale electricity market to be able to handle more than
the conventional power plants and an inflexible demand. [5]
1.2
The ancillary service in Europe
In the electricity systems there are two restraints that should always be satisfied. Every
time it should be certain that the energy supply equals the demand as well as that the
reserve requirements are covered, resulting in the TSO keeping the power system bal­
ance. [6] The ancillary services are the different technical services required by the TSO
in order to cover these reserve requirements. Their goal is to ensure the stability and
security of the power system by supporting the power transmission from production to de­
mand. Their role is to maintain the frequency, voltage, load and the restart process in the
system. [7] There are different causes for imbalances on the system, such as forecast
errors on the prediction of renewable power production or in the demand, either unex­
pected outages, for instance failure of a generator, a transmission line, or a transformer,
or any other power system asset. The term operating reserve is defined (in this report) as
the active power capacity that is available for the TSO within a short time period in case
of an unexpected energy disruption in order to meet the system’s demand and maintain
frequency control.[6] Reserves can be power plants, consumption resources and energy
storages which adjust their electric power according to the need of the power system.
[8] The operating reserve is generally divided into spinning, non­spinning or replacement
reserves. In the first category, it is included the excess generation capacity that comes
up from generators that are already connected to the system by raising or declining their
production. When it comes to the non­spinning reserve, this deals with the units that are
off­line but can be connected with a short postponement. The naming conventions of the
ancillary services as well as their classification alter in the different power systems but
in general they all implement comparable services and markets with some differences
on the names. [6] First, they are introduced the main three categories of the ancillary
services. These are:
• Frequency­supporting services that maintain the balance immediately among power
supply and demand, thus preserving the frequency of the system in 50 Hz.
• Voltage­supporting services that enable the TSO to preserve the voltage stability of
the system.
2
==PAGE:8==
• Black­start services that make possible for the TSO to restart the system after a
black out has occurred.
In Europe, according to the guidelines on the electricity balancing, the ENTSO­E (Euro­
pean Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity) classifies the spinning
and non­spinning reserves into three main groups of the frequency­supporting ancillary
services depending on their response time (ENTSO­E 2018).
• The Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR) or primary control reserve. It consti­
tutes the fastest frequency­supporting ancillary service, as it is activated immedi­
ately or up to few seconds, depending on the FCR provider and its goal is to maintain
the frequency to its initial level.
• The Frequency Restoration Reserve (FRR). In this service the objective is to restore
the system frequency by restoring the balance in the control zone of a TSO, doing
that by being activated after FCR, thus relieving the system wide activated FCR.
FRR is divided into two categories. First, is aFRR (Automatic Frequency Restoration
Reserve) i.e. secondary reserve, which takes place in a few seconds but there is full
response within 5­10 minutes. The other one is called, mFRR (Manual Frequency
Restoration Reserve) i.e. tertiary control reserve which full response is within 30 to
60 minutes, being a comparatively slow frequency supporting ancillary service.
• The Replacement Reserve (RR). This last service is only takes place in few systems
in Europe. It is activated following the FRR and its goal is to support or relief the
previously activated service. Its full response can take place in up to one hour.[6][1]
Figure 1.2: Schematic representation of the frequency­supporting ancillary services. [9]
The frequency­supporting ancillary services and their time­frame of activation mentioned
above are presented in Figure 1.2. When TSO follows a restorative strategy, the order
of the activation goes with first activating FCR in order to firstly cope with the imbalance,
continuously activates aFRR, then mFRR and lastly RR, if exists. In the case that TSO fol­
lows a preventive stategy, then taking into consideration an expected imbalance, (SMTH
3
==PAGE:9==
FOR RR) , activates mFRR in order to be ready within 30­60 minutes, approaching the im­
balance event around 5­10 minutes before TSO activates aFRR and finally FCR to takes
place at the real time of the disturbance. Apart from the time of activation of each ancillary
service, the reserve can be categorized also as upward response (upward regulation) or
downward response (downward regulation). When it comes to the upward reserve re­
quirement, this refers to the supply deficit on the system. In this case, more producers
need to be activated which can also be storage systems or it can be reduced the load
on the demand side. On the other case of downward reserve requirements, here is the
opposite situation, where there is excess supply on the system, thus it is needed either
to reduce the supply e.g. by charging storage devices either to increase on the demand
side the electricity consumption. [6]
1.3
Sizing the operating reserves
The ENTSO­E(European Network Transmission System Operator of Electricity) argues
about the sources of the imbalances on the system that affect the sizing of the reserve
requirements. These can be diversified into being held during normal operation and into
expectation of unpredicted events on the power system. When it concerns the normal
operation, the reserves needed deal with the variations on the demand and the renewable
power production during their scheduling period, as well as with the forecast errors of the
demand and VREs production coping with in the real time operation. In the case of the
unforessen events on the system, the disturbance can rely on an outage of the power
system equipment such as generation, load or transmission device. [10] [11]
The sizing of the reserve requirement is usually TSO’s responsibility. There is the pos­
sibility that the reserve need is defined by a regional or continental authority. According
to the guidelines of the ENTSO­E, the sizing of the reserve can be assessed both with
a deterministic and a probabilistic way, where in the probabilistic one it can be either
”exogenous” or ”endogenous”. The exogenous reserve is defined for example by using
historical data, while the endogenous one is relying on the future or anticipated capacities,
production or forecast errors. When it comes to the deterministic part, this usually is set
to a percentage of the loss of the largest connected unit in the system. [6]
The FCR reserve i.e. primary control requirement for the synchronous area of Europe
is set by ENTSO­E at 3 GW based on the largest possible event for the interconnection
and is shared among the different TSOs depending on their energy production. In relation
to the FRR and RR reserves, these are defined by the national operators, with ENTSO­
E setting the guidelines for the sizing procedure. In general it is sized based on both
generation outages and normal variations following a statistical regulation. [11]
The TSO’s initially have to prepare a deterministic approach relying on the greatest pos­
itive and negative disturbance on the system. The FRR requirement should be at least
equal to the highest imbalance on the system, both on positive and negative reserves. Af­
ter that, the TSO’s have to make a probabilistic assessment based on the historical data
of imbalances of at least one full year. The 99% quantile of the respected imbalances
defines the minimum value of the sum of FRR and RR requirement. As it was mentioned
in section 1.2 the use of RR is rare in most of the systems in Europe. [10]
As a general rule, the FCR reserve requirements are provided usually by quickly adjusted
units such as pumped storage and part­loaded thermal power plants or by large wind
and solar power plants. aFRR and mFRR reserves can be provided by hydro­reservoirs,
open cycle turbines, diesel generators, which they are still plants quickly connected to the
grid. The last category of the reserves, meaning the RR, can be covered by adjusting
4
==PAGE:10==
the demand side or taking other measures such as curtailment of generation, enhanced
balancing areas, virtual power plants, trade among countries, using storage devices, heat
pumps, electric vehicles etc. Overall, the resulted technologies to cover the reserves are
selected upon the least cost on the system. [6]
1.4
Renewables and impact on ancillary service
requirements
With more and more renewables penetrating the energy mix, maintaining the stability in
the power system is getting more challenging. This phenomenon will be more intense
moving towards 2050 on our effort to achieve global set targets such as Paris Agreement
goals as well as due to their reduced costs and increasingly high electricity demand. Ancil­
lary services are responsible for maintaining the power system’s security as well as meet­
ing the demand each time in the case of unpredictable events on the power­producing
units. The rising number of VRE investments on the energy system mentioned before
have an increased influence on the reserves required on the system, due to their uncer­
tainty lying on the forecasted production. Thus, it is of utmost importance to be able to
relate the existence of the VREs on the energy markets with the expected resulted re­
serve need. This would facilitate the operation of the power system in order to maintain
its security. Taking the above arguments into consideration, investigating the participation
of VRE in the ancillary market and the consequences on the energy system constitutes
an emerging issue.
After analyzing the effect of the wind and solar energy systems on the different classi­
fications of the reserve requirements, it has concluded that these do not affect the con­
tingency reserve requirement meaning the primary reserve. This relies on the fact that
the largest single contingency connected is larger than a possible combination of wind or
solar power plants (MW) that could have an outage at the same time. Additionally, these
renewable’s output change with a slower pace, thus difficult to result in a contingency
event. Hence, the variable renewable energy systems influence the secondary reserve
requirement (FRR) both the faster component aFRR and the slower one mFRR. [11]
1.5
Sector coupling and energy systems
Solar and wind energy constitute the main contributors to the decarbonization of the en­
ergy system, in addition to carbon capture, use of green gases and integration of other
sectors. The other sectors that contribute to the emitting of GHG are mainly transport,
heating, then industry and agriculture. This raises the need of an integrating system
among the different sectors with the foundation of an efficient and flexible energy grid.
In order to cope with the GHG emissions, transport and heat sector are planned to be
electrified by 2050 with electricity generated by renewables resulting in the increase of
the demand. In the Figure 1.3 it can be seen the world’s electricity consumption from the
present until the projected demand in 2040. Looking at the 1.3 the demand from 2020
to 2040 reaching 150% higher levels. Not fail to mention the efficiency enhancement of
the system that takes place at the same time which reduces at some percent the overall
consumption.A ”clean” energy system creates new challenges in terms of operation and
safety of the system but on the other hand propels for greater efficiency improvements.[12]
As shown in [13] and the influence of sector coupling in the system’s decarbonization in
Northern and central Europe, this resulted to play a significant role with hydrogen consti­
tuting a key technology to that transition.
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: World’s electricity demand from 2020 until 2040 in TWh. Chart created based on data
from [14]
6
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
2.1
Energy system modelling in Balmorel
After the oil crisis on 70s, energy system modelling started to being developed as it was
becoming popular the turn to a more sustainable way of energy production. Nowadays,
energy system models are used both by public and private energy sectors, policy makers
as well as research institutions with the aim to analyze the energy markets, contribute to
the energy system development in the foreseeable future. Balmorel was firstly introduced
by Hans Ravn et al in 2001. [15]
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of electricity and heat flow connections among countries,
regions and areas in the Balmorel model.[13]
2.1.1
General description of the model
It constitutes a bottom­up, partial equilibrium model written in GAMS (General Algebraic
Modelling System) modelling language. It is considering a wide variety of technologies
explaining its bottom­up reference.
It is an open source model and the core model is based on linear programming but mixed­
integer modelling may be applied, for example in order to represent unit commitment. The
model’s goal is to minimize energy system costs with initial primary attention on the elec­
tricity and district heating sector. At present, it includes industrial demand, individual users
like individual households, and transport sector as well. There is also the possibility of in­
cluding synthetic gas for producing energy where is included also related technologies.
In this project, for the first two scenarios it will be included only the electricity and district
heating sector with focus on the electricity sector. In the third scenario where the sector
coupling is included it will be contained additionally the industry, individual users, trans­
port sector and synthetic gas. Balmorel has a flexible model framework being able to
simulate different markets according to the user’s needs. For instance, it can be used for
capacity development optimization meaning optimize investments and decommissioning,
to simulate day­ahead market or intraday, balancing and congestion management mar­
ket simulations. Balmorel offers a flexible temporal representation as well. It includes
years(Y), seasons(S) and terms(T) being featured for different time representations like
seasons can be months, weeks, days etc while terms can be hours, minutes etc depend­
ing on users choice. In addition, there is the possibility of rolling years or seasons foresight
going from myopic to perfect foresight representation, optimizing either one eg season or
all the seasons at the same time. In this project it was used a rolling time horizon of 2
years, namely as the years simulated were 2025, 2035 and 2045, 2 years rolling horizon
7
==PAGE:13==
means optimizing 2025 already knowing data for 2035 and so on. The spatial represen­
tation on the model is divided into three hierarchical layers: there are countries divided
into regions(r) and the last into areas(a).
Regions are most commonly considered as electricity bidding zones. Areas can be flexibly
defined as well, such as where a particular wind farm located of district heating networks
etc as normally the heat flow is considered among the regions. This modelling system is
presented in Figure 2.1. At present it is included nineteen countries on the model which
are mainly located in the central and northern part of Europe.[13]
The objective function in Balmorel concerns the minimization of the system costs while
covering the exogenous energy demand. There are the investment costs, the fixed costs
that are connected with the operative installed capacity and the variable costs. In the
variable ones, it is included the operational, fuel and CO2 tax costs. In the case of the unit
commitment being activated, it is included also start­up, start­down and ramping costs.
The costs are provided annualized making possible the comparison among the different
technologies. In the end of the each unit’s lifetime this needs to be decommissioned. A
discount factor is included in order to convert the future costs to the present value.
• Electricity sector: When it comes to the electricity sector, in every time step the
electricity generation should be equal to the electricity demand, transmission flow
and transmission losses. In the demand is included flexible (storage, P2H) and
inflexible demand and distribution losses.
• Heat sector: Accordingly for the heat sector, in every time step the total heat gener­
ation should be equal to heat demand, district heating flows and distribution losses.
In the heat demand is included flexible and inflexible heat. In the heat sector is in­
cluded the district heating, individual users and industry. Regarding the individual
users, they are considered as the end purpose of heat demand and is taken into
account the residential and tertiary sector.[13]
• Synthetic gas: For the synthetic gas, there is the possibility of producing, storing
and consuming electrofuels hydrogen (H2) and synthetic natural gas (SNG). In this
project, for the 3rd scenario including sector coupling it was activated the option for
hydrogen only. It is assumed a regional market where it is used among each region
and the transport cost is neglected.[13]
• Transport sector: In the transport sector is divided in the electric vehicles and the
rest of the transport. It is assumed that the transport sector will be electrified by
2050 to fulfill the sustainability goals.The rest of the transport includes the rail elec­
trification and electricity demand from synthetic fuel for aviation, shipping and road
transport.[13]
The full data are available in [16] and more details about the modelling of each sector in
[13].
2.2
Simulation of the ancillary services in the Balmorel model
2.2.1
Ancillary services add­on
The general structure of Balmorel is with the data being separated of the core model.
When the user aspires to add more options to the model, thus more complexity to the sys­
tem, then the add­ons need to be activated. One of them is the add­on ancillary services
(ANCSERV in the model). The purpose of this add­on is to represent the requirements for
ancillary services. So far in the model it is simulated the FCR (Frequency Containment Re­
serve) and aFRR (Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve) which include both up and
8
==PAGE:14==
down regulation of the reserves, with the latest needed to be activated from the user other­
wise there will be only up­regulation included. For this work, it was activated the ancillary
service requirements including aFRR, upward and downward regulation. The FCR ancil­
lary service was not activated for simplification and as VRE influence mainly the aFRR
requirement as mentioned in 1.4. However, the requirement level to be covered was the
sum of FCR and aFRR. The FCR requirement has to do with other imbalance causes,
such as outages and load variability (described in 1.2) which has to be taken into account
as well. The technologies that can provide the reserves are the intraseasonal storage,
CHP­back pressure and CHP­extraction technologies, condensing and electricity­to­heat
technologies. The variable renewable energy units are not able to provide the reserves
by default but there is the option to activate them. In that case also wind offshore and
wind onshore plants, solar energy units, hydro reservoir and hydro run­of­river can pro­
vide the reserves as well. For this project the option for the VREs to provide the reserves
was activated. If the hydrogen add­on is activated it can provide for the reserves which
is basically in the form of electrolyzers where doing so by reducing their hydrogen gener­
ation resulting in less electricity consumption. In this project the option for hydrogen was
activated in the third scenario when considering sector coupling.
The resulted technology units for providing the reserves are decided upon their time­
related capability which provided exogenously such as ramping capabilities, start­up times.
By selecting the units that can respond to the ramping capability required for each reserve
need while resulting in the system’s most economically efficient solution, the system is op­
timized. Basically the provision of the upward reserve requirement is the most difficult to
achieve as for the down regulation there can be units stop producing energy with the
condition that they are already dispatched in the day­ahead market.
2.2.2
Modelling of the reserve requirement in the model
Up to this point in the model the reserves are simulated as a predefined constant exoge­
nous need among the hours and seasons for each country and year, for simplicity. It
should be noted here, that there is another add­on needed to be activated on the model,
when ancillary services are on. This one is unit commitment. With this add­on it is included
integer variables for online and offline units as well as start­up, shut­down, minimum time
off/on, ramping, minimum operation, online costs.
The ancillary services on the model are the responsible ones to provide the whole reserve
requirement need without having taken into account the intra­day or balancing market
where part of the initial reserve need is being updated in these markets in the reality.
2.3
Strengths and limitations of the model
Strengths: In general the Balmorel model is an energy system optimization model with
many years in use which provides a high degree of flexibility to the user. More specifically,
its open source characteristic makes it possible to keep up to date with the new technol­
ogy developments and at the same time being tested by various users resulting in its high
reliability. As it is used to simulate energy systems all over the world is consistently im­
proved and adapt to new developments. Its flexibility not only in the temporal resolution
but also in the geographical scope constitutes one of its major advantages. Furthermore,
it is possible to simulate short but also long­term operation according to the user’s needs.
It is possible to model many different production and storage technologies owning to the
bottom­up representation of the production side. It is also possible to model an elastic de­
mand. Moreover, its detailed representation of the district heating sector and the power
sector makes it distinguish from other energy models.[15]
9
==PAGE:15==
Limitations: The Balmorel model is a deterministic model where perfect foresight is as­
sumed. When it comes to the production of renewable energy systems, these are mod­
elled by exogenously given time­series while a stochastic representation would reflect
better the intermittent nature of VREs. In addition, the forecast errors of the renewables
on the system are not taken into account. This last limitation was attempted to be devel­
oped to some extent in this study. In addition, it is ignored the limits of congestion in the
transmission lines. Ramping limits on the model do not include the potential ramping in
order to cover the reserve needs. This is mostly related to the capability of the produc­
ing units to cover the reserve needs after they have already reached their ramping limits
with the electricity dispatched in the day­ahead market. In Balmorel is assumed perfect
competition and the producers behave as price takers while in reality the suppliers follow
strategic behaviours. [15]
2.4
Development of the model ancillary service requirements
based on the available renewables on the system
In this master thesis it was intended to create a variable reserve requirement, with its
static part being the exogenously given reserve requirement for each country and the
endogenous one to vary, influenced by the increased renewable penetration on the system
and more specifically from wind and solar energy units. Wind and solar are the principal
variable energy technologies correlated with forecast errors and the renewables most
commonly in the power systems. Thus, it was selected to study the impact of wind and
solar’s forecast errors on the reserve requirement. As the wind and solar penetrate more
on the total energy production, so does the increase on the reserve requirement. The
raise of renewables on the system is leading to a more unstable power system. Thus,
taking this influence into account, when planning the development of new investments on
the power system, especially towards the future, is necessary in order to plan a safer and
reliable system.
2.4.1
VRE impact the reserve requirements
In order to study the influence of the reserve requirement from the VREs (wind and solar)
penetration on the system a new scalar (V REinfluence) was defined in the Balmorel model.
More precisely, this scalar takes values from 0 to 1, where 0 means that VRE have no
additional impact on the reserve requirements (full trust in VRE generation), and 1 means
that VRE have maximum impact on the reserve requirements (no trust in VRE generation,
i.e. maximum forecast errors assumed). Introducing this scalar results in the system
penalizing the wind and solar energy units and thus affecting the reserve requirements
owning to their uncertain nature. With scalar being 0 the system assumes that all the
dispatched production from wind and solar will be delivered in the real time as promised,
hence resulting to only the exogenous reserve requirement on the system. Whereas with
1, it is assumed an extreme scenario where all of the wind and solar energy generation
on the system would be needed to be covered by the reserves. For the sake of the
different cases of trust on renewables influencing the system, this scalar takes also values
in between 0 and 1 in the scenarios simulated in this project. The in between values are
0.1, 0.3 and 0.5. Considering for example the value of 0.1 means 10% of the wind and
solar production on the system added on the exogenous reserve requirement as a result
of 90% trust on renewables to deliver the day­ahead promised production.
The following equation corresponds to the variable reserve requirement(Vreserve).
Vreserve = Exogenous(c) + V GEV RE(y, a, g, s, t) ∗V REinfluence
(2.1)
10
==PAGE:16==
where, EXOGENOUS is the reserve exogenously given and vary with the country (c) only.
V GEV RE is the expected electricity production from renewables that vary with the year
(y), area (a) ,technology (g), season (s) which in the simulation means week of the year
and time (t) which means hour of the year. V REinfluence is the scalar taking values from
0 to 1.
2.4.2
VRE impact the provision of the reserve requirements
In order to study the influence of the VRE on the system when there is different uncertainty
level on them to provide the reserves required, another scalar was used, that it is already
in use in the Balmorel model and deals with the renewables providing the promised re­
serves, V REprovide. This one again can take values from 0 to 1, reflecting the trust on the
renewables on delivering the promised reserve. It should be noted, that this scalar takes
into account the following technologies:
• Hydropower run­of­river, not including reservoir
• Wind power technologies
• Solar electrical power technologies
With this scalar, the system penalizes the renewables in relation to the reserve require­
ment delivery, due to its intermittent nature. When this scalar takes the value of 0, this
means that there is no certainty associated to the provision of ancillary services from VRE,
while with 1, it is assumed that all the promised reserve from VREs will be provided on
the system. Same as the other scalar, this one was assigned different values between 0
and 1 in order to study its influence on the system with different trust levels.
2.4.3
Optimization perspective in the project
Investment optimization: In all the created scenarios, the investment development opti­
mization approach in Balmorel was used. More specifically, it optimizes the investment
planning of production and transmission capacity in 2025, 2035 and 2045 while satisfying
the demand and minimizing the system’s cost. The goal of this optimization is to provide
the most economically optimal investments of the various technologies on the system.
The hourly dispatch of the production and storage technologies, grid reinforcement and
district heating expansion are optimized as well. The expansion of EVs, nuclear power,
hydro storage and run­of­river, demand of the rest of transport are given exogenously
and not optimized.[13]The years simulated in both three scenarios were 2025, 2035 and
2045 and it was used a limited temporal foresight with a rolling horizon of two years. That
means, that the investment planning of 2025 is decided taking into consideration data of
2035 as well and so on. Due to finite computational resources, specific temporal time
steps were selected as a fair representation of the weather circumstances and demand
during the year. The time steps were used following [13]. Additionally, it was included
ancillary services and unit commitment values of generation units.
2.5
Input data
In this section it will be provided the main input data used in the scenarios created and
simulated in the Balmorel model.
Geographical representation: The countries included in the simulation are Denmark, Nor­
way, Germany and France.(2.2) It was included only four countries due to finite compu­
tational resource. The reason of the selection of these countries were in the intention to
cover a wide range of different energy systems, taking into consideration systems with dif­
ferent production units and demand. More specifically, Denmark was chosen for having
11
==PAGE:17==
as having a high share of wind energy in its electricity generation, France for expecting to
have a quite high penetration of solar energy, Norway having a lot of hydro and Germany
having a mixed energy share with a high energy consumption. Norway and Denmark are
divided into more regions according to their bidding zones. Germany is divided to four
regions to capture the country’s congestion. The rest of the countries are consisted of
one region.
Temporal representation: When it comes to the temporal resolution, in order to be com­
putationally feasible, it was used 8 weeks of the year, spread among the year, taking
Thursday, Friday and Saturday in each week with three­hour time steps.
Figure 2.2: Countries included in the
simulations in this project ([17])
In total 24 time steps from specific 8 weeks of the
year were selected according to [13].
The days
were chosen to represent working and non working
days. The reduced time steps are scaled in order to
have a full year weather representation.[13] More
specifically the representative weeks and days of
each week used in the simulation can be seen in
the A.1, A.2.
CO2 tax: It is worth mentioning the CO2 tax as the
main driver of the system’s decarbonization with its
rising level reaching in 2045, four times the level of
2025 in euros per ton.2.1
Technology costs:
The resource of most of the
costs used in the model is from [18].
Wind and solar data: Wind and solar time repre­
sentation data are simulated in CorRes model.[19]
The different resource grades are scaled for the better representation in each region in
COrRes. The weather data are from 2012. Renewables are assumed to decrease to­
wards 2050 with solar showing the greater decrease according to [18]. Demand: The
reference demand forecasts in Balmorel Version 2.05 are taken from Baltic 21 Energy or
submitted by the participants on the basis of more detailed or recent national studies.[20]
Table 2.1: CO2 tax
Co2 tax (€2016/MW)
2025
29.79
2035
90.42
2045
120.55
FCR and aFRR data: In the following, the Table 2.2
shows the FCR exogenously given reserve require­
ment for each country.
It should be noted here,
that it is assumed the same requirement among
the years for each country in the Balmorel model,
meaning the FCR requirement from 2016. In the Ta­
ble 2.3 it is presented the exogenously given hourly
aFRR up regulation reserve requirement (MW) for
the countries that were used in the simulation. This remains the same in each country
among the hours across each year and it is assumed to remaining stable among the years.
Here the reference for the data is the year 2020. In Balmorel model the FCR requirement
is being added to the aFRR one and only these two ancillary services are existing being
responsible for delivering the reserve needed. It is worth mentioning, that in Balmorel
model doesn’t exist intra­day market and the balancing market was not activated for this
work for simplification. As a result, all the imbalances have to be dealt in the ancillary
services.
For all the scenarios it was used the variable reserve requirement (2.1) meaning the re­
12
==PAGE:18==
serve requirement being affected by the wind and solar on the system.
More details about the input data used in the Balmorel model for the simulations in [13].
Table 2.2: Exogenously FCR reserve [MW] from 2020 given for each country in the simulation
[21]
EXOGENOUS FCR RESERVE [MW]
DK1
25
DK2
123
GERMANY
632
NORWAY
563
FRANCE
586
Table 2.3: Exogenously reserve [MW] from 2020 given for each country in the simulation each
year [21]
EXOGENOUS aFRR RESERVE [MW]
2025
2035
2045
DK1
288
288
288
DK2
103
103
103
GERMANY
2350
2350
2350
NORWAY
353
353
353
FRANCE
3175
3175
3175
2.6
Scenario creation
2.6.1
1st scenario: VRE impact requirement ­ without sector coupling
For the V REinfluence scenario, it was simulated on Balmorel model investment devel­
opment optimization for the system when is not considering sector coupling and for the
temporal and year representation mentioned in 2.6 . More specifically, for this scenario
it was included the optimization of the electricity sector. It should be noted here, that the
system is assumed to be more efficient in the future [20, 22] and as the electrification of the
system is not taken into account in this scenario, a reduced electricity demand is expected
in the next years. In the different runs, the scalar V REinfluence takes a range of values
from 0 to 1, reflecting the different levels of trust that the system shows to wind and solar
production’s delivery. The following Table 2.4 shows the range of the V REinfluence val­
ues used in the different runs created for this scenario and its reflection on the additional
reserve requirement need as a percent of wind and solar on the system. For this scenario
the VRE are allowed to provide ancillary services and the scalar V REprovide has the value
of 1, in all the different runs, meaning that it is assumed 100% sure that renewables will
provide on the system the reserve promised.
13
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.4: Range of scalar V REinfluence resulting in the part of wind and solar in the system being
added to the exogenously given reserve requirement
V REinfluence
% of wind and
solar
expected
generation
added on vari­
able reserve
% of trust on the
committed day­
ahead amount
0
0%
100%
0.1
10%
90%
0.3
30%
70%
0.5
50%
50%
1
100%
0%
2.6.2
2nd scenario: VRE impact the provision of the requirement ­ without
sector coupling
In the second scenario, again different simulations on the Balmorel model for investment
development optimization were done without considering sector coupling while the tem­
poral and year representation mentioned in 2.6 is the same here as well. In this scenario,
the scalar V REprovide varies, taking values among 0 and 1. More specifically, the values
that it takes and the accordingly percentage of trust on VRE to provide the ancillary ser­
vices is presented in Figure 2.5. The scalar V REinfluence has consistently the value of
0.3. This explained as 30% of the wind and solar production on the system being added to
the exogenously given reserve need and it was chosen as a realistic scenario to happen
for having 70% trust on wind and solar’s promised day­ahead production.
Table 2.5: Range of V REprovide showing the trust on VRE to provide the reserve promised
SCALAR
trust on VRE to provide the reserves promised
1
100%
0.9
90%
0.7
70%
0.5
50%
0.1
10%
2.6.3
3rd scenario: VRE impact requirement ­ sector coupling
In the third scenario it was simulated the same cases as in the first scenario (2.6.1) but
this time it is assumed strong sector coupling on the system. This scenario reflects a more
realistic case as in the future the sectors’ integration will take place affecting the energy
systems and the investments. Hence, for this scenario some more options were activated
in the model. These ones were:
• Heat sector including individual users
• Transport including Electric Vehicles (EV)
• Hydrogen
14
==PAGE:20==
2.6.4
Summary of scenarios
Table 2.6: Scenarios run in this project. With + is included, with ­ is not included
SCENARIOS
Sector
coupling
Scalar
VRE­
influence
change
Scalar
VRE­
provide
change
VRE
influence
requirement
­
+
­
VRE
influence
provision
of
requirement
­
­
+
VRE
influence
requirement­
sector coupling
+
+
­
Figure 2.3: Representation of the modelling optimization in this project
15
==PAGE:21==
3
Results
3.1
VRE impact requirement­without sector coupling (1st
scenario)
3.1.1
Electricity demand
Figure 3.1: Aggregated annual electricity demand of the system
(TWh) among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2025,
2035 and 2045
Firstly, in Figure 3.1 it is
presented the system’s
aggregated annual elec­
tricity demand for 2025,
2035 and 2045 in TWh
for each value of the
scalar V REinfluence. As
it can be realized here,
the electricity consump­
tion of the system is be­
ing decreased in 2035
and 2045 in compari­
son to 2025 as it is as­
sumed higher efficiency
in the future mentioned
in 2.6.1 and no electri­
fication of the sectors.
The exogenous demand
remain the same for all the cases and years and accounts for around 90%.
What
shows small variations, as the trust on VRE varies is mainly the losses on the storage
(ENDOINTRASTO). As the investments in the storage vary slightly among the different
values of the scalar V REinfluence, as it will be presented in the following results, this leads
to very small variations (≃2 TWh) in the resulted system’s demand. In Figure 3.2, it is de­
picted the total demand distributed in the considered countries. Germany has the highest
electricity consumption with 483 TWh need, France is following with 400 TWh and then is
Norway and Denmark accounting for 10% and 3% accordingly of total system’s consump­
tion. When changing the trust on VREs, the electricity consumption of each country has
small differences owning mostly to the variation in each country’s storage investments.
As these four countries were taken into account in this project, the high consumption of
Germany and France, would have the largest impact on the system’s key results.
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Aggregated annual electricity demand of each country (TWh) among the different
values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2025, 2035 and 2045
3.1.2
Electricity generation
In Figure 3.3, it is illustrated the share of the technologies covering the annual electricity
production of the system in TWh, as the scalar V REinfluence varies in 2025, 2035 and
2045. As the reserve need increases, meaning going from the left to the right bar on the
graph in each year, the annual electricity production fluctuates slightly, in all the years, fol­
lowing the pattern of the demand (3.1). Among the years, the level of electricity production
is being decreased owning to the lower demand discussed in 3.1.
Figure 3.3: Technologies providing the cumulative annual electricity production of the system
(TWh) among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2025, 2035 and 2045
The total share of the production is being covered by wind energy, solar PV, hydro, ther­
mal and storage (ELSTO) technologies. The introduction of less reliability to wind and
solar in 2025, increases the need for more thermal technologies in providing the elec­
tricity production in an attempt to have more reliable units online. In addition, storage
17
==PAGE:23==
technologies are increasing their producing level of the system’s electricity in the need
of flexible units to provide the increased reserves. Solar and wind are being declined as
they are penalized for their uncertain forecast in production. In 2035, there is less annual
electricity production as a result of the reduced demand. As additional requirement from
the VREs is added to the system, still thermal technologies are increased but in a lower
pace than in 2025, due to the increased CO2 tax. Storage on the other hand, undergoing
a more rapid rise as its predicted to be more cost­competitive and its flexibility is valuable
for the system. Wind and solar again face a small decrease due to the declined reliability
on them. In 2045, until the 50% trust case on VREs, storage as well as wind and solar gain
more share on the production with thermal technologies being reduced. As VREs become
more economically competitive towards 2045, it is preferred to be used in the production
even when being more uncertain, as thermal technologies tend to reduce their share in
the production driven by the high CO2 tax projected by 2045. However, in the case of
zero trust on VREs, the system in order to handle this great additional requirement, needs
more reliable and flexible units dispatched, namely thermal and storage technologies to
be used for the provision of the reserves while solar and wind are decreased.
Figure 3.4: Fuels providing the cumulative annual electricity production of the system (TWh)
among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2025, 2035 and 2045
Figure3.4 depicts the share of the fuel used to provide the annual production of the sys­
tem in 2025, 2035 and 2045 when the reliability on VREs’ forecasted production varies.
Looking at the figure, in 2025, in the 98% of the total annual production it is used wind,
sun, water, nuclear, lignite, coal, electric and natural gas. Each of the part in 3.3 that
is provided by wind, solar, hydro and storage is fueled by wind, sun, water and electrical
energy accordingly. When it comes to the thermal, it can be noticed that nuclear accounts
for more than 75% of the total thermal technologies in 2025 and it is increased to 95% in
2045. Nuclear power plants constitute a reliable low­emission provider with high efficiency
that is why is preferred in the least trust case.
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Technologies providing the cumulative annual electricity production (TWh) of each
country in 2045 when varying the scalar V REinfluence
In 3.5 it is presented the cumulative annual electricity production (TWh) of the system
among the different values of the V REinfluence but distributed for each country and only
for 2045. The model optimizes the overall system, by choosing the best possible way of
each country to cover its energy needs in order to result in the minimization of the system’s
cost. Thus, either it will result to each country cover its needs by its own production or to
import electricity. In this last case, another country will have to produce excess energy to
export to another region. Looking at 3.2 and 3.5, it can be seen that France constitutes
an exporter, as it produces more (≃500 Twh) than its needs (≃400 Twh). Germany,
imports energy to cover its country’s requirements, as its demand is around 100 TWh
more. Norway is an exporter and Denmark importer. The transmission flows can be seen
in the Appendix B.1. As the scalar V REinfluence changes, the electricity production of
each country varies by choosing the most optimal option for handling its excess energy
needs, either to import more electricity or to handle the additional requirement with its
country’s own generation.
Denmark is expected to have more than 90% of the country’s annual electricity production
generated by wind and solar in 2045. However, the decrease in VRE’s reliability propels
the increase in the production of storage and thermal technologies by 10% and 8% ac­
cordingly. As discussed in the 3.3, the system needs more flexibility and reliability to deal
with the higher reserve requirement.
France is predicted to produce the half of its generation from thermal technologies and
more specifically mostly from nuclear power as it can be seen in the fuels providing the
generation of each country in Appendix B.2. Until the 50% trust case, thermal shows a
reduction along with wind and solar while storage rises. Nonetheless, the zero trust case
drives a high growth of thermal plants pushing wind, solar and storage to decrease. This
could be explained by the fact that the system is able to cover the level of the reserve
needs until the 50% trust case with the already dispatched capacity, whereas in the least
trust case, additional units are needed to provide for the reserves.
In Germany, the increase in the scalar V REinfluence has as an outcome the growth of
19
==PAGE:25==
wind and solar energy on the electricity production, with wind doing so until the 50%
trust case and then it drops, while solar PV is still increasing. Furthermore, storage and
thermal increase their share in the generation, with the second doing so in a very slow
pace. In Germany, already in the full trust case, wind and solar together cover 73% of the
total production. Thus, the increase on the operating costs of the additional VREs on the
system when contributing more in the electricity generation would be preferred even with
the penalty of the higher reserve needs.
Looking at Norway’s expected total generation in 2045, almost 90% is coming from hydro.
As the scalar V REinfluence increases, in the cases lower than the 70% trust, a small
percentage of the total production is coming from solar in addition to wind and hydro.
Wind follows a downward way while solar energy the opposite. Hydro remains stable. In
the lower trust cases, solar is increasing its share in the production, as a more economical
option even with the penalty of the additional requirement.
3.1.3
Generation capacity
The overall capacity levels in this scenario are decreased when moving to 2035 in relation
to 2025. Especially, in 2045 it is still less capacity than 2025 but higher than 2035. This
results from the assumed future consumption (3.1) which leads to the lower annual pro­
duction of the system (3.3) and eventually in the need of less generation capacities. The
total system capacity in 2025, 2035 and 2045 resulted after the variation on the scalar
V REinfuence is depicted in 3.1. The fluctuations in the capacity levels in each year as the
trust changes is driven by the wind and solar PV variations in the electricity production,
shown in 3.3. That is, decreasing in 2025 in all the V REinfluence cases reaching a 2%
decrease in the least trust case. Declining as well in 2035 until the zero trust case, where
it shows an increase. In 2045 the system’s capacity is growing as the trust on VREs is
falling. In the last trust cases, the capacity of solar (3.6) show a skyrocket increase in
2035 and 2045, as resulted also in the electricity production (3.3). However, in 2045 and
the least trust case on VRES, solar PV declines its share from the production while its
capacity increases. That means, that a part of solar energy is more optimal to keep it for
the provision of the reserves. The investments in wind energy follow the same pattern
with its participation in the electricity production. The capacity of the thermal technologies
rising in 2025 as its share in the production increases and the same happen with the stor­
age. In the next years, as the V REinfluence rises, thermal has less capacity owning to the
decommissioning of the thermal plants and the rise of CO2 tax. In the last trust case, ther­
mal shows some increase due to its higher participation in the production. Lastly storage
increases and hydro remains stable.
Table 3.1: Cumulative annual generation capacity of the system in GW for the different values of
the scalar V REinfluence in 2025, 2035 and 2045
Capacity [GW]
2025
2035
2045
0
331.70
300.34
306.24
0.1
331.24
298.28
306.87
0.3
329.62
293.17
312.42
0.5
327.97
295.35
326.4
1
324.34
329.77
337.46
20
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.6: Cumulative annual generation capacity of the system in GW in 2025, 2035 and 2045
among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence
3.1.4
Upward reserve requirement
Figure 3.7: Hourly upward reserve requirement for Norway during the months and hours of the
day simulated in the model in 2045 (MW) for the different values of the scalar V REinfluence
Figure 3.7 presents the hourly upward reserve requirement (MW) for Norway across all
the simulated months and daily hours in 2045 and for the different values of the scalar
V REinfluence. This time­series graph was created in order to identify any seasonality of
the wind energy penetrating to the electricity production which results to the influence in
the reserve requirements during the year. Norway in 2045 is predicted to have a higher
share of wind on its annual electricity production compared to solar, thus greater influence
in its requirement from wind. When there is full trust on wind and solar the requirement
is only the exogenous one, which remains stable in all the hours across the year, being
shown with the light blue line in 3.7. As the scalar V REinfluence increases, the requirement
show variations during the year and the hours of the day, according to the change in the
expected production share of wind and solar. The same pattern is followed among the dif­
ferent values of the scalar V REinfluence, with higher increase leading to more remarkable
21
==PAGE:27==
outliers on the graph. The upward reserve needs are reaching a peak on January and
February. The highest level observed is 9GW in February noon and for the most extreme
case of no trust on VREs. On January and February wind seems to provide electricity
during the whole months and daily hours with peaks close to noon where there is also the
influence of the solar production. In addition, on January, February, October and Novem­
ber there is less variability on the levels of requirement among the day in comparison to
the summer months. That results from the significant wind penetration.
Figure 3.8: Hourly upward reserve requirement (MW) for France during the months and hours of
the day simulated in the model among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2045
The same graph was created for France in Figure 3.8. France in 2045 is expected to have
a share of 100 TWh of solar energy in the annual electricity production whereas close to 50
TWh is predicted to be provided by wind. As a result, the level of the requirement during
the year in France is basically driven by the solar energy in the system. The highest peak
is identified on May at noon being close to 33 GW, with April following with the second
highest requirement level. Strong differences are identified on the level of the requirement
during the hours of the day, with peaks close to noon and low reserve need at night, as
in dark hours it is not produced solar energy. The same pattern is followed through the
whole year, with May having the highest peak.
Figure 3.9 depicts the system’s average hourly upward reserve requirement during 2045
as the scalar V REinfluence change. It should be noted here that for the calculation of the
hourly average requirement it was taken the mean of the summed requirement among all
the countries in each hour in the simulation. The system’s requirement is driven by all the
countries’ share of wind and solar in the production during the year. Thus, the seasonal
patterns of both wind and solar, identified in 3.7, 3.8 influence the system’s hourly reserve
need. The total upward reserve requirement in 2045 has resulted after the influence of
wind being present mostly on January and February on the countries with more wind
energy on their system. The peaks identified close to noon are an impact of solar energy
which is used during the whole year and have its highest production at noon. May and
April are the months with the highest reserve need as a result of the increased production
of solar, identified also in 3.8. The overall highest level of the system’s requirement is on
May at noon, as solar penetrates more in the electricity production in 2045 in comparison
to wind.(3.3)
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.9: Average hourly upward reserve requirement (MW) of the system for each month, day
and time in the simulation in 2045 among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence
3.1.5
Technologies covering the upward reserve requirement
Figure 3.10: Average MW of the system’s technologies expected to cover the reserve needs
among the different values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2045
The next Figure 3.10 shows the influence of the scalar V REinfluence on the technologies
expected to cover the reserve requirement of the system in 2045. In this graph, it is
presented the average yearly MW of the different technologies to be used in 2045 to
provide the system’s reserve needs, namely aggregated for the total system with the
four countries. The average MW have been calculated as the total MW of the year for
each technology chosen to provide the reserve needs, summed for all the hours and the
countries, and then divided by 8 ∗24 which are the total time steps in the simulation.
It can be seen, that storage constitutes the predominant technology for 2045 in all the trust
cases. Until the trust becomes 70%, storage accounts for approximately 80% of the total
technologies, whereas in 50% trust is decreased to 73% and in 0% trust reaches 62% of
23
==PAGE:29==
the total. Hydro covers a 10% which percentage again increases by 5% and 7% in the
last two trust cases. It can be noticed, that as the trust on wind and solar to provide the
promised production decreases, it is increased their share on the provision of the reserve
needs. As wind and solar are penalized for their uncertainty, the model after optimizing
the system chooses to ”curtail” a part of their available capacity for covering the expected
reserve needs. As it was observed in 3.3, wind energy is reduced as the trust on VREs
declines leading to the more optimal decision of a higher part of wind to be available in
the case of the reserve needs. In the most extreme case of the scalar being 1, wind and
solar have the share of 7% each. The category of technologies electricity to heat (ELECT­
TO­HEAT) account for around 5% in all the cases of the scalar. In these technologies is
included for example heat pumps where by dis­activating them it is basically decreased
the consumption, serving on the decrease of the requirement. Lastly, thermal where in the
results is accounted mostly gas turbines, covers a very small portion starting from 0.4%
which falls to 0% as the trust is reduced. This could be accredited to the decommissioning
of a great amount of thermal plants in the future and the increase of CO2 tax level.
Figure 3.11: Average MW of the technologies of each country covering the reserve needs among
the different values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2045
In the next Figure 3.11, it can be seen the average MW of the system’s technology
planned to cover the increased reserve need in 2045, allocated to each country for the
different V REinfluence values. Also in this graph, the average MW have been calculated
as the sum of MW of each technology for each country separately through the year and
divided by 8 ∗24, which are the total time steps. First of all, it can be noticed that in all
the countries apart from Norway, the greatest part of the requirement is planned to be
covered by the storage, as its high share was realized already in the system’s results.
In Denmark, the decrease on the VRE’s trust results in the inclusion of wind and solar
on the provision of the reserves in the low trust cases, with wind accounting for higher
share. As VREs are penalized more for their uncertainty, is more economically optimal to
curtail a part of their forecasted production for the reserve needs. While wind and solar
are increasing, electricity to heat technologies are decreasing towards lower trust cases.
In the case of France, storage covers 94% when it is considered the full trust case. Stor­
age technologies follow a linear relationship with the trust, decreased to the half when the
trust is zero. Apparently, for the low trust cases it is more optimal for France to provide
the reserves with solar, wind, storage and a high share of hydro technologies and more
specifically hydro reservoir. In Germany approximately 88% is planned to be covered by
24
==PAGE:30==
storage. Electricity to heat technologies, in this case mostly heat pumps, are increasing
as the trust decreases with a small decline in the zero trust case. In this country as well,
in the lower trust cases is more optimal to curtail a part of wind and solar for the reserves.
In Norway, in full trust case, 90% is covered by hydro reaching 93% when there is no trust
to wind and solar. Electricity to heat technologies show a reduction in their level as the
trust decreases. Wind and solar show a grow in the last values of the scalar V REinfluence
owning to the low certainty on providing the expected electricity production.
3.1.6
Costs
Figure 3.12: Overall costs of the system resulting from the different
values of the scalar V REinfluence in 2045
The Figure 3.12 presents
the overall costs of the
system in 2045 as the
scalar V REinfluence in­
creases.
The
costs
show an increasing pat­
tern as the impact of
VREs on the reserve re­
quirement rises.
The
higher reliability is re­
lated with higher costs.
When the system is con­
sidered to have higher
safety, it needs to be ac­
tivated more expensive
producing units in order to cope with the higher need of reserves. As mentioned in [23],
the costs of the system are associated with the necessity to maintain some producing
units operating at part load in order to be available in the case of the imbalance. As a
result more units with equal or higher producing costs need to be online. After the 50%
trust in all the years, the cost level skyrockets due to the great increase in the requirement
level. In 2045, the capital costs show a rise owning to the high penetration of VREs on
the system, which contributes to the decline of the operational costs. However, it is con­
sidered a small decrease in the operational costs due to the additional costs for providing
the reserves. The fuel costs increase until the 50% trust case where the electricity­to­
heat technologies are increasing their share in the provision of the reserves(3.10). After
that, these technologies decrease, the same does the fuel costs. The unit commitment
cost are associated with the activation of more power units to cover the increased up­
ward requirement of the system. The fixed operational costs increase as well, owning to
the increased operative capacity resulted with the higher reserve needs. In Figure 3.13
it can be seen the allocation of the costs on each country in 2045 among the different
values of the scalar V REinfluence. The level of consumption including the increased level
of the reserve requirement drives the import and export in each country which affects the
cost, depending on the technologies activated to provide these energy needs. Looking at
the annual electricity production of each country in 3.16 and the costs of each country in
3.13, Denmark decreases its production and so does its costs as the scalar V REinfluence
increases. France decreases its production with the costs following the same pattern un­
til the 50% trust. In the last trust case, its costs are increased as thermal technologies
have a much higher penetration to the production. In 2045, Germany and Norway show
increased costs with their electricity generation rising as the trust decreases.
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.13:
Costs of the each country resulting from the different values of the scalar
V REinfluence in 2045 in Mmoney
3.1.7
Conclusions
The decreased trust on VREs expected production, result on the rise of the system’s cost
as more producing units need to be activated in order to deal with the increased reserve
requirement. Solar is preferred more than wind to cover the energy production towards
2045 as it is expected to become more economically competitive. The increased uncer­
tainty of VREs is leading both wind and solar to be ’curtailed’ in the low trust cases, being
available for the case of the reserve requirement. However, wind has a greater part in
the reserves. In addition, storage plays an important role in order to handle that influence
of VRE’s uncertainty. In the zero trust case, thermal technologies are also needed to
support the reliability of the production and cover part of the reserve need.
3.2
VRE impact the provision of the requirement ­ without
sector coupling (2nd scenario)
3.2.1
Electricity generation
In Figure 3.14 it can be seen the allocation of the technologies covering the annual elec­
tricity production of the system in all the simulated years as the scalar V REprovide varies.
The total production has lower levels in 2035 and 2045 in comparison to 2025 where
the demand is lower, as explained also in the first scenario results’ analysis.(3.1) The
column corresponding to the scalar V REprovide being 1, is the same as in 3.3 for scalar
V REinfluence 0.3. In 2025 as the trust on VREs to provide the reserves decreases, stor­
age and hydro technologies remain stable with storage having a small increase in the
last trust cases. On the other hand, wind and thermal technologies gain more share on
the energy production. Thermal technologies are needed for the reliability of the system,
while wind is preferred for contributing to the production where the trust is higher than the
trust on providing the reserves. On the other hand, solar is decreased. In 2035, the same
pattern is followed apart from the case of thermal technologies, where after the scalar
V REprovide being 90% is more optimal to reduce thermal from the production and have
more wind and storage instead. However, in the last trust case thermal has a small in­
crease while storage drops. The last trust case has to do with the no trust on the provision
of the reserves by VREs, leading to the system being ready with conventional and more
expensive units online to provide for the expected reserves.
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.14: Share of the technologies covering the cumulative annual electricity production
(TWh) of the system among the different values of the scalar V REprovide in 2025, 2035, 2045
Figure 3.15: Share of the fuel covering the cumulative annual electricity production (TWh) of the
system among the different values of the scalar V REprovide in 2025, 2035, 2045
In 2045, until the lower last cases, the same pattern as in 2035 is followed. In the last
values of V REprovide, thermal increases slightly with storage the opposite, driven by the
need of storage to contribute to the reserve requirement. Solar PV starts to increase while
wind the opposite again due to the lower cost of solar PV. In general, in the 70% trust case,
which is the same level of trust on VREs both for providing the expected production and
the reserves, this causes the decline of solar energy in the production and the increase
of wind energy while storage decreases and thermal increases.
27
==PAGE:33==
What it can be observed in 3.15 in all the years is that as the V REprovide decreases, the
production being fueled by solar energy decreases while production coming from wind
energy increases as observed in 3.14 as well. Nuclear account for the highest part of
the thermal units. Again, changes in the fuels are driven by the changes in the electricity
producers in 3.14. Overall the system as we are moving to the future, is becoming a clean
system that it’s not relying on fossil fuel to produce energy. To be more precise, in 2045 the
energy is fueled predominantly by solar, wind, hydro and nuclear energy. The Figure 3.16
illustrates the technologies covering the cumulative annual electricity production of each
country in 2045 when the scalar V REprovide varies. In each country individually is noticed
a pattern on the changes among the technologies covering the generation, followed by
the decrease on the scalar V REprovide until it reaches the 70% trust, namely the same
trust assumed for the expected electricity production of VREs. More precisely, in all the
countries after the 70% trust case, thermal technologies are increasing owning to the need
of reliability in the system and the excessive availability for providing the expected reserve
requirement.
Figure 3.16: Share of the technologies covering the cumulative annual electricity production
(TWh) of each country among the different values of the scalar V REprovide in 2045
After the scalar V REprovide falls below 70%, wind energy in Denmark and France in­
creases while in the rest of the countries decreases. On the other hand, solar energy in
Denmark declines while in the other countries the opposite. That is why overall in the total
electricity production and concerning the last trust cases, solar shows a small increase
while wind the opposite. This variation of wind and solar is driven by the share of pro­
duction coming from these technologies in each country already in the full trust case. If
solar has less share, is more optimal to increase that level in the production instead of
keeping it for the reserve needs and the same for wind. Storage shows a small decrease
in Denmark and Germany while it increases in France.
3.2.2
Generation capacity
The 70% of the scalar V REprovide constitutes a critical point of change, confirmed more
clearly on the impact in the generation capacities in 2045 in 3.17. Following the changes
in the technologies covering the electricity production, on the 70% trust, the investments
in storage technologies increase while solar and thermal does the opposite. The influence
of the lower trust on VRE to provide the reserves, results in the decrease in the invest­
ments of solar and thermal on the 70% trust, while storage grows on 70% trust and wind
28
==PAGE:34==
capacities are increased already after 90%. After that point, the capacity levels of each
technology remain almost stable. Thus, after the 70% trust is more optimal to invest in
wind instead of solar.
Figure 3.17: Cumulative annual generation capacity in GW of the system as the scalar V REprovide
changes in 2045
3.2.3
Technologies covering the upward reserve requirement
Figure 3.18: Average of MW of the technologies of the system covering the reserve needs in 2045
when the scalar V REprovide varies
In 3.18 it is presented the average MW of the technologies planned to provide the reserve
needs of the system in 2045 as the scalar V REprovide decreases. As the trust on VREs to
provide the reserves is reduced, wind and solar decrease their share from the provision of
the reserves. Storage gains more share on the total while hydro shows a small reduction
together with the electricity to heat technologies which show an increase in 10% trust.
As VREs are more penalized for their uncertainty in the provision of the reserves, this
results on less MW planned to be provided by them. More specifically, below the point
that the trust on VREs to provide the reserves is the same with the certainty to provide
the forecasted production, that drop is more significant. In 3.19 is presented the average
MW of the technologies planned to cover the reserve needs in 2045 distributed for each
country and compared among the different values of the scalar V REprovide. The average
29
==PAGE:35==
MW in 3.18 was calculated as the yearly sum of the MW of each technology for the total
system and then divided by the total time steps of the simulation, namely 8∗24. The same
way it was calculated also for the 3.19 but for each country separately.
In Denmark, as the scalar V REprovide decreases, wind decreases from the provision of
the reserves due to the lower reliability and solar only provides a very small share in the
least trust case. Thermal and storage technologies show an increase in the 70% trust
case, while electricity­to­heat technologies the opposite. After that point, thermal and
electricity­to­heat decline again.
Figure 3.19: Average of MW of the technologies of each country covering the reserve needs in
2045 when the scalar V REprovide varies
In France, after the 70% trust case, solar undergoes a significant decrease with wind
doing the same but with a lower pace. Hydro shows a rise but eventually decrease again
in the least trust case. Storage increase and electricity­to­heat technologies contribute in
the provision of the reserves in the least trust case. In Germany, in the 70% trust case
there is a considerable decrease to the wind, while there is no solar in the provision of the
reserves until the 10% trust. Hydro is increasing together with storage while electricity­
to­heat technologies are decreasing. Lastly, in Norway again the same pattern for solar
and wind is observed. Hydro increases and electricity­to­heat technologies are declined.
Overall, as the reliability of wind and solar to provide the reserve requirements decreases,
both wind and solar are decreased from the provision of the ancillary services, as they
are less trustworthy. That phenomenon is more intense after the 70% trust, where is
preferred more to contribute to the electricity production. This concerns mostly the wind
energy but in the 10% trust is considered also the solar. Then, other reliable and flexible
technologies substituting them as reserve providers such as storage and heat pumps.
The average MW in 3.18 was calculated as the yearly sum of the MW of each technology
for the total system and then divided by the total time steps of the simulation, namely
8 ∗24. The same way it was calculated also for the 3.19 but for each country separately.
3.2.4
Conclusions
The decrease on the scalar V REprovide, increases the wind share on the electricity pro­
duction while it only results in the increase of solar in 2045 and after the 70% trust case.
As it was realized after that point, where the trust on VREs to provide the reserves is
30
==PAGE:36==
less than the one to provide the expected electricity production, thermal technologies in­
crease slightly as a need of reliability on the system while storage the opposite and solar
PV increased while wind remains close to the level as in the 70% trust case. When it
comes to the technologies providing the reserve needs, VREs show a decline as the
scalar V REprovide decreases with a more significant drop after the 70% trust case. Stor­
age, hydro and electricity to heat technologies contributing to the rest of the reserves
requirement.
3.3
VRE impact requirement ­ sector coupling (3rd scenario)
3.3.1
Electricity demand
Figure 3.20:
Aggregated annual electricity demand (TWh)
of the system among the different values of the scalar
V REinfluence in 2025, 2035 and 2045
The demand of the system
for each year and among
the different values of the
scalar V REinfluence is pre­
sented in 3.20 in TWh.
As
in this scenario,
it is as­
sumed the electrification of
the heat and transport sec­
tor, the demand increases to­
wards 2045 where this phe­
nomenon is planned to be
more intense. Again among
the values of the scalar V REinfluence,
there are very small varia­
tions around 0.3 TWh which
has to do with the endoge­
nous losses on the system.
The level of the system’s consumption in 2035 and in 2045 is 1.3 times and 1.5 times
higher than the one in 2025. In 2035, when is considered sector coupling the demand is
predicted to be double while in 2045 three times higher in relation to the same years but
without sector coupling.(3.1). When it comes to the different components accounting for
the total demand, the exogenous one in 2025 has the share of 63% while in the following
years it covers 36% and 27% accordingly. On the other hand, the endogenous one from
the hydrogen and the EVs in 2045 accounts for the half part of the demand while in 2025
and 2035 has a very small share.
3.3.2
Electricity generation
In Figure 3.21 it is presented the technologies that cover the cumulative annual electricity
production of the system in TWh for each year and among the different values of the scalar
V REinfluence.
In 2025, around 50% is covered by thermal technologies which looking in 3.22 is ac­
counted mostly nuclear and then a small share from natural gas, straw, wasteheat, wood­
chips, lignite and muniwaste. In 2035, thermal is almost half, again mostly coming by
nuclear (3.22). Lastly, in 2045, there is even less thermal (19%) providing the annual
electricity production, which is a result of a green transition in the energy systems and
the increased CO2 tax level.(2.1) As the trust on VREs to provide the expected electricity
production decreases, in 2025 solar energy has an increase with a small decline in the
last trust case while wind the opposite. Storage and thermal are increasing in order to
ensure the reliable provision of production, while for VREs is more optimal to be curtailed,
in the case of the reserve need.
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.21: Share of the technologies covering the cumulative annual electricity production
(TWh) of the system in 2025, 2035, 2045 when the scalar V REinfluenc varies
Figure 3.22: Share of the fuel covering the cumulative annual electricity production (TWh) of the
system in 2025, 2035, 2045 when the scalar V REinfluence varies
In 2035, thermal and storage technologies follow the same pattern as in 2025, while in the
low trust cases solar decreases whereas wind the opposite. The fluctuation of wind and
solar in the production is driven by the balance among the costs in generating the elec­
tricity production and in the additional costs in the increased reserves. In 2045, electricity
produced by thermal is decreasing as the V REinfluence increases. Storage is increasing
with a rapid pace towards the last values of the scalar V REinfluence. Solar shows a growth
while wind the opposite. As solar investments in 2045 are predicted of low­cost, solar en­
ergy is preferred for the production of electricity, even with the concerned uncertainty. It
should be mentioned, the introduction of hydrogen in 2045, which has a decline as the
trust decreases. This could be accredited to its increase in the contribution of the upward
reserve requirement.
32
==PAGE:38==
3.3.3
Generation capacity
Overall the capacity investments on the system are increasing three times moving from
2025 to 2045 in order to cover the highly increased demand as well. More specifically, it
can be seen in 3.2. The changes in the generation capacity of each technology follow the
changes in the electricity production (3.21). It is also noted in this graph the rapid rise of
the capacity of storage in 2045 as well as the great increase of solar, especially in the low
trust case.
Looking at the investments on each country in 2045 (3.24), as the trust on renewables
decreases, Denmark maintain the same capacity in wind and solar resulting in a small
decrease in the total share. As the overall country’s capacity rises towards 50% trust,
what increases until 70% is storage, hydrogen and thermal which in 50% trust results
in an increase only in storage and decrease to the other two. Thermal investments in
Denmark is mostly gas turbines.
Figure 3.23: Cumulative annual generation capacity of the system in GW in 2025, 2035, 2045
when the scalar V REinfluence varies
Table 3.2: Total Cumulative annual generation capacity of the system in GW in 2025, 2035 and
2045 when the scalar V REinfluence varies
Capacity [GW]
2025
2035
2045
0
358.16
678.65
1190.03
0.1
358.01
679.85
1197.62
0.3
359.41
680.87
1220.28
0.5
358.47
680.54
1268.07
In France, it is resulted as more optimal to invest in more solar as the trust decreases while
keeping wind stable in GW until the 50% trust, where it shows a decrease. Hydro remains
stable, storage increases, thermal meaning nuclear investments the opposite and hydro­
gen is decreased. In Germany as the expected production of wind and solar becomes
less reliable, wind is maintaining the same level of capacity while solar is reduced until the
50% trust where is more optimal to increase it again. Hydro remains stable, thermal and
more specifically biomass power plants and hydrogen are reduced, storage increases in
high pace.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.24: Cumulative annual generation capacity in GW for each country in 2045 among the
values of the scalar V REinfluence
In Norway the lower trust leads to the same level of GW in wind invested and an increase
in solar.
3.3.4
Upward reserve requirement
Figure 3.25: Reserve requirement of the system
as hourly average MW among each value of the
scalar V REinfluenc for 2025, 2035 and 2045
It is presented the evolution of the reserve
requirements among the different penalty
levels on wind and solar and among the dif­
ferent years in the simulation in 3.25. For
the scalar being 0 meaning the full trust
case the requirement remains stable as
the exogenous one among all the years.
As more part of wind and solar is added
on the reserve needs and as we move to­
wards 2045 there is more wind and solar
on the system and the total requirement
reaches even higher levels. It should be
noted that in 2045 and the trust case of
50%, in this scenario, assuming for the sector coupling, the average hourly requirement
for the system is 106 GW, while when there was not accounted sector coupling in the 1st
scenario and for the same level of trust it was 28 GW. As noted in 3.10, the hourly average
requirement was calculated as the sum of the hourly requirements during the year for all
the countries divided by 8∗24 as these are the total time steps in the simulation.(8 weeks,
24 time steps each week)
3.3.5
Technologies covering the upward reserve requirement
Looking at 3.26 where the MW of the technologies reserved to provide the expected up­
ward requirements are presented for the different values of V REinfluence, it can be seen
that hydrogen together with storage account for 60%­70% of the total share in all the trust
cases. It should be mentioned here that the share of hydrogen and storage is maintained
the same as the scalar increases. Nonetheless, the same percentage of the share means
a much more higher capacity as the reserve requirement increases. More specifically,
when there is full trust, storage and hydrogen account for 5 GW in the average yearly
capacity while in 50% trust their capacity is 85 GW. The storage and the power­to­gas
conversion are loading when there are lower electricity prices to take advantage of the
34
==PAGE:40==
surplus renewable energy on the system. Apart from storage and hydrogen, the electricity
to heat technologies gain a higher level in the reserves as the trust decreases. The main
technology contributing from this category is the heat pumps. In 3.26 the average MW
were found from the yearly sum of the MW for each technology used in all the countries
and then divided by 8 ∗24, the total time steps in the simulation.
Figure 3.26: Average MW of the technologies of the system to cover the reserve needs in 2045
among the scalars
3.3.6
Costs
Figure 3.27:
Overall costs of the system resulting from the different values of the scalar
V REinfluence in 2025, 2035, 2045
The costs of the system in 2035 show a very small reduction in comparison to 2025, while
the electricity production is increased in that year. In 2045 the costs are 1.5 times more
than in the previous years. The small fall on the costs in 2035 could be explained as the
optimization is done knowing the system’s needs and data for the next decade, leading in
covering some needs also for the following year by burdening the current ones. Another
thing to be noted here, is that the yearly costs among the values of the scalar V REinfluence
in 3.12 showed a more significant rise than in 3.27. In 3.28 it can be seen the distribution
of the system’s costs in the different cost categories in 2045, compared for the different
values of the scalar V REinfluence. As the trust on wind and solar decreases, the genera­
tion capital costs increase while the generation operational costs have a small reduction.
This means that cheap generation units are used to provide the ancillary services such
as renewable energy systems. The generation fixed costs show a small increase while
35
==PAGE:41==
the generation fuel costs the opposite. The small rise on fixed costs could be attributed
to the low fixed costs of the storage and hydrogen technologies in 2045, which cover the
highest part of the reserves (3.26). As less electricity­to­heat technologies are used, the
fuel costs follow a downward way. Moreover, the unit commitment costs are higher as the
trust decreases and they are associated with the activation of more power units to cover
the increased upward requirement need of the system.
Figure 3.28: Allocation of the system costs in each cost category for 2045 for the different values
of the scalar V REinfluence in Mmoney
3.3.7
Conclusions
The demand increases towards 2045, due to the assumed electrification of the sectors.
In general, towards 2045 thermal technologies decrease their share from the production
while storage shows a great growth together with solar. For wind is more optimal to con­
tribute less in the generation and be kept more available for the reserve needs. The costs
of the system show small increase as the V REinfluence increases. This is due to the low
fixed costs of the electricity batteries and hydrogen that used mostly for the reserves in
2045. Hydrogen together with storage constitute the key technologies for covering the
reserves. Heat pumps have also a noticed increase.
36
==PAGE:42==
4
Discussion
Data assumptions:
In this thesis project it was studied the energy system’s simulation for up to 2045, which
constitutes a long planning horizon involving a significant level of uncertainty in its as­
sumptions and data used. In this work the goal was to study the impact of the intermittent
nature of the variable renewable energy systems and specifically of wind and solar on
the energy systems. More precisely, this was focused on the synergies of wind and solar
on the ancillary service requirements stemming from the forecast error in their production.
The assumptions of many input data such as the exogenously given reserve requirements
of each country calculated from 2020 and the assumption made that it would remain stable
for all the years, the technologies’ characteristics or the fact that no cooperation among the
countries is allowed for the provision of the reserves could entail a degree of uncertainty
on the simulation’s results. Furthermore, due to computational tractability it was simu­
lated only four countries with the assumption of a fair representation of different energy
systems. Nonetheless, were there more or all countries included more realistic outcome
would result from the simulations. It should be mentioned here, that the simulations were
done in the Balmorel model and for the scenarios without sector coupling it was needed
8 hours to be completed while the one with sector coupling needed 7 days with the most
extreme case of scalar exiting the time limit two times thus not managing to present any
results for this last case of scalar. These time obstacles complicated the potential in­
creased number of input data such as including more countries or more time steps and
made difficult to run the model for more simulations. Furthermore, due to this limitation, it
was chosen to do a sensitivity analysis on the influence of the VREs uncertainty maintain­
ing the same system. However, there could have been chosen some different sensitivity
analysis as well, such as with including more countries in the simulations, varying the
exogenously given reserve requirement or allowing for cooperation among the countries
to provide the reserve needs. Additionally, it could be studied the opportunity cost of not
producing hydrogen in order to provide for the reserves or heat concerning the electricity
to heat technologies.
Modelling of the energy system and key technologies:
For the capacity investment optimization runs it was used a linear programming approach
that may not reflect the ancillary market in a realistic way. In addition, in the results pre­
sented in 3.26 it was shown the storage available to cover a high part of the reserve
requirements. Nonetheless, in the model the ramping limits do not include the poten­
tial ramping in order to cover the reserve needs. As a result, the system could rely in
producing units that might not be able to correspond to the reserve needs in the time
of the imbalance. For this reason, further development on the modelling of the storage
technologies would lead in more realistic results.
Ancillary services modelling:
The modelling of the energy markets on the Balmorel model is a simplification of the en­
ergy markets in reality and more specifically the ancillary market. To be more precise,
in the model it is assumed all the potential imbalances to be covered with the ancillary
services whereas in reality there is also the intra­day and balancing market dealing with
the imbalances, until 1­hour before the real time. Then, the remaining expected imbal­
ances have to be dealt with the ancillary services. This simplification here can make the
37
==PAGE:43==
results deviate from the reality’s one. In addition, the assumption used in that project that
both FCR and aFRR requirements have to be dealt in the aFRR may result in not reli­
able outcome. In reality, for the FCR requirement there should be more fast­acting power
units being able to be activated in 30 seconds, while for the aFRR it can also be more
slow, in 15 minutes. Thus, this could lead to some differences in the resulted invested
technologies.
Influence of VREs on the reserve requirement of the system:
The electrification of the heat and transport sectors and the high penetration of renew­
ables and flexible energy systems constitute a vital solution in order to move to a green
transition towards 2050. Thus, the study of the influence of the VRE’s uncertainty to a
system that considered high sector coupling stands as a more realistic scenario. The
high impact of the electrification of the heat and transport sector to the rapid growth of the
demand was identified in the scenario concerning the sector coupling.(3.1,3.20). In 2045,
in the scenario with sector coupling the electricity consumption is forecasted to reach
2400 TWh in relation to 850 TWh for the same year without sector coupling. It should
be also noted that when there is not sector coupling most of the part of the demand is
coming from the exogenous demand while in the other case only a small part is coming
from the exogenous one. A major part in the last case is coming from the demand of the
EVs, hydrogen and storage. That means, that in the future when integrating more flex­
ible technologies in the system it would result in the demand adapted to the generation
instead of the opposite that is happening at present. Moreover, it is important to notice
that Germany and France account for the highest part of the system’s demand studied for
this project. As Germany’s and France’s consumption is 4.5 and 3.5 times more than Nor­
way’s and 13 and 10 times more than Denmark’s, that means that Germany and France
energy system’s characteristics play a major role to the results.
A consequence of the increased demand in the sector coupling scenario is the rise in
the electricity production of the system as well. In 2045, wind and solar together account
for around 67% of the total production when there is sector coupling (3.3) in comparison
to 40% when there is not (3.14). Considering a less reliable system in terms of trust
on wind and solar forecast production, leads to both of them maintain almost the same
percentage in both scenarios with a clear decrease in the case of zero trust and no sector
coupling. Even when decreasing the reliability on VREs, they still maintain their share
in the energy production especially moving further to the future as it is assumed to have
a low cost, mainly the solar energy investments. What is increasing in both cases, is
the storage, especially in the sector coupling where is becoming double for the zero trust
case. As more and more renewables penetrate on the energy share, when there is excess
energy production leading to low prices, the storage loads energy from the grid taking
advantage of the low price and being available to provide ancillary services.(B.6, B.7)
The penetration of thermal technologies declines moving to 2045 in both cases, with and
without sector coupling. However, their share in the first case is much less. As the CO2
tax increases, the decomissioning of fossil fuel based plants takes place in the future.
The major part of the thermal technologies on the energy share is coming from nuclear
energy, which is utilized in a high share in France. As already mentioned France has a
great influence on the aggregated results of the system. When the reliability on the wind
and solar decreases in both system scenarios, in 2025 and 2035 the thermal technologies
in the electricity share increase. However, in 2045 when no sector coupling is accounted,
the thermal plants decrease as the trust on VREs decreases, with a high rise only in the
extreme case of no trust at all. In the sector coupling case, the thermal technologies do
not show any increase. In 2045, as the cost of renewables become more competitive and
38
==PAGE:44==
the CO2 tax increases, it is more optimal to invest in more VREs, even when they are
penalized due to their uncertain forecast in production. More specifically, it it observed
the same pattern in the storage and solar energy investments being increased in 2045 in
both system scenarios, as the trust on VREs production decreases. Solar reaches 60%
penetration on the total capacity in the sector coupling scenario in 2045. Wind doesn’t
seem to undergo great changes, in the sense that it maintains the same share in the total
capacity even when the trust changes, with a fall on its capacity in the extreme case of zero
trust. The pressure of the system to respond to the increased requirement needs, leads
to the rise of the system’s cost, as it needs to activate a greater number of producing units
and more expensive ones in order to cover the reserve needs. In 2025, in both system
scenarios the fuel costs together with the fixed costs and the Co2 account for the highest
part of the total costs. That is a result of the high level of fossil fuel technologies in the
system. In 2045, in both scenarios the highest part of the cost is coming from the capital
costs. As the trust on VREs decreases, the capital costs increase while the operational
decrease as a result of the growth on VRE investments. In addition, in the increased
capital costs has resulted also the rise in the storage technologies. The unit commitment
costs increase as a result of the greater activation of producers for covering the reserves.
The reserve requirement level in the sector coupling scenario, when looking in 2045 for
the whole system and 50% trust case, leads to three times higher requirement in MW.
More specifically, when looking at the average MW in 2045 with sector coupling resulted
106530 MW whereas without sector coupling was 28614 MW. It was observed similar
hourly pattern of the requirement during the year with peaks close to noon and low levels
during the night. (3.9) In 2045, for the sector coupling scenario the highest requirement
was observed on April while without sector coupling was on May. In an effort to identify
seasonalities of wind and solar penetration on the production leading to the pattern of
the requirement during the year, it was observed that wind penetrates more on the winter
months and mostly on January and February being present almost during the whole day.
While solar energy is mostly present on the summer months and more specifically on
May with its presence mostly to hours close to noon. Regarding the technologies that can
provide the reserves in the Balmorel model this is decided upon the ramping capabilities of
the units and by choosing the most economically optimal solution for the system. In both,
with and without sector coupling scenario and when considering the 2045 year, storage
is planned to provide a high share of the total MW of requirement. It was already noticed
that investments on the storage increase towards 2045 and this explained as it constitutes
the main provider of the reserves. Wind and solar account for around 2% in the sector
coupling scenario in the 50% trust case while in the scenario without sector coupling and
same trust account for 14%. Nonetheless, as the reliability on VREs electricity production
decreases, their share on the technologies to provide the potential requirement increases.
This happens, as a result of being more optimal to curtail a part of them in the case of
covering the reserves instead of contributing to the annual production, where it is already
known a degree of uncertainty. Hydro accounts for 10% in a safe system and no sector
coupling which increases to 17% of the total Mw being covered by mostly water turbines in
2045. In the sector coupling hydro has a very small percentage of around 2%. Electricity to
heat technologies such as heat pumps have a higher percentage on the sector coupling
scenario. In both scenarios, the level of requirement covered by these technologies is
decreased as the system becomes less reliable. On the sector coupling scenario in 2045
there is also the option for hydrogen to provide the reserves which it resulted to cover
together with the storage around 60% of the total.
Influence of VREs on the provision of the requirement without sector coupling:
39
==PAGE:45==
In the 2nd scenario (3.2), it was studied the influence of the VRE’s uncertainty to provide
the ancillary services, when the reliability to provide the forecasted production is 70% in
a system without accounting for sector coupling. As VREs penetrate more and more on
the energy system, it is arising the need of having more responsibilities such as providing
the ancillary services. However, their uncertain nature would affect also that role. Thus,
studying the consequences also to that aspect is informative. What was realized is that
the influence of VREs on the provision of the reserves when maintaining a stable level of
uncertainty to the VRE’s production is much less remarkable on the resulted system in
comparison to the influence of VREs uncertain production. In the system’s investments
in 2045, it was noted as a critical point of change the 70% trust. After that point, so­
lar pv investments decrease together with thermal while storage and wind increase. On
the electricity production, the decrease of the scalar V REprovide leads to the increase of
wind share while solar is only increased in 2045 and in the low trust cases. The thermal
technologies are decreased in 2045 due to emission goals. As the production of wind
increases while its capacity the opposite, this shows that less wind is curtailed for the
reserve needs but instead is used for providing the electricity production. On the tech­
nologies planned to provide the reserves, wind and solar result in a significant decline as
the trust decreases being close to ten times decrease. Especially this decline is more
obvious in the cases lower to 70% trust, where the assumed trust to the VRE’s expected
production is higher (70%). This shows that the system finds more optimal to utilize wind
and solar for the electricity production instead of providing the reserves, as their reliability
on the provision of the reserves declines. The predominant technology to provide for the
requirement is the storage for accounting close to 80% of the total MW.
40
==PAGE:46==
5
Conclusion
In this thesis project it was studied the influence of VREs on the reserve requirement and
on the provision of the reserves. This was done by modelling simulations on the Balmorel
model. Three scenarios were created, one for studying the influence of VREs on the re­
serve requirement in a system without sector coupling, one for the influence of VREs on
the provision of the reserves in a system without sector coupling and the last one stud­
ied again the influence of wind and solar on the requirement but in a system with sector
coupling. In the first and third scenario, similar behaviour of the system was observed.
Overall, the costs in the system are pushed upwards as the reserve requirement is in­
creased. However, when considering a system without sector coupling this increase is
more intense. This outcome was affected by the higher increase in the fixed costs driven
by the greater contribution of thermal units in the provision of the reserves, whereas in the
case of sector coupling the electricity batteries and electrolyzers account for the higher
level of the reserves. Overall, it is preferred to keep more renewables for covering the
reserve requirement and reducing their share in the electricity production. However, to­
wards 2045 as the solar PV becomes very competitive is more optimal to produce energy
by solar and to reduce wind, curtail it in case of the reserve needs. However, in the low
trust cases is preferred for both of them to contribute more on the ancillary services and it
is also needed the contribution of thermal technologies as more reliable producing units.
In addition, storage plays an important role in the flexibility of the system and the provision
of the reserves. Regarding the influence of the VREs in the provision of the reserves, it
was shown that in this case is more optimal to increase the wind energy in the electricity
production while solar is contributing in the low trust cases in 2045. After the 70% trust
on VREs to provide for the reserves, it is assumed more trust on them to provide the ex­
pected production (70%), thus after that level it is preferred more for them to increase in
the electricity generation, whereas they are decreased in the provision of the reserves.
To conclude with, as more renewables penetrate to the power system constituting the
foundation for the green energy, the energy systems need to overcome the challenges
arising of their uncertainty and variability. The high level of VREs on the system lead to
high reserve requirement. The conventional generators that were the ones most com­
monly providing for the reserves so far, will account for a small part in the future as a
result of the system’s decarbonization. Thus, the energy systems need to increase their
flexibility. As shown also in this project, storage and hydrogen technologies would play
in important role in providing that flexibility. Overall, the rapid technological development
would enhance the accuracy of the weather prediction in the foreseeable future, result­
ing in a lower degree of forecast errors in the renewable energy production. However, it
would still entail a percentage of uncertainty, thus taking into account that when planning
an energy system at present and mostly in the future would save financial resources as
well as result in a more reliable and safe system.
41
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Abhimanyu Kaushal and Dirk Van Hertem. An overview of ancillary services and
HVDC systems in European context. Sept. 2019. DOI: 10.3390/en12183481.
[2]
Delia Vasilica Rotaru. A Glance at the European Energy Market Liberalization. 2013,
pp. 100–110. URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10419/198233https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/www.econstor.eu.
[3]
Germany Next Kraftwerke. What does Liberalization and Unbundling of Energy Mar­
kets mean? URL: https://www.next-kraftwerke.com/knowledge/liberalization-energy-
markets.
[4]
Tomás Gómez et al. “European Union Electricity Markets: Current Practice and Fu­
ture View”. In: IEEE Power and Energy Magazine 17 (1 Jan. 2019), pp. 20–31.
ISSN: 15584216. DOI: 10.1109/MPE.2018.2871739.
[5]
Lina Silva­Rodriguez et al. Short term wholesale electricity market designs: A review
of identified challenges and promising solutions. May 2022. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.
2022.112228.
[6]
Vangelis Panos, Antti Lehtila, and Paul Deane. Energy Technology Systems Anal­
ysis Programme Enhancing the flexibility in TIMES: Introducing Ancillary Services
Markets.
[7]
Igor Kuzle et al. An Overview of Ancillary Services in an Open Market Environment.
2007.
[8]
FINGRID. Reserves and balancing power. URL: https://www.fingrid.fi/en/electricity-
market/reserves_and_balancing/.
[9]
Energinet Elsystemansvar A/S Document type. 2019. URL: https://ramboll.com.
[10]
Arne Van Stiphout, Kristof De Vos, and Geert Deconinck. “The Impact of Operating
Reserves on Investment Planning of Renewable Power Systems”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Power Systems 32 (1 Jan. 2017), pp. 378–388. ISSN: 08858950. DOI:
10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2565058.
[11]
H. Holttinen et al. Methodologies to determine operating reserves due to increased
wind power. 2012. DOI: 10.1109/TSTE.2012.2208207.
[12]
Marie Münster et al. Sector Coupling: Concepts, State­of­the­art and Perspectives
Future Gas View project Peer­to­Peer Energy Trading and Sharing­3M (Multi­times,
Multi­scales, Multi­qualities) View project. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net /
publication/339365854.
[13]
“The role of sector coupling in the green transition A least­cost energy system de­
velopment in Northern­central Europe towards 2050 Elsevier Enhanced Reader”.
In: (). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116685.
[14]
Tanveer Ahmad and Dongdong Zhang. A critical review of comparative global his­
torical energy consumption and future demand: The story told so far. Nov. 2020.
DOI: 10.1016/j.egyr.2020.07.020.
[15]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model”. In: Energy Strat­
egy Reviews 20 (Apr. 2018), pp. 26–34. ISSN: 2211467X. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.2018.
01.003.
[16]
“Balmorel Community, Balmorel Data”. In: (). URL: https://github.com/balmorelcommunity/
Balmorel_data.
[17]
“MapChart”. In: (). URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/.
[18]
Technology Data­Energy Plants for Electricity and District heating generation. URL:
http://www.ens.dk/teknologikatalog.
42
==PAGE:48==
[19]
CorRES (Correlations in Renewable Energy Sources). URL: https://corres.windenergy.
dtu.dk/.
[20]
Poul Erik Grohnheit, Helge V Larsen, and Balmorel Project. Balmorel­Data and Cal­
ibration Version 2.05. 2001.
[21]
Kaushik Das et al. Power system balancing of North Sea countries with large share
of wind power towards 2050.
[22]
Nina Dupont and Mikael Togeby. Balmorel Data Report Data Report 2 | Balmorel
Data Report­Background to Vietnam Energy Outlook Report. 2019.
[23]
Marissa Hummon et al. Fundamental Drivers of the Cost and Price of Operating
Reserves. 2013. URL: www.nrel.gov/publications..
43
==PAGE:49==
44
==PAGE:50==
A
Time representation in the simulation
Table A.1: Weeks of the year used in the temporal representation
Season
Representative
Weeks
S2
9­15 January
S8
20­26 February
S15
9­15 April
S21
21­27 May
S28
9­15 July
S34
20­26 August
S41
8­14 October
S47
19­25 November
Table A.2: Days used in the temporal representation
Time steps
Representative
hours
Time steps
Representative
hours
T073
Thursday 01:00
T112
Friday 16:00
T076
Thursday 04:00
T115
Friday 19:00
T079
Thursday 07:00
T118
Friday 22:00
T082
Thursday 10:00
T121
Saturday 01:00
T085
Thursday 13:00
T124
Saturday 04:00
T088
Thursday 16:00
T127
Saturday 07:00
T091
Thursday 19:00
T130
Saturday 10:00
T094
Thursday 22:00
T133
Saturday 13:00
T097
Friday 01:00
T136
Saturday 16:00
T100
Friday 04:00
T139
Saturday 19:00
T103
Friday 07:00
T142
Saturday 22:00
T106
Friday 10:00
T109
Friday 13:00
45
==PAGE:51==
B
Additional graphs from the simulations
B.0.1
1st Scenario­ VRE impact the reserve requirement without sector
coupling
Figure B.1: Net Transmission flow (TWh) for each country in 2045, among the different values of
the scalar V REinfluence in the simulation. + means exporter, ­ means importer
Figure B.2: Fuels providing the cumulative annual electricity production (TWh) of each country in
2045 when varying the scalar V REinfluence
46
==PAGE:52==
Figure B.3: Cumulative annual generation capacity of each country in GW in 2045 among the
scalar V REinfluence
B.0.2
2nd Scenario ­ VRE impact the provision of the reserve requirement
­ without sector coupling
Figure B.4: Costs of the system (MMoney) in 2045 as the V REprovide changes
47
==PAGE:53==
B.0.3
3rd Scenario ­ VRE impact the reserve requirement ­ without sector
coupling
Figure B.5: Transmission flow among the countries in 2045 for the different scalars. With + it
means exporters, with ­ mean importers
(a) January­scalar=0
(b) January­scalar=0.5
Figure B.6: The electricity balance of the system for the scalar 0 and 0.5 during January in 2045
48
==PAGE:54==
(a) May­scalar=0
(b) May­scalar=0.5
Figure B.7: The electricity balance of the system for the scalar 0 and 0.5 in 2045 during May
49
