==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Creating Outdoor 3D Scenes using Machine
Learning and Procedural Generation
Generering af udendørs 3D scener med maskinlæring og procedurale
metoder
Henning Munch Ribjerg (s164031)
Patrick Alexander Nielsen (s174245)
Advisors:
J. Andreas Bærentzen
Jeppe Revall Frisvad
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The thesis will examine how to extract meaningful data from 2D landscape images
and then generate 3D terrains, based on that data. We will therefore examine different
machine learning models to determine the best suited model for this task. As well
as examine how to best extract the result from a machine learning model. We will
also present a elaborate procedural terrain generator, that is capable of generating
an infinite terrain. The thesis will start of with presenting the state of the art in
both machine learning and procedural generation methods. Then it will go over our
design choices in relation to the terrain generator and the methods used to extract
the necessary data. For the terrain generator we use methods such as procedural
noise algorithms (Perlin and Simplex noise), Fractional Brownian motion and Poisson
disk sampling. We will also explore different image segmentation methods, such as
semantic and instance segmentation. With the design, it will then explain how we
implemented it. After which, it will go in to an analysis, where it discusses the results
of our machine learning model as well as the procedural terrain generator. Finally
we will go over ideas to further studies in extension to this project.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, July 21, 2022
Henning Munch Ribjerg (s164031)
Patrick Alexander Nielsen (s174245)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This Master’s thesis will mark the end of our masters degree in Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence, and the final chapter for us at DTU. It has been a mostly joy
full ride only interrupted by a small global pandemic. Despite that we would like
to extend our gratitude to DTU and all of the teachers and teachers assistants, who
have done their out most to adapt their teaching to accommodate remote studying.
We would especially thank our two advisors J. Andreas Bærentzen & Jeppe Revall
Frisvad for assisting us in this project, and providing their expertise when needed.
In addition we would like to thank Dimitrios Papadopoulos, for giving us advice and
guidance in machine learning and image recognition part of the project.
Furthermore a special thanks goes to my (Henning) girlfriend Cecilie and our
newborn son Valdemar, for bringing smiles of joy in stressful times.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Problem Statement
The goal is to create a 3D scene based on photographic inputs. The project will
consist of two main parts: a system for extracting parameters from photographs using
machine learning and/or image processing methods, and system for synthesizing 3D
scenes based on these parameters.
Our level of ambition is to be able to recreate the same aesthetic feel from the
image into a 3D world, which you can traverse, rotate and change as you see fit.
We want a user of this potential product to be able to take a stroll in nature, take
a picture of a beautiful or interesting landscape, and transfer that overall atmosphere
into a 3D environment where the user can take a digital stroll and thus share the
experience with others.
In the hands of an experienced game developer, programmer or other similar role,
we imagine the user being able to potentially use this as a way of illustrating an artistic
feel or invoking a certain atmosphere. A combination of tweakable parameters and
settings we will help accommodate this.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the art
3
2.1
Procedural terrain generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning & Image classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Design and Tools
13
3.1
Render Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Compute Shaders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Computer vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Terrain Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Biomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Natural paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.7
Texturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.8
Object placement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Implementation
45
4.1
Computer vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Terrain Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Biomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.4
Natural paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Texturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.6
Object placement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Analysis
65
5.1
Terrain Variety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Generation of a terrain based on an segmented image . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3
Analysis of a segmented image of an generated terrain . . . . . . . . .
75
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6
Future Work
79
6.1
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.2
Texturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.3
Object spawning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.4
Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7
Conclusion
83
A
Segmented classes list
85
B
Color histograms
87
C
Object Types
89
D
Vector Hashing Function
91
E
Segmentation JSON
93
F
Terrain Presets
97
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Today more than ever, people are feeling the impact and importance of digitization
especially after years of working partially from home during lock downs, because
of the global pandemic.
Entrepreneurs and philanthropists like Mark Zuckerberg
are dreaming of digitizing more and more of peoples lives, and is vastly promoting
technologies like Metaverses [Pat22].
The computer games industry is as always seeking to stretch what is possible using
the newest technologies and to keep trying to make games more and more realistic to
keep players engaged and immersed into the digital world.
Both serve vastly different ideas and purposes, but both also intents to keep the
user engaged and immersed into a digital world.
The purpose with this project is to uncover and reveal some lesser known possi-
bilities of modern day machine learning and combine them with a powerful render
engine and state of the art procedural terrain generation techniques. We want to show
a proof of concept of translating a high quality image, into a 3D environment open-
ing countless possibilities in different areas, but probably mostly in the entertainment
industry.
This will require us to produce a method to extract meaningful parameters from
landscape images and transfer them into a procedural terrain generator. The proce-
dural terrain generator will be able to create vastly different shapes and place various
vegetation models on the plane. For the terrain generator, we will use different tech-
niques to achieve that goal, that includes noise, Fractional Brownian Motion (fBms),
Poisson disk sampling and more.
This thesis will begin with an elaborate chapter on what is currently state of the
art in both the realm of machine learning and deep learning, and procedural terrain
generation. We will have a thorough discussion about the different design choices,
and what the possibilities are, and continue with a section where we show and tell
how we implemented it. Then we analyse our model, both subjectively, by looking
and comparing original and generated landscape, but also objectively by evaluating
the synthetic landscape again. We finish up by discussing the endless possibilities
and expandability, and proposing ideas for future studies.
==PAGE:14==
2
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
State of the art
In this chapter we will outline the current state of the art in procedural terrain
generation, machine learning and image recognition. We will touch upon different
methodologies in both subjects, Physical based generation and synthetic generation,
in relation to procedural terrain generation and different image classification and
object recognition techniques in regards to machine learning.
2.1
Procedural terrain generation
At its bare-bones, procedural generation can be described as a technique to generate
data algorithmically as opposed to manually creating it[Wik22b]. It has been used
widely in anything from computer graphics, music, arts, movies, and has in recent
years seen a great usage in many video games, most notably Minecraft and No Man’s
Sky.
2.1.1
Physically Based Generation
A method to generate procedural terrain is by utilizing natural processes and simulate
them, this is a physically based generation. We will mainly be highlighting erosion.
These simulations have become feasible as processing power has increased with newer
hardware. This means you can now simulate millions of water droplets for hydraulic
erosion in a few seconds or in real-time, rather than waiting multiple minutes.
In 2008, Ondřej Št’ava et al. created a method to interactively model a terrain
using hydraulic erosion and other algorithms[Šta+08]. In figure 2.1 we can see an
rendered terrain that has been eroded using their method. Their system is build up of
three different erosion algorithms: force-based and dissolution based hydraulic erosion
and direct material transportation through sediment slippage[Šta+08].
Although
their method creates visually impressive terrains, it cannot run in real-time, which
was a future goal of their algorithm.
==PAGE:16==
4
2 State of the art
Figure 2.1: A rendered terrain using Ondřej Št’ava et al. method[Šta+08]
Other examples of physical based generation are plate tectonics and hydrology
based generation. When simulating plate tectonics, you mimic the method that our
planet uses to create mountains, by shifting large plates around, which ”push” them
up, thereby creating large mountains. In Hydrology, we carve the land based on rivers
snaking through the land. This method is similar to hydraulic erosion. There is also
thermal erosion, which is an adjacent method to hydraulic erosion, that carves the
land simply by moving sediment down slopes, much like glaciers carving the land.
2.1.2
Synthetic Generation
The basis of synthetically generating terrain is noise. A noise algorithm is used to
generate pseudo random values, that can be used to generate a variety of different
things, such as terrains, plants, trees and so on. One of the first known use cases of
using noise to create procedural content, was done by Ken Perlin, who created Perlin
Noise[Per85]. He developed this algorithm to generate synthetic naturalistic imagery,
such texture for clouds, fire, wood and rock. Below is an image of a pot that has an
generated water texture (see figure 2.2), which is created by utilizing the algorithm
Ken Perlin created.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Procedural terrain generation
5
Figure 2.2: ”Water Crystal” - Generated water texture[Per85]
This noise function has since its inception been used as the foundation for a lot
of procedurally generated content. However, nature does not display ”fully” random
terrain, they display some sort of self-similarity and fractalness, which does not con-
vert to a pseudo-random noise function very well[Wik22a].
Which introduces the
method of combining many layers of noise by adding their value in a summation, this
method is called Fractional Brownian Motion (fBm). We will go into more detail on
this topic in the design and implementation section as this is the basis of our terrain
generator.
One of the characteristic behaviours of a fBm is that it displays some self-similarity
i.e if you zoom in to a part of a path, it will still resemble the whole path, yet the
whole path will still seem random[Quia]. This method allows one to generate much
more believable natural phenomena such as clouds, mountains and texture for trees
or rocks. In figure 2.3 is an image of a terrain that has been rendered purely using
fBm’s with different parameters and also by utilizing raymarching.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 State of the art
Figure 2.3:
”Rainforest” - terrain, clouds and tree distribution generated by
fBm’s[Quia]
We will now outline some of the best solutions out right now, that can produce
realistic procedurally generated terrains. They do not all work in real time however,
which is one of the criterion we have set for our terrain generator. One of the most
advanced procedural terrain generators is Planetside’s Terragen[Ter], which is a pro-
fessional software used for movies, television and art projects. One of its main features
is to create large terrains spanning entire planets with vegetation, weather systems
and everything else around it.
This software has been used for various projects
such as Star Wars: Rogue One, Avengers: Infinity War, Game Of Thrones and many
more[Plab]. In figure 2.4 are a few showcase images created by artists using Terragen.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Procedural terrain generation
7
(a) Terrain created by Jeff Boser
(b) Terrain created by Rene Van Megen
(c) Terrain created by Ulco Glimmerveen (d) Terrain created by Ulco Glimmerveen
Figure 2.4: Various terrains generated by various artists using Terragen[Plaa]
One of its main drawbacks is that it is not in real time, meaning that you will
not be able to use it for games. Which leads us to the best procedurally generated
video games, mainly Minecraft and No Man’s Sky. These games utilize the methods
described above, with noise and fBms to create vast worlds, and with No Man’s
Sky even millions of different looking planets in real time. A large part of our terrain
generator has been inspired by the methods used for No Man’s Sky, and will therefore
be explained in the design and implementation section. In figure 2.5 are screenshots
of each game with a generated terrain.
(a) A Generated terrain from Minecraft (b) A Generated terrain from No Man’s
Sky
Figure 2.5: In-game images from Minecraft and No Man’s Sky
==PAGE:20==
8
2 State of the art
2.2
Machine Learning & Image classification
In this section we will discuss relevant state of the art machine learning techniques
for extracting information from images. As our focus is to translate information from
an image to a 3D scene, we will focus on different techniques and later evaluate what
is relevant in our use case.
The different approaches for image classification has developed rapidly over the
years and has evolved from classical methods like Support Vector Machines, K-Nearest
Neighbors, Näive Bayes and Random forests [San20] to be dominated by the success
of deeper and deeper convolutional neural networks [AA].
Deep neural networks can still be used in many different ways to output different
information from images. We choose to focus on two areas as we believe they will grant
us access to the most useful information: Image segmentation and Object recognition.
It is however important to note that they are only a small subset of the possibilities
of deep neural networks.
We see new techniques and new tools constantly being built. Recently Open AI
published DALL·E 2[Ram+22], which uses NLP (natural language processing), to
convert natural language to images depicting the description, see figure 2.6. DALL·E
2 is trained on millions of images [AI22], which is also one of the main contributors
in its success.
(a) An astronaut lounging in a tropical
resort in space.
(b) A bowl of soup that is a portal to
another dimension as digital art.
Figure 2.6: Images generated using DALL·E 2, with the text description below each
image [Ram+22].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Machine Learning & Image classification
9
To underline how fast this field is evolving, DALL·E 2 only held the crown for
state of the art text to image diffusion model for little over a month before it was
beaten by Googles Imagen [Sah+22].
2.2.1
Object detection
Object detection is a small improvement to object recognition, which is the simple
task of recognizing if an image contains a given set of objects. It is the combination of
both object recognition and object localization, which is the task of localising certain
objects.
As seen in figure 2.7, an object detection model has found 3 objects and localised
them with a bounding box. The model used here is You Only Look Once (YOLO)
[Red+15]. As seen the objects are encased by a box with a name and a small number
on top of it. The name designates what object have been detected, and the number
is the models predicted probability of it being that object.
Figure 2.7: Example of an object detection model (YOLO) [Red+15]
New object detection models are constantly being made, and they keep getting
better and better. Some are very fast and can be used in real time, like the YOLO fam-
ily of models, where the newest additions includes, but are not limited to, YOLOv4
[BWL20], YOLOv5 [Zhu+21] and YOLOR [WYL21].
==PAGE:22==
10
2 State of the art
2.2.2
Image segmentation
Image segmentation is the process of dividing an image into different regions based
on the characteristics of pixels to identify objects or boundaries to simplify an image
and more eﬀiciently analyze it. An example of said image segmentation can be seen
in figure 2.8.
Earlier image segmentation models mostly used unlabeled data and was entirely
unsupervised. Algorithms like Region-Based Segmentation, Edge Detection Segmen-
tation and Segmentation based on Clustering, was commonly used [med18]. How-
ever today, image segmentation is dominated by neural networks, like Mask R-
CNN[He+17], U-Net [RFB15], FCN [LSD14], and Deeplab [Che+16].
Figure 2.8:
Sample images segmented using Semantic Segmentation on MIT
ADE20K data set in PyTorch. From left to right: Test Image, Ground Truth, Pre-
dicted Result [Zho+16][Zho+17]
State of the art image segmentation also uses deep convolutional neural networks,
and huge data sets to train on. Training complicated neural networks can easily take
days or even weeks with consumer hardware.
Today, two types of image segmentation are mostly used, Semantic Image Seg-
mentation and Instance Segmentation. It is important to note that Semantic Image
Segmentation does not distinguish between different instances of the same class. Two
different people on one image will both be classified the same way, see figure 2.9. A
well performing state of the art model is Mask DINO [Li+22] which is built upon
Resnet-50 [He+15].
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Machine Learning & Image classification
11
Figure 2.9: Side by side comparison of Semantic Image Segmentation (left) and
Instance Segmentation (right).
Instance Segmentation is a combination between image segmentation and object
recognition and is used where object recognition is not accurate enough, but you still
need to know what kind of object it is. Examples of this can be self-driving cars,
medical scans and satellite imagery [22].
Mask R-CNN[He+17] is an example of a state of the art Instance Segmentation
model.
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Design and Tools
3.1
Render Engine
For this project to work, we needed a tool to render the landscape in 3D. To do
this we considered several options such as the two game engines Unreal[Gamb] and
Unity[Teca], but also simply rendering it through a self implemented engine in OpenGL
or DirectX.
We wanted a framework which caused the least amount of headaches, providing
us the tools and help needed, but also giving us the freedom needed to configure as
much as possible.
Our very optimistic and maybe a bit naive goal, was to generate a highly realistic
3D environment, thus we wanted to have assets and textures as realistic as possible,
but as it was hardly within the scope of this project, and as we are not capable of
creating such assets ourselves, we ended up prioritizing a full on game and render
engine, with lots of premade assets available.
With those criteria, we narrowed down the choices to a highly polished and widely
used render engine, such as Unity or Unreal Engine. Tools for games and other nice
to have features aside, they both could easily work for this project.
In terms of rendering and use of shaders, in their high end rendering pipelines,
both Unreal Engine and Unity works similar and uses a node based graph system,
in Unreal it’s called material editor [Gama] and in Unity it is called shader graph
[Tecb]. Even though they remove some of the freedom you have when writing shaders
in hlsl/glsl, it also grants features such as many built in functions, previews etc.
We ended up choosing Unity, mainly because our experience with the Engine as
well as the extensive documentation.
3.1.1
Quxiel Megascans
To get high quality assets with the performance we need into our generated world,
without spending too much time creating them ourselves or searching for it on differ-
ent forums, we used a library of high quality assets called Quixel Megascans [Quic].
Quixel Megascans also have an GUI application called Quixel Bridge [Quib] with a
well implemented integration with Unity, where we can directly export assets like
textures with all the maps (Albedo, normal, occlusion height etc.), already attached,
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Design and Tools
and assets like flowers, bushes and rocks. The assets already contain LOD’s and other
performance minded features.
3.2
Compute Shaders
Since we utilize compute shaders to massively increase the performance of our terrain
generation, we will shortly outline what makes a GPU so much faster compared to a
regular CPU. A GPU (Graphics Processor Unit) is used to do millions, if not billions
of calculations in parallel, which is used for a variety of different tasks. Originally
designed for graphics, but in recent years used a lot on machine learning models.
Writing a compute shader is very much similar to writing CUDA programs, which
is NVIDIA’s own bridge between an application and the hardware[Gup20]. We will
therefore be explaining it via the CUDA programming model.
In the programming model, there is a host and a device, which is the CPU and
the GPU respectviely, they each have their own memory and processing power. To
then be able to execute a CUDA program or a compute shader, there are three steps
to the process:
1. Copy the data from the host memory to the device memory.
2. Load the GPU program i.e execute the code on the GPU.
3. And finally, transfer the results from device memory to host memory.
Compute Shaders, or CUDA Programs, splits its functions into kernels.
Kernels
informs the GPU about how many threads per block it should use and what code it
needs to run. The kernel is then executed in parallel, as many times as the user has
specified, this can be upwards of millions or more, on high end GPUs. As mentioned,
the threads are divided in to blocks, which has a maximum of 1024 threads per block
and these blocks are grouped into a grid.
Even though the GPU is used for performance increase, we are not too concerned
about eﬀicient grid layout and memory allocation and usage as the scope of this
project only is to create a 3D environment. Thus we will not discuss this further.
3.3
Computer vision
As our main goal was to transfer knowledge from an image to a 3D environment, we
started exploring the most trivial options that we knew of, image analysis. Afterwards
we explored more advanced computer vision methodologies, specifically different ma-
chine learning models.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Computer vision
15
3.3.1
Image analysis
In the beginning we wanted to prove that you could transfer knowledge from a 2D
image into a 3D world, by using very simple image analysis tools. With inspiration
from others using data mining and simple image analysis methods like computing
means, standard deviation, entropy and color histograms [Sha+12].
We found a large data set containing labeled images of 6 different classes: building,
forest, glacier, mountain, sea and street, each containing more than 2000 images
labeled as training and around 500 labeled for testing [Ban19]. In figure 3.1, there
are a few example images from the data set.
We used this data set to make some preliminary tests to have a reference point.
We wanted to be able to see if we could easily somewhat classify an image or at least
give a reasonable guess.
Figure 3.1: Sample images from the data set. From left to right: mountain, forest,
glacier.
For each of the given classes in the data sets, we established a mean baseline for
each consisting of: a fixed binned color histogram using k bins, mean color, standard
deviation and entropy.
Color histograms and the different parameters used for a few of the classes, can
be seen in figure 3.2 and table 3.1, the rest can be seen in appendix B.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Design and Tools
Figure 3.2: Average color histograms for 3 classes in the data set. From top to
bottom: Forest, Glacier and Mountain.
As one can see on figure 3.2, the histogram are distinguishable although not as
different as we might like. It shows that there is a difference, but we don’t believe we
can use this on its own. We also did some preliminary classification to check whether
we could classify an image using only binned color histogram, but this method proved
only to be very similar to random guessing.
Instead we tried to supplement using other pixel data as seen in 3.1.
Class
Mean
Standard Deviation
Variance
Entropy
Forest
78.78
55.63
3217
5.13
Glacier
134.76
58.89
3614
5.08
Mountain
121.68
67.61
4752
5.06
Table 3.1: Average values over the entire training set of a few classes
We tried to use this enhanced but very simple model to predict our data set
labeled as testing, but had mixed results as seen in table 3.2.
Buildings
Forest
Glacier
Mountain
Sea
Street
26%
67%
12%
18%
13%
19%
Table 3.2: Percentage of true positives of all 6 classes.
As random guessing would result in a true positive rate of ≈16.5%, you can
clearly see that this is not an effective way of classifying images. We suspect that the
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Computer vision
17
forest images are more distinguishable than the other classes which would result in a
higher true positive rate.
These preliminary results show that we need to have a more sophisticated way of
getting information from images, and we will not further explore the limits of simple
image analysis, which leads us to the next section.
3.3.2
Deep Learning models
In the process of finding ”a good enough” method for extracting information from
an image, we ended up in the realm of Machine Learning and by extension Deep
Learning. The first idea was to use an object detection model.
3.3.2.1
Object detection
As this project is not about creating and training the best object detection model, we
wanted something easy to work with and something that could detect objects found
in nature like, trees, rocks, lakes, etc.
There are plenty of different pre-trained object detection models in various quality
and performance on Github, even collections of different models like Yolov4, Mask-
RCNN and FCN [Exc]. What happened to be a problem was the data set they were
trained on.
Finding a model pre-trained on data with class labels matching a specific use case,
which in our case was nature objects, turned out to be really diﬀicult. We found a
tool which could both easily label our own data by manually placing bounding boxes,
and afterwards integrate it with a model, they had configured to easily accept data
labeled with their tool. The tool is made by Roboflow, it is easy to use with a tutorial
using a yolov5 implementation by Ultralytics [Jac20][Zhu+21][Ult].
Even after finding all these tools it still required a lot of work. It takes a consid-
erable long time to annotate nature images, especially if you have to label common
objects like plants, rocks and trees. And if you want to have a well performing model,
you will have to annotate a lot of images.
3.3.2.2
Image segmentation
We eventually found a pre-trained model with enough input parameters found fit-
ting the domain of nature. It was more a coincidence it became an semantic image
segmentation model than a design choice, but as explained briefly in section 2.2.2,
semantic image segmentation has many of the same qualities of an object detection
model, but with a more fitting bounding box. The model we are using is pre-trained
on ADE20K [Zho+17][Zho+16] and is a Dilated Residual Network (DRN) [YKF17].
The model has been trained to detect 150 different classes, however we have chosen
to focus on a smaller subset as seen in the following list, however all classes can be
seen in appendix A:
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Design and Tools
tree, road, grass, sidewalk, earth, mountain,
plant, water, sea, field, rock, path, river,
flower, hill, palm, dirt, land, waterfall, lake
The segmentation model will color the area of the image in a color representing a
specific class, like trees or ground, see figure 3.3. With this model we can extract how
much of an image is covered by a certain type of object and use that later to pass
into our terrain generation and object placement functions.
Figure 3.3: Sample forest image segmented. Colors indicate specific objects. Or-
dered by area, green: trees, red: path, brown: earth, blue: sky, light green: grass.
By choosing a pre-trained model of this type, we also limit ourselves to a certain
set of objects, with limited control and knowledge on how it classifies objects. This
however, qualifies as a proof of concept, and can be used as a baseline. This could
always be extended to more objects or a model could be trained on a custom data
set. It would be needed if we wanted to be able to distinguish different types of trees
and plants.
3.4
Terrain Generation
In this section, we will discuss and analyse the different methods we used for our
terrain generation. This will include different noise functions and their advantages
and disadvantages as well as hydraulic erosion.
3.4.1
Noise
As mentioned in State of the art (See section 2) noise is essential for procedurally
generating terrain. Therefore in this section, we will discuss the different noise al-
gorithms we have chosen for our program. These include Simplex and Perlin noise.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Terrain Generation
19
First, we will describe what the noise function should be able to do.
A noise function is a psuedo random number generator for computer graphics[Lag+10],
it produces a random and unstructured pattern. Usually a noise function will return
a random number between −1 and 1 based on a sampling point. This point can be
in any arbitrary dimension, in our system we use a 2D noise function. This is the
case as we are sampling based on our terrain mesh, which is a 3D grid. From the
mesh, we are taking the vertex positions to sample from the noise function (or for
the fractional brownian motion), however only using the xz-values. Other than the
above mentioned properties of noise functions, they also have other advantages to
them, this is in the context of procedural noise functions.
A procedural noise function is much more compact, requiring very little space com-
pared to noise images[Lag+10]. It is also, continuous, multi-resolution and not based
on discretely sampled data[Lag+10], meaning that it can produce random values at
any resolution and any scale. A procedural noise function is randomly accessible,
meaning that it can be sampled from in constant time, no matter the sampling loca-
tion. This advantage of randomly accessible, makes it particularly well suited for the
power of parallelism of GPUs and CPUs[Lag+10].
There exists multiple classifications of procedural noise functions, this includes: lat-
tice gradient noises, explicit noises and sparse convolution noises. However the two
procedural noise functions, we have used are both of the same type, lattice gradient
noises, and we will therefore only be discussing that specific type. A lattice gradient
noise generates noise by interpolating random values and/or gradients defined at the
points of the integer lattice[Lag+10].
To generate more believable terrain, we utilize fBm’s, that combine multiple layers
of noise such that the resulting curve has some self-similarity but still has some
perceived randomness. To calculate the fBm, we take a summation of the noise value
on a sampling point while multiplying a amplitude parameter to the noise value on
each layer, and a frequency parameter on the sample point. This can be seen in
equation 3.1, where the sampling point is s, the amplitude is a, the frequency is f
and n is the amount of octaves.
fBm(x, y) =
n
∑
i=1
ai ∗noise(f i ∗sx, f i ∗sy)
(3.1)
3.4.1.1
Perlin Noise
Perlin noise is a type of lattice gradient noise and is a relatively simple algorithm.
The basis around the noise function is a lattice grid, which can be seen in figure 3.4.
For each grid point, there is a gradient vector pointing in a random direction, these
vectors are the purple vectors in figure 3.4.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Design and Tools
Figure 3.4: Lattice grid for perlin noise with random vectors at grid points[Hut17]
For every sample point we want to calculate its noise value for, we evaluate the
function using the four neighbouring grid points. This can be seen in figure 3.5, where
the blue dot is the sampling point and again, the purple vectors are the random
gradient vectors.
Figure 3.5: Evaluating the noise function, the blue dot is the sampling point[Hut17]
For each of the neighbouring grid points, we calculate the dot product with the
difference vector. The result of this step will contribute to the value of the final noise
value. In figure 3.6, we can see the difference vectors, shown in pink.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Terrain Generation
21
Figure 3.6: The difference vectors shown as pink vectors and the purple vectors are
the random gradient vectors[Hut17]
We can then see the contribution of a single gradient vector based on its dot
product with the difference vector from the lattice grid point to the sample grid
point. We use a drop off filter to gradually drop the value to zero at unit distance,
this filter is calculated as the product of two quintic drop-off curves. In the function
in equation 3.2, the P is the sample point and Q is the lattice grid point.
filter = f(1 −abs(P.x −Q.x)) ∗f(1 −abs(P.y −Q.y))
(3.2)
f(t) = 6t5 −15t4 + 10t3
(3.3)
From the function in equation 3.2 & 3.3, we get the grid in figure 3.7, where we
have isolated the contribution of a single gradient vector when applying the drop-off
filter with the dot product. The yellow color represents a positive value, where the
blue represents a negative value. Gray is zero, caused by the drop-off function.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Design and Tools
Figure 3.7: The contribution of the gradient vector in relation to the dot product
of the difference vector with sample point P[Hut17]
Finally we can see the total contribution of all the gradient vectors where over-
lapping vectors have been interpolated between, this is the final noise map. This can
be seen in figure 3.8, again yellow is a positive value and blue is a negative value.
Figure 3.8: Final Noise field[Hut17]
The contribution of each gradient vector is then interpolated between, which re-
sults in the final noise value, which is then returned by the function.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Terrain Generation
23
3.4.1.2
Simplex Noise
In 2001, Ken Perlin improved his Perlin noise function, to be more hardware eﬀicient
and remove some of the drawbacks of Perlin noise. This new and improved noise
function is Simplex Noise[Per].
Simplex noise is not much visually different than
Perlin noise, however is much more computational eﬀicient. Below is a list of some
of the improvements compared to the original noise function[Per].
• Is visually isotropic, which means it is visually uniform in all direction unlike
the original Perlin noise.
• Does not require a look up table to compute good pseudo-random gradients.
• Does not produce visible grid artifacts.
• Does not produce visible artifacts in its derivatives.
• Is cheaper to compute than Perlin noise
• Can be generalized to higher dimensions at low computational cost, although
this is not too important for us.
Much like Perlin noise, the basis of Simplex noise is a grid. The grid consists of
equilateral triangles i.e triangles with equal length sides, this is the case, as the grid
is a simplex grid. This means that we need to fill out the space or grid, with the
simplest most compact shape possible, for 2D, that is a triangle with equal length
sides[Gus05]. For 2D, this will look like the grid in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Simplex grid with the equilateral triangles[Gus05]
Instead of interpolating between each gradient vector in the grid, which perlin
noise does. Simplex noise instead uses a summation of each of the corner points.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Design and Tools
This means that the entire calculation of each noise value can be boiled down to a
sum of three terms (in 2D). An example of this is given in figure 3.10. In the example,
the point P, gets it contributions, only from the grid points marked in red.
Figure 3.10: Example of a noise value calculation[Gus05]
Finally one needs to figure out which simplex a sample point is in. This can be
done by skewing the grid, such that it forms the regular grid from perlin noise. You
can then simply take the integer part of sample point to get the current grid square,
similarly to how it is done in Perlin noise. By then taking the magnitude of each
coordinate in the sample point, we can figure out which simplex the sample point is.
An example of this can be seen in figure 3.11
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Terrain Generation
25
Figure 3.11: The skewed grid and simplex pinpoint[Gus05]
3.4.1.3
Fractional Brownian Motion (fBm)
Our terrain generation system is heavily dependant on Fractional Brownian Motions,
which uses a noise function to generate height data for the terrain. This method has
been explained shortly in section 2 and earlier in this section about noise. One of the
first to note the similarities between fBms and nature was Mandelbrot[Ebe+03], he
found that with the correct parameters the resulting trace of a one dimensional fBm,
resembled a jagged mountain range. He then reasoned that this would also translate
well in to two dimensions, which should result in a surface that resembled a mountain
range. Which it did.
Our system has been heavily inspired by the methods explained in a paper by Gabriel
Costa Backes et al.[BEP18], as well as the GDC talk by Sean Murray from Hello
Games, who created the game No Man’s Sky[Mur17]. However first, we will go over
the base fBm and explain what each of the parameters control, see equation 3.1, for
the base equation.
We use several standard parameters to control the terrain shape, amplitude and
frequency.
However they do not stay static over each octave.
For amplitude we
multiply a gain g ∈[0, 1] on it. In the same fashion, we multiply a frequency with
a lacunarity l. So for each octave the parameters change as per the equations below
(see equations 3.4).
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Design and Tools
ai = ainitial ∗gi
(3.4)
fi = finitial ∗li
(3.5)
These parameters allows us to control the roughness of the terrain. By increasing
the gain we will make the terrain more flat, while increasing it will give more distinct
features. Already by using only these parameters, we can create a terrain that looks
like a very rough mountainous area. In figure 3.12 is an image of a terrain generated
simply from the base fBm. We can already see the base terrain is taking shape.
Figure 3.12: Image of a terrain created with the base fBm. The terrain is 4 × 4km.
From the base terrain we also add two novel noise modifications, these are billow
noise and ridge noise. Billow noise is simply the absolute value of the returned noise
value and can bee seen in equation 3.6 and results in a terrain which produces terrain,
with large boulder like structures (see figure 3.13(a)). Ridge noise is the complement
of billow noise (see equation 3.7), and produces sharp mountainous terrain (see figure
3.13(b)). The modified noise functions are linearly interpolated between based on a
sharpness scale Ss ∈[−1, 1] (see equation 3.8). We have made it such, that the user
can control if the sharpness scale is random (using a noise function) or if it should be
a static value.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Terrain Generation
27
Nb(v) = |N(v)|
(3.6)
Nr(v) = 1 −Nb(v)
(3.7)
N(v) =
{
lerp(N(v), Nb(v), |Ss|)
Ss >= 0
lerp(N(v), Nr(v), Ss)
Ss < 0
(3.8)
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Design and Tools
(a) Terrain created with billow noise
(b) Terrain created with ridge noise
Figure 3.13: Image of terrain using billow and ridge noise
The final height is then given by multiplying the result of the fBm by the absolute
value of the fBm powered by another scalar Se. The scalar controls the amount of
valleys and mountains on the terrain. Higher values of Se will cause the terrain to
have more abrupt changes in heights. We also multiply an height multiplier h, which
changes the range of the result from the fBm from [−1, 1] to [−h, h]. The final output
is seen in equation 3.9.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Terrain Generation
29
H(v) = fBm(v) × |fBm(v)|Se × h
(3.9)
To further improve the base terrain, we introduce procedural erosion, as presented
in the paper by Gabriel Costa Backes et al.[BEP18]. To start off, we introduce a
altitude erosion, meaning that at lower height values, we remove some of the finer
details of the terrain. This will result in smoother valleys. To accomplish this we damp
the amplitude based on the current noise sum δ, this is done by linearly interpolating
between the current gain and a gain that has been multiplied with the max value
of either 0 or the noise sum (see equation 3.10).
We also introduce another user
controlled parameter, altitude factor Ea, which controls how much we dampen the
amplitude with. The result of this are smooth valleys in between mountains (see
figure 3.14).
alti =
{
ainitial
i = 0
alti−1 × lerp(gi, gi × max(0, δi), Ea)
i > 0
(3.10)
Figure 3.14: A generated terrain using altitude erosion. Notice the large valleys
between jagged mountains. The terrain is 4 × 4 km.
Next we add slope erosion (see equation 3.11). This addition is related to how
steep the terrain is, we can get the steepness by looking at the analytical derivatives
of the noise. The steepness of the terrain is represented by the sum of gradients in the
noise field at v (the sampling point), and is given by the variable Gi(v) (see equation
3.12). The result of this can be seen in figure 3.15, which looks like a long mountain
range.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Design and Tools
sloi =
1
1 + (Gi(v) · Gi(v))
(3.11)
Gi(x, y) =
{
(0, 0)
i = −1
Gi−1 + ( ∂N(x,y)
∂x
, ∂N(x,y)
∂y
) × Es
i >= 0
(3.12)
Figure 3.15: Terrain with the slope erosion applied. The terrain is 4 × 4 km.
Finally we perturb the sampling location with the derivative multiplied with an
perturb scale pf, the scale will determine how ”wavy” the terrain will look. This
was inspired by the methods used for No Man’s Sky’s terrain generation[Mur17]. By
perturbing the sampling position, it generates snake like features, similar to rivers
going through the terrain (see figure 3.16).
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Terrain Generation
31
Figure 3.16: The generated terrain with perturbed sample position
In the analysis section we will present some different augmentations of the final
fBm, to better highlight the different kinds of terrain it can generate.
3.4.2
Physical Erosion
Although fully procedural methods can generate very believable terrain, it can not
fully reproduce natures own processes to form a terrain. Therefore we will highlight
one type of physical simulation to shape a terrain. That is hydraulic erosion or ero-
sion with water. Erosion is a physical process, that removes soil, sediment, rocks
and so on from one spot and then moves it to another location, where the removed
sediment is deposited. Some natural agents of erosion are: rainfall, the bedrock at
rivers, coastal erosion by the sea and waves and so on.
For our hydraulic erosion, we will simulate rainfall.
Our implementation and de-
sign was inspired by Sebastian Lague[Lag19] and E-DOG[E-D11], they use a particle
based method to simulate hydraulic erosion. Although the method produces very
interesting terrains, it has a major drawback with it, mainly that it doesn’t work
in an tileable terrain setting. It is still a method which was implemented and gave
good results. We will discuss in the implementation section (see section 4.2.4) why it
doesn’t work in an tileable terrain setting.
At a very high level, the method works by dropping a water droplet at a random
location on the height map. The water droplet will then begin to roll down a gradi-
ent (if possible) and collect sediment while also beginning to dissipate via evaporation.
When the water droplet has reached a certain limit or is stuck in a pit, it will deposit
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Design and Tools
some of its sediment and continue. This process can switch and happen many times
in a water droplets life cycle, eventually the droplet becomes stuck in a pit or reaches
a large flat area, where it will evaporate and deposit its sediment.
When a water droplet is placed on a random location on the height map, we get
the neighbouring height values to calculate the gradient. The gradient is calculated
via a bilinear interpolation, based on the old position (the water droplets position) and
the neighbouring height values. This can be seen in equation 3.13, where u, v ∈[0, 1[
is the slight offset for the random position of the droplet in a grid cell and P is the
different neighbouring points.
g(posold) =
(
(Px+1,y −Px,y) · (1 −v) + (Px+1,y+1 −Px,y+1) · v
(Px,y+1 −Px,y) · (1 −u) + (Px+1,y+1 −Px+1,y) · u
)
(3.13)
After finding the gradient, we can then move the water droplet in that direction.
This is simply done by subtracting its current direction with the gradient, while also
taking in to account its inertia pinertia ∈[0, 1]. Inertia controls the degree of turning
of the droplet, higher values makes it take more twists and turns, while smaller values
will make it move more in the same direction no matter the gradient (see equation
3.14). The new direction is then normalized, to make sure we always move one unit
at a time. The new direction is simply added to the current position.
dirnew = dirold ∗pinertia −g(posold) ∗(1 −pinertia)
(3.14)
Given the droplets new position, we need to calculate the height difference between
the new and old position. The height is calculated with a linear interpolation based on
the four neighbouring points (see equation3.15). If the height difference is negative,
we know that the new position is lower than the old position and we need to calculate
a new carry capacity c (see equation 3.16) based on its velocity, current water amount
and its current capacity. We use a minimum capacity variable to make sure that a
water droplet, can always erode a very small amount.
If the height difference is
positive, the new position is higher than the old position and we need to deposit
sediment to fill the pit, the droplet is in. We also deposit sediment when a water
droplets maximum capacity has been reached.
h = Px,y∗(1−u)∗(1−v)+Px+1,y∗u∗(1−v)+Px,y+1∗(1−u)∗v+Px+1,y+1∗u∗v (3.15)
c = max(−hdiff ∗pspeed ∗pwater ∗pcapacity, pminCapacity)
(3.16)
If a water droplet carries a surplus of sediment, we will deposit some of that at
the old position (see equation 3.17). And if the droplet has less sediment than the
maximum capacity, we will erode some sediment away from the old the position (see
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Terrain Generation
33
equation 3.18). Here we also make sure that we never erode more than the height
difference, which otherwise would result in pits in the terrain. To control how much
we erode and deposit, two parameters are introduced: perosion and pdeposit.
(sediment −c) ∗pdeposit
(3.17)
min((c −sediment) · perosion, −hdiff)
(3.18)
When depositing sediment, if the height difference is positive, we add height to the
terrain based on the amount of sediment the water droplet has. If the height difference
is negative and the water droplet has reached its maximum sediment capacity, we only
add a fraction of the current sediment the water droplet. The same amount that the
water droplet has deposited, is also removed from the droplet itself. We only deposit
sediment at the grid points that contain the water droplet. However when we erode
from the terrain, it is based on a radius pradius. Meaning that we take sediment from
all grid points in a radius around the water droplet. Finally we update the droplets
velocity and water capacity (see equation 3.19 and 3.20).
velnew =
√
vel2
old + hdiff · pgravity
(3.19)
waternew = waterold · (1 −pevaporation)
(3.20)
pevaporation controls how quickly the water droplet evaporate and pgravity controls
its velocity, which in turn can determine the sediment capacity. In figure 3.17, we
can see a terrain that has been generated with an fBm and eroded with the method
explained above.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Design and Tools
Figure 3.17: A picture of a terrain generated with a simple fBm, that has been
eroded
3.4.3
Infinite Terrain
For us to fully be capable of producing vast landscapes, with mountains in the horizon,
we needed a way to eﬀiciently create and render only what was necessary. To do that
we made the terrain tileable.
With a tileable terrain, we only want to create and render what is close to the
camera.
We do that by having a render radius and a tile size and simply only
instantiate and render what is within this range. This method also makes us able
to move around in a much larger world without the same performance hit, it would
normally take.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Biomes
35
Figure 3.18: An illustration of an actor moving from left to right, where only green
tiles now are visible.
The challenge by making an infinite tileable terrain, is not the system itself, it is
that every other system has to work within it. Now, every subsystem has to be much
more modular and able to run independently on each tile.
3.5
Biomes
By adding biomes to the terrain, we will be able to easily apply different types of
vegetation and objects and also texture them differently. To generate biomes we use
the Whittaker’s model[Whi62] (see figure 3.19), which classifies biomes using two
simple factors: precipitation and temperature.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Design and Tools
Figure 3.19: The Whittaker model - biome type based on the annual precipitation
and the mean annual temperature[Wika]
To lessen the amount of biomes and the complexity, we simplified the model to
only consist of four different biomes: Tundra, Desert, Forest, Rainforest. To generate
a biome map, we start of by generating a map for precipitation and for temperature.
This is done by using a simple fBm, as outlined in the section about fBms. To make
it easier to sample from the precipitation and temperature map, we convert their
ranges to more relevant values i.e for temperature, we would convert the range to
[−10, 30]. From the two maps we can then generate a biome map, by sampling from
the precipitation and temperature map at a location, we can get the biome i.e a
temperature of 30 and precipitation of 300 would result in a rainforest biome. In
table 3.3 we can see the different temperature and precipitation ranges for all the
biomes. We have taken some liberties on the exact cutoffs for each biome, as they
are loosely defined on the Whittaker model.
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Natural paths
37
Biome
Temperature Range
Precipitation Range
Tundra
−10 - 0
0 - 400
Forest
0 - 20
50 - 400
Rainforest
20 - 35
50 - 400
Desert
0 - 35
0 - 50
Table 3.3: Temperature and precipitation ranges for all the terrain biomes
3.6
Natural paths
One of the many tings to consider when you want to replicate an image in 3D, is
the different types of objects or scenery. One object we found particular interesting
was paths. From our initial research we found that images of landscapes fairly often
contain a path. We wanted to prove that it is doable to implement more complex
objects, like paths, in a procedural generated environment.
We wanted to design a path that looks natural in a landscape, and not artificially
created. In other words, we want to try to replicate paths that hikers and animals
use in nature. With this in mind, we want to avoid large slopes and prefer flatter
areas.
To create paths, we need a start and end position, and a way of connecting them.
As we are creating terrain one tile/mesh at a time, we don’t have information beyond
the current spawned tiles. To simplify this problem, we solved it on one mesh first.
For finding start and end points we had several iterations, but all came down to
finding two good vertices at the edge of the mesh. The final process is illustrated
in figure 3.20. We define good or natural vertices as vertices in relatively flat areas
with no steep slopes, to try and mimic places where natural paths are worn into the
landscapes by animals and hikers.
In the end we picked a random side of the mesh, selected the best vertex for a
path by looking at k0 random vertices along the edge, and choosing the vertex with
the most flat surrounding area. The endpoint was picked the same way, but with
a minimum distance to the starting point, afterwards the two vertices is connected
using a preferred pathfinding algorithm.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Design and Tools
Figure 3.20: The process of finding a ”natural” path.
Pathfinding was done through a couple of iterations, first by using Dijkstra’s
shortest path algorithm. Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm creates a shortest path
tree, by exploring neighbouring nodes until all nodes are explored or the destination
has been found.
This is a greedy algorithm, which insures that we get the best
possible path, but it searches a lot of nodes, and can take a long time, the theoretical
time is O(V 2) where V is the amount of nodes. The graph we use to represent nodes
and edges is the actual mesh we have generated for the terrain, where we view each
vertex as a node in the pathfinding graph. There are many ways we could design the
edges, but we take a classical approach and look at the 8 nearest neighbour vertices
with the weight 1 to the horizontal and vertical edges and
√
2 for the diagonal edges,
at least as horizontal distance. Because we are dealing with 3D space, we will also
add a cost for steepness, further will explained in section 4.4. Examples of different
ways of designed edges in a pathfinding problem in a dynamic environment can be
seen in figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21: Examples of different ways to choose edges for a pathfinding problem.
We use the classical version, with 8 edges, to the left
Even with enhancements like Adjacency List Representation which takes the the-
oretical time down to O(E · log(V )) where E is the amount of edges, it still takes too
long, even with relative small meshes with sizes 256 × 256 vertices.
==PAGE:51==
3.6 Natural paths
39
A better solution for our use case was to use a different pathfinding algorithm. We
chose to implement A∗, as we did not need to find the best path, only a good enough
path. The cost of any node in a A∗graph system is f(x) = g(x) + h(x), where h(x)
is the estimated cost of going to the goal node (the heuristic) from the current node,
g(x) is the cost of getting to current node from the start node, then f(x) is simply
the summation of both, and is a guess on how good the node is. The algorithm can
be seen in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 A* Graph-Search
1: explored := ∅
2: frontiers := s0;
▷s0 is the initial state
3: loop
4:
if frontiers is ∅then
5:
return failure
6:
end if
7:
Choose node n with lowest f-cost from frontiers
8:
Remove n from frontiers
9:
if n is goal state then
10:
return solution
11:
end if
12:
Add n to explored
13:
for all child m of n do
14:
cost = movementcost(current, neighbor) + g(current)
15:
if m ∈explored∧cost less than g(m) then
16:
Remove m from explored
17:
end if
18:
if m ∈frontiers∧cost less than g(m) then
19:
Update g cost of m
20:
end if
21:
if m ̸∈frontiers ∧m ̸∈explored then
22:
Add m to frontiers
23:
end if
24:
end for
25: end loop
When designing a pathfinding problem using A*, it is important that you define
a good heuristic and that tries to predict the cost left, based on the path you want
the agent to take. If you want to find the actual shortest path, it is also important
that you remember your heuristic should be admissible, thus never overestimating
the cost of the remaining path.
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Design and Tools
3.7
Texturing
When doing procedural generation, one of the many challenges is texturing. Modern
tools to create large landscapes in games or even movies, uses terrain tools where
you can sculpt and paint textures using layered shaders, this applies at least both to
Unreal Engine and Unity. Other professional software like Terragen uses an approach
similar to the one we are taking more in the area of auto texturing [FGT15]. This is
not an area with a lot of research as the concept is very simple, but nonetheless it still
requires a lot of trial and error to get the look and feel that you require. The limits of
auto texturing is mostly the quality of the textures used and the rules defined. Rules
are of course finite, and thus can’t possibly explain every scenario in real life, which
is why it is important to make good assumptions.
As we use auto texturing, it also means that we should be able to texture the en-
tire generated terrain, by only using 1 single shader. We wanted to prove that you
are able to mimic natural terrain textures with a procedural generated environment,
without using texture paintings and other static tools. We designed the shader with a
minimum of 2 requirements in mind: Textures should change given an altitude range
and textures should change given an steepness angle range.
As we are limited to Unity’s tools, we are using shader graph to make the texture
shader. A simplified version on the overall design idea of the shader can be seen in
figure 3.22.
Figure 3.22: The overall design idea of the terrain texture shader, simplified.
We designed the terrain shader to be capable of handling 4 different kinds of tex-
tures depending on the height and angle of targeted fragment. The 4 different textures
can be anything the user provides but we refer to them as: Sand, Grass, Earth and
Rock. The shader can be viewed as a stack of textures on top of each other, and a set
of rules to keep track on what textures to show, an illustration can be seen in figure
3.23.
==PAGE:53==
3.8 Object placement
41
Figure 3.23: Example textures with rules below them. This shows what texture
will be drawn on the procedural generated terrain.
To make the texture as realistic as possible we also included normal maps, metallic
maps and ambient occlusion maps, to make it even better and more life-like, you could
add other details such as bump and displacements maps.
Due to performance and engine limitations, we had to manage the increasing
amounts of textures. We used Unity’s Texture2DArrays [Tecc], to store all the tex-
tures we were using, while maintaining their Mipmaps. Texture2DArrays are similar
to texture atlases [Wikb], and both are ways to trick the GPU to not do computa-
tional expensive texture swapping. Another trick to minimize the amount of textures
is also to have different masks on one texture, some of the texture maps from Quixel
is also made this way, which is why the shader also needs to be able to handle that.
The combination of Texture2DArrays and texture masks, makes the shader able to
handle as many textures as we would want to implement.
Besides the shader used for the procedural generated terrain, we also made a
smaller and simpler shader for texturing water. Water behaves more like a new object,
than of terrain itself. Water is placed at a fixed height, and created on generated tiles
which is partly or entirely below that height. We did this small thing to try and not
break the realistic look we are trying to achieve.
3.8
Object placement
In this section we wanted to show different methodologies regarding object placement.
Starting from a very simple low level direct translation of pixel values, to a more
complex system with a lot of versatility.
We wanted to prove that we could transfer information from 2D images to 3D
very easily, just by making a few assumptions. This was not meant to be perfect,
but only to prove that it was possible. For this we used a randomly selected satellite
image containing some amount of trees.
By using a simple threshold based segmentation method, like k-means, we could
differentiate trees from non trees by tweaking the values to fit the input image, and
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Design and Tools
highlight the cluster containing trees while hiding all others. The pre-processing can
be seen in figure 3.24.
Figure 3.24: Pre-processing of 1st iteration object-spawner using k-means to sepa-
rate trees from satellite image.
After getting a matrix of only 0 and 1, or black and white, it only needed to be
translated into a 3D environment. We made a script in Unity which translated the
black and white image, into a grid where we placed trees at all the white spots, if
there was enough room for it. The same image from figure 3.24 can be seen in 3D in
Unity in figure 3.25.
Figure 3.25: Translating the last image in figure 3.24, to a 3D environment by
spawning simple trees where there is enough white.
This example was highly configured for this single task, and would not work for
general imagery, not even of similar images, but it does show that it is indeed possible
to take information from a 2D image and translate it into 3D.
We needed a better approach to both reading the image and placing the objects.
Furthermore, we do not consider satellite images our targeted set, and we do not need
to have a 1-to-1 placement of the objects in the image.
==PAGE:55==
3.8 Object placement
43
In section 4.1.1 we explain how we get information from images using a Deep
Learning Semantic Segmentation Model.
Regarding object placement we considered several different approaches, mainly a
noise based approach or using Poisson disk sampling [M19]. We decided we wanted
more control, and a little less randomness, so we decided to go with a poisson disk
sampling approach. It is however important to note that both methods can work,
and it depends very much on how you implement it. We will discuss this further in
section 4.6.
3.8.0.1
Poisson disk sampling
Poisson disk sampling is a way of placing indefinitely many samples or objects in a
similar distance to each other, but without any pattern. For any sample s it will be
no further away than 2r, where r is radius, to it’s nearest neighbour, and at least r.
An illustration of Poisson disk sampling can be seen in figure 3.26.
Figure 3.26: Two-dimensional sample pattern from the algorithm and corresponding
periodogram averaged over many runs [Bri07].
We use Poisson disk sampling to spawn all objects, from big rocks and trees, to
small flowers and bushes. We do spawn objects in a hierarchy, so larger objects get
spawned first, then smaller and smaller. We are thus performing as many Poisson
disk samples as there are different types of objects, and layer them on top of each
other.
We define different types of objects, as objects that should behave the same in
the object spawner. They should at least have the same size and density. Different
types used are: Tree, Rock, Medium Plants, Small Plants, Flowers, where plants also
includes smaller stones.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Design and Tools
By doing it this way, we insure all objects will spawn, with a density that we
control, and that can be changed according to input parameters. We are aware of
obvious improvements, especially to place smaller objects like flowers and mushrooms.
This method does not work well to make smaller clusters or groups of objects, more
on that in Future Work section 6.3.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
4.1
Computer vision
As mentioned in the computer vision design section 3.3, we tried different methods to
extract information from an image or photograph, to later transfer into 3D. We found
a well performing deep learning model, that was trained to a data-set, containing
many useful objects found in nature. The model we found was a pre-trained Semantic
Segmentation Model, and we did little to no configuration to the model. Instead we
will focus on how we extracted the relevant information and how it is used to generate
various landscapes, containing different objects.
4.1.1
From Segmentation model to 3D landscape
The information we get from the segmentation model is a segmented image of with
each color representing a different class. You can see another example in figure 4.1.
There you can see that it decently segments different parts of the image.
Figure 4.1: Semantic Image Segmentation of a landscape.
However, we need to translate the segmented image into information that we can
pass into our terrain and object spawner in Unity. To get extractable information
from the segmented image, we translate it into percentages covered of each class. In
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Implementation
the example in figure 4.1, we write the following values to a JSON file: Sky: 0.25,
Tree: 0.29, Grass: 0.11, Earth: 0.09, Mountain: 0.11, Plant: 0.06, Path: 0.100.
Most of these classes we transfer directly to the object spawner as numbers, but
non-objects like mountains and paths we send to the terrain generator. The path we
simply enable as a boolean flag, if it is the segmented image, but we use the amount
of mountain to decide what preset we should use for the terrain.
At this state of our implementation, it is the only thing we are extracting from the
image. We are aware that we loose spatial information, and we know the model is not
a perfect representation of what is on the image. Another issue is that we actually
do not do image classification, on the image as a whole, which leads us to not know
what kind of landscape we are looking at, thus making it hard for the procedural
generated terrain to adapt automatically. We adapt to this by changing the type of
landscape manually and pretend we know what kind of landscape it is, as we know
there exists deep learning classification models that can achieve it [Bha20]. We will
elaborate on this in future work section 6.1.
4.2
Terrain Generation
In this section we will discuss how we implemented the different solutions/designs
mentioned in the design chapter 3. We will also explain how we implemented an
infinite terrain system, which can generate an ”infinite” amount of tiles around a
follower object. The terrain mesh is also a component that will be explained in this
section. Another part of the system is the pipeline between the CPU and GPU, that
we will also go in to detail about in this section. Since we are using Unity’s game
engine, there will be a lot of Unity specific components mentioned as well.
4.2.1
Terrain mesh
Since we are manipulating meshes with the terrain generation, it was advantageous to
create our own meshes with code, such that we had more control over it. To generate
a terrain mesh, we create a plane that has a resolution which determines the width
and height. Let us say that we create a mesh that has a resolution of 256, this gives
us a plane that is 256 × 256 and has 65.536 vertices. Looping over each vertex, we
add that vertex to a list as well as the uv. The position of each vertex is given by
the loop i.e if the loop is at x = 5 and y = 3, the vertex position is at V (5, 0, 3). The
y-position is set to zero, since we will change this later when implementing the fBm
function. For each vertex we add, we also add the square that it is part of, where
each square is made up of two triangles (see figure 4.2).
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Terrain Generation
47
Figure 4.2: The square triangles
Once every vertex has been looped through, we have three lists: one for vertices,
one for the triangles consisting of vertex indexes and one list of UVs. We then use
Unity’s native mesh game object to create a mesh object. And finally return that
mesh to the main terrain generator class in our system.
4.2.2
Noise
As we only use noise on the GPU, we had to implement it in the native shading
language (HLSL), which is a C-like high level shading language used for program-
ming shaders on DirectX[Mic21]. As to not having to implement Simplex and Perlin
noise again, we used the implementations done by Stefan Gustavson[GB21] and Inigo
Quilez[Qui17]. They have implemented a version of Simplex and Perlin noise with
derivatives in GLSL. We translated their implementation to HLSL and incorporated
into our generation pipeline. To get a better foundation we will explain how the
implementation works.
For Perlin Noise, it starts of by getting the lower left corner of the square, in
which the sample point is in. This is done by taking the floor(float2 p) of the
sample point, which simply returns the closest integer (rounded down) to the float
from the input. We then calculate the drop off filter value, where the input value
is the fractional part of the sample vector fract(float2 p). To also calculate the
derivatives for Perlin noise, we also calculate the partial derivative (see equation 4.1),
which is derived based on the quintic function[Qui08].
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Implementation
u′(t) = 30 · t2 · (t2 −2t + 1)
(4.1)
We now get the pseudo-random gradient vectors for the lattice square with the
sampling point. This is done by using a hashing function, which takes a vector and
returns a pseudo-random vector (see appendix D [Qui13]). To get each contribution
of the lattice square corners, we take the dot product with relation to the fractional
part of the sampling point. Finally we interpolate between the contributions, as well
as calculate the analytical derivative, also done with an interpolation.
The implementation for simplex noise start off by skewing the sampling point, which
is needed to find the correct simplex cell the sampling point is in. The next step is
to figure out which equilateral triangle the sampling point is in, higher or lower (see
figure 3.10). This is done by taking the fractional part of the skewed sampling point,
and determine if the x-component is higher than the y-component. We then create
a vector, based on this, which is either a (1, 0) or (0, 1) that will determine the order
at which we traverse the simplex triangle.
It is now possible to calculate the three grid points the simplex triangle is made
of, where the grid points are from the unskewed grid.
Given the grid points, we
can get the vectors pointing from the grid points to the sampling point, simply by
subtracting the grid points from the sampling point. As well as get the gradients of
each gradient point, by hashing their respective indices. Each gradients contribution
is then calculated by taking the dot product of itself and the grid point vectors. We
also check if any of the grid points should be outside a simplex boundary. If that is
the case that contribution is set to 0. The final noise value is then calculated with a
dot product between the contributions of the grid point and the radial weights from
the corners to the power of 4. We also calculate the analytical derivatives.
4.2.3
Fractal Brownian Motion (fBm)
Our fBm implementation is a simple function that is called from the compute shader
that calculates all the heights for the terrain. The function takes a long list of param-
eters that control how the terrain shape will look (see table 4.1). Before we loop over
the octaves in the fBm, we translate the sampling position by the input offset and
multiply the scale on it. The octave loop, begins by sampling from the noise function
where we multiply the sampling position uv with the frequency as well as add the
derivative perturbation. We then calculate the simple noise variations (billow and
ridge noise, see equation 3.6 and 3.7). The next step is to determine if we should use
a random S value or a static, to determine the amount of billow or ridge noise we add
to the base noise value. If a random value of S is used, we sample a noise function
a second time, with a lower scale (to zoom in on the noise field) as well as a slight
(randomly selected) offset to decouple the two noise samples slightly.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Terrain Generation
49
With the S parameter, we determine how much billow or ridge noise, we should
add to the base noise function, this is done with the built-in lerp(a, b, t) func-
tion. We now calculate the slope erosion (see equation 3.11, based on the derivative
from the noise function. Finally we calculate the noise sum, with the interpolated
noise value and multiply both the amplitude and the slope erosion.
At the end of the octave loop, we also recalculate the derivative perturbation, which is
a sum of the derivative multiplied with a scalar to dampen the amount of pertubation.
The amplitude is also recalculated (see equation 3.10), the frequency (see equation
3.4) as well as the derivative gradient (see equation 3.12). This entire process is done
over all the octaves, we finally return the final noise sum to the main kernel in the
compute shader.
List of parameters for the terrain fBm
float2 SamplePos
The sampling position
int Octaves
The amount of octaves, default is 10
float scale
The noise scale, higher values will ”zoom” out of the noise
float persistance
Controls the amount of change the amplitude gets
float lacunarity
Controls the roughness (frequency) of the noise
float offsetX
A offset on the x-axis, to get seamless transistions between terrain tiles
float offsetY
A offset on the y-axis, to get seamless transistions between terrain tiles
float E_s
The slope erosion parameter
float E_a
The altitude erosion parameter
bool useRandomS
A flag to control if the fBm should use a random S value
float _S
The S value, if no random value should be used
Table 4.1: The parameters for the terrain fBm
Besides the function parameters there are some variables, that are set in the
fBm function (see table 4.2). These parameters are set, since they provide a base
foundation for the terrain generation.
List of pre-set variables in the terrain fBm
float amplitude = 0.5
The initial value for amplitude
float frequency = 0.001
The initial value for the frequency
float perturbFeatures = 0.1
The scalar for the pertubation of the derivatives
Table 4.2: The set variables in the terrain fBm
In section 5.1 there are a few different types of terrain that this fBm will produce.
4.2.4
Erosion
The implementation for our hydraulic erosion was inspired by Sebastian Lague’s
video[Lag19].
We start of by initializing a list of weights and their indices.
The
weights are used later, when we are eroding the terrain as they determine how much
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Implementation
sediment we remove from the terrain. To easily get random indices for the water
droplets, we also initialize a list with a lot of random indices. This is all done on the
CPU, and we therefore need to transfer it over to the GPU. We do this by initializing
a ComputeBuffer, that is set by giving it the amount of elements it needs and how
large each element is in Bytes. Once on the GPU, we create a new WaterDroplet
using the random indices we created earlier. We then set its initial values, and start
its lifetime loop.
To calculate the gradient and height for the current water droplet position, we then
get the exact grid point it is nearest by rounding to the nearest integer and also get
the fractional part of the random position of the water droplet. This also gives us the
index for the grid point on the terrain mesh. We then calculate the height and gra-
dient (see equation 3.13), which is then returned as a structure HeightAndGradient
for easier readability. From the gradient, we calculate a new direction (see equation
3.14) and update the direction for the water droplet as well as taking a step in the
new direction. We then check if the droplet has gone out of bounds, if it has, we
break the loop and the droplet has ”died”. However if not, we continue. We get a
new height from the droplets new position, which is used to determine the height
difference. Which is used to either erode or deposit on the terrain. The new sediment
is also calculated. If the height difference is larger than zero, or if the maximum
sediment capacity is reached, we deposit that sediment on the terrain. This is done
by first, calculating the amount to erode (see equation 3.17), however if the height
difference is larger than zero, we deposit all the sediment a droplet is carrying. This
is done by adding the amount to deposit on to the height at the droplet index as well
as its four neighbours. The same amount that is deposited is also subtracted from
the droplets sediment.
However if the height difference is smaller than zero and the sediment capacity has
not been reached, we will erode sediment away from the terrain. This is done by
first, calculating the amount to erode (see equation 3.18 and then looping through
the droplets radius, determined by the earlier weight list. We recalculate the amount
to erode, based on the weight on terrain node the loop is currently at. We check
the current height on the node to see if we are about to remove more than the cur-
rent height, if that is the case we only remove the current height else we remove the
weighed amount to erode. The amount we erode from the terrain, is then also added
to the droplet. This is done Radius * Radius * 4 times.
Finally we update the water droplets velocity and water capacity (see equations
3.19 and 3.20). This is done a certain maximum amount, determined by a parameter
which is set by the user. A complete list of user controlled parameters can be seen in
table 4.3.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Terrain Generation
51
List of parameters for hydraulic erosion
int resolution
The resolution of the terrain
float initialSpeed
The initial value for water droplets velocity
float initialWaterVolume
The initial value for water droplets water volume
float inertia
The inertia of the water droplet
float sedimentCapacityFactor
The scalar that determines the water droplet capacity
float minSedimentCapacity
The minimum sediment capacity; The water droplet can not go lower than this
float depositSpeed
The speed at which the water droplet deposits its sediment
float erodeSpeed
The speed at which the water droplet erodes the terrain
float gravity
The gravity of the water droplet, determines how fast it erodes the terrain
float evaporationSpeed
The speed at which the water droplet evaporates, also determines how much sediment it can carry.
Table 4.3: The parameters of the hydraulic erosion
A major drawback to the hydraulic erosion method, is that it is independent of
other terrain meshes. Meaning that it would not work for a infinite terrain environ-
ment. As explained earlier, the droplet will disappear once it reaches an edge on the
terrain tile, it will therefore not carry any information over to the next tile. Each
tile will run its own erosion, and therefore produce different results and create visible
seams.
A solution we tried, was to erode each terrain tile independently, and then fix the
seams by interpolating the edge vertices with the neighbours edge vertices. Although
that fixed the seams, it still resulted in visible elevations between the edges i.e it did
not look realistic. This solution also required the seam fixing to run every time a new
terrain tile spawned, as the process of fixing the seams had cascading effects on all
the other terrains. This caused some performance issues that was not ideal.
For above mentioned reason combined with the implementation of infinite terrain
we scrapped using hydraulic erosion.
4.2.5
Infinite terrain
For our proof of concept to work, we needed to implement an infinite terrain generator.
Based on implementations discussed above, we can generate singular terrain tiles with
no issues. However we now need to keep track of these tiles and spawn them at the
correct positions, as well as hide the tiles that are not required anymore.
The first issue, to keep track of them, is solved by utilizing a dictionary data
structure, which stores pairs of (keys, values). For our keys, we use the world
position of the tile, and for the values it is a terrainChunk class, that holds the
game objects needed. We only generate tiles that are within a certain distance to
the follow transform, which we transform in to a number that determines how many
tiles we should generate. For example, if the max distance is 300 and the tile size
(resolution) is 256 we get a chunk amount of 1 (see code 4.1). We generate tiles from
[−chunkNumber, chunkNumber] in both x and y direction.
1
int chunkNumber = RoundToInt(maxDst / resolution)
Listing 4.1: Chunk number calculation
In the beginning it will only generate new tiles, however once tiles have been gen-
erated it uses the dictionary keys to skip those tiles. The look up for this is on average
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Implementation
constant, which means, that theoretically if we were to spawn a large amount of tiles
it wouldn’t affect performance negatively. If a tile already exists in the dictionary, the
system will mostly simply skip it, however if the tile still doesn’t have its neighbour
tiles we check to see if they have been created. Neighbour tiles are used for the path
generation, such that paths can connect between tiles. If a tile exceeds the maximum
distance from the follow transform, we will disable that object making it invisible. If
the follow transform enters the maximum distance again, it will enable it once more.
The class TerrainChunk() controls the entire flow of a terrain chunk generation. Its
constructor will setup all the necessary game objects that are required for it to run:
PlaneCreator(), GrassRenderer and Pathfinding.
It is also within this class, that we have the methods which fixes visible seams, as
explained in the last part of section 4.2.4. Given two terrain tiles that are neighbours,
we get their height difference at the edge vertices, where they meet. We then add
the height difference (if the tile is lower than its neighbour) to the edge vertices and
interpolate towards the tile center. The further towards the tile center, the lower
value we add, this gives a smoother result in the end. We can control how much the
interpolation goes in on the terrain i.e if its 128, it goes 128 vertices inwards on the
terrain tile (see figure 4.3(a)). A side effect to this procedure, is wrong normals at
the edges where two neighbour tiles meet (see figure 4.3(b)). We fix this by looping
over the edge vertices and averaging the normals at the vertices (see figure 4.3). Even
tough we can fix the most obvious issues relating to hydraulic erosion in an infinite
terrain setting, the results of the fix, are not that satisfying as one can still see the
aftermath of the erosion process. With a visible ridge going across the terrain shape.
It is therefore not part of the final terrain generation process.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Terrain Generation
53
(a) Terrain tiles eroded without the seam fix
(b) The same terrain as before, with seams fixed. Notice the still
visible seams caused by wrong normals
(c) The terrain with seam and normal fix; Notice the still visible
seams caused by the terrain shape
Figure 4.3: The terrain after being eroded and fixed at the seams and normals.
Although almost hidden, there are still visible seams at the tile edges, caused by the
erosion
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Implementation
4.2.6
Terrain Presets
To translate the results from the image segmentation to the actual terrain generation,
we have created Scriptable Objects as presets, that hold the correct parameter
values for a specific Biome or terrain type. As mentioned in section 4.1.1, we manually
set what type the terrain should be. By creating these presets, we can easily change
them when required. The presets have parameters, that we found best represent the
general shape of a type of terrain. For example for desert, the general shape is defined
by sand dunes, that do not have much roughness and have sharp peaks, which can
for example be produced by the ridge noise. The different terrain shape presets we
have, can be seen in appendix F. By using these presets, it allows us in the future to
easily add more types of terrain shapes, without needing to completely rewrite the
code for terrain generation.
4.3
Biomes
In this project, Biomes are used to do two things.
Change what type of objects
that can be spawned, and change what kind of texture the landscape can have. Also
as mentioned in section 3.5 we have simplified the amount of biomes to be only 4
biomes. This will also help us limit the sets of both textures and objects. However it
still means that the shader for texturing landscapes, still has to manage 16 (biomes×
textures) different types of textures, and if we include other detail maps like normal,
ambient occlusion and metalness, then we are already at 64 different textures. We
will elaborate further in section 4.5, on how we manage to handle that, and what it
looks like.
To fit into the realm of infinite terrain, we are also generating infinite biomes.
For each terrain tile, there exists an equally sized biome tile, acting as an overlay.
The overlay is saved as a colormap / texture, where each different color represents a
biome. On figure 4.4, you can see 3 biome tiles next to each other with 2 different
biomes stretching across the tiles.
Figure 4.4: 3 biome tiles next to each other, with aligning biome maps. In these
images, the light green is the forest biome, where the yellow is a desert biome.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Natural paths
55
The biome color map is requested by the terrain tile creator and distributed to
both the shader and object spawner for the plane in question.
4.4
Natural paths
Often when dealing with pathfinding problems, you are in a confined 2D space, but
now we are in a limitless 3D space, where we a trying to generate a path based on
what is looking more natural and not just a shortest path.
As described earlier, we have taken on a divide and conquer approach where we
solve a pathfinding problem for each plane individually. But with a terrain generating
infinitely many planes, we need to control where and how paths are made.
There are two ways a path will be created on a plane, either it is the first plane
to be created, or there is a path going from a previous plane to the current. The first
plane is the only plane that has guaranteed to spawn a path, if it is enabled. The
algorithm can be seen in algorithm 2, and a sample of pathfinding in a terrain can
be seen in figure 4.6.
Algorithm 2 Path generation
1: if First plane then
2:
Get best start position
3:
Get best end position
4: else if Neighbouring path then
5:
Get start position at neighbour end position
6:
Get best end position
7: else
8:
return
9: end if
10: A* Pathfinding from start to end
11: return path
We wont get more into depth on how A* search works, the algorithm can be
seen in algorithm 1, but it is important what we use as a cost function. A* uses an
evaluation function f(x) = h(x) + g(x) where g(x) is the step cost and h(x) is the
heuristic. To make this generate natural paths, it is important to avoid steep slopes,
thus the step cost, and potentially the heuristic, must be changed accordingly.
g(x) = hdist · (1 + slopek ∗s)
(4.2)
Where hdist is horizontal distance, k and s are factors you can tweak.
The cost function can be seen in equation 4.2, and there is a couple of things to
notice. It consists of a horizontal distance element, but the main part is the slope. We
calculate the cost of the slope to the power of a factor, to control how steep a slope has
to be before the function will be likely to avoid it where as the other factor s is used
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Implementation
to control how determined it is to avoid any kind of slope. In a small illustration in
figure 4.5, you can see why it is important to make the slope to exponential function
[Joh16].
Figure 4.5: An example of two different slopes, one steep short, and one longer but
less steep. The cost of a short steep slope has a larger cost when using a exponential
cost function.
The heuristic h(x) we have decided to use, use a simple admissible heuristic, the
Manhattan distance.
h(x) =
√
(x0 −xend) + (z0 −zend)
(4.3)
Figure 4.6: A visualization of A* graph search in algorithm 2 with the cost function
as described in equation 4.2. Link to GIF.
As a final touch, we have implemented a variable pathSize which will set the
width of the path. The smallest path will have a pathSize of 1, which means that the
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Texturing
57
path is only 1 vertex wide, by incrementing pathSize by 1, the width will increase by
2, 1 on each side. We use this to smooth the path and altering the terrain a bit, to
simulate natural degradation. Furthermore, we are saving all vertices in a black and
white color map, to pass along to the plane creator and by that the terrain texture
shader and object placement.
By specifically choosing black and white, the pixel
values become all 1’s or all 0’s, because the RGB color space in Unity goes from 0 to
1.
Figure 4.7: Two examples of black and white color maps representing two generated
paths on two different planes.
4.5
Texturing
As mentioned earlier, we are writing shaders in Shadergraph. In Shadergraph you
can split the shader up into smaller parts, called sub-shaders. This is relevant, as
the shader has become quite big and, as described in previous sections, handles all
texturing of all kind on the ground. It must handle texturing different biomes with
different textures and texturing paths, while maintaining the general rules of textur-
ing differently on different heights and angles. The overall structure and process of
texturing the terrain is visualized in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: The structure of the terrain texture shader. The layered boxes indicates
split of texture array into components like albedo, normal, ambient occlusion and
metalness.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Implementation
4.5.0.1
GetIndexFromBiomeTexture
As mentioned in the Biomes section 4.3, a color-map / texture is passed on as an
input parameter to the terrain texture shader for each plane. We have defined 4
indexes and 4 colors, 1 for each biome. To make sure that the color, indexes and
texture all match between the code and the shaders, both index’, colors and texture
is set from the BiomeCreator.
We sample an object position from the biome texture and based on the color of
that position, it returns an index in the range [0; 3] and pass it along.
4.5.0.2
GetTexturesFrom2DTextureArrays
The shader takes in 4 texture arrays as input, one for each type of texture map for
the terrain. In our case the texture map types are albedo, normal, ambient occlusion
and metalness. Each texture array will be sampled with an index. The index is the
textureCount multiplied with biomeIndex, then add texture type to it (a number
between 0 and textureCount depending on if its dirt, grass, rock or sand etc.). By
doing this we sample the correct texture depending on both the texture map type,
the biome and the texture type. A full texture array would look like figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Albedo Texture array of size 16. All textures is part of the same array,
but split up to highlight each biomes texture. The order for each biome is Earth,
Grass, Rock, Sand.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Texturing
59
4.5.0.3
SetHeightSlopeTexture
After getting the correct biomeIndex the shader would now determine from both the
height and the slope of the mesh what texture to use. The overall structure of this
design is seen in figure 3.22, and the same thing happens no matter what biome, it
only operates on a different set of textures.
For each different texture type there are a few parameters which control if it
should be applied or not, see figure 3.23. An example of all different textures being
used at the same time in the same terrain, see figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Left: A sample image showing different kinds of textures at different
heights and slopes. You can also notice the sand texture from another biome.
Right: A top overview of a flat landscape, where flat areas with different textures
are actually different biomes. 1 area is highlighted and the biome color map is show.
Here 3 biomes is on 1 plane.
Biome scale is lower for demonstration purposes.
4.5.0.4
SetPathTexture
When the textures are interpolated together and the terrain is textured appropriately
based on both height and slope (and biome), the texture still needs to be applied to
the path. With the color map input like the one in figure 4.7, this shader will blend
the black and white path color map, with a texture or color we use as the path. This
will allow us to blend the two textures as an overlay, to preserve some of the original
texture. This will make it look more like a natural path carved into the landscape.
An example of a path textured on a terrain can be seen in figure 4.11.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Implementation
Figure 4.11: A sample image showing a path blended onto the terrain using another
texture.
4.6
Object placement
As mentioned in the design section, the method we use for object placement is a
poisson disk distribution, and we use it for each different type of object. The steps
of object placement can be seen in figure 4.12 as a simple flow chart.
Figure 4.12: A simplified flowchart of the object spawner for a single type of object.
Each object type, controlled by a PoissonDiskSpawner(), has a set of tweakable
parameters to adjust the spawn settings, both in regards in what type of terrain
and biome, but also how close they spawn to each other in each biome etc (see
figure 4.13). Notice that they does not spawn in the desert biome as desert is not
==PAGE:73==
4.6 Object placement
61
a part of the list, and that it is possible to tweak some parameters for each biome,
individually. Furthermore you can see on right image that there are some general
rules, that this type of object follows, like if it can rotate, scale, snap to ground or in
what height/slopes it can spawn. Each PoissonDiskSpawner() also contain an object
type tag as seen in the list in section 3.3.2.2, eg. rock, tree or plant, as a reference
to the segmentation models trained classes. Multiple object spawners can have the
same tag. Examples of different objects being spawned can be seen in appendix C.
Figure 4.13: Spawn parameters for big rocks.
Object spawning is controlled by a single manager called SpawnerManager()
this ensures that the correct spawners are instantiated on each terrain tile. For a
PoissonDiskSpawner() to be instantiated, it has to have one of the biomes on the
plane marked as a valid biome. If 1 spawner has more than 1 biome on 1 plane, it
gets instantiated multiple times, but with potentially different parameters. In real
application purposes it should happen rarely that you have multiple biomes on 1
plane. If it is scaled properly, it should not contain micro biomes, like in our example
on figure 4.10.
Before a PoissonDiskSpawner() initiates Poisson disk sampling, it applies the
information from the Segmentation Model. It loads a JSON file, and checks if there
are any objects matching the tag this spawner has been given. If it finds a match it
adjusts the Object Probability, thus adjusts the chance of this type of object spawning.
Each object can still spawn as close to another as before, but there is an adjusted
amount of objects spawning. See figure 4.14 as reference.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Implementation
Figure 4.14: Poisson disk samples adjusted with a different probability.
After doing poisson disk sampling, like in figure 4.14, it begins the process of
spawning objects on all the samples. From a list of objects it randomly picks one of
them and tries to spawn it. Depending on the size of the object and if it collides with
either a path or another object, it spawns it.
Figure 4.15: Simple example of final object spawning, using only to types objects
(rock and tree). On left image you can see there is no trees spawning on the path.
On the right image, notice the few amount of trees on steep slopes.
4.6.1
Biomes and object placement
For each object, we had a preset of parameters for each biome, as seen in figure 4.13.
This made us able to produce vastly different biomes in the same 3D environment.
This was not a goal to achieve this, but a consequence on some of our design choices.
However, it proves the versatility of the tool we have built to generate large worlds
and vastly different environments therein.
In figure 4.16, you can see a small example of a switch between biomes. We are
aware of the potential improvements such as the very abrupt change in environment,
but no further was done as it was not within the scope of the project.
==PAGE:75==
4.6 Object placement
63
Figure 4.16: An example of a transition between biomes with all objects spawning,
the biomes seen are desert and forest. Both images are from the same generated
environment.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Analysis
We will present the results of our implementation, by showcasing what different types
of terrain our system can produce as well as the variety of the terrains.
We will
also discuss some of the issues that arose while implementing it as well as current
issues. We will also discuss how well the generation is compared to a real image of
a terrain, where the image has been segmented. Given a generated terrain, we will
also experiment with feeding it to the segmentation model, to examine the result of
that and compare it to the original segmented image.
5.1
Terrain Variety
We will here highlight some of the different terrain presets that we have created (see
section 4.2.6). We have created four different presets, one for each biome that we
allow to be generated: Tundra, Desert, Forest, Rainforest. For each biome, we have
a preset for a more flat terrain shape and a preset for more mountainous terrain. For
the tundra, forest and rainforest their main difference are the object that we spawn,
however the general terrain shape is more or less the same. However for the desert
biome, both the general shape as well as the objects are different. A note to the
images shown below, is that the terrain may seem barren in the distance. This is due
to LODs from the placed game objects, meaning that it automatically changes the
models to ones with fewer vertices and triangles, to save performance, which is done
by tracking how much space the object take up in the camera frustum. If they are
far enough away they are fully culled, which removes them from the scene completely.
First we have the forest preset, which is characterised by the pine trees that we
spawn as well as a decent amount of vegetation on the forest floor. In figure 5.1(a)
we can see a forest spanning over a large area, with a fairly dense forest and a lot
of vegetation in it. On figure 5.1(b) we can see a path that has been generated with
the implementation explained in section 4.4, giving the whole image a feel of taking
a walk through a forest.
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Pictures of the forest preset
The next terrain preset is the rainforest, where the major difference is the amount
of vegetation. Rainforests are one of the most bio diverse regions on the planet, it
would therefore make sense that it has a lot of different plants and flowers and such.
It should be noted that the species of trees and vegetation, most likely isn’t accurate,
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Terrain Variety
67
and is simply used to differentiate the terrain from the forest terrain preset. It is
diﬀicult to capture the larger terrain, as the trees are so densely packed that it makes
it diﬀicult to look further than a few meters in front of one self. The images in figure
5.2 are very similar in that we are standing in the middle of the rainforest, where one
can see the different flowers and plants that are spawned.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Pictures of the rainforest preset
The next terrain preset is the tundra environment, which is characterised by vast
open fields, with little vegetation and large trees. It is also often in these environments
that we find large mountains. It also has the same types of trees, plants and flowers
as the forest environment, which are usually found nearby each other.
In figure
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Terrain Variety
69
5.3(a) we can see the larger mountains in the background.
The terrain it self is
sparsely populated with trees, rocks and vegetation, as is characteristic of this type
of environment. On figure 5.3(b) we can see a large body of water (lake), which is
also a uncommon occurrence with our terrain generator. Again we can see the same
type of vegetation placement.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Pictures of the tundra preset
Finally we have the desert environment, which is characterised by dead plants and
trees as well as cacti. Our implementation has a more densely populated environment,
that is, there are more plants than you would normally see in a desert. This is done on
purpose to show the difference in vegetation compared to the more lush environment
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Terrain Variety
71
types shown before. On both images in figure 5.4 we can see large dunes of sand,
that are populated with dead trees, rocks and dried plants.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Pictures of the desert preset
If we compare the images to a real terrain, it is evident that we lack some realism
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Analysis
if we look at the whole picture. Due to some limitations to our generator, we can
not generate further than a few kilometers without running in to memory issues (and
time). This can give the interpretation that the terrain is very small. A solution for
this could be to generate terrain chunks in much lower levels of detail i.e a simple
implementation would be to simply skip vertices on the plane mesh, thereby creating
multiple meshes that can be used for LOD groups in Unity. This would allow us to
create much vaster terrains, giving a better sense of an infinite terrain. Another major
part of realism missing is a more complex object placement system. Currently we are
placing trees, plants, rocks and so on, using Poisson disk sampling, which is fine as
a simple method. However in nature, vegetation doesn’t grow at ”random” locations
but are affected by natural interactions such as moisture, light, soil composition and
so on. More complex methods such as those presented by Gasch C. Et al.[Gas+22] can
prove to generate much more natural looking environments. Their method creates
natural outdoor scenes with vegetation, in which they maximise the covered area,
based on a system of inequalities.
Another major pain point of our terrain generation was performance. One of our
goals was to create real time natural scenes, which meant that one could generate the
terrain in run-time and play it while it generates. Although that is possible currently,
it is not enjoyable due to the long computational time of some of the calculations
done for the terrain generation. Further optimization suggestions will be discussed
in the future work section about optimizations (see section 6.4.
Finally it is also evident that the vegetation is not correct compared to the biome
we are generating, which also can give off an unrealistic or confusing sense to the
generated terrain. Providing a more varied array of trees, plant, flowers, rocks and
so on would help create a more realistic scene. This is especially true for the rainfor-
est biome. Procedural vegetation synthesis could also prove to be a viable solution
to this issue. Methods such as L-systems or other procedural plant modeling algo-
rithms could be used in conjunction with a complex vegetation placement algorithm
to generate a growing environment.
5.2
Generation of a terrain based on an segmented
image
In this section we will test our pipeline, by segmenting a landscape image and generate
a terrain based on the result. We will then compare the two landscapes, and analyse if
they are similar in any discernible manner. We expect that it will be very diﬀicult to
capture the same feeling as the landscape image. Since we can not fully control what
the terrain generator creates, it might generate a mountain or produce a lake, which
is not necessarily in the landscape image. And we do not have the same vegetation
as the landscape image has, which again can deter the overall similarity. However
this was not the goal, we wanted to prove that we could obtain information about a
landscape image and recreate some of the same essence of that landscape.
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Generation of a terrain based on an segmented image
73
We decided to showcase 2 different images with somewhat similar, but yet different
terrain. The first image we have chosen to segment and later generate, is in figure
5.5. This is an image of a dense forest with a simple path leading straight forward.
In the segmented image, we see that it captures decently what is in the image, which
mostly consists of trees.
Figure 5.5: Segmented image of a dense forest with a path. Objects segmented are:
Trees (green), earth (brown), path (red) , plant (light green). The JSON generated
can be seen in appendix E.
The generated 3D environment from the image seen in figure 5.5, can be seen in
figure 5.6. The goal for the generation is to get somewhat the same density of the
forest, and a path in it. Getting an appropriate generated landscape for this was not
a diﬀicult task, mostly due to the low level of visibility and the simplicity of terrain
itself.
Figure 5.6: The generated landscape based on the segmentation from figure 5.5
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Analysis
From the first generated image we already see, that it is possible to transfer high
level details, but much harder to transfer low level details, such as the colors, types
of plants/trees, the ground texture etc.
The second image we are trying to segment and translate to a 3D environment
can be seen in figure 5.7. This is a much more open view of a landscape, with a lot
of trees, a little path, but also a huge mountain range. The segmentation captures
all relevant details pretty well, and we again use it to generate a 3D environment.
Figure 5.7: Segmented forest image with both a path and a mountain area. Ob-
jects segmented are: Trees (”dark” green), sky (blue), grass (green), mountain (light
green), path (red), earth (brown), plant (yellow). The JSON generated can be seen
in appendix E.
The generated 3D environment from the image seen in figure 5.7, can be seen in
figure 5.8. The goal this time is to generate a bit more open forest, with a much more
diverse landscape, with mountains at least more steep hills. Getting an appropriate
noise level for the generation of the terrain was not that diﬀicult, as we could use the
contents of the segmented image to select a predefined set of parameters. We had a
preset for a terrain containing mountains and trees (a forest).
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Analysis of a segmented image of an generated terrain
75
Figure 5.8: The generated landscape based on the segmentation from figure 5.7.
Even with a preset terrain, it still required us to pan/walk around in the environ-
ment to find a place with a slope steep enough that we could look over trees, and a
mountain in the background. Here we already begin to notice some of the limitations
of our system. It required a lot of computational power to both render all the objects
and the large generated terrain, thus it was already now diﬀicult to view a mountain
far away, and due to a smaller render distance, to find a large enough mountain in
the first place. Nonetheless, as seen in figure 5.8, we could find a place in the 3D
generated environment which resembles the segmented image pretty decently.
As
with the first generated environment, we also notice here the smaller details being a
lot different from the original image.
Admittedly in both images we found a good spot to take a nice look-a-like image,
but it was still areas that exist in the generated environment, which was what we
wanted to achieve.
5.3
Analysis of a segmented image of an generated
terrain
We also wanted to test the pipeline by passing a image of one of our generated terrains
through the segmentation model and then potentially generate a terrain based on the
result from that.
We choose to try and segment the generated images from figure 5.6 and 5.8, to
try and see what it will be segmented to and compare it to the original. Flaws are
to be expected as the model is not trained on virtual images, but we hope to find
similarities.
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Analysis
In the first image segmented in figure 5.9, we had expected to classify a lot trees,
sky, earth, path, plants and maybe grass.
Figure 5.9: Generated 3D environments segmented from figure 5.6.
From the image in figure 5.9, we compare the distribution of detected classes to
the original images used to generate its 3D environment, see table 5.1.
Class
Original
Synthetic
Tree
0.730
0.432
Earth
0.188
0.280
Path
0.075
0
Plant
0.074
0.197
Sky
0
0.027
Water
0
0.036
Ceiling
0
0.023
Stairs
0
0.003
Table 5.1: Comparing the segmented classes from the original image in figure 5.5
to the generated image in figure 5.9.
It is pretty obvious from table 5.1, that the segmentation mode is not trained on
virtual images. There are some obvious errors in the segmentation of the synthetic
image, like there being absolutely no water, ceiling or stairs, but get classified anyhow.
Comparing the classes actually present, gets us a decent comparison. The values does
clearly not match, but we wouldn’t say that it is too far out. It does however clarify
that it is a less dense forest we have generated, or at least it uses a different kind of
trees with a different shape and a small tree crown, compared to the original.
In the second image segmented in figure 5.10, we had expected to classify mostly
trees, sky, mountain, earth, plants and path if we were lucky.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Analysis of a segmented image of an generated terrain
77
Figure 5.10: Generated 3D environments segmented from figure 5.8.
From the image in figure 5.10, we compare the distribution of detected classes to
the original images used to generate its 3D environment, see table 5.2.
Class
Original
Synthetic
Tree
0.288
0.381
Sky
0.252
0.139
Grass
0.106
0.003
Mountain
0.105
0.22
Path
0.100
0
Earth
0.087
0.172
Plant
0.061
0.047
Wall
0
0.038
Animal
0
0.002
Table 5.2: Comparing the segmented classes from the original image in figure 5.7
to the generated image in figure 5.10.
Similar issues are found with this synthetic segmented image, with obvious errors
such as wall and animal being classified, even though it isn’t there. In this comparison
seen in table 5.2, we actually see a closer match in the classified classes from each
image. The biggest differences is the lack of grass in the synthetic image and the
increased percentage of mountains.
It is clear from both generated 3D environment segmentation’s that the model we
are using is not trained on images of digital nature. Odd classes are being classified,
and classes like path, does not get recognized at all. Alas we are still satisfied, the
original and synthetic images still share some similarities, that extend further than
what we visually can tell.
It is also worth to mention that this comparison only
compares a single image from the generated world, and does not capture the whole
feel of the generated 3D environment.
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Future Work
With a project like this, there is always something you can improve. There is always
ways to expand the project, and add more features or improve current ones. In this
short chapter we expand a bit on some of our thoughts about this project and in what
directions we have researched and considered implementing and why. As we are not
by any means 3D artists, we will not go into how we could visually improve it if it
has no technical character. It is obvious that better 3D models and higher resolution
always results in a better experience when trying to produce a natural and realistic
image.
6.1
Computer Vision
In regards to computer vision and how we achieve information from images there
is a lot that could be done better. And in a field that is constantly evolving and
advancing, it will be impossible to keep up with the latest and greatest. Nonetheless,
with current technologies there are still some improvements do be done in this project.
We are currently using a Semantic Image Segmentation model trained on a large
data set, but we would like for it to be more focused on nature. A lot of the data
from it currently, is images taken in towns and cities. If we could train it on more
data in general, but especially images of different landscapes like forests, mountain
areas, grasslands and so on. This would most likely improve how well it segments an
image, and we could achieve more accurate results from it.
Furthermore this would be a way to create a mode advanced model, by introducing
different kinds of objects.
This will always be somewhere we could improve, but
making the model able to distinguish different kinds of tree species would make a
huge impact.
A way to possibly achieve some form of spatial awareness, maybe the distance
between trees, mountaintops and so on, would be to use instance segmentation [v7l22].
Using that we would be able to distinguish individual trees and other similar objects
from each other, and maybe this will also be better to classify overlapping objects.
Furthermore, a crucial lack of our model is the lack of landscape classification.
At this moment we are setting the landscape type manually to the terrain generation
which is not ideal for an automated process.
One possible solution for this is to support the semantic segmentation model with
a classical machine learning model for classifying landscapes [BR18]. It has already
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Future Work
been proven to work, and there exists plenty of guides on training you own deep
learning model, to do exactly this [Bha20].
Another solution would be to manually make a set of rules which should decide
what kind of landscape it is. Examples could be if the landscape contains mostly of
sand and no water it’s a desert or if it mostly trees with maybe a lake, it’s a forest
and so on. However, this would most likely not be working as well as a deep learning
classification model, but could probably work as a simple start.
To keep the feel of an image, we would also need a way to get the color palette
from the image to actually change the generated objects and terrain.
This could
include interpreting the season (summer, fall, spring or summer), to get the right
colors for leaves and the sky/clouds. However, a lot more research would be needed
for it to succeed.
6.2
Texturing
Texturing has like computer vision multiple points of improvements. Especially im-
proving texture repetition has been a personal goal, as big mountains in the distance,
where you can notice repeating patters, is just not looking as good as it could. There
exists different methods of breaking up textures and trying to minimize repetition, in
particular we looked into breaking the pattern by sampling textures multiple times
and blending it together. We tried to implement a Voronoi based texture variation,
but had different issues with it and did not prioritize to spend too much time fixing
it [DE19][Qui15].
We have also considered and wanted to implement macro variation with a simple
noise based pattern, increasing the amount of different textures and applying multiple
layers to each type. All of this is trying to enhance the quality and reduce the patterns
made by the textures.
6.3
Object spawning
Object or foliage spawning is a big part of a procedural generated landscape, and
can as with the terrain itself, make or break if a terrain is believable or not. This is
a field with very limited research compared to terrain generation, and because it is
dominantly used in game development, it is also of limited academic quality. From
procedural generation know-how, we have however a few suggestions on what we
could improve.
At the moment when we reduce the amount of objects spawned by a poisson
disk spawner, it just randomly deselect samples.
To have a more natural forest
area, it would be more realistic to have patches where multiple trees are missing
instead [Ben20]. A way of achieving this would be to introduce some sort of noise
function, to make patches of missing trees, after the segmentation parameters are
applied. We would test different functions, but we could probably use the same noise
==PAGE:93==
6.4 Optimizations
81
function we use to generate terrain, and just adjust the parameters to better fit this
purpose. It could also be interesting to compare that with another function, like
cellular automaton.
Some objects in nature, like mushrooms and other smaller plants, are also mostly
found in small clusters as they spread using fine threads of hyphae, thus we would
like to introduce the concept of mother plants.
Mother plants would spawn small plants of the same type around it, or plants
which would realistically grow close together. The same concept could be applied to
other objects like rocks, with big rocks layering smaller rocks around it would simulate
pieces that have broken off.
6.4
Optimizations
Our goal was to create a terrain generator that could then be used in real-time for
video games or something similar. It was therefore unfortunate that the performance
of the terrain generator was not that great. We will here present a few improvements
and suggestions for better performance. A large part of the issue, is that when calcu-
lating different aspects of the system i.e the spawn locations for vegetation, we ”lock”
the main thread which produce massive lag spikes. This can be solved by moving the
processes to another thread, which frees up the main thread. However that is not
always possible, since we use some of Unity’s built in methods, which are not thread
safe, meaning they will not allow them to run on other threads. A possible solution
for this would be to use a new technology stack produced by Unity, DOTS[Uni22].
Which is a new multi-threaded data-oriented workflow, that allows the user to write
safe multi-threaded code.
We also had another issue with memory usage. Once the terrain became large enough,
we would be using more than 8-10GB of memory, which is not ideal. A solution for
this would be to spawn objects on demand, rather than all at once. We can still
generate the positions for them, however wait to actually spawn them when they are
needed, i.e when the player moves in range of a certain distance. However this can
produce effects, where the distance can look empty, which can be alleviated with
LOD (levels of detail). This switches models for lower vertex count models, when
they are far enough away from the camera. Visually, it does not look different than
using only high vertex count models, when seeing them from a distance. This will
reduce the overall vertex count and alleviate some pressure from the GPU. LODs is
a simple problem to solve, as this is highly dependant on the models that one uses
for i.e vegetation. For the plane mesh, we could introduce different LODs, where the
lower level LODs are the same mesh, however with vertices that have been skipped.
There are also different rendering optimization techniques that could be utilized to
improve the performance once the terrain has been generated. One of those could
be occlusion culling, which culls (removes) objects that occluded by larger objects in
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Future Work
front of them. This would remove a large amount of objects, that are not in view of
the camera frustum anyway.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project we have been able to extract parameters from landscape images with
a deep learning model and use those to generate a terrain, that has some of the same
qualities as the landscape image. We have implemented a complex system to gen-
erate procedural terrains which can be changed with a number parameters that can
control every thing from the general shape, the biome and how vegetation has to be
spawned. We have shown that the process of extracting meaningful data from images
is less than satisfactory, with the machine learning models that we have today. The
lack of depth and spatial information makes it challenging to transfer the data to a
3D environment and the missing differentiation between different ground types and
vegetation makes it even harder to recreate.
The procedural terrain generator proved to give satisfiable results, being able to cre-
ate vastly different terrain shapes and spawning different types of vegetation based on
different biomes. However due to the lack of variety of assets and textures to spawn,
was not able to fully reproduce the landscape on the segmented images, yet still was
able to capture most of the structural features.
There is room for improvements in both the machine learning model and the ter-
rain generator. We have given a list of optimizations and further studies that can be
done on the system as a whole. Including procedural generating vegetation, train-
ing our own machine learning model, with more precise data and focused on nature
images. As well as creating more complex machine learning models that can classify
biome types besides the object that are in the image.
We estimate the amount of time and effort there would be going into developing
a model that would be suﬀicient in getting the information needed from a landscape,
not to mention data collection and preparation, would at present time be unreason-
able. From experience suspect that it would be much faster to use 100% synthetic
generation, and tweak the generators until you get a similar environment and feel.
==PAGE:96==
84
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX A
Segmented classes list
Wall, building, sky, floor, tree, ceiling, road, bed, windowpane, grass, cabinet, side-
walk, person, earth, door, table, mountain, plant, curtain, chair, car, water, painting,
sofa, shelf, house, sea, mirror, rug, field, armchair, seat, fence, desk, rock, wardrobe,
lamp, bathtub, railing, cushion, base, box, column, signboard, chest, counter, sand,
sink, skyscraper, fireplace, refrigerator, grandstand, path, stairs, runway, case, pool,
pillow, screen, stairway, river, bridge, bookcase, blind, coffee, toilet, flower, book,
hill, bench, countertop, stove, palm, kitchen, computer, swivel, boat, bar, arcade,
hovel, bus, towel, light, truck, tower, chandelier, awning, streetlight, booth, televi-
sion, airplane, dirt, apparel, pole, land, bannister, escalator, ottoman, bottle, buffet,
poster, stage, van, ship, fountain, conveyer, canopy, washer, plaything, swimming,
stool, barrel, basket, waterfall, tent, bag, minibike, cradle, oven, ball, food, step,
tank, trade, microwave, pot, animal, bicycle, lake, dishwasher, screen, blanket, sculp-
ture, hood, sconce, vase, traﬀic, tray, ashcan, fan, pier, crt, plate, monitor, bulletin,
shower, radiator, glass, clock and flag.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Color histograms
Figure B.1: Average color histograms for the other 3 classes in the data set.
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Object Types
(a) Palm like plants
(b) Palm like plants
(c) Tall cactus plants
(d) Dead tree stumps
(e) Rasberry bushes
(f) Large boulders
Figure C.1: Different kinds of objects we are spawning
==PAGE:102==
90
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX D
Vector Hashing
Function
1
float2 VectorHash(float2 x)
2 {
3
int n = (int)(x.x + x.y * 11111.0);
4
5
n = (n << 13) ^ n;
6
n = (n * (n * n * 15731 + 789221) + 1376312589) >> 16;
7
n &= 7;
8
float2 gr = float2(n&1, n>>1) * 2.0 - 1.0;
9
10
return (n >= 6) ? float2(0.0, gr.x) : (n >= 4) ? float2(gr.x, 0.0) : gr;
11 }
==PAGE:104==
92
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX E
Segmentation JSON
==PAGE:106==
94
E Segmentation JSON
1
{
2
"segmentation": [
3
{
4
"objectName": "tree",
5
"probability": 0.7304602396514162
6
},
7
{
8
"objectName": "earth",
9
"probability": 0.18786043829296425
10
},
11
{
12
"objectName": "plant",
13
"probability": 0.07420222991157248
14
},
15
{
16
"objectName": "path",
17
"probability": 0.007477092144047162
18
}
19
]
20
}
Listing 1: JSON file of the segmented forest image in figure 1.
==PAGE:107==
E Segmentation JSON
95
1
{
2
"segmentation": [
3
{
4
"objectName": "sky",
5
"probability": 0.25222222222222224
6
},
7
{
8
"objectName": "tree",
9
"probability": 0.28826666666666667
10
},
11
{
12
"objectName": "grass",
13
"probability": 0.10622222222222222
14
},
15
{
16
"objectName": "earth",
17
"probability": 0.08684444444444445
18
},
19
{
20
"objectName": "mountain",
21
"probability": 0.10546666666666667
22
},
23
{
24
"objectName": "plant",
25
"probability": 0.0608
26
},
27
{
28
"objectName": "path",
29
"probability": 0.10017777777777778
30
}
31
]
32
}
Listing 2: JSON file of the segmented forest image in figure 2.
==PAGE:108==
96
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX F
Terrain Presets
Figure F.1: The different terrain presets we have created
==PAGE:110==
98
F Terrain Presets
Figure F.2: The different terrain presets we have created
Figure F.3: The different terrain presets we have created
==PAGE:111==
F Terrain Presets
99
Figure F.4: The different terrain presets we have created
==PAGE:112==
100
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[22]
What Is Instance Segmentation? [2022 Guide & Tutorial]. May 2022.
url: https://www.v7labs.com/blog/instance-segmentation-guide.
(accessed 04.07.2022).
[AA]
Afshine Amidi and Shervine Amidi. The evolution of image classification
explained. url: https://stanford.edu/~shervine/blog/evolution-
image-classification-explained. (accessed 28.06.2022).
[AI22]
open AI. DALL E 2 Pre-Training Mitigations. June 2022. url: https://
openai.com/blog/dall-e-2-pre-training-mitigations/. (accessed
29.06.2022).
[Ban19]
Puneet Bansal. Intel Image Classification | Kaggle. 2019. url: https://
www.kaggle.com/datasets/puneet6060/intel-image-classification.
[Ben20]
Christopher Headleand Benjamin Williams Panagiotis D. Ritsos. “Vir-
tual Forestry Generation: Evaluating Models for Tree Placement in Games.”
In: (2020).
[BEP18]
Gabriel Costa Backes, Tiago Augusto Engel, and Cesar Tadeu Pozzer.
“Real-Time Massive Terrain Generation using Procedural Erosion on the
GPU.” In: (2018).
[Bha20]
Bhartra. How to Build a Landscape Photo Classifier in PyTorch | CNNs,
ResNet and Transfer Learning | by Dev Bhartra | The Startup | Medium.
July 2020. url: https : / / medium . com / swlh / how - to - build - a -
landscape - photo - classifier - in - pytorch - cnns - resnet - and -
transfer-learning-97682a2a1eb1.
[BR18]
Daniel Buscombe and Andrew C. Ritchie. “Landscape Classification with
Deep Neural Networks.” In: Geosciences 8.7 (2018). issn: 2076-3263. doi:
10.3390/geosciences8070244. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-
3263/8/7/244.
[Bri07]
Robert Bridson. “Fast Poisson Disk Sampling in Arbitrary Dimensions.”
In: (August 2007). (accessed 11.07.2022).
[BWL20]
Alexey Bochkovskiy, Chien-Yao Wang, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. YOLOv4:
Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection. 2020. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.2004.10934. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10934. (ac-
cessed 04.07.2022).
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography
[Che+16]
Liang-Chieh Chen et al. DeepLab: Semantic Image Segmentation with
Deep Convolutional Nets, Atrous Convolution, and Fully Connected CRFs.
2016. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1606.00915. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1606.00915. (accessed 03.07.2022).
[DE19]
Thomas Deloit and Heitz Eric. Procedural Stochastic Textures by Tiling
and Blending. 2019. url: https://eheitzresearch.wordpress.com/
738-2/.
[E-D11]
E-DOG. Water erosion on heightmap terrain. August 2011. url: http://
ranmantaru.com/blog/2011/10/08/water-erosion-on-heightmap-
terrain/.
[Ebe+03]
David S. Ebert et al. Texturing and Modeling: A Procedural Approach:
Third Edition. Elsevier Inc., 2003, pages 1–687. isbn: 9781558608481.
[Exc]
Open Neural Network Exchange. onnx/models: A collection of pre-trained,
state-of-the-art models in the ONNX format. url: https://github.com/
onnx/models. (accessed 06.07.2022).
[FGT15]
John Ferraris, Christos Gatzidis, and Feng Tian. “Automating Terrain
Texturing in Real-Time Using a Rule-Based Approach.” In: International
Journal of Virtual Reality 9 (November 2015). doi: 10.20870/IJVR.
2010.9.4.2787. (accessed 06.07.2022).
[Gama]
Epic Games. Material Editor User Guide. url: https://docs.unrealengine.
com/5.0/en-US/unreal-engine-material-editor-user-guide/. (ac-
cessed 23.06.2022).
[Gamb]
Epic Games. Unreal Engine. url: https://www.unrealengine.com/en-
US/. (accessed 22.06.2022).
[Gas+22]
Cristina Gasch et al. “Procedural modeling of plant ecosystems maximiz-
ing vegetation cover.” In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 81 (12 May
2022), pages 16195–16217. issn: 15737721. doi: 10.1007/S11042-022-
12107-8/FIGURES/14. url: https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s11042-022-12107-8.
[GB21]
Setafan Gustavson and Jan Christoph Bernack. GitHub - ashima/webgl-
noise: Procedural Noise Shader Routines compatible with WebGL. June
2021. url: https://github.com/ashima/webgl-noise.
[Gup20]
Pradeep Gupta. CUDA Refresher: The CUDA Programming Model. June
2020. url: https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/cuda-refresher-
cuda-programming-model/.
[Gus05]
Stefan Gustavson. “Simplex noise demystified.” In: (July 2005).
[He+15]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015.
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1512.03385. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1512.03385. (accessed 03.07.2022).
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
103
[He+17]
Kaiming He et al. Mask R-CNN. 2017. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1703.
06870. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870. (accessed 03.07.2022).
[Hut17]
Lars Huttar. Learning how Perlin noise works. January 2017. url: https:
//www.huttar.net/lars-kathy/graphics/perlin-noise/perlin-
noise.html.
[Jac20]
Joseph Nelson Jacob Solawetz. How to Train YOLOv5 On a Custom
Dataset. June 2020. url: https : / / blog . roboflow . com / how - to -
train-yolov5-on-a-custom-dataset/. (accessed 06.07.2022).
[Joh16]
Rune Skovbo Johansen. runevision blog: Creating natural paths on ter-
rains using pathfinding. March 2016. url: https://blog.runevision.
com/2016/03/note-on-creating-natural-paths-in.html.
[Lag+10]
Ares Lagae et al. “A Survey of Procedural Noise Functions.” In: Computer
Graphics Forum 29.8 (2010), pages 2579–2600. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
8659.2010.01827.x. url: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00920177.
[Lag19]
Sebastian Lague. Coding Adventure: Hydraulic Erosion - YouTube. Febru-
ary 2019. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eaXk97ujbPQ.
[Li+22]
Feng Li et al. Mask DINO: Towards A Unified Transformer-based Frame-
work for Object Detection and Segmentation. 2022. doi: 10 . 48550 /
ARXIV.2206.02777. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02777. (ac-
cessed 03.07.2022).
[LSD14]
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully Convolutional
Networks for Semantic Segmentation. 2014. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1411.
4038. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038. (accessed 03.07.2022).
[M19]
Hemalatha M. Poisson Disc Sampling. Imagine that you are playing a
game and… | by Hemalatha M | Medium. April 2019. url: https://
medium.com/@hemalatha.psna/implementation-of-poisson-disc-
sampling-in-javascript-17665e406ce1. (accessed 11.07.2022).
[med18]
medium. History of image segmentation. All development is a long accu-
mulation… | by Eai Fund Oﬀical | Medium. October 2018. url: https:
//medium.com/@eaifundoffical/history-of-image-segmentation-
655eb793559a. (accessed 03.07.2022).
[Mic21]
Microsoft. High-level shader language (HLSL) - Win32 apps | Microsoft
Docs. May 2021. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/
win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl.
[Mur17]
Sean Murray. GDC Vault - Building Worlds Using Math(s). 2017. url:
https://www.gdcvault.com/play/1024514/Building-Worlds-Using.
[Pat22]
Jule Pattison-Gordon. In: (April 2022). url: https://www.govtech.
com/products/what-is-the-metaverse. (accessed 23.06.2022).
[Per]
Ken Perlin. “Chapter 2 Noise Hardware.” In.
==PAGE:116==
104
Bibliography
[Per85]
Ken Perlin. “An image synthesizer.” In: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer
Graphics 19 (3 July 1985), pages 287–296. issn: 00978930. doi: 10.1145/
325165 . 325247. url: https : / / dl . acm . org / doi / abs / 10 . 1145 /
325165.325247.
[Plaa]
Planetside Terragen. Terragen Image Gallery – Planetside Software. url:
https://planetside.co.uk/terragen-image-gallery/ (visited on
June 28, 2022).
[Plab]
Planetside Terragen. Terragen in Film & TV – Planetside Software. url:
https://planetside.co.uk/terragen-in-film-and-tv/#terragen-
in-film (visited on June 28, 2022).
[Quia]
Inigo Quilez. Inigo Quilez :: computer graphics, mathematics, shaders,
fractals, demoscene and more. url: https://iquilezles.org/articles/
fbm/ (visited on June 28, 2022).
[Quib]
Quixel. Quixel Bridge. url: https://quixel.com/bridge. (accessed
27.06.2022).
[Quic]
Quixel. Quixel Megascans. url: https://quixel.com/megascans. (ac-
cessed 27.06.2022).
[Qui08]
Inigo Quilez. Inigo Quilez :: computer graphics, mathematics, shaders,
fractals, demoscene and more. 2008. url: https://iquilezles.org/
articles/morenoise/.
[Qui13]
Inigo Quilez. Noise - Gradient - 2D. May 2013. url: https://www.
shadertoy.com/view/XdXGW8.
[Qui15]
Inigo Quilez. Inigo Quilez :: texturerepetition. 2015. url: https : / /
iquilezles.org/articles/texturerepetition/.
[Qui17]
Inigo Quilez. Noise - Gradient - 2D - Deriv. May 2017. url: https:
//www.shadertoy.com/view/XdXBRH.
[Ram+22]
Aditya Ramesh et al. Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation
with CLIP Latents. 2022. doi: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2204 . 06125. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125. (accessed 29.06.2022).
[Red+15]
Joseph Redmon et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object
Detection. 2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1506.02640. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640. (accessed 04.07.2022).
[RFB15]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convo-
lutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1505.04597. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
(accessed 03.07.2022).
[Sah+22]
Chitwan Saharia et al. Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
with Deep Language Understanding. 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2205.
11487. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11487. (accessed 29.06.2022).
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
105
[San20]
Kavish Sanghvi. Image Classification Techniques. May 2020. url: https:
//medium.com/analytics-vidhya/image-classification-techniques-
83fd87011cac. (accessed 28.06.2022).
[Sha+12]
Muhammad Shahbaz et al. (PDF) Classification by Object Recognition in
Satellite Images by using Data Mining. July 2012. url: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/265359406_Classification_by_
Object_Recognition_in_Satellite_Images_by_using_Data_Mining.
[Šta+08]
Ondřej Št’ava et al. “Interactive Terrain Modeling Using Hydraulic Ero-
sion.” In: Eurographics Association, 2008, pages 201–210. isbn: 9783905674101.
[Teca]
Unity Technologies. Unity homepage. url: https://unity.com/. (ac-
cessed 22.06.2022).
[Tecb]
Unity Technologies. Unity Shader Graph. url: https://unity.com/
features/shader-graph. (accessed 23.06.2022).
[Tecc]
Unity Technologies. Unity Texture2DArray. url: https://docs.unity3d.
com/ScriptReference/Texture2DArray.html. (accessed 08.07.2022).
[Ter]
Planetside TerraGen. What is Terragen? – Planetside Software. url:
https://planetside.co.uk/terragen-overview/ (visited on June 28,
2022).
[Ult]
Ultralytics. ultralytics/yolov5: YOLOv5 in PyTorch > ONNX > CoreML
> TFLite. url: https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5. (accessed
06.07.2022).
[Uni22]
Unity. DOTS - Unity’s new multithreaded Data-Oriented Technology
Stack. 2022. url: https://unity.com/dots.
[v7l22]
v7labs. What Is Instance Segmentation? [2022 Guide & Tutorial]. July
2022. url: https://www.v7labs.com/blog/instance-segmentation-
guide.
[Whi62]
Robert H Whittaker. “Classification of natural communities.” In: The
Botanical Review 28 (1 1962), pages 1–239. issn: 1874-9372. doi: 10.
1007/BF02860872. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02860872.
[Wika]
Wikipedia. Biome - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Biome.
[Wikb]
Wikipedia. Texture atlas. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Texture_atlas. (accessed 08.07.2022).
[Wik22a]
Wikipedia. Fractal landscape - Wikipedia. July 2022. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractal_landscape.
[Wik22b]
Wikipedia. Procedural generation - Wikipedia. July 2022. url: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procedural_generation.
==PAGE:118==
106
Bibliography
[WYL21]
Chien-Yao Wang, I-Hau Yeh, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. You Only Learn
One Representation: Unified Network for Multiple Tasks. 2021. doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.2105.04206. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04206.
(accessed 04.07.2022).
[YKF17]
Fisher Yu, Vladlen Koltun, and Thomas Funkhouser. Dilated Residual
Networks. 2017. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1705.09914. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/1705.09914. (accessed 06.07.2022).
[Zho+16]
Bolei Zhou et al. Semantic Understanding of Scenes through the ADE20K
Dataset. 2016. doi: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 1608 . 05442. url: https : / /
arxiv.org/abs/1608.05442. (accessed 28.06.2022).
[Zho+17]
Bolei Zhou et al. “Scene Parsing through ADE20K Dataset.” In: 2017
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
2017, pages 5122–5130. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.544. (accessed 28.06.2022).
[Zhu+21]
Xingkui Zhu et al. TPH-YOLOv5: Improved YOLOv5 Based on Trans-
former Prediction Head for Object Detection on Drone-captured Scenar-
ios. 2021. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2108.11539. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2108.11539. (accessed 04.07.2022).
