==PAGE:1==
Investigating the impact of O-antigen cell
surface structures on clinically relevant
phenotypes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Theodoros Tsiamis
Master’s Thesis
student - s202232
July 1, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Abstract
Nowadays scientific and medical community has been greatly concerned about the outburst of severe
nosocomial infections due to the emergence of high-risk, mutidrug-antibiotic resistant (MRD) and exten-
sively drug-resistant (XDR) strains of the Gram-negative bacterium P. aeruginosa that can cause high mor-
bidity and mortality in immunocompromized patients and particularly patients with cystic fibrosis (CF).
Recent studies have proposed a correlation between the presence of immunogenic and highly variable O-
polysaccharide, or O-antigen, which is located at the outer core of the lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) in the
outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, and the acquisition of improved properties among P. aerugi-
nosa strains like augmented biofilm adhesion, resistance in antibiotics and remarkably higher virulence. The
aim of this thesis is to investigate different characteristics, including growth rate in both rich and minimal
media, biofilm adhesion, swarming and swimming motility testing, colony morphology, surface features of the
bacterial cells and GFP tagged transconjugants production of several P. aeruginosa PA14 strains that vary
regarding O-antigen (wild type, ∆OSA (mutant with deleted O-antigen cluster), O1, O2, O4, O8, O11, O12,
O14 and O19 (mutant with deleted and then restored O-antigen cluster)). Furthermore, it is attempted to
evaluate whether these features are associated with modified survival skills and adaptation of each variant.
Interestingly, all serotypes presented improved growth rate than the wild type in environments devoid of
nutrients, except for O11 variant and ∆OSA mutant, as well as decreased swimming motility. Moreover, it
was demonstrated that ∆OSA showed the lowest biofilm adhesion and the second most reduced growth rate
in minimal media (after O11 serotype), the highest hydrophobicity, a relatively increased swimming motility
and smoother wrinkled colony morphology with trivial autolysis among all the variants. These observations
lead to the conclusion that the presence of O-antigen may acquire enhanced characteristics for the persever-
ance and colonization of the strains. It is also essential to mention that several serotypes related to high-risk
antibiotic-resistant clones worldwide (O1, O2, O14) indicated ameliorated biofilm adhesion, possibly caused
by the production of highly rough wrinkled colony morphology as well as the significant phenomenon of
autolysis. This evidence possibly explains their outstanding predominance in healthcare centers. Moreover,
as in recent studies it has been demonstrated serotype conversion of an ancestral O4 variant to a high-risk,
high-virulent and greatly antibiotic-resistant O12 strain through horizontal gene transfer and recombina-
tion, the display of ameliorated characteristics concerning persistence of the bacterium has been verified, as
O12 serotype presented higher biofilm attachment, significantly rougher wrinkled colony morphology and
noteworthy autolysis.
i
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Preface
This thesis was carried out at the department of Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Section
for Microbial and Chemical Ecology, Infection Microbiology laboratory at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU) in achievement of the prerequisites for acquiring a Master of Science Degree in Biotechnology.
This thesis project was conducted from January 12, 2022 until July 1, 2022 and it is evaluated with
30 credits in the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS). The supervisor was Lars Jelsbak from DTU
Biotechnology and Biomedicine Department.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Lars Jelsbak and PhD student Mikkel
Anbo for their substantial support, valuable contribution and encouragement every time that troubles were
appeared during the experiments, for the time devoted, for receiving constructive feedback to my results
and assisting me in enhancing my critical approach over scientific research. It was indeed a great pleasure
collaborating together in this insightful project.
I would also like to thank my family and my friends,
especially Stefanos Masalas, for their constant assist during my thesis and master’s program at DTU.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Contents
Contents
1
Theory
1
1.1
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
O-antigen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Contribution of O-antigen to the properties of the bacterial strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Aim
11
3
Materials and methods
11
3.1
Growth rate assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Biofilm adhesion assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Cell surface properties assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Swimming and swarming motility assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Colony morphology assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
GFP tagging assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results
14
4.1
The wild type demonstrated higher growth rate than ∆OSA in rich media . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
All the variants, except for ∆OSA and O11, showed higher growth rate in minimal media
than the wild type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
O12 serotype showed higher biofilm adhesion compared to O4 serotype . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
∆OSA was detected to acquire the highest hydrophobicity in SAT assay . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
The wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Colony morphology results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6.1
∆OSA appeared to form the most transparent colonies of all the strains in NSLB assay 29
4.6.2
O12 serotype indicated rougher wrinkled morphology and significant autolysis com-
pared to O4 serotype in Congo red assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.7
Successful GFP Tagging when Gentamicin (GM) was used, failure with the utilization of
Tetracycline (TET) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
34
5.1
Correlation between the presence of O-antigen in P. aeruginosa PA14 strains and enhanced
survival skills in both rich and minimal media conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
O-antigen may affect the acquisition of improved characteristics in P. aeruginosa PA14 strains
concerning biofilm adhesion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
O-antigen induces low hydrophobicity to P. aeruginosa PA14 strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
O-antigen expression in P. aeruginosa PA14 is potentially associated with reduced swimming
motility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
The presence of O-antigen may affect colony morphology leading to rougher wrinkled colonies
and increased autolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
P. aeruginosa PA14 strains indicated susceptibility to Tetracycline (TET) and resistance to
Gentamicin (GM) during GFP Tagging assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.7
Future prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
List of Figures
I
References
III
6
Appendix
VI
A Appendix A
VI
A.1 Results of ANOVA by using Tukey’s range test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
iv
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
1
Theory
1.1
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative bacterium which can provoke disease in animals as well as
humans and plants [1] [2]. It is considered one of the most threatening microorganisms worldwide recently
and serious nosocomial infections because of its spectacular metabolic plasticity and versatility [3]. It is also
listed as one of the ESKAPE pathogens, a group of microorganisms with a high proclivity for provoking
troublesome, multidrug-resistant (MDR) or extensively drug-resistant (XDR), nosocomial infections [4].
Furthermore, this bacterial species is able to trigger disease by colonizing a big number of human host sites,
for example burn wounds, the urinary tract, and the respiratory system, but is also able to infect a broad
variety of ecological niches, including aquatic and soil environments, animals and plants [3] [4] [5]. Due to its
flexibility to contaminate clinical installations, mostly sinks, plumbing, and water in hospitals, this bacterium
is infamous as a noteworthy cause of morbidity and mortality (>30%) [3] [4] [5]. Moreover, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa is associated with emerge of chronic diseases in immunocompromised patients globally, mostly
those who are suffering from cystic fibrosis (CF), as the mucus in their lungs is thick and viscous, so it
impedes the proper mucociliary clearance of possible pathogens [3] [4] [5].
As a Gram-negative bacterium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa has a thin cell wall and a hydrophobic outer
membrane in contrast to Gram-positive bacteria that acquire a thick cell wall and no outer membrane
(fig. 1) [6]. On this aforementioned outer membrane, Pseudomonas aeruginosa expresses its utmost virulence
factor, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is an integral element of the cell envelope of the bacterium, being
composed of a membrane-anchored lipid A, a polysaccharide core region, and an exceptionally variable O-
specific polysaccharide (O-antigen or O-polysaccharide) [4] [7]. LPS is extremely important component of
the bacterium, as it contributes to the antibiotic resistance of the pathogen and plays an essential role in
inhibiting host immune system and interacting with the receptors of the host [4] [7] [8]. This is the reason
why there have been so many intense scientific investigations concerning the biosynthesis of this cell-surface
glycolipid and the contributions of its structural domains [7] [8]. The components that are highly related to
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections are lipid A and O-polysaccharide [7].
Figure 1: Comparison of the outer membrane of Gram-Positive (on the left) and Gram-Negative bacteria (on the
right). Figure from [9].
1
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
1.2
O-antigen
Figure 2: Analysis of the outer membrane and the lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) on Gram-Negative bacteria (pyrogenic
means it induces fever when infecting a host, while non-pyrogenic does not induce fever to the infected host). Figure
from [10].
1.2
O-antigen
The lipid A domain, in the wild-type strains, is adhered to a preserved nine or ten sugar, branched
oligosaccharide core [7]. It has been indicated that, in P. aeruginosa, the aforementioned oligosaccharide
core could be further substituted this lipid A-core in approximately 15% of lipopolysaccharide molecules with
O-polysaccharide ("O-antigen") [7]. Two distinct forms of O-antigen (O-Ag) are produced by the majority
of P. aeruginosa strains, the one is a homopolymer of d-rhamnose that is a typical polysaccharide antigen
(CPA, formerly termed A-band), and the other is a heteropolymer of three to five distinct (and frequently
unique dideoxy) sugars in its repeat units, known with the term O-specific antigen (OSA, formerly termed
B-band) [8]. These two types are different structurally and serologically [7]. A-band ("common"or CPA)
polysaccharide is a homopolymer of D-rhamnose with length approximately 70 sugars and which evokes a
weak antibody response [8] [7] [4]. It is important to mention that, according to a survey, CPA did not
react with any of the special antibodies that a laboratory created towards a large number of serotypes [8]
[7] [4]. On the other hand, B-band ("O-specific" or OSA) polysaccharide is a strain-variable heteropolymer
regarding both the length of the chain and the nature of the sugars, which reacts towards serotype-specified
antibodies and evokes a strong antibody response [7] [4] [8]. Moreover, it plays an important role in serotyping
classification by the International Antigenic Typing Scheme (IATS), as the strains that express O-antigen
are usually more resistant to serum than those that are O-antigen deficient [7] [4] [8]. Some strains of P.
aeruginosa do not have the ability to produce O-polysaccharide at all ("rough" strains), while others are able
to replace the lipid A and core with only one O-saccharide unit ("semi-rough") [7]. Surprisingly, many chronic
P. aeruginosa isolates lose their capability to express the OSA polysaccharide, whereas CPA polysaccharide
has become prevalent antigen over time [7] [8]. This characteristic may be driven by selective pressure so as
the bacteria are able to elude host adaptive immune responses by restraining the more antigenic O-specific
polysaccharide [7] [8]. It has also been discovered that the chain length of the O-antigen has an impact on
the heterogeneity of the bacterium [8].
There is a variety of main virulence factors that are correlated with P. aeruginosa pathogenesis, such
as Type III secretion system (T3SS) [5] [3]. T3SS is evolutionarily related to flagella of the bacterium, that
can also commence an inflammatory response to the host, and produces a proteinaceous channel through
2
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
1.2
O-antigen
which toxins, like ExoS, ExoT and ExoU, are delivered directly into the host cell cytoplasm provoking severe
disruption of the cells and, eventually, their death (fig. 4) [11] [7] [5]. The excretion of ExoU toxin leads to a
more severe effect in respiratory and bloodstream infections than the excretion of ExoS, meaning that ExoU
is more virulent than ExoS [5][12]. In addition, P. aeruginosa populations have been separated into two
distinct branches, PAO1 and PA14, which have been identified by their capability to produce either the ExoS
toxin, or the ExoU toxin [12]. PAO1-like isolates synthesize the less-virulent ExoS toxin, whereas PA14-like
isolates synthesize the more-virulent ExoU toxin, leading also to a distinction concerning abundance of O-
antigen receptors on the cell membrane [12]. Furthermore, there is the indication that the exoU+ genotype,
meaning the strains that are able to produce ExoU toxin, is related to higher probability of provoking
pneumonia in patients with cultures of respiratory samples positive for P. aeruginosa [5].
3
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
1.2
O-antigen
Figure 3: O-specific antigen (OSA) biosynthesis gene clusters were structured into 11 groups depended on sequence
preservation. Genes were constructed by the utilization of the PFAM database. Insertion sequences (IS) existing
within genes are demonstrated by a minor gray box. Figure from [8].
4
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
1.2
O-antigen
Figure 4: Synopsis of the principal properties of the 10 clones P. aeruginosa of greater concern. Black squares
demonstrate that the equivalent variable has been detected for the equivalent clone (ST: sequence type). Figure from
[13].
Recent studies have impressively verified the involvement of O-antigen structures in multidrug-resistant
(MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) phenotypes of P. aeruginosa as well as in serious infections
outbreaks and in augmented virulence in most of the predominant high-risk clones [13] [5] [7]. It has also been
investigated the effect of O-antigen in triggering host immune system, having interactions with host receptors
and affecting the biogenesis of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), which contribute to cell-cell interactions,
antibiotic resistance, biofilm formation, and excessive transport of toxins and virulence factors [4]. It is
essential to mention that the O-antigen region is hugely immunogenic, so it induces a robust antibody
production from the host [14]. Moreover, it is implicated that there is a link between modifications in the
O-specific antigen (OSA) length and conversions in the virulence of the variants [14]. The three globally
predominant MDR/XDR high-risk clones are ST111, ST175 and ST235 (fig. 5) [5] [3]. Interestingly, the
huge majority of severe and often lethal infections are provoked by these clones internationally [3]. ST235
is unquestionably the high-risk clone that indicates a global spreading [13] [3] [15]. It is also related to
over 60 different beta-lactamase (ESBLs) variants, as well as multiple carbapenemases from classes A and
B, that are enzymes produced by the mutants in order to acquire multidrug resistance and resistance to
bacteriophages, showing a much higher mortality that other high-risk clones [13] [3] [15]. On the other
hand, ST111 is associated with VIM-2 metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL) [13] [3] [15].
In addition, ST175,
predominant in some European countries, demonstrates a MDR/XDR phenotype often caused by specific
chromosomal mutations and is linked to lower virulence [13] [3]. Moreover, a current study has revealed that
the 3 main high-risk clones are correlated with a defined set of biological markers which, unexpectedly, are
involved with defective motility and decreased in vitro fitness in bacterial competition experiments [5] [3].
5
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
1.2
O-antigen
Figure 5: Global spread (A) and spread in Europe (B) of high-concern clones ST111, ST175 and ST235. Figure
from [3].
ST235 is linked to O-antigen serotype O11 [13] [3]. Nevertheless, O11 is also recorded in some other
high-risk clones, like ST357, ST308 and ST298 [13]. In addition, O11 was the third most prevalent serotype
(13.3%), according to a current international research in Spain, following O6 (17.8%) and O1 (15.4%),
whereas O12 is the fourth one (6.2 to 7.9%) [13] [16]. On the contrary, O11 antigen has not been strongly
related with MDR/XDR phenotypes (72% of the isolates were non-MDR) [13] [16]. ST111 is the second
most universal high-risk clone after ST235, strongly linked with MDR/XDR phenotypes, demonstrates
genotype that is capable of producing T3SS and the toxin ExoS [13] [15]. Furthermore, even though it
lacks the genome for ExoU toxin production, ST111 exhibits considerable virulence [13] [15].
It is also
strongly related to O12 serotype, as the most O12 isolates (1.4%) in a multicentre scientific research were
associated to the aforementioned high-risk clone and to MDR/XDR profiles, verifying the evidence that
serotype O12 presents outstanding prevalence compared to other epidemic strains [13] [15]. Nevertheless,
available scientific literature proposes that ST111 originally demonstrated an O4 serotype that obtained
O12 characteristics through recombination and horizontal transfer of the antibiotic resistance gene cluster
gyrA [13] [15]. Indeed, a very illuminating study has indicated that evolution and predominance of MDR
O12 strains could be correlated with the aforementioned serotype switching provoked by horizontal transfer
of O-specific antigen (OSA) biosynthesis genes among phylogenetically discrete variants of the bacterium
and by genetic recombination regarding biosynthesis of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (fig. 6) [15].
This
phenomenon could also lead to the possession of antibiotic resistance genes by the recently emerged O12
serotype [15]. Furthermore, it is shown that MDR O12 variants appeared very recently (in the 1980s) and
have speedily spread in the nosocomial environment the last four decades [15]. These observations are based
on the investigation of 328 P. aeruginosa isolates selected over 125 years from different countries [15]. ST175
demonstrates a genotype that enables T3SS and ExoS production, while impedes ExoU toxin production
[13].
Moreover, ST175 is related to the O-antigen serotype O4, is particularly predominant in Europe,
especially in Spain and France, and is characterized by a combination of specific gene mutations that lead
6
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
1.3
Contribution of O-antigen to the properties of the bacterial strains
to its MDR/XDR phenotype [13]. Nevertheless, the aforementioned clone demonstrates interestingly lower
virulence than ST235 and ST111 [13].
Figure 6:
Maximum likelihood phylogeny according to the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the core
genomes of 81 P. aeruginosa isolates, evaluated by the usage of the parsnp software program. All isolates are labelled
based on their in silico serotype by the colors and shapes sketched in the key. Figure from [15].
Another interesting fact is that the three major high risk clones have been documented to be deficient
in swimming and swarming motility and production of pyoverdine and pyocyanin [3]. However, high-risk
clones have been reported to have increased biofilm formation and unprompted mutant frequencies [3]. The
aforementioned biological markers of P. aeruginosa high-risk clones show certain resemblances with those
usually resulting from chronic infections [17] [3]. It is scientifically verified that O-antigen has an impact
on the selective packaging of cargo into outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), a substantial element of biofilms
[4] [5]. Moreover, isolates of the bacterium belonging to some O-antigen serotypes (particularly O1) have
been epidemiologically linked with a worse prognosis, meaning more severe disease developments, than other
serotypes (such as O2) [4] [5].
1.3
Contribution of O-antigen to the properties of the bacterial strains
The perseverance of P. aeruginosa during cystic fibrosis (CF) infections has been related to its capability
of biofilm formation [18]. Biofilms, which are stated as communities of microorganisms that are adhered to
a surface, contribute remarkably to infectious diseases [18] [19]. Bacteria within biofilms are often implanted
within a matrix, which can contain proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleic acid [18]. The CF lung is at first
colonized with non-mucoid P. aeruginosa strains, but afterwards, mucoid variants appear and become the
prevalent lung pathogens [18]. The non-mucoid laboratory strain P. aeruginosa PA14 has the ability of
7
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
1.3
Contribution of O-antigen to the properties of the bacterial strains
forming thick, shear-forces resistant biofilms at the air-liquid interface [20]. These biofilms (or pellicles)
demonstrate to acquire a tight, paper-like consistency [20]. Molecules that are in charge of the structural
integrity of this kind of biofilms have not been reported until nowadays, but they might be extracellular (EC)
or covalently adhered to the bacterial membrane [20]. The pel gene cluster has been indicated, in many recent
studies, to be associated with the formation of a pellicle, a surface-related biofilm on the air-liquid interface
in non-shaking cultures [20] [21].
It has been also investigated in current researches that the O-antigen polysaccharide is a plentiful extra-
cellular carbohydrate of PA14 strain and it is identified as a structural component of the biofilm matrix of the
bacterium [20]. Moreover, the existence of full-length O-antigen contributes to smooth lipopolysaccharides
(LPSs), meaning they consist of O-antigen (O-Ag) and a complete core oligosaccharide, whereas deprivation
or reduction of O-antigen leads to rough LPSs, meaning they lack of O-Ag but possess lipid A and steadily
smaller in length core oligosaccharides [18] [22]. Another interesting study verified reduced O-antigen and
augmented lipid A in biofilm-forming cells compared to planktonic cells, meaning the bacterial cells which
flow freely in suspension, demonstrating a phenotypic change in the LPSs from a smooth structure to a rough
one (fig. 7) [18] [23] [8]. Furthermore, bacterial strains of P. aeruginosa with smooth phenotype indicate
the lowest surface charge and hydrophobicity, even though they can attach to the glass surfaces the most
effectively due to improved electrostatic interaction [24]. On the other hand, strains that lack O-specific
antigen are more cytotoxic and cohere to polystyrene surfaces very efficiently, a property that is essential for
biofilm formation on medical prosthetic devices [24]. All this evidence leads to the conclusion that reduction
in O-antigen bands of LPSs could possibly be a mechanism that assists biofilms in bypassing the immune
system, while increased lipid A compartments might demonstrate a rise in biofilm endotoxicity, signifying
that biofilms are more virulent than their planktonic equivalents and that also present antibiotic resistance
[18].
In addition, some recent scientific studies have revealed that the presence of the O-antigen in different P.
aeruginosa strains also affects their colony morphology. The data from these researches have demonstrated
reduction of core oligosaccharide (OS) of the LPS, that binds Lipid A with the O-antigen, augmentation
of both anchoring and adhering forces by up to 10 times [8]. It is essential to mention that conversions in
instantaneous elasticity in the colony have been linked to the existence of O-Ag [8]. Furthermore, the wild
type strain of P. aeruginosa PAO1, that normally shows a smooth type of LPSs, when O-antigen is expressed
in its outer membrane, shows rougher surface topography than other strains that normally are O-antigen
deficient (fig. 7) [8]. These researches underline the significance of O-Ag in the development of structures of
the cells and the physiology of P. aeruginosa in a biofilm way of growth [8] [25]. Moreover, modifications
regarding the formation of O-antigen along with the complete loss of O-antigen leads to decreased virulence of
P. aeruginosa [8] [25]. This observation accords to the interestingly reduced surface adhesive forces, further
underlying the role of O-Ag concerning augmented persistence in P. aeruginosa strains [8] [25]. Furthermore,
the aforementioned experiments have justified an earlier study in which rough mutants of the bacterium,
which are devoid of O-antigen, presented an median lethal dose (LD50) 1000 times higher than the one of the
wild type in a murine infection model [8]. Moreover, microcolonies produced by cells of the wild type PAO1
demonstrated circular perimeters, whereas the microcolonies produced by rough mutants indicated more
irregular peripheries (fig. 8) [8]. It is also necessary to mention that the differences in phenotype regarding
O-antigen expression could be a mechanism by which the bacterium is able to modify its overall surface
properties to affect biofilm adhesion and, eventually, favor survival [24].
8
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
1.3
Contribution of O-antigen to the properties of the bacterial strains
Figure 7: Pictures acquired from Atomic Force Microscopy surveys of P. aeruginosa cells gathered in contact mode
in air for the wild type of the variant PAO1 (A) and its rough mutants (mutants devoid of O-antigen) migA (B),
wapR (C), rmlC(D). Height pictures (upper panels) are demonstrated with secluded regions for roughness evaluations.
Deflection pictures (lower panels) contribute to a more detailed description regarding cell morphology. Figure from
[8] [26].
9
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
1.3
Contribution of O-antigen to the properties of the bacterial strains
Figure 8:
Pictures acquired from confocal laser scanning microscopy surveys of the wild type of P. aeruginosa
PAO1 variant (A) and its rough mutants (mutants devoid of O-antigen) migA (B), wapR (C), rmlC(D) in order
to depict the switch in biofilm formation as a consequence of the LPSs truncation of the mutants, leading to their
O-antigen deficiency. Upper panels demonstrate average projections, whereas lower panels indicate midpoint cross
parts of illustrative microcolonies of the aforementioned bacterial strains. Figure from [8] [26].
10
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
2
Aim
As it is stated in the theoretical part (section 1), scientific evidence and researches have demonstrated
that the presence of O-antigen has a significant impact on clinically relevant phenotypes of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and that each different kind of O-antigen influences in a distinct way their properties and their
complexity. This impact could be the explanation of the unprecedented prevalence of multidrug-resistant
(MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) variants of the bacterium. Moreover, the acquisition of en-
hanced features, including evolutionary adaptability, noteworthy virulence and increased mortality of distinct
Pseudomonas aeruginosa serotypes, mostly in immunocompromized people and cystic fibrosis (CF) patients,
as well as improved persistence and survival skills, particularly when they contaminate medical prosthetic
implants inside the host and surgical tools, sinks, pipes and water in hospitals and clinics, might justify the
important role of O-antigen in a plethora of high-risk clones of the aforementioned bacterium.
The aim of this master’s thesis is, initially, to characterize different variants of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PA14, which is a known laboratory strain, based on their different O-antigen (O1, O2, O4, O8, O11, O12,
O14), including PA14 wild type, which naturally encodes the O19 gene cluster, a mutant with deleted O-
antigen cluster (∆OSA) and a mutant with at first deleted and then restored its O-antigen cluster (O19).
These characteristics are associated with growth rate in both rich and minimal media, biofilm formation
and adhesion, swarming and swimming motility testing, colony morphology and surface properties of the
bacterial cells evaluation. Furthermore, the tagging of all the aforementioned bacterial strains with Green
Fluorescent Protein (GFP) will be examined whether it is feasible. Last but not least, the description of
a potential mechanism regarding contamination of each strain in clinical facilitation, such as hospitals and
healthcare centers, and of a possible correlation of the observed properties of each variant with their virulence
and antibiotic resistance will be attempted.
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Growth rate assay
For the determination of the growth rate [27] of the P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (Wild Type, ∆OSA, O1,
O2, O4, O8, O11, O12, O14, O19) in rich media, the materials that are used are LB (Luria broth) Medium (5
gr of LB/250 ml of distilled water), PBS (Phosphate-buffered saline) buffer (8 gr/l NaCl, 0.2 gr/l KCl, 1.15
gr/l Na2HPO4, 0.2 gr/l KH2PO4 ), with its pH calibrated to 7.4 and then sterilized by autoclaving, and
the bacterial cultures streaked from freezing cultures (−80◦C), containing 5% (v/v) glycerol, on LB Agar (5
gr of LB Medium + 5 gr of Bacteriological Agar with the addition of 250 ml of distilled water, then being
sterilized by autoclaving, poured on agar plates, solidified after 30-40 minutes and then dried in a dryer for
20 minutes approximately, streaked with the freezing cultures of each bacterial strain and incubated o/n at
(37◦C)). For the growth rate assay in minimal media, M9 Medium salts solution (48 mM Na2HPO4, 22
mM KH2PO4, 9 mM NaCl 19 mM NH4Cl, 2 mM MgSO4, 100 µM KH2PO4), in a final volume of 250
ml by adding distilled water, is used instead of LB Agar. Its pH is adjusted to 7.2, then is sterilized by
autoclaving and, afterwards, sterile 20% glucose (20 gr glucose/ 100 ml distilled water) is added to a final
concentration of 10 mM.
On the first day (Day 1) of the experiment, overnight (o/n) cultures (approximately 18 hours in the
incubator at 37◦C ) of 3 biological replicates per strain, meaning 3 different colonies per strain streaked from
the LB Agar (or LBA) plates are prepared in LB Medium. On the second day (Day 2), 1 ml of the o/n
culture is transferred to Eppendorf tube, then washed twice in PBS by centrifuging at 5000 g for 3 minutes
and dissolved completely by vortex or pipetting. Furthermore, the 96 well microtiter plate is prepared. In
other words, 198 µl of Media (LB Medium for rich media and M9 Medium for minimal media) is placed into
each well by using a multi-channel pipette and, afterwards, the wells are inoculated with 2 µl of the washed
o/n culture (3 technical replicates per biological replicate) for 1/100 dilutions, whereas 2 µl of PBS are
added to the non-inoculated wells as negative control. Last but not least, the adequate plate reader machine
(SPT-042-BioTek-Synergy-H1) parameters are set (omnidirectional shake, 200 rpm (rounds per minute),
37◦C, reads every 3 minutes (every 16 minutes for the minimal media), incubation 18 hours (36 hours for
11
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
3.2
Biofilm adhesion assay
minimal media)). The results are demonstrated in the Results part (section 4) and the data analysis has been
conducted with Excel and Matlab, while their statistical significance with ANOVA (Analysis of Variance)
by using Tukey Test (appendix A.1).
3.2
Biofilm adhesion assay
Crystal Violet Biofilm quantification adhesion assay protocol [28] describe how to quantify biofilm
formation in a 96 well microtiter plate after 2 hours of adhesion. Utilizing 4 biological replicates per strain,
a maximum of two strains per microtiter is evaluated. Regarding the materials, LB Medium, distilled water,
PBS, crystal violet solution (0.1% w/v in distilled water, in this assay 23 mg of crystal violet in 23 ml
distilled water), 23 ml 96% Ethanol, and the examined bacterial strains of P. aeruginosa PA14 (as stated in
growth rate assay section 3.1) are used.
On Day 1, a preparation of 4 biological replicates o/n cultures per each strain is taken place. On Day
2, for each culture, 1 ml of o/n culture is transferred to a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube, centrifuged at 5000 g for
3 minutes and the supernatant is discarded. A repetition of the previous step is held with the addition of
PBS in order to ensure that the pellet is entirely dissolved by vortex or pipetting. Afterwards, the optical
density at 600 nm (OD600) is measured and, in order to verify accurate measurements, the culture is 10
times diluted in the cuvette. The measured OD600 ought to be between 0.1 and 0.5 for maximum accuracy.
In new 2 ml Eppendorf tubes each culture is diluted to OD600=1 in 1.5 ml of PBS. Subsequently, 200 µl are
transferred to microtiter plate, as the whole culture is utilized for technical replicates, while the blank wells
are filled with 200 µl of PBS, and the microtiter plate is incubated for 2 hours at 37◦C with the lid on, so
the evaporation is better restricted (chronometer is started after the addition of the last sample). After the
incubation, all the liquid is discarded by flicking the plate and all the wells are washed 3 times by adding
250 µl of distilled water with a multi-channel pipette. After discarding the water by flicking as described
before, all the wells are stained with 200 µl 0.1% (w/v) crystal violet with the multi-channel pipette and
the microtiter plate is incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT) with the lid on. Then, the stain
is removed by flicking and the wells are washed 4 times with 250 µl distilled water, which is also discarded
by flicking. Moreover, the plate is dried by tapping with a tissue, 200 µl 96% Ethanol are added to all the
wells with multi-channel pipette and then the plate is incubated for 30 minutes at RT with the lid on so
as the stain is re-solubilized. Finally, the absorbance at 570 nm is measured utilizing the microtiter reader
machine SPT-042-BioTek-Synergy-H1. The results are demonstrated in the Results part (section 4) and the
data analysis has been conducted with Excel and their statistical significance with ANOVA by using Tukey
Test (appendix A.1).
3.3
Cell surface properties assay
For the determination of the cell surface hydrophobicity of the bacterial strain, the improved Salt
Aggregation Test (SAT) assay is performed [29]. As the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, like P.
aeruginosa, is hydrophobic, there are a lot of indications that hydrophobic interactions are the main event
related to the adherence of bacteria to host cells, to prosthetic implants and to plastic in medical devices in
the clinical facilitation [29]. The materials for this assay are the examined bacterial strains of P. aeruginosa
PA14 (as stated in growth rate assay section 3.1), 0.02 M Na2SO4 buffer, adjusted the pH to 6.8, 4 M
(NH4)2SO4 and 2% Methylene blue solution for staining the salt solutions that contain the bacterial strains
for better visualization.
For the experiment, 1 ml of o/n cultures is transferred in 1ml Eppendorf tube and is centrifuged,
the supernatant is discarded by flicking and then the buffer is added (1 ml) and vortex is used briefly for
approximately 5 seconds. After discarding the supernatant, the pellet is completely dissolved with 1 ml
buffer again. Clean empty petri dishes, one for each strain, are divided in 5 spots where 50 µl of different
concentrations of (NH4)2SO4 are placed (4 M, 2 M, 1 M and 0.2 M, while spot 5 is filled with 50 µl of buffer
to be used as negative control) along with 1 µl/ml Methylene blue solution. In the end, 50 µl of culture
from the Eppendorf tube are added in each of the 5 spots and the petri dishes are left for 24 hours on the
laboratory bench at RT with the petri dish lid off. A second series of the experiment was also carried out
with 8 different spots of different concentrations of (NH4)2SO4 (4 M, 2 M, 1 M, 0.8 M, 0.6 M, 0,4 M, 0.2 M,
12
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
3.4
Swimming and swarming motility assay
while spot 8 is filled with 50 µl of (NH4)2SO4 buffer to be used as negative control) together with 1 µl/ml
Methylene blue solution. The results of the aforementioned assay are presented and analyzed in the Results
part (section 4).
3.4
Swimming and swarming motility assay
Plate-based protocols for swimming and swarming motility [30] [31] in the strains of P. aeruginosa
PA14 are carried out in order to observe their differences in motility phenotypes. Regarding swimming, it is
detected in liquid and low viscous conditions and is the result of a functional polar fragellum that the bac-
terium acquires [30]. As for swarming, it is considered to happen on gelatinous and semisolid environments,
such as on epithelial cells of the host, and both fragellum and two biosurfactants produced by the bacterium
(rhamnolipids (RL) and 3-hydroxyaalkanoic acids (HAA)) are required for the accomplishment of this kind
of motility [31].
The materials for this assay are the examined bacterial strains (3 biological replicates per strain) of P.
aeruginosa PA14 (as stated in growth rate assay section 3.1), Bacteriological Agar for the formation of thick
petri dishes (1.25 g in 200 ml distilled water for both swimming and swarming motility and then sterilized by
autoclaving), PBS, 20% Casamino acids aqueous solution (sterilized by autoclaving), 20% Glucose aqueous
solution (sterilized by autoclaving), 1 M MgSO4 aqueous solution (sterilized by autoclaving) and 5X M8
solution (10.68 g Na2HPO4 ∗2H2O, 3.75 g KH2PO4 and 0.625 g NaCl in 250 ml distilled water and then
sterilized by autoclaving) [30] [31]. After autoclaving all the aforementioned solutions, the Bacteriological
agar for both swimming and swarming is mixed with 50 ml 5x M8, 2.5 ml 20% Glucose, 6.25 ml 20%
Casamino acids and 0.25 ml of 1 M MgSO4 [30] [31]. After pouring the agar into petri dishes in order to be
thick enough (approximately 1.5 cm thick in each dish), the plates are solidify at RT for approximately 1 hour
and the cultures preparation is commenced [30] [31]. 1 ml of o/n cultures is transferred to 1 ml Eppendorf
tube, centrifuged at 5000 g for 3 minutes, while the supernatant is discarded, 1 ml (250 µl for swarming
motility) of PBS is added and the pellet is dissolved by vortex or pipetting. The OD600 is measured. To
verify accurate measurements, the culture is 10 times (20 times in swarming assay) diluted in the cuvette
before measuring the optical density. In new 1 ml Eppendorf tubes each culture is diluted to OD600=1 (for
swarming motility, OD600=1, OD600=2.5 and OD600=5 are tested) in PBS to a final volume 100 µl (for
swarming motility assay, 50 µl).
After drying the plates for 60 minutes, for swarming assay, each poured petri dishes is inoculated with
2.5 µl of each bacterial strain culture in the centre of the plate and the drop is left to dry approximately
40 minutes. On the other hand, for the swimming assay, the plates are inoculated in their centre utilizing a
yellow sterile pipette tip which has been dipped in the o/n culture [30] [31]. The agar layer is stabbed into
the agar and not so deep to reach the base of the petri dish [30]. Last but not least, in both assays, the
inoculated plates are sealed very carefully in special plastic bags, in order not to have great loss of humidity,
and are incubated for 48 hours at 37◦C. Afterwards, their phenotype is observed and the diameters of the
circle that every strain produces in the swimming assay are measured [30] [31]. The results are demonstrated
in the Results part (section 4) and the data analysis has been conducted with Excel, while their statistical
significance with ANOVA by using Tukey Test (appendix A.1).
3.5
Colony morphology assay
Regarding the characterization of colony morphology, Congo red and Coomasie brilliant blue assay [32]
and No-Salt LB (NSLB) with 15% Sucrose water solution assay are held. For NSLB assay, the examined
bacterial strains (3 biological replicates per strain) of P. aeruginosa PA14 (as stated in growth rate assay
section 3.1), PBS, NSLB solution (2.5 g tryptone, 1.25 g yeast extract and 3.75 g agar and distilled water
to a final volume of 150 ml, sterilized by autoclaving) and 15% Sucrose aqueous solution (15 g sucrose and
distilled water to a final volume of 100 ml, sterilized by filtration) are used. For Congo red assay, the required
materials are the examined bacterial strains (1 biological replicate per strain) of P. aeruginosa PA14 (as
stated in growth rate assay section 3.1), PBS, Congo red (40 µg/ml), Coomasie brilliant blue (20 µg/ml),
1% agar and tryptone broth (10 g/l) [32].
In NSBL assay, after sterilization, 100 ml 15% Sucrose are added gradually and carefully to NSLB
13
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
3.6
GFP tagging assay
solution while the flask is shaken in order to evade the formation of agar solids.
After the solution is
homogenized, petri dishes are poured, left to solidify for approximately 2 hours and then dried for 20
minutes in the dryer. 1 ml of o/n cultures is transferred to Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 5000 g for
3 minutes, the supernatant is discarded and 1 ml PBS is added and the pellet is dissolved by vortex or
pipetting. Then OD600 is measured, the culture is diluted to OD600=1 and then PBS is added to final
volume of 1 ml. The poured plates are divided in three spots stained by a pen (one plate per each biological
replicate of each strain). Each spot is inoculated with o/n culture and, to be more specific, the first spot
is inoculated with 2 µl of o/n culture, the second one with 5 µl and the third one with 20 µl. When these
spots are dried (approximately 1 hour), the inoculated plates are incubated for 18 hours at 37◦C and then
the formed colonies are observed and photographed in the microscope.
In Congo red assay, the same procedure with NSLB assay is followed but the culture is diluted to
OD600=0.025, PBS is added to final volume of 200 µl and the three spots on the plates are inoculated with 1
µl, 5 µl and 10 µl respectively [32]. Finally, the plates are incubated at RT for up to 6 days and each day the
colonies are observed in the microscope. Colony pictures are taken daily. The results of the aforementioned
assay are presented and analyzed in the Results part (section 4).
3.6
GFP tagging assay
The materials that are needed for the GFP tagging assay are the examined bacterial strains (3 biological
replicates per strain) of P. aeruginosa PA14 (as stated in growth rate assay section 3.1) and two Escherichia
coli strains that contain the conjugation helper plasmid pRK600 and the genome tagging plasmid mini-
CTX respectively, Pseudomonas Isolation Agar (PIA) (the instructions stated on the bottle concerning
the adequate concentrations for petri dish preparations are followed), PBS and the antibiotics Tetracycline
(TET 100 mg/ml in distilled water, sterilized by filtration), Carbenicillin (CM 10 mg/ml in 70% Ethanol),
Gentamicin (GM 10 mg/ml in distilled water, sterilized by filtration). In the first series of the experiments
PIA is mixed with TET and CM solutions respectively, while in the second series with GM solution.
According to the protocol description, 1 ml of each culture is transferred in an Eppendorf tube and
washed twice in PBS. Then the OD600 is measured by diluting 10 times to OD600=1 and the washed
cultures are mixed in a ratio 1:1:1 (each biological replicate of P. aeruginosa PA14 strains with pRK600 and
mini-CTX strains respectively) to a final volume of 200 µl. After centrifuging at 5000 g for 3 minutes and
discarding the supernatant, 50 µl PBS are added and the pellet is dissolved by pipetting. Afterwards, these
50 µl of the aforementioned culture mixture for each biological replicate are added to a new Eppendorf tube
(1 tube per mixture). For the transconjugants selection, the petri dish containing PIA with TET are dried
for 20 minutes in the dryer. Furthermore, the entire bacterial spot is scratched with a 10 µl loop from the
Eppendorf tubes that contain the conjugation mix, transferred to a new Eppendorf tube that contains 1 ml
PBS and completely dissolved with vortex or pipetting. Afterwards, 100 µl from the aforementioned mixture
are placed on the PIA plate that contains TET (Neat) and incubated for 18 hours at 37◦C. In addition,
1/10 of the same mixture from each tube is transferred to a new Eppendorf tube with PBS to a final volume
of 1 ml. Then, 100 µl of each new mixture are placed on the PIA with TET plates (Diluted) and incubated
for 18 hours at 37◦C. After incubation, the produced colonies on the plates, both Neat and Diluted ones, are
transferred on dried PIA plates that contain CM and incubated for 18 hours at 37◦C as described before.
After incubation, both Neat and Diluted colonies are observed and photographed in the microscope in order
to investigate whether the transconjugants are fluorescent or not. In the second series of experiments, the
sole difference in the protocol is that plates with PIA mixed with GM are used for incubation of Neat and
Diluted colonies.
4
Results
4.1
The wild type demonstrated higher growth rate than ∆OSA in rich media
The purpose of the growth rate assay in rich media is to investigate differences among P. aeruginosa
PA14 wild type and the strains with different O-antigen serotypes (∆OSA, O1, O2, O4, O8, O11, O12, O14,
14
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
4.1
The wild type demonstrated higher growth rate than ∆OSA in rich media
O19). Furthermore, the contribution of the various kinds of O-antigen, or even its absence in some serotypes
(∆OSA), concerning bacterial growth rate in nutrient-abundant (LB medium) environment is evaluated.
For this purpose, the 96 well microtiter plate growth rate assay was carried out. The full description of the
aforementioned method is described in Materials and Methods part (section 3). For the current assay, two
different microtiter plates were used, each one containing 6 different strains and three biological replicates
of each strain. The strains that were used in both plates were the wild type and ∆OSA and this is the
reason why the plots of these two strains in fig. 9 and table 1 are 18 instead of 9 of all the other variants.
The plates were incubated in the plate reader machine (SPT-042-BioTek-Synergy-H1) at 37◦C for 18 hours
which was regulated to take reads every 3 minutes. Then the data were selected and analyzed in Matlab,
after logarithmic transformation of the optical density (Log(OD)), and the plots for each technical replicate
of each biological replicate for the P. aeruginosa PA14 strains were constructed (Log(OD) versus time (in
minutes)). The plots are shown in fig. 9.
Figure 9: Growth rate in rich media plots for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of P. aeruginosa
PA14 strains (logarithmic optical density (Log(OD)) vs time (minutes)).
As demonstrated in (fig. 10), four different phases of the bacterial growth cycle; the Lag, the Exponential,
the Stationary and the Death Phase [33]. In the Exponential Phase, a model of balanced bacterial growth
is observed where the cells are divided in a continuous rate and grown by geometric progression, determined
by incubation conditions and by the nutrient abundance of the growth medium [33]. The growth rate of a
bacterium is defined in the Exponential Phase of its growth circle. This is the reason why linear regression
was conducted in the Exponential Phase of each plot with the highest possible accuracy (R2>0.95) and the
growth rate in each plot was determined by the slope of the regression line (table 1). Afterwards, the average
of the growth rate of each biological replicate was calculated and plotted in Box and Whiskers charts in Excel
for each strain (fig. 11).
15
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
4.1
The wild type demonstrated higher growth rate than ∆OSA in rich media
Figure 10: The representative curve of bacterial growth (switch in the number of viable cells vs time) demonstrating
the adaptation of bacterial cells in the new medium (Lag phase) followed by the initiation of commonly cell division
by binary fission (Exponential phase). As the cell growth becomes restricted, cell division comes to an end (Stationary
phase) until finally they indicate loss of viability (Death phase). Figure from [33].
Table 1: Calculation of slope of the regression line in the Exponential phase (growth rate) in rich media conditions
for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of P. aeruginosa PA14 strains.
16
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
4.2
All the variants, except for ∆OSA and O11, showed higher growth rate in minimal media than the
wild type
Figure 11:
Box and Whiskers plots regarding growth rate in rich media indicated by measured optical density
(Log(OD)) for each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1), the asterisks
with the same color demonstrates significant difference among these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01
and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05].
From fig. 11 it is indicated that serotype O1 had the highest growth rate of all strains, while serotypes
O2 and O11 had the lowest ones. The wild type demonstrated a bigger growth rate than the mutant with
the deleted O-antigen cluster (∆OSA), whereas serotypes O12 and O14 showed more or less the same growth
rate with ∆OSA. In addition, O2 and O11 serotypes had even lower growth rate than ∆OSA. Furthemore,
O4 variant showed a higher growth rate than O12 variant, while the wild type presented almost the same
(slightly higher) growth rate with the mutant with deleted and then restored its O-antigen cluster (O19).
4.2
All the variants, except for ∆OSA and O11, showed higher growth rate in
minimal media than the wild type
The purpose of the growth rate assay in minimal media is to investigate differences among P. aeruginosa
PA14 wild type and the strains with different O-antigen serotypes (∆OSA, O1,O2,O4,O8,O11,O12,O14,O19).
Furthermore, the contribution of the various kinds of O-antigen, or even its absence in some serotypes
(∆OSA), concerning bacterial growth rate in conditions devoid of nutrients (M9 Medium) is evaluated. For
this purpose, the 96 well microtiter plate growth rate assay was carried out. The full description of the
aforementioned method is described in Materials and Methods part (section 3). For the current assay, two
different microtiter plates were used, each one containing 6 different strains and three biological replicates
of each strain. The strains that were used in both plates are the wild type and ∆OSA and this is the
reason why the plots of these two strains in fig. 12 and table 2 are 18 instead of 9 of all the other variants.
The plates were incubated in the plate reader machine (SPT-042-BioTek-Synergy-H1) at 37◦C for 36 hours
and was regulated to take reads every 16 minutes. Then the data was selected and analyzed in Matlab,
after logarithmic transformation of the optical density (Log(OD)), and the plots for each technical replicate
of each biological replicate for the P. aeruginosa PA14 strains were constructed (Log(OD) versus time (in
minutes)). The plots are shown in fig. 12.
17
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
4.2
All the variants, except for ∆OSA and O11, showed higher growth rate in minimal media than the
wild type
Figure 12: Growth rate in minimal media plots for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of P. aerugi-
nosa PA14 strains (logarithmic optical density (Log(OD)) vs time (minutes)).
As demonstrated in fig. 10, four different phases of the bacterial growth cycle; the Lag, the Exponential,
the Stationary and the Death Phase [33]. In the Exponential Phase, a model of balanced bacterial growth
is observed where the cells are divided in a continuous rate and grown by geometric progression, determined
by incubation conditions and by the nutrient abundance of the growth medium [33]. The growth rate of a
bacterium is defined in the Exponential Phase of its growth circle. This is the reason why linear regression
was conducted in the Exponential Phase of each plot with the highest possible accuracy (R2>0.95) and the
growth rate in each plot was determined by the slope of the regression line (table 2). Afterwards, the average
of the growth rate of each biological replicate was calculated and plotted in Box and Whiskers charts in Excel
for each strain (fig. 13).
18
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
4.2
All the variants, except for ∆OSA and O11, showed higher growth rate in minimal media than the
wild type
Table 2:
Calculation of slope of the regression line in the Exponential phase (growth rate) in minimal media
conditions for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of P. aeruginosa PA14 strains.
Figure 13: Box and Whiskers plots regarding growth rate in minimal media indicated by measured optical density
(Log(OD)) for each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1), the asterisks
with the same color demonstrates significant difference among these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01
and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05].
Interestingly, except ∆OSA and O11 serotypes, all the other variants showed higher growth rate than
the wild type in minimal media. To be more specific, O8 serotype indicated the highest growth rate followed
by O2 and O14 serotypes. The variant O2 demonstrated an unexpected alteration regarding its growth rate
properties in rich media (lowest growth rate) and in minimal media (the second highest growth rate). On the
other hand, O11 serotype presented again the lowest growth rate among the other variants. Furthermore,
O19 variant showed higher growth rate than the wild type possibly due to complications in the experiments,
such as change in pH of PBS buffer (usually more acidic (less than 7.4)) and utilization of old bacterial
colonies (colonies that are preserved more than two weeks on agar plates in the fridge). It is also essential to
mention that O4 strain demonstrated sightly higher growth rate than O12 strain and both strains indicated
a noticeable reduction compared to their growth rate in rich media, but the most significant decline was
19
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
4.3
O12 serotype showed higher biofilm adhesion compared to O4 serotype
observed in O1 serotype.
4.3
O12 serotype showed higher biofilm adhesion compared to O4 serotype
The purpose of the biofilm adhesion assay is to detect the correlation between biofilm formation and
the presence of O-antigen. Furthermore, the evaluation of the different contribution of O-antigen to various
serotypes of P. aeruginosa PA14 regarding biofilm production and attachment was investigated. The protocol
that was followed is associated with quantifying biofilm in a 96 well microtiter plate after 2 hours of incubation
at 37◦C. In the microtiter plate, six technical replicates for each biological replicate of P. aeruginosa PA14
strains were used per strain with a maximum of two different strains of the bacterium per plate, so 5 different
microtiter plates were utilized in total. Afterwards, the plate was washed with distilled water, stained with
crystal violet 0.1 % (w/v) and washed again, then filled with 96% Ethanol for stain re-solubilization and,
after 30 minutes of incubation, the Absorbance at 570 nm was measured utilizing microtiter reader (SPT-042-
BioTek-Synergy-H1). The full description of the protocol procedure is stated in the Materials and Methods
part (section 3).
After collecting the data from the plate reader in Excel, the average of the absorbance at 570 nm for each
technical replicate of the biological replicates of P. aeruginosa PA14 strains was calculated and t-test was
held in order to confirm that there was a significant difference between the two strains that were examined in
each reader plate. Furthermore, the average of the two columns in the reader plate used as negative controls
(Columns 2 and 11) was calculated and then subtracted from the average of the absorbance at 570 nm for
each biological replicate (table 3). The difference of this subtraction was utilized for Box and Whiskers
charts plotting so as to evaluate the biofilm adhesion of each strain (fig. 15).
20
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
4.3
O12 serotype showed higher biofilm adhesion compared to O4 serotype
Figure 14: Example of crystal violet biofilm quantification adhesion between two serotypes (O1 and O4) in a 96
well microtiter plate.
21
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
4.3
O12 serotype showed higher biofilm adhesion compared to O4 serotype
Table 3: Calculation of the difference of the average of Negative Control columns subtracted from the average of the
Absorbance at 570 nm for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of P. aeruginosa PA14 strains in biofilm
adhesion assay.
Figure 15: Box and Whiskers plots regarding biofilm adhesion indicated by measured Absorbance at 570 nm for
each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1), the asterisks with the same
color demonstrates significant difference among these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01 and * (one
asterisk) for p<0.05].
The serotype O1 demonstrated the highest biofilm adhesion, followed by O14 and O2 serotypes. All
serotypes, except the three aforementioned variants, indicated lower biofilm attachment than the wild type.
The mutant ∆OSA showed the most reduced biofilm adhesion. Furthermore, O11 serotype indicated one of
the most decreased biofilm adhesions that is opposed to the current observations depicting O11 as one of
the most common serotypes isolated from respiratory track of CF patients [13]. This possibly happened due
to switch in pH of PBS buffer (usually more acidic (less than 7.4)). Indeed, in the laboratory this master’s
22
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
4.4
∆OSA was detected to acquire the highest hydrophobicity in SAT assay
thesis has been held it has been observed through a variety of experiments that there is a correlation
between pH change of PBS and decrease in biofilm adhesion of P. aeruginosa strains. In addition, usage of
old bacterial colonies for the experiment could explain the aforementioned result in biofilm attachment assay.
These reasons maybe also justify the observation that the wild type showed increased biofilm formation and
adhesion than the most of the serotypes, including the mutant with the restored its O-antigen cluster (O19).
One of the most surprising results of this assay was that O12 serotype showed enhanced biofilm adhesion
compared to O4 serotype.
4.4
∆OSA was detected to acquire the highest hydrophobicity in SAT assay
The aim of Salt Aggregation Test (SAT) is to observe the bacterial interactions that are related to outer
membrane hydrophobicity and investigate a mechanism on how different types of O-antigen could affect cell
surface properties as well as cohesion of the serotypes to host cells, prosthetic implants and various surfaces
in healthcare installations. In the first series of experiments, in 5 distinct spots of petri dish (1 dish per
strain), 50 µl of 5 different concentrations of (NH4)2SO4 were placed together with 1 µl/ml Methylene blue
solution (4 M, 2 M, 1 M and 0.2 M, while spot 5 was filled with 50 µl of buffer to be used as negative
control). Afterwards, 50 µl of bacterial culture of each strain were added in each of the 5 spots and the petri
dishes were left for 24 hours on the laboratory bench at RT with the petri dish lid off. The results showed no
difference regarding their behaviour in each different salt concentration among the strain, even between the
wild type and the mutant ∆OSA (fig. 16). For better distinction of potential differences regarding surface
hydrophobicity of each variant a second series of experiments was conducted where 50µl of 8 different
concentrations of (NH4)2SO4 (4 M, 2 M, 1 M, 0.8 M, 0.6 M, 0,4 M 0.2 M, while spot 8 was filled with 50
µl of (NH4)2SO4 buffer to be used as negative control) were placed together with 1 µl/ml Methylene blue
solution in 8 different spots of each petri dish (1 dish per strain). Afterwards, 50 µl of bacterial culture of
each strain were added in each of the 8 spots and the petri dishes were left for 24 hours on the laboratory
bench at RT with the petri dish lid off. Noticeably, there were also no difference among the salt aggregation
properties among the strains, except the O-antigen-deficient mutant ∆OSA, which presented detectable
hydrophobicity in (NH4)2SO4 salt concentrations 4 M, 2 M, 1 M, 0.8 M and 0.6 M (fig. 17).
23
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
4.4
∆OSA was detected to acquire the highest hydrophobicity in SAT assay
Figure 16: Salt Aggregation Test (SAT) between the wild type and ∆OSA mutant during the first series of experi-
ments
24
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
4.5
The wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility
Figure 17: Salt Aggregation Test (SAT) among the wild type, ∆OSA mutant, O4 and O12 serotypes during the
second series of experiments
4.5
The wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility
The purpose of swimming and swarming motility assays is to investigate whether the presence of O-
antigen influence the motility characteristics of each strain. Regarding swimming motility, it is indicated in
liquid and conditions with low viscosity and a functional fragellum is needed [30]. Furthermore, the strains
indicate radial migration, meaning that they show a circle-like pattern around the site of inoculation in agar
petri dishes [30]. After drying for 60 minutes, the agar plates were inoculated in their centre utilizing a yellow
sterile pipette tip which had been dipped previously in the o/n culture (3 biological replicates per strain) [30].
The agar layer was stabbed but not so deep to reach the base of the petri dish [30]. The inoculated plates
were sealed very carefully in special plastic bags, in order not to have great loss of humidity, incubated for
48 hours at 37◦C and, eventually, their phenotypes were observed and the diameters of the circle produced
by the biological replicates of each strain were measured (fig. 18). The method is described in detail in
Materials and Methods section (section 3). After collecting the data in Excel, Box and Whiskers charts were
plotted for each variant (fig. 19).
25
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
4.5
The wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility
Table 4: Swimming diameters for the biological replicates of each P. aeruginosa strain
Figure 18: Typical circle-like pattern that all the P. aeruginosa variants demonstrated in swimming motility assay
after 48-hour incubation at 37◦C
26
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
4.5
The wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility
Figure 19: Box and Whiskers plots regarding measured swimming diameters for each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain.
For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1), the asterisks with the same color demonstrates significant
difference among these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01 and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05]
As shown in fig. 19, the wild type demonstrated the highest level of swimming motility, with significant
statistical difference among all the variants, except O8, according to Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1).
Furthermore, O4 serotype indicated the lowest swimming motility. It is also noteworthy that mutant ∆OSA
had one of the highest level of swimming motility, even from serotypes that are associated with high-risk
clones, such as O12, O4 and O11 serotypes. It is important to mention that the time of drying in the
dryer, the loss of humidity from agar plates during incubation due to imperfect sealing of the bags and the
estimation that the thickness of the agar might be less than the adequate one could potentially influence the
results of the aforementioned assay. It may also explain the difference between wild type and the mutant
with the restored O-antigen gene cluster O19.
Concerning swarming motility, it is observed in gelatinous and semisolid environments, such as on ep-
ithelial cells of the host, and both fragellum and two biosurfactants produced by the bacterium (rhamnolipids
(RL) and 3-hydroxyaalkanoic acids (HAA)) are needed [31]. Furthermore, it is essential to mention that P.
aeruginosa PA14 produce a distinctive flower-like motif with noteworthy tendril projections from the spot of
inoculation [31]. After drying for 60 minutes, each plate was inoculated with 2.5 µl of each bacterial strain
culture (3 biological replicates per strain) in the centre of the plate and the drop was left to dry approxi-
mately 40 minutes. Afterwards, the inoculated plates were sealed very carefully in special plastic bags, in
order not to have great loss of humidity, incubated for 48 hours at 37◦C and, eventually, their phenotypes
were observed. The method is described in detail in Materials and Methods (section 3). Surprisingly, any of
the strains did not demonstrate swarming motility as shown in fig. 20. The main reason of this phenomenon
might be the used agar concentration (1.25 g agar in 200 ml distilled water) was not the adequate one.
Indeed, a testing was held with some of the bacterial strains by using a higher agar concentration (2 g in
200 ml distilled water) and flower-like motifs appeared after a 48-hour incubation at 37◦C (fig. 21). The
only mutant that indicated no swarming motility, even in the aforementioned testing, was ∆OSA. It is also
important to mention that the time of drying in the dryer, the loss of humidity from agar plates during
incubation due to imperfect sealing of the bags and the estimation that the thickness of the agar might be
less than the adequate one could potentially influence the results of the assay.
27
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
4.5
The wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility
Figure 20: Swarming motility assay (agar concentration: 1.25 g in 200 ml distilled water) did not show the typical
flower-like pattern for any of the P. aeruginosa PA14 strains after 48-hour incubation at 37◦C
28
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
4.6
Colony morphology results
Figure 21:
Testing of swarming motility between ∆OSA (lower picture) and the wild type P. aeruginosa PA14
(upper picture) at a higher agar concentration (2 g in 200 ml distilled water)
4.6
Colony morphology results
The aim of the colony morphology assays (NSLB and Congo red) is to observe the characteristics of
the biofilm formation of each strain, to investigate potential mechanisms that enhance colony integrity
and survival and to detect whether there is a correlation between the presence of different O-antigens
and bacterial colony properties.
Colony morphology is an easy-conducted phenotypic characteristic and
the morphotype is utilized as a main criterion in the clinical microbiology in order to choose isolates for
further analysis [19].
The colony is a microbial community that consist of genetically indistinguishable
microorganisms where the sole cell faces a constantly altering microenvironment defined by the abundance
of nutrients, metabolites secretion and neighbouring signals [19]. As a result, properties of growth rate,
motility, metabolites and proteins secretion, extracellular matrix structure and cell-to-cell interaction could
rule the macroscopic appearance of a colony [19].
4.6.1
∆OSA appeared to form the most transparent colonies of all the strains in NSLB assay
In NSLB assay, poured plates were divided in three spots stained with pen (one plate per each biological
replicate of each strain, hence 3 biological replicates per strain). Each spot was inoculated with o/n culture
and, to be more specific, the first spot was inoculated with 2 µl of o/n culture, the second one with 5 µl and
the third one with 20 µl. These spots were left to dry (approximately 1 hour), then the inoculated plates
were incubated for 18 hours at 37◦C and formed colonies were observed and photographed in the microscope
(fig. 22 fig. 23 fig. 24). The method is described in detail in Materials and Methods (section 3).
Figure 22: NSLB colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (2 µl spot)
29
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
4.6
Colony morphology results
Figure 23: NSLB colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (5 µl spot)
Figure 24: NSLB colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (20 µl spot)
The colony morphology in NSLB assay was not visible maybe due to the fact that there was no colouring
or staining used. The colonies seemed to acquire more or less the same circular shapes, whereas the colonies
of the serotypes O1 and O12 seemed to form the opaquest (darker, not transparent) of all the variants. In
addition, in the wild type, O19, O2, O8 and O14 serotypes, lysis of the cells was observed (most extensively
in O14 serotype). This phenomenon might be a result of bacteriophage lysis or aytolysis. O19 and the wild
type showed the same phenotypic properties, while ∆OSA appeared to form the most transparent (brighter)
colonies of all the strains.
4.6.2
O12 serotype indicated rougher wrinkled morphology and significant autolysis com-
pared to O4 serotype in Congo red assay
In Congo red assay, the same procedure with NSLB assay was followed and three spots on the agar
plates were inoculated with 1 µl, 5 µl and 10 µl respectively. Finally, the plates were incubated at RT for
up to 6 days and each day the colonies were observed in the microscope. Colony colony pictures were taken
daily ( fig. 25 fig. 26 fig. 27).The method is described in detail in Materials and Methods (3).
30
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
4.6
Colony morphology results
Figure 25: Congo red colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (1 µl spot)
31
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
4.6
Colony morphology results
Figure 26: Congo red colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (5 µl spot)
32
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
4.7
Successful GFP Tagging when Gentamicin (GM) was used, failure with the utilization of Tetracycline
(TET)
Figure 27: Congo red colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (10 µl spot)
Unlike NSLB assay, colony morphology in Congo red assay was much more visible and the shape of
each colony could be better identified, even macroscopically. Moreover, the colonies that presented wrinkled
morphology demonstrated rough shapes detectable with bare eyes. All colonies indicated circular shape.
Through microscope in 1 µl spot, but also seen with bare eyes, wild type, O12, O1, O2, O8 and O19
serotypes demonstrated rough wrinkled colony morphologies, while in O14 and O11 serotypes significant cell
lysis was detected. The mutant ∆OSA indicated a smoother wrinkled colony morphology and only on Day 6.
However it was not detectable macroscopically. In 5 µl and 10 µl spots, all strains showed intensive cell lysis,
mostly from Day 5, except O4 serotype and ∆OSA that indicated a trivial lysis on Day 6. This phenomenon
might be a result of bacteriophage lysis or aytolysis. It is essential to mention that O12 serotype indicated
rough wrinkled morphology and significant autolysis compared to O4 serotype.
4.7
Successful GFP Tagging when Gentamicin (GM) was used, failure with the
utilization of Tetracycline (TET)
The aim of GFP Tagging assay is to detect whether the production of fluorescent transconjugants of the
examined strains of P. aeruginosa PA14 (as stated in growth rate assay section 3.1) is feasible and which
antibiotics or combination of them are efficient for the aforementioned transconjugation. The data from this
assay will be further processed by PhD student Mikkel Anbo in order to assist his scientific research. Along
with the examined bacterial strains (3 biological replicates per strain) of P. aeruginosa PA14, two Escherichia
coli strains, containing the conjugation helper plasmid pRK600 and the genome tagging plasmid mini-CTX
respectively, were also used for this assay. For the first series of experiments, Pseudomonas Isolation Agar
(PIA) was mixed with the antibiotics Tetracycline (TET) and Carbenicillin (CM) respectively, whereas for
the second series of experiments, PIA was mixed with the antibiotic Gentamicin (GM). The protocol is
described in detail in Materials and Methods part (section 3).
The first series of experiments was conducted, where washed colonies were mixed at a ratio 1:1:1 (each
33
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
biological replicate of P. aeruginosa PA14 strains with pRK600 and mini-CTX strains respectively) and
the aforementioned conjugation mix was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube that contained 1 ml PBS,
completely dissolved with vortex or pipetting. Afterwards, 100 µl from each aforementioned mixture were
placed on previously dried PIA plates that contained TET (Neat) and incubated for 18 hours at 37◦C. In
addition, 1/10 of the same mixture from each tube was placed on a new Eppendorf tube with PBS to a final
volume of 1 ml. Then, 100 µl of each new mixture were placed in the PIA with TET plates (Diluted) and
incubated for 18 hours at 37◦C. Surprisingly, no bacterial colonies, both in Neat and Diluted ones, were
grown for any of the variants, even though the plates were left in the incubator at the same temperature for
6 hours more.
As a consequence, a second series of experiments was held, following the same procedure as before but
PIA plates were mixed with GM. After 18 hours of incubation at 37◦C no bacterial colonies were observed,
but after leaving the plates 2 hours more in the incubator at the same temperature, bacterial growth was
detected in both Neat and Diluted colony plates. The Neat colonies were more densely distributed than the
Diluted ones but both demonstrated fluorescent phenotypes when they were observed in the microscope, as
shown in fig. 28.
Figure 28: Comparison between a GFP-tagged P. aeruginosa PA14 transconjugant strain that resulted from GFP
tagging assay (on the left) and a non-GFP-tagged P. aeruginosa PA14 strain (on the right)
5
Discussion
The unprecedented emerge of high-risk multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR)
strains of the Gram-negative bacterium P. aeruginosa that can lead to high morbidity and mortality of im-
munocompromized patients in hospitals and healthcare facilities, mostly patients with cystic fibrosis (CF),
has nowadays increased the concern of the scientific and medical community.
Indeed, it has been indi-
cated that the lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), that are expressed in the outer hydrophobic membrane of Gram-
negative bacteria, and especially the immunogenic and highly variable O-polysaccharide (O-antigen), which
is attached to their outer core, are associated with enhanced characteristics among P. aeruginosa variants,
such as ameliorated biofilm formation and adhesion, excessive antibiotic resistance and more severe prognosis
particularly in CF patients. It has also been demonstrated that the presence of O-antigen contributes to
higher contamination in surgical tools, sinks, pipes and water in hospitals and clinics due to improved biofilm
attachment to these surfaces. Moreover, the recently occurred noteworthy predominance of P. aeruginosa
strains with greater antibiotic resistance and virulence has been detected to be potentially provoked by hor-
izontal transfer and recombination of gene clusters that are correlated with O-antigen serotype switching,
such as an ancestral O4 serotype that obtained O12 features [15] [13].
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate distinct characteristics of different P. aeruginosa PA14
34
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
5.1
Correlation between the presence of O-antigen in P. aeruginosa PA14 strains and enhanced survival
skills in both rich and minimal media conditions
variants, including the wild type, that naturally expresses O19 antigen, the mutant ∆OSA with deleted
O-antigen gene cluster, O1, O2, O4, O8, O11, O12, O14 serotypes and the mutant O19 that its O-antigen
gene cluster had been deleted and then restored.
These properties are related to growth rate in both
rich and minimal media, biofilm formation and adhesion, swarming and swimming motility testing, colony
morphology, surface features of the bacterial cells and GFP tagging with the utilization of different antibiotics.
In addition, a possible mechanism of survival and adaptation in clinical facilitation, such as hospitals and
healthcare centers, as well as a potential linkage of the detected characteristics of the strains to their virulence
and antibiotic resistance, are suggested.
5.1
Correlation between the presence of O-antigen in P. aeruginosa PA14
strains and enhanced survival skills in both rich and minimal media condi-
tions
It is essential to mention that the wild type demonstrated higher growth rate in rich media than ∆OSA
mutant, possibly indicating that the presence of O-antigen is related to improved survival skills. Serotype
O1 has maybe less complex O-antigen than the wild type O-antigen (O19) in order to present the highest
growth rate of all the strains. In addition, O2 and O11 serotypes had even lower growth rate than ∆OSA,
implying that strains O2 and O11 need potentially more energy to express their gene clusters responsible
for production of the O-antigen than all the other variants.
Noticeably, almost all variants, excluding ∆OSA mutant and O11 serotype, showed greater growth
rate in minimal media than the wild type leading to the estimation that the presence of O-antigen gives
the opportunity to the strains to survive even in low-nutrient conditions, such as the sinks and plumbing
in hospitals or on the surface of medical prosthetic devices and implants. The variant O2 demonstrated
an unexpected alteration regarding its growth rate properties in rich media (lowest growth rate) and in
minimal media (the second highest growth rate) leading to the conclusion that the presence of the O-
antigen contributes to better survival skills in environments devoid of nutrients. On the other hand, O11
serotype presented again the lowest growth rate among the other variants that may imply a high energy-
consuming production of the respective O-antigen leading to growth circle inhibition. In addition, O4 strain
demonstrated sightly higher growth rate than O12 strain and both strains indicated a noticeable reduction
compared to the growth rate in rich media. Nevertheless, the most significant declined was observed in
O1 serotype. This indication may suggest that O1, O4 and O12 serotypes need a plethora of nutrients in
order to produce their O-antigens and, in low-nutrient conditions, these 3 serotypes modify the encoding
mechanisms of the O-antigen gene cluster to sustain their energy savings in favor of their survival.
5.2
O-antigen may affect the acquisition of improved characteristics in P. aerug-
inosa PA14 strains concerning biofilm adhesion
∆OSA mutant presented the lowest biofilm adhesion signifying the results of recent studies that the
presence of O-antigen contributes to ameliorated biofilm formation and cohesion of the bacterial strains of
P. aeruginosa. It is also important to mention that a recent study has indicated that the most predominant
serotypes in bloodstream nosocomial infections are O4 (20.6%) followed by O1 (15.6%), O6 (15.6%), and
O11 (15.2%) serotypes [34]. Moreover, O11 serotype has demonstrated the greater mortality, septic shock
and high-risk infections and the second most prevalent MDR phenotype after O4 serotype [34].
These
observations might imply a correlation of O11 and O4 serotypes with higher biofilm formation in epithelial
cells of the blood vessels and/or blood cells, potentially even better than their biofilm cohesion to epithelial
cells of the respiratory track. On the other hand, O1 serotype indicated the main non-MDR phenotype
(78.9%) [34] and hence it is possible that O1 serotype has increased biofilm adhesion in both respiratory
track and bloodstream. One of the most surprising results of this assay was that O12 serotype showed
enhanced biofilm adhesion compared to O4 serotype and might be associated with the unprecedented global
nosocomial spread and MDR outbreak of high-risk clones, such as ST111 which originated from a O4 serotype
that possess the ability to produce O12 antigen through horizontal gene transfer and recombination [13] [15]
[35]. The aforementioned observation is in accordance with many experiments that have been conducted in
the laboratory where this master’s thesis has been held.
35
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
5.3
O-antigen induces low hydrophobicity to P. aeruginosa PA14 strains
5.3
O-antigen induces low hydrophobicity to P. aeruginosa PA14 strains
Regarding Salt Aggregation Test (SAT), the only significant observation was that ∆OSA mutant pre-
sented significant hydrophobicity in most of the salt concentrations. This observation agrees with the sci-
entific literature, as chemotypes of P. aeruginosa that are able to express O-antigen (smooth chemotypes)
indicate the lowest hydrophobicity [24]. This may be the reason why the examined variants demonstrated
higher dissemination in the aqueous solution drops as salt concentrations gradually got lower [24]. It is also
an evidence that the presence of O-antigen is significant for biofilm formation and adhesion to host cells and
medical prosthetic devices [8] [29] [24].
5.4
O-antigen expression in P. aeruginosa PA14 is potentially associated with
reduced swimming motility
Due to complications during the experiments, there was no swarming observed in any of the exam-
ined variants in swarming motility assay. However, in a testing with higher agar concentration (2 g in 200
ml distilled water), some strains indicated the characteristic flower-like pattern. Noteworthy, ∆OSA mu-
tant demonstrated no swarming motility, even during the aforementioned test, suggesting that O-antigen
deficiency leads to the loss of the O-antigen ligase WaaL, which covalently adheres O-antigen to Lipid A
core [36]. This particular ligase seems to be essential for P. aeruginosa swarming motility, as well as in
other Gram-negative bacteria like Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, so the absence of O-antigen is
associated with swarming motility defect [36].
Furthermore, the wild type presented the highest level of swimming motility among all the strains,
whereas serotypes that are correlated with high-risk variants, such as O4, O11 and O12 variants, showed
the lowest swimming motility. These observations accord to recent surveys that the most of P. aeruginosa
variants isolated from cystic fibrosis patients with chronic infections are non-piliated and demonstrate motil-
ity deficiency [8] [37]. This review may also explain that the aforementioned serotypes present the lowest
swimming motility among the other variants [13].
5.5
The presence of O-antigen may affect colony morphology leading to rougher
wrinkled colonies and increased autolysis
By evaluating colony morphology assays, the presence of O-antigen might lead to the formation of highly
rough wrinkled colonies, ameliorated autoaggregation and/or significant autolysis.
Autolysis of the bacterial cell, even though it seems harmful to an unicellular organism, is an adaptive
feature of P. aeruginosa mediated by excessive production and secretion of the quinolone PQS (Pseudomonas
Quinolone Signal), which is an extracellular stimulus, reinforcing the robust response and the formation of
enhanced protective biofilm by released DNA originated from the lysis of the cells [19] [38].
Wrinkled colonies are associated with autoaggregation of bacterial cells in smaller colonies where the
presence of small colony variants (SCVs) has been reported [38] [39]. SCVs have indicated ameliorated biofilm
formation and stronger adherence to surfaces both in host cells and medical prosthetic devices. Furthermore,
SCVs isolated from CF patients sputum are validated to be related to improved resistance to antibiotics,
lung malfunction and protracted persistence of infection [38] [39].
These observations lead to the conclusion that the presence of O-antigen may improve the autolysis and
autoaggregation of the strains, as ∆OSA demonstrated a smoother wrinkled morphology with insignificant
autolysis.
As it was previously said in Theory part (section 1), recent studies have shown that strains
which express O-antigen in their outer membrane (smooth strains) produce rougher colony morphology than
rough strains (those that lack O-antigen) [8]. Moreover, the production of O-antigen could enhance biofilm
formation and attachment to surface in the host cells but also in hospital sinks and medical implants [13] [8].
Hence, it is also possible to be related to the predominance of antibiotic-resistant high-risk clones [13] [8].
Indeed, many strains that exhibited highly rough wrinkled colony morphology and/or noticeable autolysis
in these two aforementioned assays have also demonstrated the highest levels of cohesion during biofilm
adhesion assay held for this master’s thesis (O1, O2, O14 serotypes).
It is important to mention that O12 serotype indicated greater biofilm adhesion, noticeably rougher
36
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
5.6
P. aeruginosa PA14 strains indicated susceptibility to Tetracycline (TET) and resistance to
Gentamicin (GM) during GFP Tagging assay
colony morphology and significant autolysis compared to O4 serotype. This observation possibly justifies the
enhanced characteristics, including significant multidrug resistance and virulence, associated with serotype
switching through horizontal transfer and gene recombination of a O12 variant that originally demonstrated
O4 serotype [13] [15]. It may also explain the noteworthy prevalence of O12 high-risk clones the last four
decades [13].
5.6
P. aeruginosa PA14 strains indicated susceptibility to Tetracycline (TET)
and resistance to Gentamicin (GM) during GFP Tagging assay
Regarding GFP Tagging assay, surprisingly, no bacterial colonies were grown, both in Neat and Diluted
transconjugant colonies, for none of the variants in PIA agar plates with the antibiotic Tetracycline (TET).
This observation lead us to the estimation that the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains are possibly
susceptible to TET or could not receive the genomic tagging plasmid with the usage of TET. Hence this
antibiotic may not be suitable for fluorescent transconjugants production of P. aeruginosa PA14 variants.
Nevertheless, GFP tagging of all the examined strains was feasible by using PIA agar plates with the
antibiotic Gentamicin (GM), both in Neat and Diluted colonies, meaning that GM is suitable for fluorescent
transconjugants production of the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains. It is also indicated that P. aerug-
inosa PA14 variants may have acquired resistance to GM when normally the aforementioned antibiotic is
highly efficacious against this bacterium [40] [41] [42].
5.7
Future prospects
Regarding future prospects, more experiments should be conducted for further analysis of the impact
of O-antigen cell surface structures on clinically relevant phenotypes in other P. aeruginosa strains, such
as in PAO1. Furthermore, it is necessary to expand scientific investigations towards other characteristics of
different P. aeruginosa variants, like susceptibility to antibiotics and twitching motility, and their correlation
with the presence of O-antigen. In addition, it is recommended that the assays held during this master’s
thesis could be replicated and examined in vivo, for instance in murine respiratory track, in order to validate
the observed results and also to investigate whether different O-antigens influence the virulence of each
strain.
37
==PAGE:43==
List of Figures
1
Comparison of the outer membrane of Gram-Positive (on the left) and Gram-Negative bacteria
(on the right). Figure from [9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Analysis of the outer membrane and the lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) on Gram-Negative bac-
teria (pyrogenic means it induces fever when infecting a host, while non-pyrogenic does not
induce fever to the infected host). Figure from [10]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
O-specific antigen (OSA) biosynthesis gene clusters were structured into 11 groups depended
on sequence preservation. Genes were constructed by the utilization of the PFAM database.
Insertion sequences (IS) existing within genes are demonstrated by a minor gray box. Figure
from [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4
Synopsis of the principal properties of the 10 clones P. aeruginosa of greater concern. Black
squares demonstrate that the equivalent variable has been detected for the equivalent clone
(ST: sequence type). Figure from [13]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Global spread (A) and spread in Europe (B) of high-concern clones ST111, ST175 and ST235.
Figure from [3]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
6
Maximum likelihood phylogeny according to the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
the core genomes of 81 P. aeruginosa isolates, evaluated by the usage of the parsnp software
program. All isolates are labelled based on their in silico serotype by the colors and shapes
sketched in the key. Figure from [15]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
7
Pictures acquired from Atomic Force Microscopy surveys of P. aeruginosa cells gathered
in contact mode in air for the wild type of the variant PAO1 (A) and its rough mutants
(mutants devoid of O-antigen) migA (B), wapR (C), rmlC(D). Height pictures (upper panels)
are demonstrated with secluded regions for roughness evaluations. Deflection pictures (lower
panels) contribute to a more detailed description regarding cell morphology. Figure from [8]
[26].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
8
Pictures acquired from confocal laser scanning microscopy surveys of the wild type of P.
aeruginosa PAO1 variant (A) and its rough mutants (mutants devoid of O-antigen) migA
(B), wapR (C), rmlC(D) in order to depict the switch in biofilm formation as a consequence
of the LPSs truncation of the mutants, leading to their O-antigen deficiency. Upper pan-
els demonstrate average projections, whereas lower panels indicate midpoint cross parts of
illustrative microcolonies of the aforementioned bacterial strains. Figure from [8] [26].
. . . .
10
9
Growth rate in rich media plots for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of P.
aeruginosa PA14 strains (logarithmic optical density (Log(OD)) vs time (minutes)).
. . . . .
15
10
The representative curve of bacterial growth (switch in the number of viable cells vs time)
demonstrating the adaptation of bacterial cells in the new medium (Lag phase) followed by
the initiation of commonly cell division by binary fission (Exponential phase). As the cell
growth becomes restricted, cell division comes to an end (Stationary phase) until finally they
indicate loss of viability (Death phase). Figure from [33].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
11
Box and Whiskers plots regarding growth rate in rich media indicated by measured optical
density (Log(OD)) for each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test
(appendix A.1), the asterisks with the same color demonstrates significant difference among
these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01 and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05].
. . .
17
12
Growth rate in minimal media plots for the technical replicates of each biological replicate of
P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (logarithmic optical density (Log(OD)) vs time (minutes)).
. . .
18
13
Box and Whiskers plots regarding growth rate in minimal media indicated by measured optical
density (Log(OD)) for each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test
(appendix A.1), the asterisks with the same color demonstrates significant difference among
these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01 and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05].
. . .
19
14
Example of crystal violet biofilm quantification adhesion between two serotypes (O1 and O4)
in a 96 well microtiter plate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
I
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
List of Figures
15
Box and Whiskers plots regarding biofilm adhesion indicated by measured Absorbance at 570
nm for each P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1),
the asterisks with the same color demonstrates significant difference among these particular
strains [** (two asterisks) for p<0.01 and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05].
. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
16
Salt Aggregation Test (SAT) between the wild type and ∆OSA mutant during the first series
of experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
17
Salt Aggregation Test (SAT) among the wild type, ∆OSA mutant, O4 and O12 serotypes
during the second series of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
18
Typical circle-like pattern that all the P. aeruginosa variants demonstrated in swimming
motility assay after 48-hour incubation at 37◦C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
19
Box and Whiskers plots regarding measured swimming diameters for each P. aeruginosa PA14
strain. For ANOVA with Tukey’s range test (appendix A.1), the asterisks with the same
color demonstrates significant difference among these particular strains [** (two asterisks) for
p<0.01 and * (one asterisk) for p<0.05]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
20
Swarming motility assay (agar concentration: 1.25 g in 200 ml distilled water) did not show the
typical flower-like pattern for any of the P. aeruginosa PA14 strains after 48-hour incubation
at 37◦C
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
21
Testing of swarming motility between ∆OSA (lower picture) and the wild type P. aeruginosa
PA14 (upper picture) at a higher agar concentration (2 g in 200 ml distilled water) . . . . . .
29
22
NSLB colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (2 µl spot)
. .
29
23
NSLB colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (5 µl spot) . . .
30
24
NSLB colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (20 µl spot)
.
30
25
Congo red colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (1 µl spot)
31
26
Congo red colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (5 µl spot)
32
27
Congo red colony morphology assay for the examined P. aeruginosa PA14 strains (10 µl spot)
33
28
Comparison between a GFP-tagged P. aeruginosa PA14 transconjugant strain that resulted
from GFP tagging assay (on the left) and a non-GFP-tagged P. aeruginosa PA14 strain (on
the right)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
29
Tukey’s range test in growth rate (rich media) assay data. Each letter represents a distinct
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 strain; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E
for O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for O19, I for O11, J for O12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
30
Tukey’s range test in growth rate (minimal media) assay data. Each letter represents a distinct
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 strain; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E
for O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for O19, I for O11, J for O12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
31
Tukey’s range test in biofilm adhesion assay data. Each letter represents a distinct Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa PA14 strain; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E for
O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for O19, I for O11, J for O12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VII
32
Tukey’s range test in swimming motility assay data concerning the swimming diameters of
the biological replicates of each Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 strain. Each letter represents
a distinct Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 strain ; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D
for O4, E for O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for O19, I for O11, J for O12
. . . . . . . . . . . . VII
Page II of VII
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
References
References
[1] S. P. Diggle and M. Whiteley, “Microbe profile: Pseudomonas aeruginosa: Opportunistic pathogen and
lab rat,” Microbiology (United Kingdom), vol. 166, no. 1, 2020.
[2] Health protection agency, “Identification of Pseudomonas species and other Non-Glucose Fermenters,”
UK Standards for Microbiology Investigations, no. 3, 2015.
[3] A. Oliver, X. Mulet, C. López-Causapé, and C. Juan, “The increasing threat of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
high-risk clones,” 2015.
[4] S. M. Huszczynski, J. S. Lam, and C. M. Khursigara, “The role of Pseudomonas aeruginosa lipopolysac-
charide in bacterial pathogenesis and physiology,” 2020.
[5] C. Juan, C. Peña, and A. Oliver, “Host and pathogen biomarkers for severe Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infections,” Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 215, 2017.
[6] P. Murray, Manual of Clinical Microbiology. Volume 1. Bacteriology. 2003.
[7] S. L. Gellatly and R. E. Hancock, “Pseudomonas aeruginosa: New insights into pathogenesis and host
defenses,” Pathogens and Disease, vol. 67, no. 3, 2013.
[8] J. S. Lam, V. L. Taylor, S. T. Islam, Y. Hao, and D. Kocíncová, “Genetic and functional diversity of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa lipopolysaccharide,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 2, no. JUNE, 2011.
[9] T. O. Larsen, “Chemistry of Antibiotics 2021,” 2021.
[10] P. Heegaard, “Analysis of the final product; Immunobased
}analytical methods,” 2021.
[11] M. Galle, S. Jin, P. Bogaert, M. Haegman, P. Vandenabeele, and R. Beyaert, “The pseudomonas
aeruginosa type III secretion system has an exotoxin S/T/Y independent pathogenic role during acute
lung infection,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, no. 7, 2012.
[12] E. A. Ozer, E. Nnah, X. DIdelot, R. J. Whitaker, A. R. Hauser, and H. Ochman, “The Population Struc-
ture of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Is Characterized by Genetic Isolation of exoU+ and exoS+ Lineages,”
Genome Biology and Evolution, vol. 11, no. 7, 2019.
[13] E. del Barrio-Tofiño, C. López-Causapé, and A. Oliver, “Pseudomonas aeruginosa epidemic high-risk
clones and their association with horizontally-acquired β-lactamases: 2020 update,” 2020.
[14] H. L. Rocchetta, L. L. Burrows, and J. S. Lam, “ Genetics of O-Antigen Biosynthesis in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa ,” Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, vol. 63, no. 3, 1999.
[15] S. W. Thrane, V. L. Taylor, L. Freschi, I. Kukavica-Ibrulj, B. Boyle, J. Laroche, J. P. Pirnay, R. C.
Lévesque, J. S. Lam, and L. Jelsbaka, “The widespread multidrug-resistant serotype O12 pseudomonas
aeruginosa clone emerged through concomitant horizontal transfer of serotype antigen and antibiotic
resistance gene clusters,” mBio, vol. 6, no. 5, 2015.
[16] E. Del Barrio-Tofiño, I. Sánchez-Diener, L. Zamorano, S. Cortes-Lara, C. López-Causapé, G. Cabot,
G. Bou, L. Martínez-Martínez, and A. Oliver, “Association between Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen
serotypes, resistance profiles and high-risk clones: Results from a Spanish nationwide survey,” Journal
of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, vol. 74, no. 11, 2019.
[17] A. Oliver, A. Mena, and M. D. Maciá, “ Evolution of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Pathogenicity: From
Acute to Chronic Infections ,” in Evolutionary Biology of Bacterial and Fungal Pathogens, 2014.
Page III of VII
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
References
[18] M. M. Masadeh, N. M. Mhaidat, K. H. Alzoubi, E. I. Hussein, and E. I. Al-Trad, “In vitro determination
of the antibiotic susceptibility of biofilm-forming Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus:
Possible role of proteolytic activity and membrane lipopolysaccharide,” Infection and Drug Resistance,
vol. 6, 2013.
[19] E. Rakhimova, A. Munder, L. Wiehlmann, F. Bredenbruch, and B. Tümmler, “Fitness of isogenic colony
morphology variants of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in murine airway infection,” PLoS ONE, vol. 3, no. 2,
2008.
[20] C. Coulon, E. Vinogradov, A. Filloux, and I. Sadovskaya, “Chemical analysis of cellular and extracellular
carbohydrates of a biofilm-forming strain Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14,” PLoS ONE, vol. 5, no. 12,
2010.
[21] C. Ryder, M. Byrd, and D. J. Wozniak, “Role of polysaccharides in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm
development,” 2007.
[22] M. Triantafilou, K. Triantafilou, and N. Fernandez, “Rough and smooth forms of fluorescein-labelled
bacterial endotoxin exhibit CD14/LBP dependent and independent binding that is influenced by endo-
toxin concentration,” European Journal of Biochemistry, vol. 267, no. 8, 2000.
[23] N. Høiby, “A short history of microbial biofilms and biofilm infections,” 2017.
[24] T. A. Soares, T. P. Straatsma, and R. D. Lins, “Influence of the B-band O-antigen chain in the structure
and electrostatics of the lipopolysaccharide membrane of Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Journal of the
Brazilian Chemical Society, vol. 19, no. 2, 2008.
[25] I. E. Ivanov, E. N. Kintz, L. A. Porter, J. B. Goldberg, N. A. Burnham, and T. A. Camesano, “Relating
the physical properties of pseudomonas aeruginosa lipopolysaccharides to virulence by atomic force
microscopy,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 193, no. 5, 2011.
[26] P. C. Lau, T. Lindhout, T. J. Beveridge, J. R. Dutcher, and J. S. Lam, “Differential lipopolysaccharide
core capping leads to quantitative and correlated modifications of mechanical and structural properties
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 191, no. 21, 2009.
[27] M. Kurokawa and B. W. Ying, “Precise, high-throughput analysis of bacterial growth,” Journal of
Visualized Experiments, vol. 2017, no. 127, 2017.
[28] M. Negri, V. Gonçalves, S. Silva, M. Henriques, J. Azeredo, and R. Oliveira, “Crystal violet staining
to quantity Candida adhesion to epithelial cells,” British Journal of Biomedical Science, vol. 67, no. 3,
2010.
[29] F. Rozgonyi, K. R. Szitha, Ă. Ljungh, S. B. Baloda, S. Hjertén, and T. Wadström, “Improvement of
the salt aggregation test to study bacterial cell-surface hydrophobicity,” FEMS Microbiology Letters,
vol. 30, no. 1-2, 1985.
[30] D. G. Ha, S. L. Kuchma, and G. A. OâToole, “Plate-Based assay for swimming motility in pseudomonas
aeruginosa,” Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1149, 2014.
[31] D. G. Ha, S. L. Kuchma, and G. A. OâToole, “Plate-based assay for swarming motility in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa,” Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1149, 2014.
[32] L. Friedman and R. Kolter, “Genes involved in matrix formation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14
biofilms,” Molecular Microbiology, vol. 51, no. 3, 2004.
[33] T. A. Rouault, “MICROBIOLOGY: Enhanced: Pathogenic Bacteria Prefer Heme,” Science, vol. 305,
no. 5690, 2004.
Page IV of VII
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
References
[34] R. Recio, M. Mancheño, E. Viedma, J. Villa, M. a. Orellana, J. Lora-Tamayo, and F. Chaves, “Predictors
of mortality in bloodstream infections caused by pseudomonas aeruginosa and impact of antimicrobial
resistance and bacterial virulence,” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, vol. 64, no. 2, 2020.
[35] S. W. Thrane, V. L. Taylor, O. Lund, J. S. Lam, and L. Jelsbak, “Application of whole-genome sequenc-
ing data for o-specific antigen analysis and in silico serotyping of pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates,”
Journal of Clinical Microbiology, vol. 54, no. 7, 2016.
[36] P. D. Abeyrathne, C. Daniels, K. K. Poon, M. J. Matewish, and J. S. Lam, “Functional characteriza-
tion of WaaL, a ligase associated with linking O-antigen polysaccharide to the core of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa lipopolysaccharide,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 187, no. 9, 2005.
[37] S. Demirdjian, K. Schutz, M. J. Wargo, J. S. Lam, and B. Berwin, “The effect of loss of O-antigen ligase
on phagocytic susceptibility of motile and non-motile Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Molecular Immunology,
vol. 92, 2017.
[38] D. A. D’Argenio, M. W. Calfee, P. B. Rainey, and E. C. Pesci, “Autolysis and autoaggregation in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa colony morphology mutants,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 184, no. 23, 2002.
[39] J. G. Malone, “Role of small colony variants in persistence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in
cystic fibrosis lungs,” 2015.
[40] J. Yayan, B. Ghebremedhin, and K. Rasche, “Antibiotic resistance of pseudomonas aeruginosa in pneu-
monia at a single university hospital center in Germany over a 10-Year Period,” PLoS ONE, vol. 10,
no. 10, 2015.
[41] N. L. Martin and T. J. Beveridge, “Gentamicin interaction with Pseudomonas aeruginosa cell envelope,”
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, vol. 29, no. 6, 1986.
[42] G. Rukholm, C. Mugabe, A. O. Azghani, and A. Omri, “Antibacterial activity of liposomal gentamicin
against Pseudomonas aeruginosa: A time-kill study,” International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents,
vol. 27, no. 3, 2006.
Page V of VII
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
6
Appendix
A
Appendix A
A.1
Results of ANOVA by using Tukey’s range test
Figure 29: Tukey’s range test in growth rate (rich media) assay data. Each letter represents a distinct Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PA14 strain; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E for O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for
O19, I for O11, J for O12
Figure 30: Tukey’s range test in growth rate (minimal media) assay data. Each letter represents a distinct Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa PA14 strain; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E for O2, F for O14, G for
O8, H for O19, I for O11, J for O12
Page VI of VII
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
A.1
Results of ANOVA by using Tukey’s range test
Figure 31:
Tukey’s range test in biofilm adhesion assay data.
Each letter represents a distinct Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PA14 strain; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E for O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for
O19, I for O11, J for O12
Figure 32: Tukey’s range test in swimming motility assay data concerning the swimming diameters of the biological
replicates of each Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 strain. Each letter represents a distinct Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PA14 strain ; A for wild type, B for ∆OSA, C for O1, D for O4, E for O2, F for O14, G for O8, H for O19, I for
O11, J for O12
Page VII of VII
