==PAGE:1==
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia
lipolytica
CFB
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
June, 2022
By
Guangya Shen
Supervisor:
Irina Borodina, Jane Dannow Dyekjær, Jonathan Dahlin, Nikolaus Sonnen­
schein.
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom­
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Kemitorvet 220,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in 5 months at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Bio­
sustainability (DTU Biosustain) in the fulfilment for the master degree in bioinformatics and
systems biology.
Guangya Shen ­ s200104
June 23, 2022
ii
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Yarrowia Lipolytica has been widely used in the food industry, and its high nutritional value
gives it great potential to be considered as a meat alternative. Analysis of its metabolomics
data can help further understand the chemical composition of Y. lipolytica cultures and find
biological routes to enhance its flavor. Therefore, we established a workflow for efficient
analysis of untargeted Y. lipolytica datasets and analyzed a FIA­MS dataset. After the data
processing steps: quality control, Signal/Noise ratio filtering and FDR correction, etc., we
performed a statistical analysis of the final data and visualized the outcome. The results
illustrate that the rising in the nitrogen source of the medium had a restricted effect on the
metabolism of Y. lipolytica. The results also show that although strains incubated with glyc­
erol as a carbon source compared to glucose as a carbon source were more similar to the
chemical composition of beef, but still significantly differ from beef in terms of amino acid con­
tent and content of sugar derivatives. The related findings will help to improve Y. lipolytica
flavor in the future.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Irina Borodina, Jonathan Dahlin, Jane Dannow Dyekjær
for their help and guidance on my project. I appreciate Jonathan Dahlin for exposing me to
such an interesting project and for teaching me metabolomics analysis. I would like to thank
the whole YMZ lab for their assistance to me.
I would like to thank my family and friends for their support in my academic life.
Thank my roommates for bringing me joy during my thesis!
iv
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to Yarrowia Lipolytica
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Y. Lipolytica in food industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
The potential of Y. Lipolytica as a meat alternative . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2.1
Amino Acid Content in Y. Lipolytica biomass . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2.2
The simulation of meat flavors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Influence of medium on producing of valuable metabolites . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3.1
Carbon source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3.2
Nitrogen limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3.3
Low phosphate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3.4
pH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Untargeted metabolomics analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
LC­MS technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
FIA­MS technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
Untargeted metabolomics strategies and challenges . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3.1
Analytical variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3.2
False positives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods and Materials
9
2.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Quality control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Signal/Noise ratio filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Statistical test and FDR correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Software tools and Packages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
v
==PAGE:8==
3
Results
13
3.1
Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Data cleaning performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
CV distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
S/N ratio and its distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Food­related information of metabolites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Visualization of different group comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
The general heatmap of the final dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.2
Clustering of beef with multiple Y. lipolytica groups . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.3
Metabolite difference between beef and Y. lipolytica
. . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.4
Maillard reaction potential­based clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.5
Metabolic differences in Y. lipolytica under different culture conditions
24
3.4.6
Metabolic differences in different Y. lipolytica strains . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.7
Metabolic differences between ST4835 and beef . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Discussions
33
5
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
A Appendix
41
vi
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to Yarrowia Lipolytica
Yarrowia Lipolytica is one of the yeast species that synthesizes a large group of potentially
valuable metabolites such as microbial oils, lipases and other hydrolytic enzymes. According
to research, it is a nonpathogenic species, and its yeast­based process is generally recog­
nized as safe by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
The demand for non­traditional foods has increased as a result of climate change and food
shortages. It speeds up the growth of environmentally friendly food production. Microor­
ganisms are used as an alternative to meat in the food supply. Microorganisms grow very
quickly and are less dependent on water, weather, and soil than animals and plants [1]. The
abundance of nutrients, which are superior to those in meat, is another advantage of microbe
food. Y.lipolytica has been widely used in the food industry for a long time, and the possibility
of using it directly as food has not yet been explored.
1.1.1
Y. Lipolytica in food industry
Y. Lipolytica has unique physiological and biochemical properties that are relevant to applica­
tions in food industry. Some strains are utilised in meat and dairy products help to generate
distinct textures and tastes. Their metabolites can be used as food additives. Y. Lipolytica
strains produce a wide range of flavor compounds. They mostly consist of acids, alcohols, ke­
tones, terpenes, alkanes and cyclohexane. The biogenic amines detected were: putrescine,
cadaverine, histamine, tyramine, spermidine and spermine [2]. Various fatty acid profiles
were obtained when different lipolytic strains were inoculated into pork fat [3].
Palmitic,
stearic, oleic, and linoleic acids were among the most common free fatty acids. These are
thought to be crucial in the flavor industry.
Lactones are volatile essential oils and plant elements that contribute to the flavor and fra­
grance of foods. The FDA has authorized γ­Decalactone (lactone of 4­hydroxydecanoic
acid) as a food­additive which has a peachy flavour. Lactone bioconversion in Y. Lipoly­
tica is caused via peroxisomal b­oxidation. One method for increasing lactone synthesis
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
1
==PAGE:10==
has been to disrupt some of the POX genes that code for acyl coenzyme A (acyl­CoA) oxi­
dase isozymes [2]. Optimization of process parameters, such as constant medium feeding
rate and intermittent fed­batch fermentation strategies, can improve the production of γ ­
Decalactone [4].
1.1.2
The potential of Y. Lipolytica as a meat alternative
1.1.2.1
Amino Acid Content in Y. Lipolytica biomass
Yeast has a well­balanced AA composition, with a high concentration of lysine, the most
scarce AA in cereals and one of the essential amino acids [5]. This AA was found in 6.22 g
16 g−1 N of Y. Lipolytica and 6.46 g 16 g−1 N of S. cerevisiae [6]. Because of its high lysine
content, this yeast may be useful for lysine supplementation. The proportion of lysine in the
proteins of the yeast strains studied was comparable to that of soybean meal proteins [7] [8].
The amount of amino acids present is determined by the content of the medium. The addition
of fatty substrates, such as crude or industrial glycerol or biofuel waste, can increase the
quantity of amino acids [6] [9] [10]. The essential amino acid profile of the proteins of Y.
Lipolytica produced in these fatty substrates is equivalent to or more than the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) needs for the daily human diet. Another
significant difference between traditional protein sources such as plants and animals is that
Y. Lipolytica biomass rich in high­quality proteins can be generated in less time and at a lower
cost.
1.1.2.2
The simulation of meat flavors
Meat flavor is a combination of flavor and scent. Raw fresh meat has essentially little scent
and a metallic taste, but cooked meat gets an aromatic taste only after heat treatment. Sug­
ars, nucleotides, amino acids, peptides, and lipids are the primary precursors for the for­
mation of desirable meat flavor compounds such as pyrazines and thioethers. The major
mechanisms that turn these precursors into volatile flavor chemicals via heat breakdown
include the Maillard reaction and lipid oxidation.
The Maillard reaction is crucial in the formation of volatile flavor molecules and in the appear­
ance of cooked meat. Under particular heating circumstances, the engagement of primary
precursors such as free amino compounds (e.g. amines, amino acids, peptides, or proteins)
and reducing sugars (e.g. ribose, xylose, glucose, or fructose) form Maillard reaction prod­
2
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:11==
ucts [11] [12] [13]. During the heating process, these precursors undergo primary reactions
that result in intermediate products. The intermediate compounds then combine with other
degradation products to generate a complicated mixture of volatiles which is responsible for
flavor, fragrance, and dark color pigmentation.
Since the metabolites of Y. Lipolytica consists of a large amount of various amino acids, and
its culture medium has sugars as a carbon source, it will be easy to perform the Maillard
reaction when food made from Y. Lipolytica is being heated.
Figure 1.1: Y. Lipolytica, cooked as chicken fillet style.
1.1.3
Influence of medium on producing of valuable metabolites
Changing the composition of the culture medium can affect the synthesis of metabolites in
Y.lipolytica, such as choosing different carbon sources, adjusting the content of nitrogen
and phosphate and changing the pH. Understanding Y.lipolytica metabolism data for differ­
ent culture conditions can help develop a reasonable strategy for constructing engineered
strains.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
3
==PAGE:12==
1.1.3.1
Carbon source
Y. Lipolytica is capable of using sugars (glucose, fructose, mannose) as a carbon source,
but also glycerol, organic acids, and alcohols. Y. Lipolytica has the ability to produce citric
acid using both carbohydrate and fatty carbon sources [14]. The carbon source and its
concentration have a considerable impact on the buildup of citric acid. Glucose is thought to
be a common source of carbon for microbial growth. Glycerol is also an optional substrate for
citric acid production because for every 10 kg of biodiesel produced during esterification, 1
kg of glycerol is formed as a by­product [15] [16]. Changing the carbon source from glucose
to oleic acid increases particle size while also altering the lipid and protein composition of
this cellular area [17].
1.1.3.2
Nitrogen limitation
As for Y. Lipolytica, Lipid accumulation is heavily influenced by environmental factors, no­
tably the relative amount of carbon and nitrogen sources. Citric acid production requires
nitrogen concentrations between 0.1 and 0.4 g/L. Higher concentrations promote cell growth
but reduce citric acid production [18]. The accumulation of lipids in response to nitrogen
limitation is the dual result of an increase in acetyl CoA and decreased β­oxidation capacity
produced by excess citric acid [19].
1.1.3.3
Low phosphate
Phosphate regulates enzymes involved in acid generation, low amounts of phosphate in Y.
Lipolytica medium improve citric acid production [18].
1.1.3.4
pH
Some strains of Y. Lipolytica have the best production of citric acid at initial pH values of 7.0
and 5.2. The pH of the medium was reported to have an effect on the production of both
citric and isocitric acids. Overexpression of the DGA1 gene in a medium with glycerol as the
main carbon source produces large amounts of stearic acid (C18:0) at both pH 6.0 and pH
3.0. Overexpression of GUT1 and SCT1 genes at the same time result in efficient production
of PUFAs from crude glycerol at low pH, which is advantageous for industrial applications
[20]. At pH 6.0, it produced more isocitric acid. This is because citric acid transport across
the membrane is stimulated at low pH, whereas isocitric acid transport is independent of the
pH of the medium [21].
4
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Untargeted metabolomics analysis
The goal of metabolomics is to identify and quantify tiny molecules involved in metabolic
processes. Studying the metabolomic data of Y. Lipolytica contributes to the analysis of
the chemical composition of Y. Lipolytica cultures.
For metabolomics experiments, vari­
ous separation and detection techniques are employed. LC­MS has the advantages of high
throughput, mild ionization, and strong coverage of metabolites. It has grown in favor as a
platform for metabolomic investigations. FIA­MS is another useful platform for untargeted
metabolomics. It uses high­resolution MS to resolve complex samples without the need for
front­end separation.
1.2.1
LC­MS technology
Liquid chromatography (LC) is a physical separation method in which the components of
a liquid mixture are distributed between the stationary phase and the mobile phase. After
injection, there is a retention time, which is the amount of time a compound passes through a
chromatography column. If a sample contains multiple compounds, each one in the sample
will cost a different amount of time on the column depending on its chemical composition. The
mass­to­charge ratio (m/z) of charged particles is measured using mass spectrometry (MS)
(ions). The neutral sample molecules are converted and broken down by the ion generator
into gas­phase ions, which are then transported to the mass analyzer. The detector monitors
and amplifies ion currents to compute the abundance of each mass­resolved ion, as the mass
analyzer uses electric and magnetic fields to categorize the ions by their mass. The data
system records, analyzes, saves, and displays data in a computer to form a mass spectrum
that is easily recognizable [22].
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry are combined in LC­MS. To enhance
metabolome coverage, it is essential to examine biological samples in both +ve (positive)
and ­ve (negative) ionization modes throughout a scan range of m/z 50­1000 [23].
1.2.2
FIA­MS technology
Flow injection analysis (FIA)­mass spectrometry (MS) is a method that involves directly in­
troducing samples to the MS instrument without the use of a chromatographic system. The
primary advantages of FIA­MS over LC­MS are the speed of analysis and the simplicity of
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
5
==PAGE:14==
the method [24]. Unlike other MS techniques, FIA­MS has a high throughput without sacrific­
ing sensitivity or accuracy. The limitation of FIA­MS is unable to distinguish metabolites with
identical mass. Today, FIA­MS is becoming more widely accepted as a technique suitable
for research that requires fast and effective quantitative screening of chemicals.
1.2.3
Untargeted metabolomics strategies and challenges
Metabolomics data is divided into targeted and untargeted. Targeted ones attempt to detect
and quantify a small number of known metabolites, ranging from tens to hundreds. Untar­
geted metabolomic are distinguished by the detection of a wide number of metabolites from
each sample at the same time.
Untargeted metabolomics gather data without prior information. This results in that sample
preparation and analytical procedures will have a direct influence on the data quality, such as
the types of the metabolites, sample preparation, instrumentation platforms, and parameters.
1.2.3.1
Analytical variation
The performance of the platform applied to analyse the metabolite, as well as instrument
drift, account for a major portion of the analytical variability. The capacity of a technique
to detect a specific metabolite involves a complicated interplay of its physical and chemical
characteristics, and it is also affected by the composition and concentration of the sample.
A variety of reasons limit the amount of samples accessible for metabolomics, and certain
kinds of sample preparation are expensive. When the number of groups in an experiment
is too large, sample preparation takes a long time, which affects sample composition. As a
result, dealing with sample variation at the appropriate number of replicates per group is a
key step in metabolomics analysis.
1.2.3.2
False positives
False positives are another major challenge in the metabolomics analysis process. Metabo­
lite annotations are obtained by searching a database of neutral masses vs putative small
molecule masses. Because neutral masses are inferred from experimental m/z, the exis­
tence of significant isotopic and adduct characteristics may confound the estimation of neu­
tral masses and lead to false positive identifications. The hypothesis test results are subject
to the possibility of false positives. On the contrary, in untargeted metabolomics, the data
analysis process tests the hypotheses for each metabolite in each group of sample findings.
6
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:15==
As a result, there is the possibility of a significant number of false­positive outcomes when
analyzing large metabolomics datasets. The limitation of the sample size also increases the
generation of false positives.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:17==
2
Methods and Materials
2.1
Dataset
The dataset in our work is a metabolomic dataset derived from the FIA­MS. Strain types
and medium composition represent the differences between the different groups in this
dataset. The dataset includes 6 wild type Y. lipolytica strains, ST4835, ST10955, ST10958,
ST10959, ST10960 and one Yarrowia galli strain, ST10957, one Yarrowia divulgata strain,
ST10962, one Yarrowia porcina strain, ST10963 (table 2.1). Each strain has a group with
minimal nitrogen­limited Y.lipolytica medium and a group with high nitrogen source medium
((NH3)2SO4 15g/L) (table 2.2) (table 2.3). For ST4835, there are four other different condi­
tions: low phosphate (0.5g/L), glycerol as a carbon source (60g/L), pH 6.0, glucose as carbon
source with ribose (20g/L). As for the whole dataset, all components and their concentration
in each group are the same except for the variables. In addition, there are one beef group
(minced beef meat, from supermarket in Sweden) and one quality control(QC) group. QC
group has 9 samples, and each of the other groups has 4 samples. In the raw data, 287
metabolites were discovered. The dataset also has the information of sample wet weight,
volume, ionization mode(positive).
Table 2.1: The information of strains in the dataset
CfB ID
Isolate ID
Species
Source
ST10955
Y­7754
Yarrowia lipolytica
Meat product, USA
ST10956
Y.00587
Yarrowia lipolytica
Margarine, Netherlands
ST10957
Y.00639
Yarrowia galli
Pears, USA
ST10958
Y.00879
Yarrowia lipolytica
Sauerkraut, Hungary
ST10959
Y.01087
Yarrowia lipolytica
Smoked fish
ST10960
Y.01481
Yarrowia lipolytica
Chicken, USA
ST10962
Y.02062
Yarrowia divulgata
Chicken breast, Hungary
ST10963
Y.02100
Yarrowia porcina
Minced pork, Hungary
ST4835
Y­1095
Yarrowia lipolytica
Industrial citrate producer, Japan
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
9
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.2: Six groups of different medium composition
Low phosphate
(Low­P_)
Glycerol
as carbon source
(Gly_)
Control
(Glu_)
High nitrogen
(N­high_)
pH = 6
(pH6_)
+ Ribose
(GR_)
Glucose [g/L]
60
­
60
60
60
60
Ribose [g/L]
­
­
­
­
­
20
Glycerol [g/L]
­
60
­
­
­
­
(NH3)2SO4 [g/L]
5
5
5
15
5
5
pH
7
7
7
7
6
7
Phosphate [g/L]
12
12
12
12
12
0.5
Table 2.3: The dataset composition
Low phosphate
(0.5 g/L)
Glycerol
as carbon source
(60 g/L)
Glucose
as carbon source
(60 g/L)
High nitrogen
(15 g/L)
pH = 6
Glucose
as carbon source
(60 g/L)
+ Ribose
(20 g/L))
ST4835
ST4835
ST4835
ST4835
ST4835
ST4835
ST10955
ST10955
ST10956
ST10956
ST10957
ST10957
ST10958
ST10958
ST10959
ST10959
ST10960
ST10960
ST10962
ST10962
ST10963
ST10963
2.2
Quality control
Analyzing quality control (QC) samples is the most effective way to detect analytical variation.
Replicas of the QC group were created by pooling aliquots from each other sample. Calculat­
ing the coefficient variation (CVQC) of each mzRT value of each metabolite (or mzRT­value)
in the dataset that was used to assess the performance of the analytical platform for each
characteristic detected in real samples. It is shown in eq. (2.1). Due to this concept, CVQC
is expected to be as low as possible to ensure that instrument detection has good stability.
For this data set, the CVQC limitation is set to 0.15. It means that a metabolite/feature can
only be trusted if the corresponding CVQC is below 0.15
CVQC = SQC
¯XQC
(2.1)
10
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Signal/Noise ratio filtering
The Signal/Noise ratio(S/N ratio) is another method of removing unreliable data.
The
metabolomics dataset always has a blank sample group to ensure that the instrument is
not measuring noise/contaminants. Therefore, the difference between blank samples and
experimental samples is expected as large as possible. The S/N ratio is calculated to screen
which mzRT features or metabolites can be trusted for the subsequent process. To compute
the S/ N ratio, we divide the value detected for each individual sample under each feature by
the mean of values for that feature in the blank group. It is shown in eq. (2.2). We want this
ratio to be greater than a certain value, for example, 2. Then we count how many samples
under that feature have the ratio that satisfies this requirement. In the analysis of this data
set, we would like the data for one compound that can be used for the subsequent analysis
to have at least 25% of the samples with an S/N ratio greater than 2 that filter out the poor
quality data while retaining enough data for further processing.
S/N = Xindividual
¯Xblank
(2.2)
2.4
Statistical test and FDR correction
In untargeted meatbolomics studies, the metabolite content of samples from different groups
is compared to see if the experiment variables have an effect on metabolite yield. In most
cases, a hypothesis test is used. It is classified into two types: parametric tests and non­
parametric tests. Because parametric tests require that the samples being tested have a
normal distribution, it is usually necessary to test the samples’ normality before deciding
which test to use. The normality test, however, cannot be performed effectively because
the sample size in our dataset is too small (n < 5). In fact, the results of parametric and
nonparametric tests for untargeted meatbolomics data do not differ significantly [25], so we
chose to use the t­test.
To deal with the possibility of false positives, the p­values of hypothesis tests must be strictly
limited. As a result, the p­values obtained from multiple parallel tests for the identified mzRT
features must be corrected. This is done to reconfigure the probabilities obtained from re­
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
11
==PAGE:20==
peated statistical tests. False Discovery Rate (FDR) is a way to correct the P­values by
calculating the rate of significant difference being false. For each feature in tests, the FDR
correction computes a p­corrected value or q­value. This q­value is determined by the p­
value and the distribution of all p­values for the whole group test. The related q­value for
each feature can be thought of as the expected proportion of false positives when such a
feature is stated to be a significant change. For example, a q value of 0.05 indicates that 5%
of the significant results will be false positives. The equation is shown in eq. (2.2), where V
is the number of false discoveries, R is all positives.
FDR = E[V /R|R > 0] × P(R > 0)
(2.3)
2.5
Software tools and Packages
All programming work of the project is done in python3 on Jupyter Notebook. The code is
divided into three scripts: data processing, visualization, and Pubchem information extrac­
tion (see in appendix). The Pandas 1.3.5 package is responsible for the majority of data
organization. The Statsmodels package is in charge of statistical analysis and the automatic
correction of the FDR. Data visualization is handled by Matplotlib 3.1.3 and Seaborn 0.10.0
packages. PubChemPy 1.0.4, as an API, can be used in a Python environment to extract
desired compounds information such as classification, safety, and usage, etc., directly from
the PubChem database.
12
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:21==
3
Results
3.1
Workflow
To analyze the dataset, we construct the data analysis workflow that encompasses the entire
process from obtaining data in the laboratory to ultimately deriving valuable conclusions from
the data. First step: The lab technician obtains samples from the lab and get metabolomics
data through the analysis platform. Second step: Null values in the data are removed and
the data are normalized according to the weight and volume of the sample. Third step: The
data are processed using the CV of the QC samples in the data. Fourth step: On the basis of
the S/N ratio distribution of the dataset, the data were filtered by setting a suitable criterion.
Fifth step: Samples from different groups were compared using statistical methods, such as
t­test. Sixth step: FDR correction was performed on the p­value of the hypothesis test to
reduce the presence of false positives. Seventh step: Visualization of processed data and
statistical results. Eighth step: Extracting valuable insights from the analysis. The analysis
yields information that can be used to guide further experimental design.
Figure 3.1: The workflow of untargeted metabolomics analysis.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2
Data cleaning performance
3.2.1
CV distribution
A pool QC sample was created to account for instrumental variation over time (containing
aliquots from all other samples). In order to quantify instrumental fluctuations or metabolic
changes over time, the same QC­sample was repeatedly injected throughout the run. Each
metabolite’s coefficient of variance (CV) was calculated in order to quantify this variation
fig. 3.2. Metabolites with a high CV (>15 percent) were then filtered out and excluded from
further investigation. The dataset was reduced from 287 to 203 metabolites when it was
discovered that 84 metabolites had high CV.
Figure 3.2: CV of the dataset
3.2.2
S/N ratio and its distribution
The majority of the dataset’s metabolites are connected to some level of background noise
(detected in blank samples). We compared the signals to the corresponding value in the
blank, computing a Signal/Noise (S/N) ratio, to make sure that the signal detected for a
given sample is meaningful (as opposed to random noise). Each metabolite in each sample
had its S/N ratio assessed. The cutoff point for considering the value for further analysis was
chosen to be a S/N ratio of 2.
We added an additional filter, requiring that 25% of the samples had S/N ratios greater than 2,
in order for that metabolite to be kept for further analysis and ensure that there were enough
samples with a detectable signal fig. 3.3. In our case, this required that the S/N ratio threshold
be crossed by at least 23 out of 92 samples. The violin plots shows S/N ratio distributions for
each metabolites fig. A.6. The dataset was reduced from 203 to 121 metabolites because
82 metabolites were found to have low S/N ratios or occur only in a small subset of samples.
14
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: S/N ratio filtering
3.3
Food­related information of metabolites
The desire to convert Y. lipolytica into a meat alternative allowed us to concentrate on the
flavor of the metabolites in the samples. 17 of the 121 metabolites had taste or odor in­
formation registered in PubChem. , but the majority of them had not [table 3.1]. Most of
them have a good contribution, especially L­glutamate of umami taste. Nicotinamide has a
bitter taste. Although L­methionine is sulfurous and faint, it can probably forms nice flavor
molecules during the Maillard reaction.
3.4
Visualization of different group comparisons
3.4.1
The general heatmap of the final dataset
In the dataset, we want to compare the metabolite composition of beef and Y. lipolytica sam­
ples and find the differences. Heat maps are widely used in the visualization of metabolomic
and transcriptomic data because they provide a broad view of the dataset. The difference
in color blocks in the heat map allows us to clearly see the distinction in data composition
between different groups of samples. Because of the wide range of compound content val­
ues between different samples, direct graphing would result in poor display. Therefore, the
relative value of the sum of each compound data is calculated for each sample to control
the range between 0 and 1 for each compound feature (fig. 3.4). The brighter the color, the
higher the relative value of the feature values compared with the other groups, and the darker
the color, the lower the relative value in comparison. For example, (S)­lactaldehyde had a
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
15
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.1: Metabolites that can be found with taste or odor information in PubChem database
Metabolite
Cid
Taste information
Odor information
D­glucitol
5780
Sweet taste, approx 60%
as sweet as sugar (wt/wt)
Odorless
Oleate
445639
Peculiar lard­like taste
Peculiar lard­like odor
Diacetyl
650
Taste characteristics at 50 ppm:
sweet, butter, creamy and milky
Quinone odor; vapors have
a chlorine­like odor
Nicotinamide
936
Bitter taste
Odorless
L­glutamate
33032
Umami sour taste
Odorless
L­proline
145742
Sweet
Odorless
L­glycine
750
Sweet
Odorless
L­aspartate
5960
Acidic/neutral
L­serine
5951
Sweetish taste, insipid aftertaste
Glycerol
753
Sweet, warm taste
Mild Odor
L­methionine
6137
Sulfurous
Faint
L­histidine
6274
Sweet
D­fructose
2723872
Sweet
Odorless
Putrescine
1045
Strong piperidine­like odor
Acrylamide
6579
Odorless
Itaconate
811
Characteristic odor
Methylglyoxal
880
Pungent
high relative content in ST4835 with Glycerol as the carbon source. N­phosphocreatine, an
endogenous substance found primarily in the skeletal muscle of vertebrates, was found in
high concentrations in beef samples.
In contrast, several metabolites present in Y. lipolytica were not detected in the beef
samples.
They include:
4­methyl­5­(2­phosphonooxyethyl)thiazole, 2’­deoxyguanosine,
sphinganine, adenosine 3’;5’­bismonophosphate, 3­dehydro­4­methylzymosterol, methyl
alpha­D­glucopyranoside, 4­hydroxyphenyl acetate, ergosterol ester backbone, adenosine
2’­phosphate, phytosphingosine, AMP, decanoate, L­cystathionine, 5­(2­hydroxyethyl)­4­
methylthiazole. Ergosterol is a sterol found in fungal cell membranes and is a precursor
form of vitamin D2.
16
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: Heat map of the final dataset. The color of each small square corresponds to
the ratio of the value to the sum of the feature values of the compound in which the value is
located. Blue represents null values.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
17
==PAGE:26==
3.4.2
Clustering of beef with multiple Y. lipolytica groups
Y. lipolytica has great potential as a meat alternative. In the dataset, there are samples from
different strains and different culture conditions, among which we want to find the closest to
the composition of the compounds in beef and use it as a basis to construct an engineered
strain. This aim can be achieved by performing cluster analysis on all sample groups. Before
clustering all groups, all null values in the dataset should be removed. Therefore, compound
features with null values are removed from the dataset, including hypotaurine, hypoxanthine,
2­methylbutanol, in addition to those not contained in beef. When performing the clustering
analysis, the algorithm needs to calculate the distance between samples (e.g. Euclidean
distance), such as KNN, kmeans, and other clustering algorithms. If the range of values of
one feature is very large, then the distance calculation depends mainly on this feature, so it
is necessary to normalize the data: this is done by subtracting the mean of the compound
column and dividing it by the standard deviation, and the resulting value is called the Z­score.
The results of the clustering analysis are also illustrated with a heat map (fig. 3.5). The tree
on the left side of the figure shows the similarity relations between the different groups. In
this dataset, the closest to beef is ST4835 cultured with glycerol as the carbon source. Most
of the compounds were lower in the beef samples than in the yeast. Both in beef, and in
Gly_4835, several compounds were significantly higher than in the other groups of samples.
A specific comparison will be in the later analysis presented. During the clustering process,
samples derived from the same strain had a higher similarity compared to samples from the
same culture conditions. This indicates that changing the nitrogen source concentration has
a limited effect on the metabolism of Y. lipolytica. The shift in phosphate concentration in the
medium made a big change in the metabolic data of ST4835.
Further comparisons of variability were made between yeast groups. To exclude the inter­
ference of beef samples in the clustering to other samples, the data set with beef data ex­
cluded was re­clustered. In the newly generated heat map, ST10962, ST10957 and ST10960
showed large differences from the other six strains (fig. 3.6). The differences in metabolic
data did not clearly distinguish Y. lipolytica from the other three species. The clustering
results did not change much from the previous ones, demonstrating the great metabolic dif­
ferences between beef and Y. lipolytica.
18
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Cluster map of the final dataset. The columns are metabolites and the rows are
sample groups. Brightness means high content level and darkness means low content level.
Data was standardised to be Z­score.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Cluster map of the final dataset without beef group. The columns are metabolites
and the rows are sample groups. Brightness means high content level and darkness means
low content level. Data was standardised to be Z­score.
20
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:29==
3.4.3
Metabolite difference between beef and Y. lipolytica
Using the beef samples as controls, relative values can be obtained for each group of sam­
ples. Due to the large differences in the metabolism of beef and Y. lipolytica, a base of 2
logarithms was obtained for all ratios to better demonstrate the effect. Compounds with mean
values greater than 1 or less than ­1 were selected, i.e., the amount in Y. lipolytica more than
twice as much as in beef, and vice versa. The results obtained were considered as com­
pounds with a large difference in content between the beef and yeast samples (fig. 3.7). It
can be noticed that the Y. lipolytica samples have a higher relative content of nucleic acids
and their derivatives. In addition, the relative content of some flavor related compounds, like
diacetyl(buttery, creamy), glutamate(umami) and putrescine(piperidine­like odor), are also
higher in yeast. In contrast, in beef, N­phosphocreatine, hypoxanthine, carnitine derivatives,
inosinic acid 2­methylbutanol, and nicotinamide(a form of vitamin B3) were relatively high.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.7: Composition difference between beef samples and Y. lipolytica samples. The
x­axis is the logarithm of the content difference with a base of 2, and the y­axis is the name
of each compound. The values of beef samples were used as controls, and metabolites with
more than double the difference were selected.
3.4.4
Maillard reaction potential­based clustering
The Maillard reaction was first discovered by the French chemist L.C. Maillard in 1912.
Specifically, it refers to the process in which reducing sugars (carbohydrates), amino acids,
22
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:31==
and proteins in food undergo a complex series of reactions at a certain temperature, around
140 to 165 ° C (280 to 330 °F), to produce both flavor compounds and browning compounds.
Maillard reaction increases the flavor substances in the food. At higher temperatures of
grilling and frying­type cooking, the Maillard reaction will be more intense. In the frying of
steak, the beef that comes with glucose and amino acids will undergo a Maillard reaction.
When comparing sugars, amino acids and their derivatives in beef and Y. lipolytica, the
group that is closest in flavor to beef when cooked can be identified. The data of relevant
compounds in the dataset were selected and clustered for multiple groups of samples. The
results showed that Gly_4835 remained as the Y. lipolytica group closest to the beef sam­
ple, and the similarity between the two groups was much greater than the other groups of
data (fig. 3.8). In addition to this, ST4835 also showed a better similarity to beef in terms of
substrate composition for the Maillard reaction compared to the other strains.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Cluster map based on Mailldard reaction substances. The columns are Mailldard
reaction substances, and the rows are sample groups. Brightness means high content level,
and darkness means low content level. Data was standardised to be Z­score.
3.4.5
Metabolic differences in Y. lipolytica under different culture conditions
Different culture conditions can bring about differences in Y. lipolytica metabolism. To com­
pare the effects of changes in the components of the medium on Y. lipolytica, we compared
different groups of conditions for the same strain. Volcano plots give a good illustration of the
significant differences between the group comparisons. Usually, the P value corrected by
24
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:33==
FDR is taken as the negative logarithm of the base 10, so when the difference in comparison
is more significant, the value will be larger. The logarithm of the relative content of one group
versus the other with a base of 2 is called log2FC. The cut­off points requires log2FC less
than minus 1 or greater than 1 means that there is at least a doubling of the difference in the
content of each metabolite between the two groups, it ensured that metabolites with large
differences in content could be screened out.
Figure 3.9: Volcano plot of metabolite difference in high nitrogen source and normal culture
conditions. The x­axis is the log2 logarithm of the relative content and the y­axis is the neg­
ative log10 logarithm of the FDR­corrected P value of t­test, α = 0.05. In FDR correction, q
< 0.05.Compounds with relative content greater than 1(orange points) or less than negative
1(blue points) are selected.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
25
==PAGE:34==
We compared the groups with different concentrations of nitrogen sources. As shown, in all
nine strains, when the concentration of nitrogen source was raised from 5g/L to 15g/L, almost
no significant changes in the content of metabolites were observed (fig. 3.9). In contrast, the
glucose carbon source group of ST4835 was used as a control to compare the metabolite
content of the other five culture conditions of this strain, and significant changes were found in
the content of some compounds (fig. 3.10). The lower phosphate leads to an increase in the
content of some amino acids and their derivatives￿such as histidine, tyrosine, arginine. The
change in carbon source from glucose to glycerol, or the addition of ribose, led to a decrease
in the amount of some sugars and their derivatives in the metabolites, while leading to an
increase in the amount of some amino acid derivatives (fig. 3.11).
26
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10: Volcano plot of metabolite difference of ST4835 after changing the medium
composition. The x­axis is the log2 logarithm of the relative content and the y­axis is the
negative log10 logarithm of the FDR­corrected P value of t­test, α = 0.05. In FDR correction, q
< 0.05. Compounds with relative content greater than 1(orange points) or less than negative
1(blue points) are selected.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.11: The content difference of Maillard reaction substrates in ST4835 after changing
the medium composition. The x­axis is the log2 logarithm of the relative content and the
y­axis is compound name. Compounds with relative content greater than 1(orange bar) or
less than negative 1(blue bar) are selected.
3.4.6
Metabolic differences in different Y. lipolytica strains
In the results of clustering, we found that different strains differed dramatically in terms of
metabolism. After comparing two by two different strains under the same culture conditions,
we found that the same outcome was obtained (fig. 3.12). The glucose carbon source group
of ST4835 was used as a control and compared with the other eight strains. The metabo­
lite content in the samples of ST10956 and ST4835 did not differ significantly, in line with
the fact that the groups of the two strains were close to each other in the clustering tree
28
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:37==
fig. 3.6. In contrast, the samples of the other seven strains showed significant differences in
multiple metabolites compared to strain 4835. Among them, ST10955, ST10957, ST10958,
ST10960, ST10962, and strain 10963 samples had higher levels of multiple Maillard reaction
substrates than ST4835 (fig. 3.13). Although ST10957 was metabolically very different from
ST4835 in overall, only carnitine were significantly lower than ST4835 in the substrates of
the Maillard reaction.
Figure 3.12: Volcano plot of metabolite difference in different Y. lipolytica strains. The x­axis
is the log2 logarithm of the relative content and the y­axis is the negative log10 logarithm of
the FDR­corrected P value of t­test, α = 0.05.. In FDR correction, q < 0.05. Compounds
with relative content greater than 1(orange points) or less than negative 1(blue points) are
selected.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.13: The content difference of Maillard reaction substance in different Y. lipolytica
strains. The x­axis is the log2 logarithm of the relative content and the y­axis is compound
name. Compounds with relative content greater than 1(orange bar) or less than negative
1(blue bar) are selected.
3.4.7
Metabolic differences between ST4835 and beef
In the clustermap, ST4835, cultured with glycerol as a carbon source, was analyzed as Y.
lipolytica strain closest to beef. A specific comparison of the metabolic composition of the
two will help how to make the flavor of Y. lipolytica closer to beef when constructing the
engineered strain. Glycerol­cultured ST4835 had more than four times the amount of many
amino acids in metabolites than beef, while the concentration of some sugar derivatives,
such as fructose, was lower than beef. Meanwhile, the content of N­phosphocreatine was
30
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:39==
much higher than that of Y. lipolytica in beef.
Figure 3.14: Metabolite difference between ST4835 and beef. For the volcano plot, the x­
axis is the log2 logarithm of the relative content and the y­axis is the negative log10 logarithm
of the FDR­corrected P value of t­test, α = 0.05. In FDR correction, q < 0.05. Compounds
with relative content greater than 1(orange points) or less than negative 1(blue points) are
selected. The barplot shows content difference of Maillard reaction substance.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:41==
4
Discussions
Y. lipolytica has great potential to be applied as a type of meat alternative, The analysis of
its metabolomic data can help to gain valuable information about the flavor and nutritional
benefits. In our work, a workflow was established to be able to process the untargeted
metabolomic data of Y. lipolytica in an efficient way. In the data cleaning process, the range
of values of CV and S/N ratio during quality control has a great impact on the final data
obtained. When the initial dataset is of poor quality, setting strict filtering criteria often results
in the removal of most of the data. Loose restrictions on the criteria can lead to data that
cannot be analyzed effectively. Therefore, it is necessary to observe the distribution of CV
values and S/N ratio before data processing and establish a reasonable criterion.
For metabolomics analysis, the sample preparation and the accuracy of the instrumentation
greatly affects the data. Some important compounds such as cyteine may react during sam­
ple preparation and therefore it requires the identification methods of better performance.
For metabolome data based on LC­MS or FIA­MS, there are often many null values in the
derived data set because of the flawed precision of the instrumental measurements. The
experimentally obtained samples are constrained by cost and time, and the number of repli­
cates of the samples is often limited. In our dataset, there are four replicates for each data
set. Therefore, when more than two nulls appear in a data group, we have to discard the
whole group. The limited sample size also affects the number of false positives in the hypoth­
esis test. When the stability of the data is poor and the number of replicates in the sample
is too low, the number of false positives will also be high. It is necessary to apply the FDR
correction to the P value in the t­test. q value is set to determine the percentage of false
positives that can be accepted in the results. In addition to FDR, there are other methods to
correct the P value, such as Bonferroni Correction [26].
By comparing the compound composition of beef versus Y. lipolytica in our dataset, large dif­
ferences were found in the metabolite content, although the data from the ST4835 Glycerol
carbon source group were closest to those of beef. The clustering outcomes were influ­
enced by the choice of compounds. Clustering is done by calculating the distance between
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
33
==PAGE:42==
samples (e.g., Euclidean distance) and generating a distance matrix. There are many meth­
ods to calculate the distance matrix, we choose the Ward variance minimization algorithm.
Besides that there are the Nearest Point Algorithm, the Farthest Point Algorithm, and other
approaches [27] [28] [29]. Support vector machine SVM can also be used as a tool for clus­
tering [30]. After exploring with different tactics, we discovered that the output of various
algorithms could vary only slightly.
This workflow built for analyzing yeast metabolism data can be used for the analysis of other
analysis platform datasets in spite of the FIA­MS dataset for this project. We also attempted
data processing on a dataset from LC­MS. Before processing, the composition of the dataset
needs to be taken into account.
Y. lipolytica, as a widely used microorganism in the food industry, has not been used com­
mercially for direct food production. Hence, at the beginning of the study, suitable engineered
strains need to be selected for modification and gene editing to adjust the yield of specific
compounds to achieve enhanced flavor and texture. Metabolomics data from Y. lipolytica
need to be further analyzed, and there are correlations between different metabolites in the
biosynthetic pathway. Our results show that an increase in the content of the Millard reaction
substrate does not necessarily lead to a strain that is more similar to beef. To more closely
resemble meat flavor, it may be necessary to build engineered strains to increase the produc­
tion of sugar derivatives in Y. lipolytica as well as some compounds that are more abundant
in meat, such as creatine and carnitine. Since high nucleic acid content has been a problem
that needs to be addressed in microbial foods due to the harmful consequences for human
health, how to reduce the content of nucleic acid derivatives in Y. lipolytica metabolites needs
to be further investigated.
34
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
In our work, a workflow for efficient analysis of Y. lipolytica untargeted metabolomics dataset
was established. By QC, S/N ratio filtering, we cleaned up a dataset originating from the
FIA­MS. In the final dataset, we found significant differences in metabolite content in different
strains and obtained the Y. lipolytica group closest to the beef samples by cluster analysis,
with relevant experimental information to be further investigated in the future.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Ramesh Chander Kuhad et al. “Microorganisms as an alternative source of protein”.
In: Nutrition reviews 55.3 (1997), pp. 65–75.
[2]
Smita S Zinjarde. “Food­related applications of Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Food chemistry
152 (2014), pp. 1–10.
[3]
Francesca Patrignani et al. “Variability of the lipolytic activity in Yarrowia lipolytica
strains in pork fat”. In: Meat science 88.4 (2011), pp. 689–693.
[4]
Nelma Gomes, Jose A Teixeira, and Isabel Belo. “The use of methyl ricinoleate in lac­
tone production by Yarrowia lipolytica: aspects of bioprocess operation that influence
the overall performance”. In: Biocatalysis and Biotransformation 28.4 (2010), pp. 227–
234.
[5]
Wioletta Biel, Kazimierz Bobko, and Robert Maciorowski. “Chemical composition and
nutritive value of husked and naked oats grain”. In: Journal of cereal science 49.3
(2009), pp. 413–418.
[6]
B Michalik et al. “Chemical composition and biological value of proteins of the yeast
Yarrowia lipolytica growing on industrial glycerol”. In: Canadian Journal of Animal Sci­
ence 94.1 (2014), pp. 99–104.
[7]
Maitri Thakur and Charles R Hurburgh. “Quality of US soybean meal compared to the
quality of soybean meal from other origins”. In: Journal of the American Oil Chemists’
Society 84.9 (2007), pp. 835–843.
[8]
B Winkler et al. “Dried yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisae) as a protein source for
horses”. In: Livestock Science 137.1­3 (2011), pp. 168–177.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
37
==PAGE:46==
[9]
ME Jach et al. “Yarrowia lipolytica grown on biofuel waste as a source of single cell
protein and essential amino acids for human diet”. In: Saudi J Med Pharm Sci 3.12
(2017), pp. 1344–1351.
[10]
Monika Elżbieta Jach et al. “Statistical evaluation of growth parameters in biofuel waste
as a culture medium for improved production of single cell protein and amino acids by
Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: AMB Express 10.1 (2020), pp. 1–12.
[11]
Gary Reineccius. “Changes in food flavor due to processing”. In: Flavor chemistry and
technology. CRC Press, 2005, pp. 127–162.
[12]
MAJS Van Boekel. “Formation of flavour compounds in the Maillard reaction”. In:
Biotechnology advances 24.2 (2006), pp. 230–233.
[13]
Hoa Van Ba et al. “Principle of meat aroma flavors and future prospect”. In: Latest
research into quality control 2 (2012), pp. 145–176.
[14]
Waldemar Rymowicz et al. “Citric acid production from raw glycerol by acetate mutants
of Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Chemical Papers 60.5 (2006), pp. 391–394.
[15]
Seraphim Papanikolaou and George Aggelis. “Biotechnological valorization of
biodiesel derived glycerol waste through production of single cell oil and citric acid
by Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Lipid technology 21.4 (2009), pp. 83–87.
[16]
Sarat Babu Imandi et al. “Optimization of medium constituents for the production of
citric acid from byproduct glycerol using Doehlert experimental design”. In: Enzyme
and Microbial Technology 40.5 (2007), pp. 1367–1372.
[17]
Karin Athenstaedt et al. “Lipid particle composition of the yeast Yarrowia lipolytica de­
pends on the carbon source”. In: Proteomics 6.5 (2006), pp. 1450–1459.
[18]
Carlos R Soccol et al. “New perspectives for citric acid production and application”. In:
Food Technology and Biotechnology 44.2 (2006), pp. 141–149.
38
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:47==
[19]
Kyle R Pomraning et al. “Multi­omics analysis reveals regulators of the response to
nitrogen limitation in Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Bmc Genomics 17.1 (2016), pp. 1–18.
[20]
Adam Dobrowolski et al. “Production of tailor­made fatty acids from crude glycerol at
low pH by Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Bioresource Technology 314 (2020), p. 123746.
[21]
Savas Anastassiadis, Christian Wandrey, and H­J Rehm. “Continuous citric acid fer­
mentation by Candida oleophila under nitrogen limitation at constant C/N ratio”. In:
World journal of microbiology and biotechnology 21.5 (2005), pp. 695–705.
[22]
Chhabil Dass. “Hyphenated Separation Techniques”. In: (2007), pp. 151–194.
[23]
Bin Zhou et al. “LC­MS­based metabolomics”. In: Molecular BioSystems 8.2 (2012),
pp. 470–481.
[24]
Sergio C Nanita and Laura G Kaldon. “Emerging flow injection mass spectrometry
methods for high­throughput quantitative analysis”. In: Analytical and bioanalytical
chemistry 408.1 (2016), pp. 23–33.
[25]
Maria Vinaixa et al. “A guideline to univariate statistical analysis for LC/MS­based un­
targeted metabolomics­derived data”. In: Metabolites 2.4 (2012), pp. 775–795.
[26]
Eric W Weisstein. “Bonferroni correction”. In: https://mathworld. wolfram. com/ (2004).
[27]
Miroslava Čuperlović­Culf et al. “NMR metabolic analysis of samples using fuzzy K­
means clustering”. In: Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry 47.S1 (2009), S96–S104.
[28]
Jos A Hageman et al. “Genetic algorithm based two­mode clustering of metabolomics
data”. In: Metabolomics 4.2 (2008), pp. 141–149.
[29]
Peter Meinicke et al. “Metabolite­based clustering and visualization of mass spectrom­
etry data using one­dimensional self­organizing maps”. In: Algorithms for Molecular
Biology 3.1 (2008), pp. 1–18.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
39
==PAGE:48==
[30]
Nishith Kumar, Md Hoque, Masahiro Sugimoto, et al. “Robust volcano plot: identifica­
tion of differential metabolites in the presence of outliers”. In: BMC bioinformatics 19.1
(2018), pp. 1–11.
40
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Violin plot of S/N ratio for all metabolites and its distribution, part1. The y­axis is
S/N ratio, the x­axis is metabolite name. The text next to each violin plot is the percentage
of how many replicates had S.N ratio over 2.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.2: Violin plot of S/N ratio for all metabolites and its distribution, part2.
42
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.3: Violin plot of S/N ratio for all metabolites and its distribution, part3.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.4: Violin plot of S/N ratio for all metabolites and its distribution, part4.
44
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.5: Violin plot of S/N ratio for all metabolites and its distribution, part5.
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.6: Violin plot of S/N ratio for all metabolites and its distribution, part6.
46
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
==PAGE:55==
Analysis of metabolomics data in Yarrowia lipolytica
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet 220
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
