==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Hydrodynamic simulation of urban
drainage flows using generalized
residue networks
Vinh Duy Nguyen (s164308)
Supervisors:
Roland Löwe
Morten Grum
Allan Peter Engsig-Karup
Rocco Palmitessa
Technical University of Denmark 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to increasing rainfall events of heavy precipitation coupled with a growing urbanisation
globally, the necessity of flexible and fast urban water modelling tools are increasingly appar-
ent. Accurately modelling urban drainage systems allows for identifying urban areas at risk of
flooding while fast models are required in real time application for flood risk warning systems.
Within these areas, machine learning techniques have shown great potential.
This study investigates the gResNet (generalized Residue Network) which has been developed
on a single urban area and shown to be effective in predicting water level and surcharges
in nodes as well as flow in links at a fraction of the time required for Hi-Fi(High-Fidelity)
physical-based urban models. The gResNet model is tested on 5 system sizes, ranging from 5
nodes and 4 links to 172 nodes and 180 links. In addition to testing the model application on
varying system sizes, they are tuned to several hyperparameters to find best model fit for the
size emulated. The training structure of the gResNet is furthermore sequentially trained to
determine if reductions in training times related to optimising the model are possible. Lastly
in an effort to improve prediction accuracy the model is optimised using Maximum-likelihood
estimation.
It was found that the gResNet model structure achieved Nash-Sutcliffe Eﬀiciency(NSE) scores
for prediction of water levels and flows above 0.89 across system sizes with poorer prediction for
surcharge. The model struggled to predict accurately at individual nodes or links with low/no
water appearing. In order to maintain high prediction accuracy, the model requires increasing
hyperparameters as the system size increases. Prediction times of the gResNet model were
1 to 3% of the required simulation time of a Hi-Fi model depending on system size. When
sequentially training the gResNet model, related training time would increase by 12% for the
smallest system size but decrease by up to 60% for large system sizes. The maximum-likelihood
estimation did not increase model performance, it was shown to be able to predict very well
for few nodes and links, however at the cost of worse prediction in the remaining system.
As a surrogate of a Hi-Fi model, the gResNet model structure retains the spatial detail while
predicting much faster than the Hi-Fi model. From this study, knowledge of the model opti-
misation has been gained from which additional areas of improvement are addressed. With
additional research, the applications of these machine learning models in urban hydrology are
both exciting and very promising.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was carried out at DTU Sustain, Department of Environmental and Re-
source Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis was started 24th of
January and submitted 12th of August 2022 and serves as fulfillment of the Master of Science
in Environmental Engineering and equals 30 ECTS points.
The thesis was made under the supervision of Associate Professor Roland Löwe, external su-
pervisor from WaterZerv Morten Grum, Associate Professor Allan Peter Engsig-Karup and
postdoc Rocco Palmitessa.
Vinh Duy Nguyen, Kongens Lyngby, August 12, 2022
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my main supervisor Roland Löwe for always
having time for weekly meetings, for thorough guidance and constructive feedback. It
has no doubt elevated my work and pushed me throughout the project. A special thanks
likewise goes to Morten Grum and Allan Peter Engsig-Karup for valuable insight and
thoughtful discussions. I am thankful to Rocco Palmitessa for introducing me to the
source code of the model used in this study.
A thanks goes to the water utility company of Bochum, Germany who has provided
model information of the urban drainage network.
I have been fortunate to work on my thesis alongside fellow co-students with whom I
have been able to share moments of distress and celebrate the victories related to the
work. Each and everyone of them has made these months enjoyable. I want to espe-
cially thank Frederik who I have had majority of supervisor meetings with, it has been
insightful and incredibly useful to be able to present our separate findings and discuss
the implications thereof. Likewise I would like to thank Emilie for spending the time to
proof-read this thesis.
Lastly I want to sincerely thank Sian, who has supported and believed in me throughout.
While it has been some hectic months, I am glad to have finished this project and look
forward to celebrating with you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
Adam
Adaptive Moment Estimation
ELU
Exponential Linear Unit
gResNet
Generalized residue network
Hi-Fi
High fidelity
IoAD
Index of Agreement
Lo-Fi
Low Fidelity
MSE
Mean of squared Error
NSE
Nash-Sutcliffe Eﬀiciency
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
RMSE
Root Mean Squared Error
SSE
Sum of Squared Error
UDS
Urban Drainage System
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background for this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
High fidelity models in urban hydrology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Surrogate models for urban drainage systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Artificial Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Generalized Residue networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data
13
3.1
Langendreer Area in MIKE+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Rain series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Preprocessing label data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Materials and methods
19
4.1
gResNet Model formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Experiment 1: Varying system sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Experiment 2: Sequenced gResNet formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Experiment 3: Maximum likelihood estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
Technical implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Results
27
5.1
Exploring model hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Model performance on system sizes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
General model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Sequenced gResNet structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5
Maximum likelihood loss function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Key learnings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Outlook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
7
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
A
Supporting Information
57
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Climate change has brought forth increasing changes to precipitation, which has shown
increasing rainfall events of heavy precipitation as well as decreasing events of light and
moderate precipitation over many land areas (IPCC 2021, Copenhagen Municipality
2011).
Not only has the amount of heavy rainfall events increased, the intensity of
such events are likewise increasing which requires a continued effort in managing water
resources and flooding. Coupled with the growing urbanisation globally, the relationship
between rainfall and runoff unto urban surfaces and sewers become an increasingly larger
factor in preventing floods and otherwise unwarranted ponding surface water. Therefore
flexible adaptation and foresight during urban expansion are necessary to avoid severe
mental and economic costs to society.
These changes to precipitation are likely to continue as the climate is changing which
makes research in urban water management increasingly relevant.
Within this field,
urban water modelling of sewer systems and flows proves useful in estimating the effect
of increasing rainfall events and which current urban areas are heavily exposed and at
risk of flooding. It likewise becomes a mandatory tool for identifying how to secure
urban climate adaptation as well as futureproofing urban expansion.
1.1
Background for this project
When modelling UDSs (Urban Drainage System) the degree of spatial and temporal
detail vary highly depending on the type of model used. Models that retain a high
spatial and temporal detail do so through solving the Saint-Venant equations used to
describe conservation of mass and energy throughout the UDS (Abbott & Ionescu 1967).
These so called Hi-Fi(high fidelity) models are solved numerically and as such impose
heavy computational costs to provide detailed simulations for the relationship between
rainfall-runoff into sewer flows and water levels. When computation costs are a limit-
ing factor or high accuracy is not as necessary, other types of models are available to
simulate suﬀiciently using much simpler model structures at a much lower cost. These
conceptual Lo-Fi(low fidelity) models thus simplify the physical detail into for example
a linear reservoir that produces one single output as compared to Hi-Fi models that will
produce output at every pipe and node that the linear reservoir has simplified (Kroll
et al. 2017).
Current established Hi-Fi models used for climate planning of existing urban areas re-
quires re-simulating the whole system at heavy computational costs due to changing
UDS structures, thus making practical use limited for city planners. For example in the
areas of real-time warning systems or risk assessment for climate adaptation, Hi-Fi mod-
els predict flooding at such speeds that the warning lead times limit response time for
civil protection and emergency measures (Copenhagen Municipality 2011, Kundzewicz
et al. 2013). In other areas such as design scenario workshops or similar planning for
urban drainage stakeholders, Hi-Fi models are simply too computationally expensive to
incorporate which limits the scientific foundation for such decision making forums (Löwe
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
et al. 2017). Simultaneously, Lo-Fi models today have too simplified structures to ac-
curately predict the effect of small physical changes to the UDS. It is in this area that
emerging machine learning models show potential. The aim of these models is to explore
the model domain between current established Hi-Fi and Lo-Fi models, where compu-
tation times are significantly lower than Hi-Fi models while providing higher resolution
than Lo-Fi models. Should they prove useful in predicting hydraulic states accurately
at a fraction of the computational cost, it will allow decision makers and city planners
to combat the challenges of increasing climate change in urban areas, thus resulting in
decreasing economic and social costs.
Within urban water modelling, recent machine learning techniques have shown promising
results in emulating the physical relationship between rainfall to runoff as well as in flood
prediction (Srinivasulu & Jain 2006, Kratzert et al. 2019). The work of Kratzert et al.
(2019) showed that it was possible to use machine learning to extrapolate hydrologic
catchment behaviour applicable even on regionally different catchment areas.
While
this work pertains to rainfall-runoff modelling specifically, it is interesting that machine
learning was able to simulate regional system behaviour from large-sample hydrology
data. Hydrologic catchment intricacies aside, translating rainfall to runoff comes at a
marginal computational cost when related to simulating the 1D hydrodynamics of the
UDS. For this, Palmitessa et al. (2022) propose a so-called surrogate model built on
the gResNet(generalized Residue Network) structure. This model simulates water level
in the nodes, flow in connecting links and surcharge from nodes in an autoregressive
manner, meaning it predicts the aforementioned states from one time step to another
and uses these time step predictions for subsequent time steps.
The model had only been developed on a single stretch, it is therefore necessary to
research further into the applicability of the model on different systems with minimal
local calibration required. If the model is to be applicable in practice, the relationship
between UDS size and the neural network complexity within the gResNet model must be
explored to understand the limitations of the model, especially on small or large drainage
systems. Further, it differs from the gResNet structure from Chen & Xiu (2021) from
which it was inspired by, in that Palmitessa et al. (2022) trains model components simul-
taneously whereas Chen & Xiu (2021) trains them sequentially. It is therefore beneficial
to a formulate sequential training structure to determine the effects on model prediction
accuracy and computation times related.
This report aims to explore and develop on the gResNet model. As the aim for the
model is to be applicable for an UDS of varying complexity, it is necessary to establish
model behavior when faced with different systems. Likewise it is essential to determine
the model complexity that returns best prediction accuracy.
Aside from prediction
accuracy, as the gResNet model is a surrogate of a Hi-Fi model, the computation cost
of the gResNet compared to Hi-Fi models is of importance. Further, efforts are made
towards improvement of the model through formulating a sequenced training structure
as well as reformulating the target objectives for model optimisation.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Research questions
3
1.2
Research questions
The overlying research questions this project aims to answer are the following:
1. How well does the gResNet model predict water level and surcharge in nodes and
flow in links considering varying system sizes?
a) Which neural network complexity is required for varying system sizes?
b) How does the computational cost compare to Hi-Fi models?
2. Is sequenced gResNet training faster than regular gResNet training?
a) Does prediction accuracy change when changing the training structure?
b) Does the sequenced training affect optimisation convergence?
3. Can prediction accuracy be improved through a maximum likelihood function?
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In order to understand the physics and complexity of the world, models are used as
a best attempt at simulating reality. This will allow for understanding past trends as
well as predict future events to a certain degree. However, as Box (1976) states: ”All
models are wrong, but some are useful”. While models rarely can account for the full
complexity of reality, they are useful as long as the limitations of said models are known.
This chapter aims to present the type of models which are used in this thesis, as well
as the type of models these are compared against. The model types described will be
in the context of how they are used within urban hydrology. As there are numerous
types and categorisations of models, it may not always be the purpose for a model to
perfectly simulate reality. It is therefore important to underline the purposes and limita-
tions of relevant types of models as these are necessary for evaluating model performance.
2.1
High fidelity models in urban hydrology
Models can vary highly in the spatial and temporal detail they are able to simulate for.
The models that retain the highest detail are Hi-Fi(high fidelity) models which within
urban hydrology, pertaining to the 1D simulation of the UDS, translates rainfall to runoff
that enters the UDS as water flow throughout the system. Simulating the flows in the
1D UDS then requires solving mass and energy conservation equations as described by
de Saint-Venant (Abbott & Ionescu 1967).
Continuity equation:
∂A
∂t + ∂Q
∂x = 0
(2.1)
Momentum equation:
1
A
∂Q
∂t + 1
A
∂
∂x(Q2
A ) + g∂h
∂x −gh(S −J) = 0
(2.2)
where A is the cross-sectional area of a pipe link perpendicular to the flow, Q is the flow,
at time t and distance x. Additionally for the momentum equation g is the gravitational
acceleration, h is the water level and S and J are the bed and friction slopes (Thrysøe
2021). Examples of Hi-Fi models are MIKE from DHI (DHI 2022) and SWMM from
US EPA (Rossman 2022). These physical-based models allow for detailed simulations of
water at many points across the UDS for a chosen temporal resolution. The governing
equations within an UDS must be solved numerically as no analytical solution exists
for the given equations. They therefore impose heavy computation times as they are
restricted to solving within numerical stability through increasing temporal resolution.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theory
2.2
Surrogate models for urban drainage systems
Surrogate models aim to develop and utilize cheaper-to-run ”surrogates” of the ”original”
simulation models. A surrogate model therefore operates at a second level of abstraction
from reality as the goal for the surrogate is to approximate the response of an original
simulation model while operating at a fraction of the computation time (Razavi et al.
2012). As a surrogate is a model of a model, the expense of moving towards lower model
fidelity must be justified for when the original simulation model is computationally
intensive. Likewise, the accuracy of the surrogate in regards to the original model must
be suﬀicient.
2.2.1
Conceptual hydrological models
Lo-Fi(Low-Fidelity) models have simplified terms usually by lowering the number of
physical processes and thus lowering the resolution of the Hi-Fi model. For example,
simplifying the Hi-Fi model through pruning, trimming or merging the UDS can greatly
reduce computation time but must be done specifically for the given Hi-Fi model that
needs simplifying (Davidsen et al. 2017). Other simplifications include the linear reser-
voir models based on mass balances, which are related through the continuity equation:
dS(t)
dt
= I(t) −Q(t)
(2.3)
where S is storage, I is input and Q is output, all as a function of time t. This equates the
following storage function S = f(Q) (Thrysøe 2021). These turn the complete pipe and
node network into an inflow-outflow reservoir. Extending upon this type of application,
a series of linear reservoirs can be modelled for, known as Nash-cascades (Meert et al.
2014). Figure 2.1 shows how an UDS has been divided into smaller compartments that
are then modelled as linear reservoirs.
Figure 2.1: Example of a distributed physically-based urban drainage model divided into
compartments. Figure from Thrysøe et al. (2019).
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Artificial Neural Networks
7
2.3
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks are built from a number of layers usually structured in parallel
and each consisting of a set of neurons as can be seen in figure 2.2. The input and
output layers are the ’visible’ layers due to these being the specific input and output
state vector one would be operating with. The hidden layers are however needed for a
model to transform the given input to a certain output. The number of inputs, that
together make up the input layer, depend on the states included in the model, which
is likewise the case for the output layer. If the neural network was to determine the
water level in a node changing with time, its initial water level would be an input and
its final water level the output. When more nodes are to be determined, more inputs
and outputs would correspondingly be added to the neural network.
Figure 2.2: Regular feed forward neural network with one input layer of 6 inputs, 2 hidden
layers with 4 neurons each and one output layer with 3 outputs.
The arrows denote the
weighted input from one neuron into the next.
The neurons within the layers will take the sum of a set of inputs xi paired with a set of
weights wi and pass these through a non-linear activation function to produce the output
a for that given neuron as shown in figure 2.3. The output of a neuron is therefore given
as:
a = f(
∑
i
wixi + b)
(2.4)
where b is an added bias term which is a constant used to adjust the output making the
neural network more flexible.
Activation function
The prediction accuracy of a neural network highly depends on the type of activation
function used, as this function is the governing equation for the network across its
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a neuron with three inputs xi with associated weights wi and an
added bias term b. The sum of inputs are then passed through an acivation function to produce
output a. Figure from Agarwal (2020)
layers (Sharma et al. 2020). If no activation function is defined, the neural network
would act as a linear regression model causing the output to be equal to the provided
input. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) is one of the most widely used activation
functions, with its lower boundary it will deactivate a neuron if the output of the linear
transformation becomes zero. From ReLU comes a few variations, for instance Leaky
ReLU which instead of defining the output to zero is defined as a small linear component
of x, dependent on α.
Lastly, the Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) handles negative
outputs with a log curve. While several more activation functions exist, these are the
most relevant to this report and are summarised in table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Activation functions used in Neural Networks. α determines the shape of negative
activation output, it can be a trainable parameter or fixed. For additional activation functions,
see Sharma et al. (2020)
Activation function
Linear
f(x) = x
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit)
f(x) = max(0, x)
Leaky ReLU
f(x) =
{
x
if x ≥0
αx
if x < 0
ELU (Exponential Linear Unit)
f(x) =
{
x
if x ≥0
α(exp (x) −1)
if x < 0
Training and Validation
For a neural network to make the best possible prediction, for example accurately em-
ulating a UDS, it must be trained to achieve best fit. When training, the model will
update parameter weights w related to every input to every neuron. This requires suf-
ficient data of both input and output states, as the only way for the neural network to
learn is through seeing the data and finding the patterns in the input-output relation-
ship. Not only must the quantity of data be suﬀicient, the quality of the data is another
major requirement in creating accurate models. Provided this, the data is typically split
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Generalized Residue networks
9
into what is called training data and validation data.
It is the training data the model adjusts its weights to in the process of optimisation.
Once a set of weights are proposed for the model, it uses the inputs of the validation
data set to predict, and the corresponding outputs of the validation data to evaluate
prediction error, or loss. Running the full training set through the neural network and
evaluating the performance on the validation set with the proposed set of weights is
called an epoch. Fitting the model through numerous epochs will save the set of weights
with the lowest validation loss. The number of epochs must be enough for the model to
confidently converge, however an excessive amount of epochs will cost additional com-
putation time for little gain and can make the model more prone to over-fitting. Early
stopping metrics can however be implemented to stop the model during fitting if no
improved weights are found for a set number of epochs.
Once optimal parameter weights are proposed, the model can predict output given only
new input variables. For the case of model evaluation, an independent test series is
required containing both input and output. Test data must be independent from previ-
ously used training and validation data, to ensure unbiased evaluation.
Loss function
As the neural network is training, it evaluates prediction through the loss function. The
loss function will typically describe the prediction error, as the aim is to minimize this
error, the loss function therefore must be as low as possible during training. For the
defined number of epochs, the set of trained weights providing the lowest loss therefore
is the set of weights that provide the best prediction accuracy.
Table 2.2: Residual loss functions for model comparison, where y are observed values, ˆy are
predicted values and n is the number of observations. For more residual criteria, see Bennett
et al. (2013)
Residual loss function
Formula
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
√
1
n
n∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
Mean Square Error (MSE)
1
n
n∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
Sum of Square Error (SSE)
n∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
2.4
Generalized Residue networks
The gResNet (Generalized Residue Network) method aims to recover unknown dynami-
cal systems through modelling the difference between output data and input data, which
is defined as the residue (Chen & Xiu 2021). The input data in this regard refers to the
predictive output made by another model, also called ”prior prediction”. The residue
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory
is then modelled through a standard feed forward neural network to construct a final
prediction by taking into account the prior prediction. In short, the gResNet structure
can therefore be seen as a model correction method for the prior predictive model (Chen
& Xiu 2021). Palmitessa et al. (2022) propose a gResNet model that predicts water
level in nodes, flow in links and surcharge from nodes for a UDS given information from
a Hi-Fi model. The gResNet model therefore becomes a surrogate model of the Hi-Fi
model it aims to emulate, gResNet and surrogate are henceforth used interchangeably
in this report. The gResNet model is formulated as:
xt+∆t = L(xt, ΘL) + N(xt, ΘN)
(2.5)
where xt+∆t denotes a state vector xt defined for the discrete time steps t + ∆t. Both L
and N are defined as a feed forward neural network to approximate the state changes
to the time step given parameters Θ. L resembles a linear regression model through a
single hidden layer while N is a deep neural network with various formulations for its
system complexity. It is N that becomes the model correction for the linear regression,
so that the gResNet model is able to emulate unknown dynamical systems.
Figure 2.4: a) Hydraulic states of interest for an urban drainage model where QUS, QDS is
upstream and downstream flow in the links respectively, h is the water level in the node, R
is the catchment runoff and QW,overflow is the surcharge. b) Workflow for gResNet modelling,
where runoff and initial hydraulic states are generated from the Hi-Fi model and given as input
to the surrogate model. The surrogate model predicts the hydraulic states for t > t0 which
is fed back as input to the surrogate model for following time steps. Figure from Palmitessa
et al. (2022)
For an urban drainage network, the hydraulic states of relevance are depicted from
figure 2.4a. For a given node, the states are the water level(h) in the node, the upstream
and downstream discharge through the links (QUS and QDS respectively), the rainfall
runoff from connected catchments (R) into the node and the weir discharge (Qs) when
h exceeds the ground level for the node. Imposing the gResNet structure to simulate
UDS requires defining a state vector for the states considered in figure 2.4. The state
vector therefore includes the water level h in N nodes, the flow Q in M links and the
spilling Qs in the N nodes.
xt = [h1, ..., hN, Q1, ..., QM, Qs,1, ..., Qs,N]
(2.6)
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Generalized Residue networks
11
The changes to the states from one time step to the next will both depend on the
upstream states from previous time step as well as the runoff input for the time step
Rt = [R1, ..., RN]. As this runoff is required for determining the residue for the time
step, it becomes an input for the deep neural network N, thus altering equation 2.5 to
the following gResNet formulation (Palmitessa et al. 2022):
xt+∆t = L(xt, ΘL) + N(xt, Rt, ΘN)
(2.7)
Palmitessa et al. (2022) furthermore tested a physics-constrained model formulation
which would only predict water level and flow through the gResNet and compute spill
flow rates through mass balance equations at every node. This formulation would con-
siderably improve prediction of spill, however prediction for water level and flow were
slightly lower.
2.4.1
Model fitting
For the model to be applicable, it first needs to be trained with training and validation
data to find optimal weight parameters ΘL and ΘN.
Once these weights are found,
the model can be used to predict state variables given new input. For more eﬀicient
computational training, the training series is divided into smaller sub-sets called windows
of W time steps, which the batch size of the neural network is shaped correspondingly
from. Sub-dividing into windows allows the weight adjustments to be made more often
as well as parallel processing which can significantly reduce training times. The model
then predicts for a full training window before evaluating the proposed weights from the
given validation window loss. Palmitessa et al. (2022) found that using a training window
of 60 time steps yielded lowest validation loss. The validation loss was computed from a
validation window of 1,000 time steps which would provide a longer series for the model
to evaluate loss from. Two data sets were used independently for training to determine
the effect of the quality of rain data on the model. One data set was constructed from
rain events gathered across 40 years of continuous rainfall observations from a single
gauge. The other data set was constructed from 10 rain gauges across Denmark with
the intention of over-representing extreme rainfall events for training. From these it
was concluded that the second data set containing more extreme events provided more
certain predictions, enforcing the requirement of high quality data for use in data-driven
models. The gResNet proposed by Palmitessa et al. (2022) had an N operator consisting
of 6 hidden layers with 100 neurons in each layer using the ReLU activation function
and fitted using a MSE loss function.
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Data
To explore model performance, the system sizes to be evaluated upon are extracted from
the Langendreer catchment in Germany as provided by the local municipal water utility
company. Along with the premade rain series, preprocessing is required to produce data
that the surrogate model can train itself on.
Figure 3.1: Geographical map of Langendreer, Germany. White triangles depict outlets, red
dots depict nodes, blue lines depict links between nodes and basins are marked with brown.
The area within the yellow circle denotes the system area to be modelled for this report.
3.1
Langendreer Area in MIKE+
The city of Langendreer, Germany has been modelled in MIKE+ as can be seen in figure
3.1. This UDS contains 2575 nodes, 2641 links and spans a total catchment area of 1030
ha.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Data
((a)) System A containing 5 nodes and 4 links. ((b)) System B containing 16 nodes and 15 links.
((c)) System C containing 26 nodes and 26 links. ((d)) System D containing 57 nodes and 58 links.
((e)) System E containing 172 nodes and 180 links.
Figure 3.2: System sizes to be modelled using the gResNet model. Red dots are nodes with
the blue lines inbetween depicting links. The light blue areas are catchment areas connected
to corresponding notes through the dashed line. The white triangle is an added free outflow
boundary, which also shows the general flow direction in the systems.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Rain series
15
As part of this project, different system sizes are to be explored to evaluate the surrogate
model performance on. These originate from the northern part of Langendreer and are
highlighted by the yellow circle in figure 3.1, their sizes and characteristics can be found
in table 3.1 and individually seen in figure 3.2. To ensure best possible comparison of
results, the area of a smaller system size is aimed to be within the boundaries of a bigger
system. Within these system sizes, no basins nor overflow weirs are present which limits
the hydraulic complexity present in the systems. Furthermore the Hi-Fi model has been
configured with a ”spilling configuration” causing surcharging water from nodes to not
reenter the UDS. This has been implemented through imposing a weir at every node in
the Hi-Fi model. While this configuration affects the pressure levels in the links, it has
previously shown to yield more realistic pressure levels during intense rain storms than
the ”ponding configuration” (Jamali et al. 2021, Palmitessa et al. 2022).
Table 3.1: Summary of systems investigated, their number of nodes and links as well as the
total connecting catchment area to the system.
System Name
Nodes
Links
Catchment Area [ha]
A
5
4
2.38
B
16
15
5.80
C
26
26
9.33
D
57
58
27.80
E
172
180
56.01
3.2
Rain series
The rain series used in this project are split into Training, Validation and Test series
and used as input to the Hi-Fi model for label generation of the hydraulic states. The
provided rain series correspond to the second data set tested in Palmitessa et al. (2022).
The rain intensities for training and validation are historic events measured and then
restructured for the purpose of training neural networks, they are therefore not contin-
uous rain measurements. As described in section 2.3, the data to be used in training
neural networks must be both suﬀicient quantity and quality.
As part of this model is to predict surcharge in the system, extreme rainfall intensities
are required to produce spilling when running the Hi-Fi model, which the neural network
aims to emulate. For training and validation, there has been an emphasis on including
varying intensities while ensuring extreme rainfall occurring. This combined series has
been made through observing previous 40 years of rainfall in Denmark through 10 rain
gauges throughout the country. The highest measured events were extracted and made
into the rain series shown in figure 3.3. Of this series, 22% of it has been split into the
validation series and the remaining 78% will become the training series. The rainfall
series was recorded with a 1 minute resolution and results in 74,770 time steps for
Training and 21,701 time steps for Validation.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Data
Figure 3.3: Artificially constructed rain series in 1 minute resolution spanning a total of 67
days.
Figure 3.4: Rain series for a single rain gauge where every dry period has been omitted.
Original time span was 42 years which has been condensed to 3.2 years.
The testing series is made from 42 years of rain gauge measurements where all dry periods
have been omitted, resulting in a 3 year continuous rain series of 1,681,697 time steps.
While it may not have the same peak intensities as seen in the training and validation,
it is imperative to evaluate model performance on an unbiased rain series, meaning the
test series should not be presented to the neural network during training. The rain gauge
from which the testing series was extracted is located in Næstved, Denmark, roughly 30
km away from the nearest rain gauge considered in the training and validation series.
With these criteria, the rain series shown in figure 3.4 should serve satisfactory.
3.3
Preprocessing label data
For the purpose of training the gResNet model, the simulation results from MIKE+ are
used as label data and thus will act as the ”ground truth” results. As the gResNet
model is to be trained on multiple system sizes, the model only aims to properly predict
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Preprocessing label data
17
Figure 3.5: Preprocessing steps required for this report
the hydraulic states within the system boundaries. It should therefore be unaffected
by precipitation and sewage flow outside the system as well as any backwater dynamics
and similar from the remaining area, which the label data must reflect.
As part of
preprocessing, label data must therefore be generated for each system size. The original
UDS as set up in MIKE+ is therefore altered to fit the size of the systems in table 3.1.
A free out-flowing boundary node is set downstream the system boundary to allow the
water to exit the system immediately. For each system size, the Hi-Fi model is then
generating label data using the training, validation and testing rain series. Finally the
result data are converted to readable file types to be used for the gResNet model. These
are additionally reduced in temporal resolution to 2 minute time steps, taking the mean
of the timesteps from previous resolution. In addition to the label data extracted, the
weir crest levels of every node is collected for use in the physically informed correction of
spill predictions, furthermore the node invert and ground levels are collected for scaling
of water level label data. These preprocessing steps are not strictly insignificant time
wise and can be considered when comparing computation times between the different
model applications. Preprocessing times will stay out of scope for this report however.
==PAGE:30==
18
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Materials and methods
This section will describe the base model and variations thereof, model setups are de-
tailed and lastly evaluation metrics are outlined. This has been summarised to the figure
below.
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of the workflow related to this thesis. The sections refer to the sections
of Chapter 4 Materials and methods, from which a further elaboration of the steps are given.
Before experiments are described, the gResNet model is formulated. This involves more
detailed steps of the model structure and processes. Next, Experiment 1 entails training
the gResNet model on varying system sizes with a set of different hyperparameters
which alters the model architecture. This provides an optimal model performance for
each system size which the following two experiments will use as benchmark. Experiment
2 involves altering the training setup of the model, aimed primarily at lowering training
times for the model. Experiment 3 looks to change the loss function of the model with
the aim of improving prediction accuracy. Although there are different primary purposes
for each experiment, thereby imposing different evaluation criteria, they are generally
evaluated on how well they can predict the system states and the computational cost
involved in both training and predicting using the models. As such, section 4.5 introduces
metrics to quantify prediction accuracy as well as describing how results are presented.
4.1
gResNet Model formulation
Figure 4.2 illustrates the gResNet model steps involved from taking the preprocessed
input to the outputted predicted state variables. This model formulation is henceforth
named Model 1 to differentiate from subsequent model variations. Before introducing the
runoff input and label data to the model, they are scaled to a range of [0,1]. The scaling is
performed individually for each state variable through the minimum and maximum value
observed from Hi-Fi simulations. Water levels are however scaled from their physical
corresponding node invert level to ground level which was extracted from the Hi-Fi model.
Furthermore for any flow or spill state variable found to have maximum values of 0, their
maximum value has been set to 0.1 to avoid improper scalability around 0. This ensures
that each state variable contributes roughly equally to parameter estimation.
Model 1 is defined by two operators, the L and N network as described from equation
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Materials and methods
2.7. The model then makes an initial prediction by passing the state variables at the
initial time step through L and N as well as passing the runoff into N. The prediction
for this initial time step is then used as the state variables for the following time step,
having only given the following runoff input into N. This autoregressive step is done for
W time steps.
Figure 4.2: gResNet model formulation. The size of L operators layers is the sum of the
input states whereas for the N operator the runoff state is an additional input. The model
predicts the state variables x for W time steps.
When predictions have been made for a series, physical correction for spilling predictions
are imposed as part of the model. Specifically, the spilling predictions are corrected for
negative flows which are then set to zero. Likewise any spilling occurring when the
predicted water level is below 95% of the weir crest level is set to zero. The model then
returns predictions for the three states; Water level [m] in nodes, Flow [cbm/s] in links,
and corrected Spill flow rates [cbm/s] from nodes which are then unscaled.
For model parameter optimisation, a widely used stochastic gradient descent algorithm
Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) is used which has shown to be effective and well
suited for problems with large data and/or parameters (Kingma & Lei Ba 2014). This
optimisation scheme traverses the gradient space with an initial learning rate set to 1e-3
and decaying exponentially to 1e-5 when training through the epochs. Unless specified
otherwise, the model simulations were run for 2,500 epochs with an early stopping
indicator of 700 epochs, meaning if the validation loss had not improved for the past 700
epochs, the model would stop training further. The ReLU activation function is used
between layers in the N operator which for figure 4.2 illustrates 2 hidden layers with 10
neurons in each. This complexity increases with experiment 1 in section 4.2. The model
is furthermore optimised using SSE as the loss function.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Experiment 1: Varying system sizes
21
4.2
Experiment 1: Varying system sizes
The gResNet model will be trained and tested on several system sizes with varying
model hyperparameters to determine best accuracy. Each system size, as defined in
table 3.1, is simulated with increasing hyperparameter complexity in the deep neural
network operator N of the model. From figure 4.2 these therefore correspond to the
green hidden layers within only the N operator which increases in both layers and
neurons per layer.
Table 4.1: Hyperparameter settings used for model 1 on all system sizes. Suﬀix denotes
the given suﬀix to the name of the model setting, layers and neurons describe the respective
number of each which comprises the neural network N operator. ΘN denotes the number of
trained parameter weights as a result of network complexity.
Suﬀix
Layers
Neurons per layer
ΘN
_L2N10
2
10
102
_L4N20
4
20
1.20 · 103
_L6N50
6
50
1.25 · 104
_L8N100
8
100
7.00 · 104
_L8N200
8
200
2.80 · 105
All systems are tested with the hyperparameter settings as shown in table 4.1. The fol-
lowing naming convention for a system therefore includes the System Name + Suﬀix for
hyperparameter setting, for example C_L6N50 denotes System C which spans 26 nodes
and 26 links modelled with 6 layers and 50 neurons per layer. The number of trained
parameter weights for each model setting are likewise presented to give indication of the
increasing network complexity. These only pertain to the number of weights in the N
operator and is excluding the weights from the input and output layer as these relate to
the size of the UDS, as does the weights from the L operator.
Table 4.2: Additional hyperparameter settings used for model 1 on systems D and E. The
value at the combination of the layer and neurons correspond to the number of trained param-
eter weights associated with that network complexity.
ΘN
Neurons per layer
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
1000
8
2.80·105
6.30·105
1.12·106
1.75·106
2.52·106
3.43·106
4.48·106
7.00·106
Layer
10
3.60·105
8.10·105
1.44·106
2.25·106
3.24·106
4.41·106
5.76·106
9.00·106
12
4.40·105
9.90·105
1.76·106
2.75·106
3.96·106
5.39·106
7.04·106
1.10·107
It was shown that as the systems increase in size, increasing the hyperparameters accord-
ingly yields better prediction accuracy for the model. Therefore an additional hyperpa-
rameter exploration is conducted on the two biggest systems, D and E, to determine
best possible prediction accuracy that the model could emulate for. Hyperparameter
exploration is done through a grid search of increasing network depth and width, corre-
sponding to increasing the number of neurons and layers correspondingly. In addition
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Materials and methods
to the hyperparameter settings from table 4.1, both system D and E had the same
grid search performed on them, with neurons increasing incrementally to 1000 neurons
and the number of layers increasing from 8 to 10 to 12. The combinations and their
respective number of contributing parameter weights are shown in table 4.2.
4.3
Experiment 2: Sequenced gResNet formulation
The gResNet formulation as described in section 4.1 trains both L and N operators
simultaneously. Chen & Xiu (2021) propose, when the dynamical system is unknown,
an operator L defined by a single-layer feed forward neural network which resembles a
simple linear regression model. This operator can be estimated using the same known
data set used in the operator N.
This operator has been adopted in the model by
Palmitessa et al. (2022) as the purpose for the gResNet model is to emulate an unknown
UDS. However Chen & Xiu (2021) trains the L operator individually then subsequently
introduces N, which differs from the gResNet model formulated in section 4.1.
This section therefore aims to investigate how training the operators sequentially, rather
than simultaneously, affects prediction accuracy, computation times as well as optimi-
sation convergence. It must be emphasized that this training structure is only relevant
when optimising the parameter weights Θ. When the model has optimised weights, it
corresponds to the regular gResNet model when predicting new input.
As the optimal hyperparameters for a system size were found in Experiment 1, this
model structure is only tested on the optimal hyperparameter setting. The sequenced
training structure is performed on each system size to evaluate the effect throughout
increasing system complexity. The proposed model structure will be termed Model 2
for ease of comparison.
Figure 4.3: Training setup for sequenced parameter estimation for generalized Residue Net-
works.
The proposed training structure can be found on figure 4.3. The L operator is trained
individually taking only the state variables as input. As the L operator is a simple model,
the window size is set to 1 and the number of epochs fixed to 200 without any early
stopping implemented. The physical corrections made to the spill states are likewise
part of this model. The prediction accuracy of this part of the model is insignificant,
it is the parameter weights ΘL that are of importance. The second part of the model
shown as the green box on figure 4.3 is identical to model 1, except for model 2 the L
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Experiment 3: Maximum likelihood estimation
23
operator is fixed and therefore its weights do not update during training. The second
part is then trained, aiming to find optimal parameter weights only for ΘN.
As it is primarily training times that are compared, generally the single training of model
1 should be compared to the two-fold training of model 2. While more fine-tuning can be
done to reduce the training time of L-optimisation of the sequenced model 2 training, it
is primarily the second part that is of interest. It is therefore this part that will primarily
be compared to the gResNet training.
4.4
Experiment 3: Maximum likelihood estimation
This part changes the loss function which the surrogate model uses during training to
find most optimal parameter weights. This is done in an effort to equalise optimisation
of the state variables.
Although the state variables are scaled, they continue to be
potentially subject to certain nodes or links prioritised due to a higher contribution
even in the scaled space.
For this reason, a variance-based parameter estimation is
attempted. Log-likelihood is defined as
LogL = −n
2log(2πσ2) −
n∑
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
2σ2
(4.1)
where n is the number of time steps, y are the observed state variable values, ˆy are
the predicted values and variance σ2 =
∑
(yi−ˆyi)2
n
for the state variable (Hicks 2020).
Variance for all spilling state variables have an added numerical stability term ϵ. The
value was derived from variances of the observed and predicted spilling values from
system D_L8N300 and chosen to be ϵ = 5.7 · 10−7, for details see appendix A.1. The
loss function is described through a log-likelihood function to be maximised by reducing
variance in the state variables. As the model optimiser aims to minimise the loss function,
the negative log-likelihood is therefore constructed. The loss is therefore defined as
Loss = −
∑
LogLh,N −
∑
LogLQ,M −
∑
LogLQs,N
(4.2)
summing the negative LogL for the states h, Q and Qs for N nodes and M links. This
model variation using different loss function will be termed Model 3 and is tested with
the same hyperparameter settings as for Experiment 2 for each system size.
Two additional model 3 runs are performed on systems C and D in order to ensure conver-
gence throughout training. These are run for 50,000 epochs with the same early stopping
indicator imposed, which would stop the training prematurely if no improvement to loss
has been found for the previous 700 epochs.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Materials and methods
4.5
Evaluation metrics
How to evaluate the performance of a rainfall-runoff model is largely related to the model
purpose, characteristics and application among others (Bennett et al. 2013). For the case
of evaluating a surrogate model, model prediction must first of all be suﬀiciently accurate
compared to the model it aims to emulate, in this case the Hi-Fi model. While Hi-Fi
model predictions carry their own uncertainty, for the purpose of evaluating surrogate
performance, the Hi-Fi model results will act as ground truth. Therefore the accuracy
of the surrogate model becomes tied to how closely it can capture each prediction made
from the Hi-Fi model by reducing the residual error of the surrogate.
Based on the work of Bennett et al. (2013) two evaluation criteria are used, the Nash-
Sutcliffe Eﬀiciency(NSE) and the Index of Agreement(IoAD). NSE is widely used within
hydrologic modelling for estimating goodness of fit. It compares the model performance
to the mean of observed values, with a range from [−∞, 1] where 1 is a perfect model
and score below 0 would be a model worse than mean of observed values. The NSE
evaluation score is applied to the water level and flow state predictions. Due to spilling
only occurring during very high rainfall events at individual nodes, calculating NSE
would not be feasible. Instead the IoAD is more applicable as it compares the sum of
squared error to the potential error, defined as the sum of squared absolute values of the
difference between predicted and mean observed values as well as the difference between
observed and mean observed values. The range of IoAD values are [0, 1]. Both NSE and
IoAD formulas can be seen in table 4.3. All evaluation scores are calculated on unscaled
state values.
Table 4.3: Evaluation scores for surrogate model performance. n is the number of observa-
tions, y are observed values, ˆy are predicted values and y is the mean of observed values
Name
Formula
Nash-Sutcliffe Eﬀiciency (NSE)
1 −
n∑
i=1
(yi−ˆyi)2
n∑
i=1
(yi−y)2
Index of Agreement (IoAD)
1 −
n∑
i=1
(yi−ˆyi)2
n∑
i=1
(|ˆyi−y|+|yi−y|)2
The evaluation scores are calculated as one collective score for each of the three states
as well as an individual score for each state variable. When calculating the collective
score, the mean of observed values y remains the related y to each state variable and
then summed for the collective score.
4.5.1
Computation times
The computation times are compared between the Hi-Fi model and model 1 as well
as between model 1 and model 2. The comparison is made in regards to simulating
hydraulic state variables from the test rain series described in section 3.2. For the Hi-Fi
==PAGE:37==
4.6 Technical implementation
25
model the hydrodynamic time step required for numerical computation was 10 seconds
for system A,B and C. Systems D and E required adaptive time stepping between [1,10]
for numerical stability.
For neural networks, the computation times related are its
training time and prediction time. Training of neural networks is performed once to
obtain the parameter weights that provide highest prediction, hereafter prediction time
can be performed simply as a function of new given input. It is the prediction time that
will be compared to the simulation time of the Hi-Fi model, however related training
times are to be considered if the practical use requires re-training of the surrogate model.
For best possible comparison of results, all models are simulated single threaded and on
a single core.
4.5.2
Results analysis
When evaluating the performance of the surrogate models, they are evaluated against
the observed values. While the spilling state is defined as a flow rate, absolute spill
volumes predicted is an additional metric for analysis as volumes remove the penalty
of time-lagged flow rates. As the test series was constructed from 8,225 individual rain
events, the volumes are therefore calculated from the flow rates within each given event.
These are therefore reported as spill volumes per rain event.
When comparing performance across system sizes, their absolute values are normalised
to aid in visual presentation of spread of scores. Normalised values are then defined as
xi,n =
xi
max(x) where the absolute value xi is is a fraction of the highest observed value of
x. For the example shown on figure 4.4, the maximum mean flow observed for system
B and D respectively will normalise to 1 while their system respective values become a
fraction hereof.
Figure 4.4: Normalisation example of mean flow in links versus corresponding NSE score for
the link for system B and D. When normalising, the max observed value of 0.004 and 0.0125
are both normalised to 1.
4.6
Technical implementation
Hi-Fi model label data and pre-processing was extracted using Intel Xeon E7-4830
2.13GHz processor with 64GB RAM. Surrogate models were implemented in Python
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Materials and methods
3.8 using Tensorflow version 2.7.0 (Abadi et al. 2016) on an Intel Xeon 2260v3 2.60GHz
processor with 256GB RAM. Related libraries for data management and results analysis
are Numpy, Pandas, Matplotlib and the QGIS software (QGIS 2022) for geographical
result presentation.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This section will present and evaluate the results from the experiments performed. As
the model performance evaluation is based on accuracy and reduction in computation
times, these are the overlying evaluation metrics for the results. The hyperparameter
results are evaluated in section 5.1, then model 1 prediction performance on each system
size is investigated in section 5.2 while section 5.3 then aims to analyse which physical
dynamics the model may not be able to capture. Model 2 is then evaluated against model
1 in section 5.4, primarily comparing computation cost. Finally model 3 is evaluated
against model 1 in section 5.5 focusing on whether model prediction performance has
improved.
5.1
Exploring model hyperparameters
For this part of the results, 5 model sizes were tested to evaluate model performance on
the system sizes as well as determining the hyperparameters that yielded best fit. These
model setups are evaluated more detailed in section 5.2 to determine the performance
in emulating the physical system. For the results presented and analysed, robustness of
the model in relation to prediction accuracy, convergence and training times was not
investigated. Evaluation scores and training times are therefore the result of parameter
weights obtained from single training for each hyperparameter setting on each system.
Robustness related to convergence was not documented, it was however found that train-
ing the model with high number of neurons, starting at 700, showed unstable training
when the randomized initialisation was unable to find an initial loss. It was therefore
necessary to re-run the model until the optimisation scheme could find an initial loss.
Table 5.1: Overview of gResNet model results on varying system sizes and hyperparameters.
Values closer to 1 equals better prediction. WL is the Water level in nodes in m, Flow is the
flow in links between nodes in m3/s and Spill is the surcharge from nodes in m3/s. For visual
aid the results are coloured to highlight performance with red being score<0.5 .
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
A_L2N10
0.6804
0.9025
0.0036
B_L2N10
0.9234
0.9673
0.7648
A_L4N20
0.856
0.8985
0.0667
B_L4N20
0.9675
0.9893
0.9395
A_L6N50*
0.9675
0.9841
0.0655
B_L6N50
0.9881
0.9864
0.592
A_L8N100
0.9621
0.9702
0.0509
B_L8N100
0.9879
0.9947
0.7344
A_L8N200
0.9608
0.9760
0.0436
B_L8N200*
0.9923
0.9969
0.9154
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
C_L2N10
0.8915
0.9448
0.8266
C_L4N20
0.891
0.9508
0.9069
C_L6N50
0.9236
0.4689
0.9409
C_L8N100
0.9548
0.959
0.958
C_L8N200*
0.9639
0.9641
0.9793
For the systems A,B, and C, the hyperparameter results can be seen in table 5.1. The
hyperparameter setting that yielded best results are highlighted in cursive with an as-
terisk. For all three systems it is evident that increasing hyperparameter complexity
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Results
returns increasingly better model predictions. As shown with system A, there is how-
ever an upper bound of hyperparameter complexity where increasing the network layers
or neurons no longer increase prediction accuracy, for a size of system A this was found
at 6 layers with 50 neurons in each layer. For both systems B and C, the best accuracy
was found with the highest tested hyperparameter setting of 8 layers with 200 neurons
in each. While it could be beneficial to increase complexity for these systems until an
upper bound was found, the prediction scores in both cases were deemed suﬀicient for
more detailed analysis, whereas the hyperparameter grid search was kept to only the
two biggest systems, D and E.
Figure 5.1 illustrates the result of the extended hyperparameter grid search performed
on systems D and E. Generally, increasing the number of layers in the network does not
show a consistent increase in prediction accuracy for any state. For system D with 8
layers, numerous settings show high prediction scores across the states. 300, 600, 800
and 1000 neurons achieve among the highest scores. When considering training and
prediction times for these settings, D_L8N300 is considerably faster as shown in table
A.2 in appendix. Therefore D_L8N300 will be the chosen model setting for further
investigation. For system E, it is the E_L8N800 setting that scores highest in all three
states.
As the UDS increases in size and therefore in physical complexity, the gResNet model
must increase in hyperparameter complexity accordingly to achieve best possible predic-
tion.
Figure 5.1: Hyperparameter results for model 1 on systems D and E. For numeric values, see
appendix figure A.1.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Model performance on system sizes
29
5.2
Model performance on system sizes
System A performance
For system A the best results are found using A_L6N50 model settings. Figure 5.2
illustrates model performance on individual links and nodes. Each node is represented
by two half-circles with the right half-circle describing the NSE Score for prediction of
Water level in the node, whereas the left half-circle describes the IoAD performance
related to predicting spill out of the node. Blue colored nodes indicate that no spilling
occurs in neither label data nor prediction. The blue link likewise indicates no score due
to being outside the system boundary, it simply connects the system to a free outflow
node downstream. It is included to indicate the flow direction of the system. Similar
result structure is given for each system size in this section. The spread for Water level
is minimal whereas performance varies much more for Flow and Spilling states. Looking
further into the flow variance, it appears to be the most upstream link from node 35010
to 6185 that is unable to emulate the flow dynamics for this link.
Figure 5.2: Model 1 results for A_L6N50. Evaluation scores are shown in a colour gradient,
blue gradients denote no score, due to no Spilling observed and predicted while for links it is
the outflow link not within system boundary. White triangle denote free outflow boundary.
Figure 5.3 illustrates observed versus predicted values for a) the three downstream nodes
with high NSE score and b) the upstream node containing primarily 0 flow. For the
upstream link 35010_6185 the model does capture small backwater events occurring as
well as the subsequent positive flow as figure 5.3c illustrates. It did however not capture
the few instances of very high flow. Likewise is the case for the following downstream
link 6185_6184 which was unable to predict flows higher than 0.2 cbm/s. Specifically
for the node 35010, there is no catchment area that provides runoff into the node which
causes the corresponding downstream link to be inactive except for when water comes
from downstream.
The link itself therefore has different dynamics compared to its
downstream counterparts which the model prediction undervalues. For predicting the
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Results
((a))
((b))
((c))
Figure 5.3: Model 1 A_L6N50 flow results. a) observed versus predicted flow values for
three downstream links. b) observed versus predicted values for easternmost upstream link.
c) Hydrograph of easternmost upstream link shown only on part of the full time series. For
full time series plot, see appendix figure A.2.
Spilling states, of the 5 nodes in the system only the 3 most upstream are surcharging
water in the label data. Of these the model best captures the spill happening in node
6185 while the neighboring nodes 6184 and 35010 have near equal insuﬀicient score.
Each surcharging node is presented in figure 5.4 where the surcharging flows per rain
event has been calculated to volumes per rain event. The number of activated spilling
events increases as the nodes go upstream, node 6184 observes one rain event with
exceptionally high spill volume compared to its remaining 5 spill events, this was unable
to be captured. This trend can be seen throughout the three surcharging nodes, where
the maximum volumes are severely underestimated, albeit less so for node 6184.
((a))
((b))
((c))
Figure 5.4: Model 1 A_L6N50 observed versus predicted spill volumes pr rain event for a)
node 6184, b) node 6185 and c) node 35010.
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Model performance on system sizes
31
System B performance
System B consists of 16 nodes and 15 links. For this system size, the network hyper-
parameters with 8 layers and 200 neurons in each layer is very close to predicting label
data perfectly.
Figure 5.5: Model 1 results for B_L8N200. Evaluation scores are shown in a colour gradient,
blue gradients denote no score, due to no Spilling observed and predicted while for links it is
the outflow link not within system boundary. White triangle denote free outflow boundary.
For this model setting even the lowest NSE-score for an individual node/link is 0.937.
IoAD for Spill is however about equal performance as seen in the previous system. Com-
paring this system to the previous, it must be noted that the two easternmost nodes in
system A are not a part of this system B. This has shown to be impactful to the results,
as system B therefore does not contain an upstream dead link. Interestingly however,
for this system the worst predicting nodes are specifically three upstream nodes, 6184,
6239 and 35061. Likewise is the case for the links, where 6184_35009 and 35061_6239
are the worst link predictions.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.6: Model 1 B_L8N200 observed versus predicted spill volumes pr rain event for a)
node 6255 and b) node 35007.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Results
Overall IoAD score has improved for this system size compared to previous, largely due
to the increased quantity of activated spill events that the model was able to capture
and predict. Figure 5.6 shows the two low-scoring spill nodes, where for node 6255 it
has predicted spill to occur when none was observed. Meanwhile node 35007 shows
the opposite with frequent spilling of volumes up to 40 cbm while none are captured.
Whereas figure 5.4 for system A does show observed spilling that was not captured, the
opposite can additionally be seen occurring for system B as figure 5.6a indicates.
System C performance
For system C containing 26 links and 26 nodes, 200 neurons per 8 layers yielded best
prediction accuracy. The same link as in system A appears in this system, 35010_6185,
with a score of -3.93 compared to -0.25 for system A. As system C contains roughly 5
times more links than system A, the model likely punishes this link dynamic even further
when trying to lower loss across all links.
Figure 5.7: Model 1 results for C_L8N200. Evaluation scores are shown in a colour gradient,
blue gradients denote no score, due to no Spilling observed and predicted while for links it is
the outflow link not within system boundary. White triangle denote free outflow boundary.
The other cases of low prediction score for links are at the up- and downstream links to
node 6259. These do however have a connected catchment area upstream and therefore
are much more active than link 35010_6185. For this case, link 35089_6259 which is
the upstream link, is unable to capture the often recurring peak flows at 0.08 cbm/s but
does capture smaller flows as figure 5.8 illustrates. Meanwhile it appears the downstream
link 6259_35098 is able to capture all extreme peak flows and smaller flows but likewise
unable to capture the recurring flows at 0.06 cbm/s, shown on figure 5.9. The connecting
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Model performance on system sizes
33
node 6259 suffers the same behavior as seen for its downstream link 6259_35098. It is
able to capture extreme event water level but does not reach the correct magnitude of
commonly recurring water level.
Figure 5.8: Hydrograph of link 35089_6259 in model 1 C_L8N200 shown only on part of
the full time series. for full time series plot, see appendix figure A.3
Figure 5.9: Hydrograph of link 6259_35098 in model 1 C_L8N200 shown only on part of
the full time series. for full time series plot, see appendix figure A.4
For comparison link 6261_35098 is illustrated on figure 5.10, which is the other joining
link to the most downstream node with an NSE score of 0.989. This link shows no
issue capturing every flow in each time step at both low and high flows. Notably the
mean and maximum flows are much greater for link 6261_35098, however even at equal
magnitude flows in this link, the model is able to accurate predict the magnitude.
Figure 5.10: Hydrograph of link 6261_35098 in model 1 C_L8N200 shown only on part of
the full time series. for full time series plot, see appendix figure A.5
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Results
System D performance
Figure 5.11: Model 1 results for D_L8N300. Evaluation scores are shown in a colour gradient,
blue gradients denote no score, due to no Spilling observed and predicted while for links it is
the outflow link not within system boundary. White triangle denote free outflow boundary.
System D consists of 57 nodes and 58 links with a total connecting catchment area triple
the size of system C. System D introduces additional upstream nodes with no connecting
catchment area. These are nodes 35072 connected to 6245 and 108290 close by. Their
connecting links score NSE below 0. However, the previously examined link 35010_6185
has increased score to 0.22. Comparing the easternmost link in this system compared to
the same link in system A, figure 5.12a to 5.3b, shows the biggest difference being lower
observed flows within the link for system D likely contributing most dominantly to the
links increased score.
Investigating the newly introduced dead links, illustrated on figure 5.12b and 5.12c, nega-
tive flows of -0.15 and over -1.5 cbm/s are observed in the links, whereas the model could
only predict a magnitude below observed. The high negative flows are likely a result
of the node location in the system. Modelling wise they are a branch connected quite
far downstream with no connected catchment area. Although they have no connected
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Model performance on system sizes
35
((a))
((b))
((c))
Figure 5.12: Model 1 D_L8N300 observed versus predicted flow rates for a) link 35010_6185,
b) link 35072_6245 and c) link 6245_35059.
catchment area, much like the easternmost link, they are affected by the upstream flows
of their connecting node.
System E performance
Figure 5.13: Model 1 results for E_L8N800. Evaluation scores are shown in a colour gradient,
blue gradients denote no score, due to no Spilling observed and predicted while for links it is
the outflow link not within system boundary. White triangle denote free outflow boundary.
System E spans 172 nodes and 180 links with best prediction accuracy found with 8
layers and 800 neurons per layer.
At this system size, the model retains evaluation
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Results
scores above 0.93 for all three states. However, as is evident on figure 5.13 and 5.17
in next section, the model cannot individually retain high NSE scores for water level
and flow and as such, an increasing system size leads to increasing number of individual
states with poor performance.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.14: Model 1 E_L8N800 results for link 15258_15242. a) Hydrograph of flow for
part of the full time series. b) All observed versus predicted values for the link for the full
time series. For full hydrograph of link 15258_15242 see appendix figure A.8
A noteworthy flow dynamic is captured downstream in system E. The pipe stretch
between node 15258 to 15240, illustrated on figure 5.14 in the zoomed in box, naturally
flows downward from 15240 to 15258 due to the ground level difference. However due to
the upstream system arriving from 15260 to 15258 regular backwater flows are enforced
in this stretch.
A subset of the time series is shown on 5.14a, this link having an
observed average flow of 0.014 cbm/s and an NSE score of 0.662. All observed versus
predicted flows are shown on figure 5.14b where it can be seen that the model generally
can predict the peak negative and positive flows but does not generally capture the
magnitude correct at every time step which the associated hydrograph confirms.
The western connected links, 15241_15242 and 15240_15241 both have an observed
average flow of -0.030 cbm/s and NSE scores of 0.923 and 0.949 respectively.
The
equivalent time series is illustrated for link 15241_15242 as well as its corresponding
scatter plot on figure 5.15. Link 15240_15241 has similar scattered values and can be
seen in appendix figure A.9. For these two links, peak flows of up to 0.4 cbm/s are
captured, however the model is unable to capture the negative flows lower than -0.1
cbm/s for both links. The lowest NSE for water level is node 35060 with a score of -
17643.2 and illustrated on figure 5.16. It is clear that this node sees no water at any time
as every observed value corresponds to the invert level of the node. The downstream
link 35060_6230 likewise has no observed flow and thus scores -8927.12.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 General model performance
37
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.15: Model 1 E_L8N800 results for link 15241_15242. a) Hydrograph of flow for
part of the full time series.b) All observed versus predicted values for the link for the full time
series. For full hydrograph of link 15241_15242 see appendix figure A.10
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.16: Model 1 E_L8N800 results for water level in node 35060. a) Hydrograph of
water level for part of the full time series. b) All observed versus predicted values for the node
for the full time series. For full hydrograph of node 35060 see appendix figure A.11
5.3
General model performance
While the overall NSE and IoAD scores may seem high, figure 5.17 show that there are
individual states with poor performance. For water level and flow states, it becomes
increasingly diﬀicult for the model to adhere to each individual state dynamic as the
system increases. This is further evident on the flow distribution, where only system
B, which contains simpler and more identical flow dynamics, is the only system to
score every link above 0.9. IoAD scores for spill include every node which has observed
and/or predicted spill flows throughout the time series. The nodes with no observed nor
predicted spill flows, illustrated with blue ”gradient” in previous figures, are therefore
not binned but make up the remaining percentages that will summarise the distribution
to 1. That means for system A with 5 nodes, 3 nodes are surcharging and shown in figure
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Results
Figure 5.17: Histogram of evaluation scores for each state. As NSE scores can go to −∞, all
NSE scores below 0 are binned together in the leftmost bin. For the spilling state, the nodes
with no observed nor predicted spill are not binned but their contribution will summarise the
percentages to 1.
5.17 making up 60%, while the remaining 2 nodes contain no observed nor predicted
surcharge and correspond to the remaining 40%. Prediction performance of the spill
state shows no apparent increase nor decrease as the system size increases.
((a))
((b))
((c))
Figure 5.18: Scatter plots where x-values are normalised for ease of comparison between
systems. The values are normalised to maximum observed value per system. a) Activated spill
events versus NSE score for corresponding node. Activated spills are the number of rain events
in which spilling occurs at least once for a given node. b) Max connected flow observed in all
connected links to a node versus NSE score for corresponding node. c) Mean flow for the full
time series versus NSE score for corresponding link.
Figure 5.18 illustrates normalised observed values for different metrics plotted against
the NSE score. Few outliers with extreme values are omitted, these are however checked
to be in line with the trend seen from the figure. For example for system E, node 35060
with an NSE score of -17643.2 has 0 activated spill events. From figure 5.18a it can
clearly be seen that any number of spilling events in a node guarantees high prediction
accuracy for the water level, albeit less so for system E. The presence of spilling is ac-
companied by water levels within the node reaching weir crest levels, thus indicating
that connected flow is suﬀicient to regularly change observed water levels causing ex-
pected hydrodynamics which the model can capture. Figure 5.18b further illustrates
==PAGE:51==
5.3 General model performance
39
the relationship between the maximum observed flow in any of the connected links to a
given node with the NSE score for the water level in the node. The relationship is not
as clearly pronounced as for figure 5.18a, especially so for system E. Having very low
maximum connected flow to a node generally gives an indication of an upstream node.
While it appears that most nodes with a low NSE score are upstream nodes, there are
certain node dynamics, particularly in system E, that do contain a bigger upstream area
while not being able to predict water level consistently high. Figure 5.18c illustrates
mean flow versus corresponding NSE for the link. For these, it is apparent that the
worst scoring links rarely have much water coming through which the model struggles
to emulate.
((a))
((b)) System A
((c)) System B
((d)) System C
((e)) System D
((f)) System E
Figure 5.19: a) Observed versus predicted spill volumes per rain event for all nodes with
IoAD<0.1. Grey dashed line indicates x=0. b) to f) Observed versus predicted spill volumes
per rain event for all nodes with IoAD>0.9 per system size.
As figure 5.17 illustrated for IoAD, prediction of spilling were primarily either in the high-
est or lowest bin. Figure 5.19 then illustrates the observed versus predicted spill volumes
per rain event, grouped in nodes with low or high IoAD scores respectively. From figure
5.19a it is apparent that low scores are contributed to nodes that either fail to predict any
spilling or the opposite, predicts spilling when none is observed. The absolute volumes
and number of spilling events observed does increase as the system size increases, but
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Results
as the histogram showed, it has not helped the model capture the underlying conditions
related to spills happening. Comparing the NSE for water level to IoAD for spilling as
well as the lowest NSE for flow for a connecting link to the IoAD for spilling showed no
indication of clear relation between low IoAD and low NSE, see appendix A.12 and A.13.
((a))
((b))
Figure 5.20: Model 1 validation loss throughout the epochs for each system size. a) Loss
contribution of flow divided by water level. b) Loss contribution of spill divided by water level.
The grey dashed line indicates when the state loss is equal to water level loss.
Figure 5.20 illustrates the progression of validation loss throughout the epoch runs,
where loss for flow and spill both are divided by loss for water level. These show the loss
contribution for each state and therefore indicates which state the model generally will
try to minimise for better fit. Figure 5.20b shows how prediction for spilling therefore
does not improve due to the low contributing loss.
5.3.1
Computation time evaluation
Table 5.2: Computation cost comparison between model 1 and Hi-Fi model. Model 1 requires
training before being able to predict, where prediction time then is compared to simulation
time for Hi-Fi model.
Model 1
Hi-Fi
System
Training time [s]
Prediction time [s]
Simulation time [s]
A
1,106.30
45.00
1,543.00
B
4,967.90
92.30
5,927.00
C
5,518.70
95.20
6,344.00
D
15,004.10
177.70
16,361.00
E
80,184.80
1,867.30
53,792.00
Table 5.2 compares the simulation time of the Hi-Fi model to the training and prediction
time of the best model setting for each system size. Simulation time for the Hi-Fi model
are considering a fixed time step of 10 seconds for every system except system D and E
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Sequenced gResNet structure
41
which was simulated with adaptive time stepping between [1, 10]. All gResNet models
are trained for the full 2,500 epochs. For the validation loss throughout the epochs, see
figure 5.21 which shows general convergence for all systems.
Training times increase considerably with increasing system size, from 18 minutes for
system A to over 22 hours for system E. If the practical setting for which the gRes-
Net model will be applied does not require re-training as the dynamical UDS does not
change, training times can then be considered a one-time sunk cost whereas prediction
times are more significant. Prediction times are 1 to 3 percent of the corresponding
Hi-Fi simulation time with the biggest difference seen for system D and the smallest for
A and E.
5.4
Sequenced gResNet structure
Table 5.3 summarises the training times of the model 2 training structure compared to
the regular simultaneous gResNet model 1 training. Model 2 training was only performed
on one hyperparameter setting for each system size. As the training consists of two
separate parameter weight optimisations, ’Training L’ refers to the first part of training
on only the L operator while ’Training LN’ refers to the second part of training that
involves both operators, however only the weights for N are updated. Focusing primarily
on comparing ’Model 1-Training’ to ’Model 2-Training LN’ an interesting development
is seen for model 2 as the system size increases. Model 2 is 12% slower than model 1
for system A, while for systems B and C it is within 3% and -5.5% of model 1 times
respectively. Although model 2 training is slightly slower for C, both B and C are likely
within margins where convergence has generally been found and retraining both model
1 and 2 would return near equal training times. A reduction of 14% and 60% can be
found for the biggest systems D and E respectively.
Table 5.3:
Computation costs for model 1 versus model 2.
Model 1 has single training
structure while model 2 requires two-fold training, first of the single operator in isolation, then
it requires training N in the regular gResNet formulation composed of both operators L and
N.
Model 1
Model 2
Model 1
Model 2
System
Training time
Training L
Training LN
Prediction time
Prediction time
A_L6N50
1,106.3
593.3
1,238.8
45
46.5
B_L8N200
4,967.9
640.4
4,826.4
92.3
94.1
C_L8N200
5,518.7
703.9
5,824.5
95.2
100.3
D_L8N300
15,004.1
958.0
12889.0
177.7
170.7
E_L8N800
80,184.8
1,509.9
32,455.7
1,867.3
1,844.2
The increasing reduction in training times comparatively are suspected due to the in-
creasing physical complexity within the UDS that the models try to emulate. For smaller
systems, and thus lower complexity, the training structure yields no benefit as the si-
multaneous training can converge as fast. For the bigger systems however, the benefit of
already having L operator fixed allows the model to converge more smoothly and faster.
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results
This can be seen in the development of the validation loss throughout the epochs shown
on figure 5.21. Furthermore system E found its minimum validation loss after only 448
epochs due to early stopping taking effect after 1148 epochs total.
Figure 5.21: Validation losses for Model 1 and Model 2 for each system size.
If training of L is to be considered, training times favour model 1 for all but the two
biggest system sizes, D and E. For training L, the training time contribution to the
combined training of model 2 decreases as the system size increases. For example for
system A, training L corresponds to 48% of the time training LN takes, while the same
only corresponds to below 5% for system E. As the training parameters for L were fixed,
a multitude of tuning steps can be done to decrease training L, both for small and big
systems. Specifically, imposing a much more aggressive learning rate decay as well as
an early stopper can significantly reduce this.
Table 5.4: Comparison of prediction accuracy between model 1 and model 2. Values closer
to 1 equals better prediction. For visual aid the results are coloured to highlight performance
with red being score<0.5.
Model 1
Model 2
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
A_L6N50
0.9675
0.9841
0.0655
0.9608
0.9778
0.0542
B_L8N200
0.9923
0.9969
0.9154
0.9923
0.9958
0.9637
C_L8N200
0.9639
0.9641
0.9793
0.9656
0.9658
0.9775
D_L8N300
0.8961
0.9456
0.9101
0.8473
0.9408
0.966
E_L8N800
0.9521
0.9346
0.9692
0.9278
0.9242
0.9698
The prediction accuracy of model 2 training are shown in table 5.4. Scores are very
comparable to the prediction scores of model 1, with the most differing scores at a 5
percent-point difference. The prediction performance of model 2 training is therefore
not worsened by sequentially optimising the operator weights.
5.5
Maximum likelihood loss function
Model 3 has been run on the hyperparameter setting for each system size that yielded
best results from Model 1. Model 3 was trained using the Log-likelihood loss function
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Maximum likelihood loss function
43
from which the results can be seen below in table 5.5 compared to model 1 and on
figure 5.22 showing a histogram of the scores. At a glance, it is clear that changing
the loss function to a maximum likelihood estimation does not improve overall model
performance on any of the states. However comparing the histogram of model 1 on
figure 5.17 to model 3 on figure 5.22, shows that model 3 in fact has higher percentage
of NSE scores > 0.9 for predicting water level for system D and E compared to model
1. Likewise is the case for NSE for flow > 0.9 for system E only. For Flow and IoAD
scores, the lowest bin has higher percentage than model 1 across all system sizes, which
gives the first indicator of how the model has chosen to optimise.
Table 5.5: Comparison of prediction accuracy between model 1 and model 3. Values closer
to 1 equals better prediction. For visual aid the results are coloured to highlight performance
with red being score<0.5.
Model 1
Model 3
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
A_L6N50
0.9675
0.9841
0.0655
0.7739
0.9791
0
B_L8N200
0.9923
0.9969
0.9154
0.9386
-28.5187
0.5288
C_L8N200
0.9639
0.9641
0.9793
0.9162
-99.8859
0.8339
D_L8N300
0.8961
0.9456
0.9101
0.6186
-497.545
0.6363
E_L8N800
0.9521
0.9346
0.9692
-1.7118
-114.372
0.3436
Figure 5.22: Histogram of evaluation scores for each state. As NSE scores can go to −∞, all
NSE scores below 0 are binned together in the leftmost bin. For the spilling state, the nodes
with no observed nor predicted spill are not binned but their contribution will summarise the
percentages to 1.
When observing the variation of the NSE scores for each state across the systems, the
maximum NSE scores obtained for an individual state variable are higher than from
model 1, see table 5.6.
They have however come at the cost of essentially ignoring
certain nodes and links as the minimum NSE scores are several orders of magnitude
worse. It appears that in trying to minimise overall variance in the predictions, it has
found weights that give near perfect prediction for few nodes or links. While this would
give high variance to remaining nodes or links it would result in an overall lower Log-
likelihood loss for the state.
Interestingly, the loss distribution of the states during
training shows that spill has by far the highest negative loss while loss for water level
is below flow for system A and B while it is above for the bigger systems. Although
the loss contribution for flow therefore is the lowest for the biggest systems, it appears
the optimisation was unable to propose weights that would provide an overall higher
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results
Table 5.6: Overall, minimum and maximum scores presented for each state in each system
size for model 1 and 3. Red are scores < 0.5.
Model 1
Model 3
Overall Score
Min Score
Max Score
Overall Score
Min Score
Max Score
WL
0.9675
0.9567
0.9754
0.7739
-0.3055
0.957
A_L6N50
Flow
0.9841
-0.2473
0.9943
0.9791
-1.7465
0.9952
Spill
0.0655
0
0.9363
0
0
0.0002
WL
0.9923
0.9369
0.9959
0.9386
0.4983
0.9987
B_L8N200
Flow
0.9969
0.9777
0.9983
-29.5187
-805.853
0.999
Spill
0.9154
0
0.9583
0.5288
0
0.731
WL
0.9639
0.5194
0.9913
0.9162
0.3187
0.997
C_L8N200
Flow
0.9641
-3.9348
0.9923
-99.8859
-346328
0.9986
Spill
0.9793
0
0.9851
0.8339
0
0.8762
WL
0.8961
-4.1141
0.9821
0.6186
-3.5675
0.9983
D_L8N300
Flow
0.9456
-2.1979
0.9843
-497.555
-194144
0.9936
Spill
0.9101
0
0.9898
0.6363
0
0.9007
WL
0.9521
-17643.2
0.9891
-1.7118
-11.2949
0.9931
E_L8N800
Flow
0.9347
-8927.12
0.9769
-114.372
−1.6 · 108
0.9945
Spill
0.9692
0
0.9899
0.3436
0
0.984
negative loss.
As the Log-likelihood loss may allude to the model not having found proper convergence,
system sizes C and D were additionally run with model 3 setting for 50,000 epochs rather
than 2,500. The results thereof are illustrated on figure 5.23 where the evaluation scores
are compared to model 3 results using only 2,500 epochs. Even when the model has run
for this many epochs, taking 29 and 67 hours respectively, only water level prediction
has improved. The improvement in water level prediction did not come at the cost of
reduced accuracy for the remaining states, however considering the required epochs for
this accuracy model 3 is likely not applicable in practice considering alternatives. Model
3 formulation is therefore not an improvement from the regular model 1 prediction.
Figure 5.23: Histogram of evaluation scores for each state using model 3 on system C and D
for 2,500 and 50,000 epochs. As NSE scores can go to −∞, all NSE scores below 0 are binned
together in the leftmost bin. For the spilling state, the nodes with no observed nor predicted
spill are not binned but their contribution will summarise the percentages to 1.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This section discusses the data used, the methods and results thereof. First, the key
learnings are outlined, which summarises and discusses the results. Next, the limitations
related to data and methods are discussed, particularly related to how these affect the
given results. Lastly an outlook is addressed to discuss further work, areas of improve-
ment and what steps must be taken towards a model structure more applicable for use
in urban planning.
6.1
Key learnings
6.1.1
gResNet performance
A criteria for applicable use of these surrogate model architectures is that they should
be able to properly capture the hydraulic dynamics of an UDS. These dynamics are
much more complex than simply being divided into three states; water level in nodes,
flow in links and spilling from nodes. While model 1 is able to simulate water level,
flow and spilling with high overall prediction accuracy, it fails to properly capture areas
that rarely, if ever, see any water. It has however shown to properly capture backwater
effects at both very low magnitudes as well as when backwater is the main dynamic
in a pipe. Likewise the model would consistently undervalue optimising prediction for
spilling throughout training, regardless of system size. With the loss functions tested, a
physically-informed correction of a data-driven prediction of spilling was insuﬀicient.
The gResNet model structure has maintained high overall NSE scores throughout in-
creasing the system size from 5 nodes and 4 links to 172 nodes and 180 links. It is
shown that an increasing system size requires increasing hyperparameters to maintain
high accuracy. However as the system size in the chosen case area increases, there is
seen compounding areas of very low/no water appearing. As more of these nodes and
links appear, the model optimisation can no longer choose to ignore them as the con-
tributing residual becomes too high. This unfortunately causes the model to predict less
accurately for its remaining states, as seen in the development for Water level and Flow
scores as the size increases.
The simulation times related to prediction of state variables given required input for the
gResNet model were one to three percent of the time required for the corresponding Hi-Fi
model. These reductions make gResNet models very attractive in real-time application
for flood risk warning systems or for scenario planning where urban measures change
the amount of runoff but does not change the physical dimensions of the 1D UDS.
6.1.2
Sequenced gResNet training
The sequenced training of model 2 provided only a decrease in computational cost for
the bigger systems, D and E, of 14% and 60% respectively. No significant gain was
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Discussion
observed for low to medium size systems, where for the lowest system of 5 nodes and 4
links an increase in computation cost of 12% was shown. The computation times related
to two-fold training of model 2 did not come at an increased cost to prediction time nor
at the cost of prediction accuracy when compared to model 1.
6.1.3
Maximum likelihood estimation
Optimising the model fit through maximum likelihood estimation would not provide
higher prediction accuracy for the hydraulic states. Although the model was able to
predict certain state variables with near perfect accuracy, it would come at the cost of
reducing accuracy for other state variables too drastically. Poor model fit was not due
to lacking convergence after training, as two system sizes were run for 20 times more
epochs without considerable improvement across the states.
6.2
Limitations
While the model could emulate the general hydraulic dynamics found in the UDS, the
case area does not contain more complex structures than circular pipes connected to
regular manholes. Other structures like overflow weirs, basins, trunk sewers or even
outlet nodes all propose new hydraulic dynamics which was not accounted for in this
study. Palmitessa et al. (2022) tested an area with a weir structure in addition to the
spilling configuration as used in this study. While predictions of weir overflow were less
accurate than predictions of node surcharge spilling, they were able to predict absolute
volumes with high accuracy using a physics-constrained approach to spill prediction
through mass balance equation imposed in the model prediction. Jeppesen et al. (2022)
meanwhile tests a different model architecture on a small case area including a free
outflow boundary node which was unable to predict the distinct dynamics of the free
flowing boundary and even worsened the prediction of the connected nodes. These show
that when introducing additional hydraulic structures to the system, they may require
different approaches to effectively account for their contribution, which can be through
different model architectures, training structures, physically imposed mass balances or
likely a combination of aforementioned.
For selection of system sizes, the smaller sizes would be nested within the larger sizes
for better comparability. Although this makes comparison of areas possible as the size
increases, it also means that complex hydraulic areas, primarily due to no water passing
through, remain a recurring issue throughout. This limits investigating core causes for
poor model performance as only few problematic areas with different enough dynamics
are present to single out core causes.
When training neural networks, the many tunable parameter weights are adjusted until
lowest loss is returned. As deep neural networks are complex models, the set of weights
that return lowest loss within a set number of epochs may not be the same weights and
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Outlook
47
therefore may produce a model with different prediction accuracy if trained again. For
this, suﬀicient epochs are required to expect the weights to converge towards weights
that provide the same results. Throughout training all models, their loss curves showed
that they did reach convergence, except for model 3 training which had an additional
test run with additional epochs to investigate if previous model 3 results are applica-
ble. However simply reaching general convergence does not guarantee the exact same
weights for a model, loss may for one training have higher contribution from flow than
for water level compared to another training with the same loss. This robustness of the
models was not explored thoroughly, however divergence is expected to be minimal due
to convergence generally obtained.
Furthermore robustness related to training includes the ease of which the optimiser can
find an initial loss to begin training from. This was particularly relevant for the biggest
systems, D and E, that experiences issues with initialising stable training at a high
network complexity. These instability issues were not documented, however they are
relevant to address if this model architecture is to be applicable. While robustness test-
ing was out of scope for this study, promising results in this regard come from model 2
training structure, this is further discussed in section 6.3.
Although computation times have been compared, they come with a multitude of lim-
itations to be addressed.
All computation results are presented using a single core
processor. Even so, Hi-Fi simulations were performed on a slightly different processor
than surrogate models. Furthermore the hydrodynamic time step of the Hi-Fi models
were 10 seconds for system A, B and C while it was necessary to perform system D
and E simulations at an adaptive time stepping with a lower bound of 1 second. This
would additionally increase simulation times of Hi-Fi models, however it is an inherent
constraint for bigger UDSs that smaller time steps are required for numerical stability.
Machine learning models do not suffer from this constraint as they simply extrapolate
between time steps, which is the primary difference behind the low prediction times of
the surrogates compared to the high simulation times of the Hi-Fi model. As the tempo-
ral resolution was reduced for the surrogate, this may likewise affect related prediction
times when comparing to the resolution of the Hi-Fi model. Efforts were not made to
decrease the training times through parallellisation for the surrogate models, although
their training structure allows for it. While training times were purposefully limited
and pre-processing times omitted, arguments can be made to comparing most eﬀicient
training and prediction times from surrogates to most eﬀicient simulation times from
Hi-Fi models.
6.3
Outlook
Technical improvements
For model 1 and 3 tested in this study, both models would under-prioritise whole states
as they found higher yield in loss through optimising remaining states.
It therefore
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Discussion
becomes clear that the loss function needs re-evaluation to accommodate an equal con-
tributing loss for each state. In this area, Heydari et al. (2019) propose an adaptive loss
function formulation applicable on any gradient descent-based optimiser, as is the case
for these models. It dynamically learns the best weighting of a multi-component loss
function based on set target metrics, which would fix the issues observed in this study
with the loss function targeting the highest loss contributor due to equal weighting.
The training structure of model 2 where one set of parameter weights were trained and
then kept fixed while training another set of parameter weights shows great potential
for transfer learning which may be applicable for optimisation of the model. Transfer
learning essentially makes use of pre-existing knowledge from one domain to improve
learning in a related domain (Tan et al. 2018, Weiss et al. 2016). Making use of transfer
learning can further help the model reach convergence faster as well as aid in robust-
ness of optimisation due to the initialisation starting off at a proper gradient than what
random initialisation would find. Likewise implementing transfer learning would poten-
tially decrease re-training times of the model in an urban planning setting where minor
changes would be made to the UDS. Lastly, making use of transfer learning lessens the
requirements related to the training data (Pan & Yang 2010, Tan et al. 2018). In urban
water modelling, this may decrease the quantity of minimal requirements to training
data for suﬀicient model prediction, provided the quality of the training data remains
suﬀiciently varied, particularly for extreme rainfall events.
6.3.1
Applicable use in practice
The vision for use of hydraulic gResNet models is to have bigger UDSs defined through
several sub-models trained independently while informing boundary conditions to one
sub-model from the output of connecting sub-models (Palmitessa et al. 2022). In this
regard, this study has shown that the gResNet model is flexible in terms of system sizes
used and its prediction is more so governed by the complexity of the UDS. Research
must therefore be made in how well these sub-models can be coupled and how well
the hydraulic dynamics are preserved across model boundaries. If the dynamics remain
preserved independent from variable system sizes, the gResNet architecture would em-
ulate simple hydraulic structures which are kept within the gResNet sub-model while
other structures such as basins remain outside gResNet boundaries and can more eas-
ily be computed through mass balances given information from surrounding sub-models.
Meanwhile other research areas show potential for bypassing before-mentioned sub-
model structures through different machine learning architectures, namely through graph
neural networks that can predict the states of relevance in a node given the current state
of its neighbouring nodes. As a proof of concept, Jeppesen et al. (2022) showed that
the graph architecture is applicable in an urban hydraulic setting, however additional
research would be required to accurately emulate the hydraulic dynamics present. A
successful graph structure would in particular eliminate the influence of dead areas on
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Outlook
49
remaining state variables as found for the case areas in this study.
This study reduced the temporal resolution of Hi-Fi results in pre-processing for label
data and was able to obtain high prediction accuracy in spite of lower resolution. This
shows potential in enabling models that emulate the physical hydraulic dynamics with-
out being limited by numerical instability related to solving partial differential equations
from numerical models. If reduction in temporal resolution is achieved without reducing
accuracy, these models allow for simulating at very rough time steps for major computa-
tional reductions when changes to the states at small time steps are not of importance
to the modeller. Further research in the accuracy retained from lowering temporal reso-
lution will therefore help in delivering additional tools relevant for achieving suﬀiciently
confident results at as low a cost as possible.
==PAGE:62==
50
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This study aimed to investigate the accuracy of the gResNet model as a surrogate model
for an existing Hi-Fi model formulated through MIKE. The surrogate performance was
evaluated across 5 UDS sizes and with varying hyperparameters.
The models were
trained using 2 months of artificially constructed extreme rainfall observations and eval-
uated on 3.2 years of continuous rainfall events with no dry periods. Furthermore, a
sequential gResNet training structure was tested in an effort to reduce computation
times without reducing accuracy.
Lastly changing the optimisation through a maxi-
mum likelihood loss function was tested in an attempt to improve prediction accuracy
of the model. Model performance was evaluated through the NSE and IoAD scores.
The following conclusions were drawn based on the findings above:
• The gResNet model can predict water level from nodes and flow in links with
NSE scores above 0.89 across system sizes. It however struggled to consistently
accurately predict the individual state variables at areas with low/no water flow
through.
• The related computation times for gResNet models were 1 to 3% of the correspond-
ing simulation time from Hi-Fi models
• An increased neural network complexity through increasing hyperparameters is
required to maintain high accuracy for larger system sizes.
• A sequenced training structure of the gResNet model reduces computation times
for large systems but increases computation times for very small systems.
• Maximum likelihood estimation did not improve model performance. It was shown
to predict few state variables very accurately at the cost of poor prediction for
remaining corresponding state variables.
• When optimising the model to predict the three states, it was shown not to weigh
optimisation of each state evenly resulting in poor prediction for spilling specifically.
The use of generalized Residue Networks as surrogates for current Hi-Fi models in urban
hydrology shows great potential. With additional research, it should be possible to de-
velop system-independent models that can provide more detailed hydraulic information
than Lo-Fi models at only a fraction of the computational cost of Hi-Fi models.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., Brevdo, E., Chen, Z., Citro, C., Corrado, G. S.,
Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Goodfellow, I., Harp, A., Irving, G.,
Isard, M., Jia, Y., Jozefowicz, R., Kaiser, L., Kudlur, M., Levenberg, J., Mané, D.,
Monga, R., Moore, S., Murray, D., Olah, C., Schuster, M., Shlens, J., Steiner, B.,
Sutskever, I., Talwar, K., Tucker, P., Vanhoucke, V., Vasudevan, V., Viégas, F.,
Vinyals, O., Warden, P., Wattenberg, M., Wicke, M., Yu, Y., Zheng, X. & Research,
G. (2016), TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed
Systems, Technical report.
URL: www.tensorflow.org.
Abbott, M. B. & Ionescu, F. (1967), ‘On The Numerical Computation Of Nearly Hori-
zontal Flows’, Journal of Hydraulic Research 5(2), 97–117.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/00221686709500195
Agarwal (2020), ‘A Review of the Math Used in Training a Neural Network’.
Bennett, N. D., Croke, B. F., Guariso, G., Guillaume, J. H., Hamilton, S. H., Jake-
man, A. J., Marsili-Libelli, S., Newham, L. T., Norton, J. P., Perrin, C., Pierce,
S. A., Robson, B., Seppelt, R., Voinov, A. A., Fath, B. D. & Andreassian, V. (2013),
‘Characterising performance of environmental models’, Environmental Modelling and
Software 40, 1–20.
Box, G. E. (1976), ‘Science and statistics’, Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion 71(356), 791–799.
Chen, Z. & Xiu, D. (2021), ‘On generalized residual network for deep learning of unknown
dynamical systems’, Journal of Computational Physics 438, 110362.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110362
Copenhagen Municipality (2011), COPENHAGEN CLIMATE ADAPTATION PLAN,
Technical report.
Davidsen, S., Löwe, R., Thrysøe, C. & Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K. (2017), ‘Simplification
of one-dimensional hydraulic networks by automated processes evaluated on 1D/2D
deterministic flood models’, Journal of Hydroinformatics 19(5), 686–700.
URL: http://iwaponline.com/jh/article-pdf/19/5/686/392230/jh0190686.pdf
DHI (2022), MIKE 1D DHI Simulation Engine for 1D river and urban modelling Refer-
ence Manual, Technical report.
Heydari, A. A., Thompson, C. A. & Mehmood, A. (2019), SoftAdapt: Techniques for
Adaptive Loss Weighting of Neural Networks with Multi-Part Loss Functions, Techni-
cal report.
Hicks, R. (2020), ‘Tensorflow with Custom Likelihood Functions’.
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
IPCC (2021), Climate Change 2021 Working Group I contribution to the Sixth As-
sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Summary for
Policymakers, Technical report.
Jamali, B., Haghighat, E., Ignjatovic, A., Leitão, J. P. & Deletic, A. (2021), ‘Machine
learning for accelerating 2D flood models: Potential and challenges’, Hydrological Pro-
cesses 35(4).
Jeppesen, F., Löwe, R., Grum, M., Engsig-Karup, A. P. & Palmitessa, R. (2022), ‘Hy-
drodynamic simulations of urban drainage flows with graph neural networks - DTU
Findit’.
URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/62dddf78f24ac254e433134a
Kingma, D. P. & Lei Ba, J. (2014), ‘ADAM: A METHOD FOR STOCHASTIC OPTI-
MIZATION’.
Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Shalev, G., Klambauer, G., Hochreiter, S. & Nearing, G. (2019),
‘Towards learning universal, regional, and local hydrological behaviors via machine
learning applied to large-sample datasets’, Hydrology and Earth System Sciences
23(12), 5089–5110.
Kroll, S., Wambecq, T., Weemaes, M., Van Impe, J. & Willems, P. (2017), ‘Semi-
automated buildup and calibration of conceptual sewer models’, Environmental Mod-
elling and Software 93, 344–355.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.02.030
Kundzewicz, Z. W., Beven, K., Hall, J., Krasovskaia, I., Penning-Rowsell, E. & They,
B. S. (2013), Late lessons from early warnings: science, precaution, innovation - Emerg-
ing lessons from ecosystems | Floods: lessons about early warning systems, Technical
report.
Löwe, R., Urich, C., Sto. Domingo, N., Mark, O., Deletic, A. & Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K.
(2017), ‘Assessment of urban pluvial flood risk and eﬀiciency of adaptation options
through simulations – A new generation of urban planning tools’, Journal of Hydrology
550, 355–367.
Meert, P., Leuven, K. U. & Pereira, F. (2014), Development of conceptual models for
an integrated catchment management: Subreport 1. Literature review of conceptual
modelstructures, Technical report.
URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301549292
Palmitessa, R., Grum, M., Engsig-Karup, A. P. & Löwe, R. (2022), ‘Accelerating hydro-
dynamic simulations of urban drainage systems with physics-guided machine learning’.
Pan, S. J. & Yang, Q. (2010), ‘A survey on transfer learning’, IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering 22(10), 1345–1359.
QGIS, D. T. (2022), ‘QGIS Geographic Information System’.
URL: https://www.qgis.org/
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
55
Razavi, S., Tolson, B. A. & Burn, D. H. (2012), ‘Review of surrogate modeling in water
resources’, Water Resources Research 48(7).
Rossman, L. (2022), Storm Water Management Model User’s Manual Version, Technical
report.
URL: www.epa.gov/water-research
Sharma, S., Sharma, S. & Athaiya, A. (2020), ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS IN NEU-
RAL NETWORKS, Technical report.
URL: https://www.ijeast.com/papers/310-316,Tesma412,IJEAST.pdf
Srinivasulu, S. & Jain, A. (2006), ‘A comparative analysis of training methods for artifi-
cial neural network rainfall-runoff models’, Applied Soft Computing Journal 6(3), 295–
306.
Tan, C., Sun, F., Kong, T., Zhang, W., Yang, C. & Liu, C. (2018), ‘A survey on
deep transfer learning’, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11141
LNCS, 270–279.
URL:
https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-
01424-727
Thrysøe, C. (2021), Surrogate modelling of urban pluvial flooding for real time-and
planning applications, Technical report, Technical University of Denmark.
Thrysøe, C., Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K. & Borup, M. (2019), ‘Identifying fit-for-purpose
lumped surrogate models for large urban drainage systems using GLUE’, Journal
of Hydrology 568, 517–533.
Weiss, K., Khoshgoftaar, T. M. & Wang, D. D. (2016), ‘A survey of transfer learning’,
Journal of Big Data 3(1), 1–40.
URL: https://journalofbigdata.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40537-016-0043-
6
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Supporting Information
Figure A.1: Model 1 variance for spilling from nodes, in ascending order. The red variance
value was chosen for numerical stability in Maximum Likelihood estimation.
==PAGE:70==
58
A Supporting Information
Results
Table A.1: Hyperparameter results using model 1. a) Results for system D. b) Results for
system E. Both have colour gradients where red scores are <0.5
((a))
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
D_L2N10
0.2971
0.6841
0.775
D_L4N20
0.7383
0.9058
0.9063
D_L6N50
0.7557
0.8752
0.8757
D_L8N100
0.73242
0.8704
0.9081
D_L8N200
0.8027
0.8888
0.5943
D_L8N300*
0.8961
0.9456
0.9101
D_L8N400
0.8669
0.9379
0.8739
D_L8N500
0.7029
0.8968
0.8526
D_L8N600
0.8991
0.9429
0.9179
D_L8N700
0.7675
0.9098
0.9246
D_L8N800
0.8927
0.9477
0.959
D_L8N1000
0.9251
0.957
0.9526
D_L10N200
0.8005
0.8648
0.7212
D_L10N300
0.8853
0.9401
0.8787
D_L10N400
0.8699
0.9207
0.6156
D_L10N500
0.7777
0.9056
0.9303
D_L10N600
0.7534
0.8862
0.919
D_L10N700
0.877
0.9186
0.9262
D_L10N800
0.8448
0.9135
0.9459
D_L10N1000
0.6777
0.8775
0.9304
D_L12N200
0.7352
0.863
0.9243
D_L12N300
0.7527
0.8586
0.6717
D_L12N400
0.7998
0.8709
0.8303
D_L12N500
0.8223
0.8994
0.9466
D_L12N600
0.6905
0.8358
0.9172
D_L12N700
0.7691
0.9118
0.9153
D_L12N800
0.8205
0.9082
0.9108
D_L12N1000
0.791
0.876
0.8934
((b))
System
NSE_WL
NSE_Flow
IoAD_Spill
E_L2N10
-0.6815
-13.4437
0.8362
E_L4N20
0.1468
0.2955
0.8631
E_L6N50
0.8355
0.7377
0.905
E_L8N100
0.8554
0.7477
0.8572
E_L8N200
0.6812
0.5553
0.692
E_L8N300
0.7484
0.6912
0.8162
E_L8N400
0.8434
0.8708
0.9473
E_L8N500
0.847
0.8494
0.6987
E_L8N600
0.7804
0.7937
0.8858
E_L8N700
0.9479
0.9326
0.7419
E_L8N800*
0.9521
0.9346
0.9692
E_L8N1000
0.7241
0.6861
0.9547
E_L10N200
0.7658
0.7552
0.9442
E_L10N300
0.9135
0.9045
0.9579
E_L10N400
0.8447
0.8655
0.9042
E_L10N500
0.8498
0.7942
0.9472
E_L10N600
0.6295
0.5932
0.9325
E_L10N700
0.8691
0.8687
0.8173
E_L10N800
0.5319
0.5048
0.9273
E_L10N1000
0.8404
0.8375
0.9411
E_L12N200
0.7612
0.7005
0.9445
E_L12N300
0.9046
0.893
0.9535
E_L12N400
0.8727
0.8547
0.6754
E_L12N500
0.8458
0.8549
0.9363
E_L12N600
0.6328
0.681
0.9373
E_L12N700
0.9129
0.9048
0.9559
E_L12N800
0.7247
0.679
0.8125
E_L12N1000
0.8766
0.885
0.9447
Table A.2: Training and prediction times related to system D hyperparameter search for
Model 1. Chosen hyperparameter setting was 8 layers and 300 neurons and the times are
marked in bold. Colour gradient are linear from lowest (green) to highest (red) values.
D
Training [s]
Training per epoch [s]
Prediction [s]
8
10
12
8
10
12
8
10
12
200
10531.1
11393.4
10368.4
4.212
4.557
4.147
125.7
135.4
158.9
300
15004.1
17868.1
20715.3
6.002
7.147
8.286
177.7
211.6
254.1
400
19092.9
22746.9
28375.1
7.637
9.099
11.35
239.8
283.2
731.2
500
27223.1
27652.2
43496.5
10.889
11.061
17.399
317.3
379.6
1433.9
600
34135.6
47112.9
54027.6
13.654
18.845
21.611
413.6
1579
1781.7
700
46088.3
61714.3
73742.9
18.435
24.686
29.497
546.9
1986.2
2117.5
800
51619.5
70094.8
82556.3
20.648
28.038
33.023
739.1
2051.6
2457.3
1000
76799.6
96296.4
121655.1
30.72
38.519
48.662
2060.5
2621.1
3747.6
==PAGE:71==
A Supporting Information
59
Table A.3: Training and prediction times related to system E hyperparameter search for
Model 1. Chosen hyperparameter setting was 8 layers and 800 neurons and the times are
marked in bold. Colour gradient are linear from lowest (green) to highest (red) values.
E
Training [s]
Training per epoch [s]
Prediction [s]
8
10
12
8
10
12
8
10
12
200
28251.6
29116.9
21136.9
11.301
11.647
8.455
235
246.9
277.4
300
14544.5
22418
34790.7
5.818
8.967
13.916
297.4
328.5
372
400
19799.2
34154.7
18859.9
7.92
13.662
7.544
406.8
402.6
554.2
500
23212.4
26667.9
33110.2
9.285
10.667
13.244
645.3
1573.7
2031.3
600
27779.1
48292
36489.3
11.112
19.317
14.596
1214.9
1406.7
2594.7
700
73638.8
39511.7
56577.1
29.456
15.805
22.631
2346.3
2893.1
3227.9
800
80184.8
91497.3
104599.9
32.074
36.599
31.84
1867.3
2116.6
3568.8
1000
108187.9
84383.4
68363.1
43.275
33.753
27.345
3245.1
4022.2
4629.4
Figure A.2: Hydrograph of Model 1 A_L6N50 of the full time series for link 35010_6185.
Figure A.3: Hydrograph of Model 1 C_L8N200 of the full time series for link 35089_6259.
==PAGE:72==
60
A Supporting Information
Figure A.4: Hydrograph of Model 1 C_L8N200 of the full time series for link 6259_35098.
Figure A.5: Hydrograph of Model 1 C_L8N200 of the full time series for link 6261_35098.
Model D Hi-Fi dynamics
The observed hydraulic dynamics related to node 35072 appears to be inaccurate even
from the Hi-Fi simulations. Node 35072 is a node with invert level of 108.74m and a weir
crest level of 110.49m with no connecting catchment area. From figure A.6 it is apparent
that the water level in node 35072 generally remains at 109.1m which corresponds to
the invert level of the downstream node 6245. However the connecting link between
the nodes does not contain backwater reflecting the water appearing in upstream node
35072 as illustrated on figure A.7 with mean flow of the link at 1.2 · 10−6cbm/s.
==PAGE:73==
A Supporting Information
61
Figure A.6: Hydrograph of water level in node 35072 for model 1 D_L8N300.
Figure A.7: Hydrograph of flow in link 35072_6245 for model 1 D_L8N300.
Figure A.8: Hydrograph of Model 1 E_L8N800 of the full time series for link 15258_15242
==PAGE:74==
62
A Supporting Information
((a))
((b))
Figure A.9: Model 1 E_L8N800 results for link 15240_15241. a) Hydrograph of flow for the
full time series.b) All observed versus predicted values for the link for the full time series.
Figure A.10: Hydrograph of Model 1 E_L8N800 of the full time series for link 15241_15242
Figure A.11: Hydrograph of Model 1 E_L8N800 of the full time series for water level in
node 35060
==PAGE:75==
A Supporting Information
63
Figure A.12: Worst NSE_flow for connected links versus IoAD_Spill for the given node.
Figure A.13: NSE_wl versus IoAD_Spill for the given node.
==PAGE:76==
64
A Supporting Information
Figure A.14:
Scatter plot of IoAD for Spill versus normalised number of activated spill
events.
Figure A.15: Validation losses for each state for model 3 training.
==PAGE:77==
A Supporting Information
65
Figure A.16: Validation loss for Model 3 training on system C and D across 50,000 epochs.
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
