==PAGE:1==
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
Master Thesis
DTU Biosustain
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
==PAGE:2==
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Elli Dertili
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom-
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, B220 Kemi-
torvet, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the group of Quantitative Modelling of Cell
Metabolism, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Biotechnology, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of biotechnology and molec-
ular biology.
Elli Dertili - s202274
Signature
Date
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
ii
10/07/2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The field of proteomics has rapidly developed after the introduction of mass spectrometry
(MS) based approaches. However, challenges remain with the quantification of membrane
proteins due to their hydrophobic nature and their low abundance. In particular when it comes
to gram-negative bacteria, their membrane structure renders them challenging to analyse and
quantify. The purpose of the present study is to establish a universal sample preparation pro-
tocol for absolute membrane protein quantification of gram-negative bacteria. Escherichia coli
was used as a model organism to develop and evaluate various protocols. The preparation of
the bacterial samples was mainly based on the solubilisation of membrane proteins by the use
of buffers and detergent solutions, and appropriate clean-up of the samples. Additionally, the
genome of E. coli was analysed to identify all theoretical peripheral and membrane proteins
and further develop a list of tryptic peptides, which could serve as a transition list for targeted
acquisition of membrane proteins. The presented approach resulted in the identification of
approximately 26% of the theoretical membrane proteome of E. coli, while it presented a 22%
increase in identified membrane proteins compared to reference sample which was treated
with a standard protocol. The identified methodology is relatively fast, necessitates equipment
available in most laboratories and constitutes a promising foundation for the development of
sample preparation protocols.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The past six months has been a fascinating journey and I would like to take the opportunity
and thank everybody who contributed to it.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor Erwin Schoof and co-supervisor Lars
Keld Nielsen, for giving me the opportunity to conduct my master thesis under their guidance
and contribute to the research field.
Secondly I would like to express my gratitude to my co-supervisor Shannara Taylor Parkins
for her continuous guidance and support, without her this project would not have come to
fruition. Thank you for introducing me to this exciting topic. I am grateful for your role as a
mentor and a friend throughout the journey.
Moreover I would like to express my appreciation to Tune Wulff, for his assistance with the
HPLC-MS equipment, raw data preparation and knowledge sharing. Big thank you to Nicolas
Gurdo for his assistance and for being available to reach out and discuss.
I would also like to thank my family, my friends and especially Ignacio for their unconditional
support and motivation. Your encouragement, even at the hardest times, helped me to suc-
cessfully complete this thesis.
Finally I would like to express my appreciation to the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Bio-
sustainability and especially to the people from the Quantitative Modeling of Cell Metabolism
group for welcoming me to their group and taking good care of me.
Elli Dertili, MSc Biotechnology, DTU
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Bottom-up proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Peptide and protein identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Acquisition methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Protein quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.1
Labelled Quantification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.2
Label-free Quantification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Membrane Proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Scope of work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Materials and Methods
11
2.1
Chemicals & Buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Membrane proteomics methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Results & Discussion
15
3.1
Proteomics data: Protein Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Development of sample preparation protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.1
Generation of an ultracentrifugation based protocol and resulting bot-
tlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2.2
Advancements in the new version of the protocol focused on membrane
protein solubilisation and sample clean-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.3
Implementation of additional wash steps and consequent sample loss . 19
3.2.4
Incorporation of the FASP protocol in the method and a variety of iden-
tified proteins between samples of different detergents . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2.5
Performance of the sample preparation protocols and influence of the
ultracentrifugation in the method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
In silico digestion of protein samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1
Development of a tryptic peptide list from E. coli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.2
Identification of actively expressed proteins of E. coli under specific con-
ditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3.3
Identification of peptides detected in samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3.4
Selection of theoretical peptide list for development of a targeted acqui-
sition method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Conclusions & Further research
29
Bibliography
30
A Protocols
34
A.1 Sample preparation protocol for HPLC-MS analysis of membrane proteins -
Version 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A.2 Desalting: Stagetipping C-18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
v
==PAGE:7==
B Scripts
37
B.1 In silico digestion script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
B.2 Identification of expressed proteins script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Proteins are a major class of biomolecules that carry out various essential tasks for every
living organism and therefore there has been a huge effort to map the overall protein content
of a cell. Proteomics is the field which studies the identification, quantification, structure and
functions of a protein at any stage of the cell’s life and under any conditions. Over the past
few years, huge advancements have been made in the field and various methods have been
developed to obtain quantitative data on the basis of individual proteins. As a highlight, the
introduction of mass spectrometry (MS)-based approaches resulted in immense improve-
ments in quantification techniques. However, there is a demand for absolute quantitative
data, which is required to get a better understanding of cellular composition and for imple-
mentation into mathematical modelling of cellular processes (Aslam et al., 2017; Schubert
et al., 2015; Schubert et al., 2017).
1.1
Bottom-up proteomics
The development of new technologies for peptide-protein separation, internal standards for
protein quantification and new bioinformatic tools, have played an important role in the pro-
gression of the field. An overview of an MS-based proteomics workflow is depicted in figure
1.1. In the meantime, huge advancements have been made in the accuracy, sensitivity and
scan rate of MS equipment, resulting in improvements of large-scale analysis of proteins
(Zhang et al., 2013).
Figure 1.1: MS-based shotgun proteomics workflow. Proteins extracted from biological samples are enzymatically
digested to peptides and subjected to HPLC-MS analysis.
These advancements result in two primary approaches called bottom-up proteomics (shot-
gun proteomics) and top-down proteomics. Both methods were initially used for discovery
proteomics, i.e. to identify and quantify the protein content of a sample without any prior
knowledge of it. In shotgun proteomics, proteins are characterized and quantified based on
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
1
==PAGE:9==
the peptide mix that is released after digestion, preferably by using sequence-specific en-
zymes. It serves as an indirect way of measuring proteins through their peptide derivatives,
followed by peptide separation and subjection to MS analysis. On the other hand, top-down
proteomics aims at characterizing intact proteins by directly fragmenting them in the MS.
Due to challenges with protein separation, ionisation and later fragmentation in the top-down
method, shotgun proteomics constitutes the universal approach for protein analysis (Zhang
et al., 2013).
The huge advantage of shotgun proteomics relies on the detection of peptides, which are
generally more easily ionised and fragmented than proteins, and the enhanced sensitivity of
MS for low molecular weight molecules (Cappadona et al., 2012). The peptides are then
separated, either directly or by biochemical fractionation, in a high-performance liquid chro-
matography (HPLC) column, charged by electrospray ionisation and injected into a mass
spectrometer. Mass analysis occurs in two stages, the first one measures the mass to charge
(m/z) ratio of peptide ions (MS1), while in the second level specific peptide ions are further
fragmented and the m/z ratios are measured. The peptides are identified based on their fin-
gerprint, which is the expected tandem mass (MS/MS) spectrum of that specific peptide as
calculated in silico based on protein databases. Every peptide can then be assigned to one
or more proteins and the detected proteins can be categorised further based on their peptides
(Schubert et al., 2017).
To overcome some limitations that discovery proteomics had set, interest also turned to tar-
geted proteomics and exploring its capabilities. In this case specific, predefined proteins are
targeted and quantified during the MS analysis, giving the opportunity to test hypothesis-
driven experiments. This method allows for accurate quantification of proteins even at low
abundances or multiplexed samples, while being highly sensitive and reproducible (Schubert
et al., 2017).
Nowadays shotgun proteomics is utilised in various ways for research experiments such as
proteome profiling, quantification and modification. It can also be used for the detection of
diagnostic markers or potential vaccine production candidates (Aslam et al., 2017; Zhang et
al., 2013). The absolute quantification of complex samples can have a huge impact on both
the fields of biology and medicine.
1.2
Peptide and protein identification
The greatest challenge of peptide and therefore protein identification is the accurate match of
MS/MS spectra to a corresponding peptide sequence, which constitutes a crucial factor re-
garding the success of shotgun proteomics. Several methods are available for protein identifi-
cation such as Edman degradation, electroblotting or affinity-based identification techniques,
but MS-based techniques are most-commonly used for proteomics (Gevaert and Vandeker-
ckhove, 2000).
1.2.1
Acquisition methods
Apart from targeted proteomics, there are two main approaches to generate proteomics data
and eventually identify proteins: data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent
acquisition (DIA). In both methods, the m/z scan of peptide ions (MS1) is performed in the
same way, while the MS2 scan of breaking down precursor ions into fragments differentiates
(figure 1.2).
Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA)
During the DDA method, the mass spectrometer performs an MS1 search to determine the
precursor peptides and their relative intensities. Following, the precursor peptides with the
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
2
==PAGE:10==
highest intensities are selected, isolated and subjected to sequential MS2 resulting in the frag-
mented ion spectra. The identification of peptides occurs by comparing the MS2 scans with
theoretical spectra derived from a database. DDA is a relatively simple and cheap method
to run, offering more sensitive quantification of targeted peptides compared to DIA (Bruderer
et al., 2017). On the contrary, DDA is inherently limited by the reproducibility, since it will only
select the highest abundant peptides of an MS1 scan for further analysis. The stochastic
nature of peptide ion selection favors the identification of higher abundant peptides and thus
proteins, while the low abundant ones are underrepresented (Bereman et al., 2012).
Data Independent Acquisition (DIA)
For the DIA method, all detected precursor ions of the MS1 scan will be fragmented for the
MS2 scan. In order to cope with the complexity of biological samples, the MS2 scans are
acquired either on segments of specific m/z range, called isolation windows or at a specific,
given time, called broadband DIA. In both cases all the precursor ions detected either at an
isolation window or entering the mass spectrometer at a specific time are fragmented together
in an MS2 scan (Hu et al., 2016). Since there is no peptide ion selection, it is an untargeted
and unbiased acquisition method, which obtains thorough MS/MS data by using sequential,
wide isolation windows. The continuous sampling in the retention time and mass dimension
renders DIA as a highly reproducible method of excellent analysis depth, while it does not
require any knowledge regarding the sample’s protein content (Kawashima et al., 2019).
Figure 1.2: The acquisition scheme for data dependent (DDA) and data independent (DIA) analysis. The red
squares in the graphs represent the sampling points/windows of MS2 scans. Image taken from Schubert et al.,
2017.
However the resulting MS2 spectra of DIA analysis are highly complex, since they contain the
multiplexed fragmented ion spectra of multiple peptides, which hampers accurate quantifica-
tion. Proper interpretation of DIA results is problematic, since the robust database search
methods used for DDA can not be applied and a more peptide-centric approach should be
employed by using spectral libraries. Based on this approach, the peptides are identified by
comparing already known peptide fragmentation patterns with the results from DIA, instead
of analysing the results in a spectrum-centric way (Ting et al., 2015).
1.3
Protein quantification
The next crucial step after protein identification is the quantification of peptides and thereafter
proteins. Accurate quantification of the proteins in a sample conveys more information than
solely a qualitative study. It provides a holistic view of the intracellular content, enabling for
example correlations between the protein abundance and a disease state or the construction
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
3
==PAGE:11==
of kinetic models, which could serve as a tool for cell factory improvement.
Over the last decade, MS-based methods emerged as the go-to method for protein identi-
fication experiments. The quantification remains challenging for MS-based techniques due
to the poor correlation between the abundance of a protein and thus peptide in the analysed
sample and the corresponding signal from MS spectra. This poor response factor could result
from the digestion efficiency, sample loss during sample preparation, matrix effects, ionisa-
tion efficiency, sensitivity of the mass spectrometer, etc. In order to quantify a peptide, the
intensity of each peptide is measured over multiple points throughout the chromatographic
retention time creating a chromatographic peak of MS intensity of the peptide. Integration of
the area under the peak indicates the relative abundance of that peptide.
It is essential to note that this quantification only indicates the relative abundance of the pro-
teins between different samples. Even though relative quantification is a powerful tool to
assess differences in the protein content of samples, there is an emerging need to accurately
translate this relative abundance to absolute protein concentration in the sample. Two main
strategies can be deployed here, a labelled or a label-free approach to protein quantification.
Labelled approaches are the go-to method when it comes to absolute quantification, how-
ever label-free methods gained a significant amount of attention due to their simplicity. An
overview of multiple available methods for protein quantification is presented in Figure 1.3.
1.3.1
Labelled Quantification
The majority of MS-based techniques for absolute quantification rely on spiked-in stable iso-
tope labelled (SIL) standards. The philosophy behind these spiked-in standards is to imitate
as closely as possible their natural counterparts. Therefore, introducing them in a known
concentration in the sample serves as a reference for quantifying endogenous peptides (Pan
et al., 2009). The most common SIL standards include synthetic peptides or proteins en-
riched with the stable isotopes and quantification is performed based on the comparison of
light (endogenous) and heavy (standard) peptides (Calderón-Celis et al., 2018). Each type of
standards has benefits and limitations, but depending on the nature of the biological system
and the aim of the research, they can provide substantial results.
Absolute quantification peptides (AQUA)
AQUA peptides are synthetic peptides with a 13C or 15N labelled C-terminal amino acid, which
are introduced in the sample usually after the digestion stage. They can be applied to highly
complex samples due to their selectivity, while they are relatively simple to synthetically pro-
duce and purify. AQUA peptides also offer excellent chromatographic performance and res-
olution (Calderón-Celis et al., 2018). Since these standards are added so late in the sample
processing procedure, they cannot compensate for variations during protein extraction and
digestion. Their accuracy is determined by a variety of parameters, including the properties
of the synthetic peptides themselves as well as the targeted proteins. AQUA peptides of-
ten have limited solubility and adhere to surfaces, while their accuracy may be affected by
non-ideal digestion of proteins in the sample (Trötschel and Poetsch, 2015). Despite these
disadvantages, AQUA peptides are widely and frequently used, because they are commer-
cially available and relatively fast to obtain . The price of these peptides may vary significantly
depending on their purity.
Quantification concatamer (QconCATs)
A QconCAT is an artificial SIL protein comprised of concatenated peptides. Multiple pep-
tides of interest (Q-peptides), which originate from different proteins, are assembled into an
artificial gene on a plasmid and overexpressed in medium containing SIL amino acids. Typ-
ically a QconCAT contains multiple tryptic peptides unique to a target protein, that are well-
positioned in order to overcome intrinsic restrictions during digestion (J. Chen and Turko,
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
4
==PAGE:12==
2014). These peptides should be free of residues prone to modification, of locations prone
to post-translational modifications, and of sequence segments which can induce miscleav-
ages (Vandermarliere et al., 2013). QconCATs have been thoroughly investigated in terms of
design, expression, and purification in order to give an accurate tool for quantitative mea-
surements.
To accomplish this, considerable emphasis has been put on the addition of
natural flanking sequences to each Q-peptide, which was found to increase digestion effi-
ciency. These flanking sequences consist of three to six amino acids found in the native
protein of interest near the cleavage sites. A great benefit of QconCAT is that it allows for
parallel quantification of various proteins as well as the measurements of stoichiometry of
post-translational modifications (Scott et al., 2016). Another advantage is the availability of
public plasmid repositories that allow for the distribution of QconCAT constructs at various
concentrations and lead to reduced cost compared to peptide synthesis (Batth et al., 2014).
In contrast to AQUA peptides, QconCATs are co-digested with endogenous proteins in the
sample. However they can not account for variations during extraction of native proteins.
QconCATs may need to be solubilised in a buffer containing a denaturing agent, such as
urea, to prevent precipitation, which necessitates thorough cleaning of the denaturing agent
from the buffer before the sample can be analysed. Lastly, QconCATs do not have the same
physicochemical characteristics as the natural proteins they represent, since they are unlikely
to enrich, fractionate or precipitate together with the target proteins (Scott et al., 2016).
Protein standard absolute quantification (PSAQ)
One of the major drawbacks of employing peptides as standards for quantification is the in-
sufficient coverage of the protein sequence and the lack of control in the sample preparation
stages preceding digestion. Using full-length SIL proteins, such as PSAQ, as standards can
compensate for such limitations. Protein standards usually consist of a copy of the entire pro-
tein of interest and they are be overexpressed in medium with labelled amino acids. PSAQ
proteins are then purified and their concentration is determined, so that they can be introduced
to the sample in known amounts at the early stages of sample processing and are thus sub-
jected to the same treatment as the samples for analysis (Calderón-Celis et al., 2018). One
of the downsides of using intact proteins as standards is that they have a restricted dynamic
range, as higher abundant proteins may interfere with the analysis of less abundant proteins.
Furthermore, the synthesis, labelling, and purification processes are time consuming, labour
intensive, and expensive (Wang et al., 2016).
Although labelled quantification approaches are very promising, they have several bottle-
necks. Synthetic proteins are typically difficult to express due to physical properties such as
weight, hydrophobicity, amongst others, whereas synthetic peptides can be affected by solu-
bilisation, modifications, or digestion conditions (Mirzaei et al., 2008). Furthermore, absolute
quantification methods using labelling are highly dependent on the nature of the experiment
and the targeted proteins. SIL standards are most beneficial in targeted proteomics research,
since their synthesis necessitates prior knowledge about the samples and the proteins they
contain, which is available for targeted proteomics. Labelled approaches are essentially con-
strained by the need for synthesised and precisely characterised peptide/protein standards
in each case, rendering them less useful for discovery proteomics research (Calderón-Celis
et al., 2018).
1.3.2
Label-free Quantification
Despite the fact that label-based approaches are still extensively used, label-free approaches
offer a tool for simplified experimental strategies. The label-free methods have grown in
popularity in recent years due to their ease of implementation and low cost, while providing
reasonably accurate quantitative results. The majority of label-free techniques are based
on comparing either the MS peak intensities or the spectral counts of peptides and utilise
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
5
==PAGE:13==
normalisation of the peptide intensities. These methods provide sufficient proteome coverage
and can address system-wide biological concerns, however their accuracy and sensitivity are
limited (Ahrné et al., 2013; Schubert et al., 2017).
Several label-free MS-based approaches have been developed over the years to reliably
quantify a wide range of proteins in a high-throughput manner. The absolute concentration of
a protein is often calculated using spectral counting, precursor ion intensity, or selected frag-
ment ion intensity. To compute the absolute abundance of proteins, many algorithms have
been created that employ different normalisation strategies and have been trialed using ex-
isting data sets of accurately quantified proteins which mimic actual biological systems. Most
of them use an estimate of total protein content to convert experimentally measured abun-
dances to absolute concentrations. The nature of the existing data, amongst other factors,
constrains the selection of the appropriate algorithm. Data obtained from shotgun analysis,
for example, is evaluated using algorithms based on spectral counting or MS peak intensity,
whereas methods based on fragment ion intensity employ targeted or SWATH data (Ahrné
et al., 2013; Trötschel and Poetsch, 2015).
Figure 1.3: An overview of multiple quantification methods available separated on labelled based and label free.
The value upon which quantification is performed is mention in the green frames
Label-free quantification methods may be less accurate, yet they are simple to implement
and inexpensive. Label-Free Absolute Protein Quantification algorithm (LFAQ) (Chang et
al., 2018), xTop (Mori et al., 2021), TopN, Intensity-Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ),
Absolute Protein Expression (APEX), Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (em-
PAI), NSAF, and SCAMPI are several of the algorithms applied for label-free quantification.
Each one of them has its computational framework and differs in protein intensity inference
(Rosenberger et al., 2014).
Algorithms for estimating absolute protein quantities
One of the first approaches which attempted to determine the absolute abundance of a pro-
tein in a complex mixture is called protein abundance index (PAI) (Rappsilber et al., 2002).
The philosophy behind PAI is that larger proteins produce a greater amount of tryptic peptides
which can be detected in the chosen mass range of MS. To achieve absolute quantification,
the PAI is calculated for each protein, which is defined as the number of observed peptides
divided by the number of observable peptides per protein. Further developments to the PAI
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
6
==PAGE:14==
algorithm resulted to the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) (Ishihama
et al., 2005).The emPAI is defined as 10PAI −1, can be easily estimated and is roughly pro-
portional to protein abundance, even in complex mixtures. Another approach, named TopN
(Silva et al., 2006), is based on correctly identifying the top N tryptic peptides with the highest
intensity for each protein. The peptides’ average value is utilised to adjust their abundance to
the absolute concentration of total protein loaded on the mass spectrometer. This algorithm
typically focuses on the top three tryptic peptides of a protein and delivers high confidence
for proteins which are abundant in the sample. The iBAQ method (Schwanhäusser et al.,
2011), as indicated by the name, utilises the peak intensities to calculate the absolute protein
concentration. The sum of all peptide peak intensities derived from a protein of interest is
divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides resulting in an accurate
approximation of absolute protein abundance. Both TopN and iBAQ rely on calculating the
absolute protein quantities from unprocessed peak intensities. They are two examples of
algorithms which are mostly effective for proteins of high abundance in the sample, how-
ever they perform poorly for low abundance proteins for which only a few peptides can be
identified.
APEX, (Lu et al., 2007), uses the likelihood of detecting a peptide to adjust protein spec-
tral counts. Absolute protein concentration is calculated by correcting the protein’s sampling
depth by the probability of observing a peptide. Even though it provides rapid and repro-
ducible results, it is essentially unsuitable for absolute quantification. Peptide detectability is
unsuitable for lowering MS intensity bias and is often determined using internal peptide or pro-
tein standards, which may be unavailable for complex samples. The LFAQ method, (Chang
et al., 2018), is based on raw MS data and employs a correction factor to produce more
accurate and precise quantification. This factor, known as the quantitative peptide factor or
Q-factor, is predicted from the physicochemical parameters of the peptides without the need
for standards. A peptide’s Q-factor indicates the extent to which the peptide abundance may
be represented by its raw MS intensity and is used to adjust for biased peptide MS intensities.
The introduction of a correction factor in the estimation of absolute protein abundance proved
critical in improving the accuracy of label-free quantitative methods. The xTop algorithm, (Mori
et al., 2021), adopts a different approach to increase the accuracy of absolute protein mea-
surements. It computes the protein intensity in each sample by combining the intensities
produced from unique peptide precursors of a protein across all provided samples. Based
on the degree of consistency of the peptide intensities across all samples, the xTop algorithm
determines the protein abundance as a weighted average of all peptide intensities. Applica-
tion of a weighted average has the significant benefit of reducing the effect of noisy peptides
on the calculated protein intensities. Compared to previous algorithms, it provides improved
quantification of low abundant proteins Nonetheless, there is still a lot of room for improve-
ment to accurately detect lowly expressed proteins.
The abundance of existing algorithms and the numerous methodologies they are based on
demonstrate the extreme complexity of precise absolute protein quantification. Normalisation
of peptide intensities is the most crucial step in determining measurement precision and ac-
curacy (Sánchez et al., 2021). Therefore, the availability of open-source algorithms tailored
to diverse types of data is critical, not only for obtaining high-quality and robust results, but
also for comparing existing approaches, improving them, and developing new ones.
1.4
Membrane Proteomics
Despite the wide range of available techniques for relative or absolute, labeled or label-free
protein quantification, the majority of them are focused on proteins of high abundance, which
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
7
==PAGE:15==
are mostly cytosolic proteins. Challenges remain with the quantification of low abundant
proteins, such as membrane proteins.
Membrane proteins have several essential biological roles, including cell communication,
ATP synthesis, metabolite transport across cell membranes, and signal transduction. Due
to their position on the cell surface and heterogeneity, membrane proteins play a crucial role
in drug discovery, accounting for about 70% of all current drug targets. Their identification
and quantification is critical for understanding an organism’s proteome, which could lead to
development of kinetic models, which are useful tools for cell factory improvement (Poetsch
and Wolters, 2008).
The primary function of membrane proteins is to connect the cells and their surroundings,
whereas their subsequent functions are highly dependent on their position and the type of
cell. Eukaryotic cells, for example, contain membrane proteins which also act as a conduit
between intracellular organelles, providing them with a unique structure as well as highly spe-
cific functionality, and allowing intracellular transport of information and material (Tan et al.,
2008). For prokaryotic organisms, membrane proteins are mainly present in the cell walls,
however, there are differences between those found in gram-positive and gram-negative bac-
terial cell walls. Gram-positive bacteria have an inner lipid membrane and an outer thick pep-
tidoglycan layer which functions as a cell wall, whereas gram-negative bacteria have an inner
and an outer lipid layer separated by a thin peptidoglycan layer. In both cases, membrane
proteins are attached to the inner membrane layer, but in the case of gram-negative bacteria,
the outer membrane also contains proteins such as porins which allow the circulation of small
hydrophilic molecules (Figure 1.4).
Figure 1.4: Morphology of bacterial membrane proteins separated by gram-status. Different types of membrane
proteins are also presented.
Membrane proteins are associated with the membrane in a variety of ways and are classified
as integral membrane proteins or peripheral membrane proteins. The primary distinction be-
tween these two types of membrane proteins is the type of interaction with the membrane.
Integral proteins are distinguished by the presence of a single or several transmembrane do-
mains (TMs), and they are further classified as type 1, type 2, or multi-pass proteins based
on the number of TMs and the orientation of the protein. On the contrary, peripheral proteins
lack transmembrane domains yet interact with the membrane surface via different moieties.
They bind to the membrane either directly by a covalent bond, such as glycosylphosphatidyli-
nositol (GPI), or indirectly through interactions with lipid polar head groups. Some peripheral
proteins completely lack a cytoplasmic tail and hence reside outside the membrane (Figure
1.4) (Kanapin et al., 2003; Tan et al., 2008).
Even though membrane proteins cover approximately 20-30% of all naturally produced pro-
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
8
==PAGE:16==
teins, they are underrepresented in proteomics studies due to their hydrophobic nature and
low abundance per protein (Vuckovic et al., 2013). Moreover, due to the unique morphology
of membranes on the different cell types, the existence of a universal sample preparation
strategy for membrane protein identification and quantification is rather unachievable. The
differences in eukaryotic membrane structure render them easier to analyse and as a result,
different approaches for eukaryotic membrane proteomics are available (Wu et al., 2003).
However, an appropriate reproducible membrane proteomics approach for gram-negative
bacteria has yet to be reported. Escherichia coli, a gram-negative bacterium, which is one
of the most extensively studied organisms universally, still lacks quantitative information re-
garding the low abundant proteins such as membrane proteins. E. coli has a relatively simple
genome, it can be easily handled in the laboratory and over the past years, advancements
have been made to comprehensibly quantify its proteome (Mori et al., 2021). As a result,
it constitutes a promising target for absolute quantitative membrane proteomics in order to
broaden the knowledge regarding the proteome of E. coli and develop a methodology for
membrane proteomics of gram-negative bacteria.
Existing protocols for studying the membrane proteome of prokaryotic cells are mostly fo-
cused on gram-positive bacteria, since the lack of an outer membrane renders them more
accessible. Most techniques include strong buffers and detergents and/or ultrasonication to
effectively solubilise membrane proteins and ultracentrifugation to enrich them (Antelo-Varela
et al., 2019; Roma-Rodrigues et al., 2010). Ultracentrifugation-based approaches appear to
be particularly promising, as they are employed not just to characterise the membrane pro-
teome under normal conditions, but also under stress (Antelo-Varela et al., 2020). Another
approach is based on the use of a two-phase system for protein separation and the use of de-
tergents such as SDS, however this requires clean-up, which potentially makes the process
unreproducible and might not be scalable (Everberg et al., 2008). A different promising ap-
proach is the use of a homogeniser, FASP clean-up, and suitable chemicals, however it has
only been tested in mammalian cells so far (Nagaraj et al., 2008). One of the most significant
issues with protein quantification is that many approaches rely on the use of powerful deter-
gents, which necessitate extensive clean-up to make the samples suitable for MS analysis.
This problem is addressed by a different technique called sample preparation by easy ex-
traction and digestion (SPEED) that is based in three basic steps: acidification, neutralisation
and digestion of the samples. It is characterised by rapid sample processing and high repro-
ducibility due to the limited sample processing steps therefore it constitutes a very promising
method. However this method has not been targeted to membrane proteins yet (Doellinger
et al., 2020).
When it comes to protocols regarding membrane proteomics in gram-negative bacteria nu-
merous approaches have been reported, however an accurate, reproducible method is yet
to be found. A method focusing on digestion of hydrophobic proteins by trypsin and phase
transfer surfactants (PTS) was investigated. The method was based on the ability of PTS
to promote trypsin cleavage and enhance the solubility of hydrophobic proteins resulting in
improved results compared to other previous studies (Masuda et al., 2008). Moreover the
aforementioned protocol was modified in an attempt to improve the amount of observed hy-
drophobic proteins and achieve unbiased quantification. This method was also based on the
use of PTS, but immobilised trypsin columns were used during digestion aiming to reduce
the digestion time. The quantification of the membrane proteins was performed using emPAI
(Masuda et al., 2009). A following study states that beside the solubilisation of hydrophobic
proteins, the size of the generated peptides cause a different bottleneck. Tryptic digestion
usually generates long peptides from membrane proteins that are not detectable in MS. To
circumvent this limitation, a combination of trypsin digestion and cyanocysteine (Cys) cleav-
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
9
==PAGE:17==
age was attempted, paving the way for multiple peptide digestion in membrane proteomics
approaches (Iwasaki et al., 2009). Eventually, an attempt was made to automate part of the
sample preparation technique in order to minimise human error and provide high throughput
results (Y. Chen et al., 2022). Even though these methods aided the optimization of already
existing protocols, the percentage of identified membrane proteins still remain relatively low.
They require a rather high amount of total protein as starting material, while many of them
have been developed particularly for E. coli and have not been validated for other gram neg-
ative bacteria.
1.5
Scope of work
There is a growing demand for absolute quantitative data from various organisms, in order
to determine how microorganisms adapt to environmental conditions, their biological pro-
cesses, and products as well as to identify novel therapeutic targets. The scope of this work
is to determine the most suitable approach for the identification and absolute quantification
of membrane proteins in gram-negative bacteria using HPLC-MS. A suitable method would
result in a high number of identified proteins, it should be cost-effective, repeatable, and
reproducible. To achieve this, a sample preparation protocol will be developed based on
the existing methodologies, while various data acquisition methods are going to be tested.
Furthermore, different internal standards would be explored in order to achieve accurate ab-
solute quantification of membrane proteins. The quality of the tested methodologies will be
assessed based on the quantity of membrane proteins identified as well as the time and cost
involved in carrying out the specific procedure. Potentially some of the results could be ap-
plied to a small-scale kinetic model, to further investigate their function and how to integrate
them into larger kinetic models.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
10
==PAGE:18==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Chemicals & Buffers
In this section, all the chemicals used in this work are listed in Table 2.1, while Table 2.2
presents all the solutions and buffers used with their composition and each concentration
mentioned in the brackets.
Table 2.1: All the chemical used in this study
Chemical
Manufacturer
Acetonitrile (CH3CN)
VWR Chemicals
Ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic)
Sigma Aldrich
Chloroacetamide (CAA)
Sigma Aldrich
Disodium phosphate (Na2HPO4)
Sigma Aldrich
EDTA
Sigma-Aldrich
Formic acid (FA)
Fisher Scientific
Guanidinium hydrochloride (HCl)
ThermoFisher Scientific
Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit
ThermoFisher Scientific
Monopotassium phosphate (KH2PO4)
Sigma Aldrich
NP-40
ThermoFisher Scientific
Potassium chloride (KCl)
Sigma Aldrich
SDS
ThermoFisher Scientific
Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3)
Sigma Aldrich
Sodium chloride (NaCl)
Sigma Aldrich
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)
Sigma Aldrich
Triethylamine (C2H5)3N
ThermoFisher Scientific
Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)
Sigma Aldrich
Triton X-100
ThermoFisher Scientific
Tris-HCl
ThermoFisher Scientific
Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)
Fisher Scientific
Trypsin/Lys-C Mix
Promega
Trypsin resuspension Buffer
Promega
Urea
Sigma Aldrich
Medium used for the cultivation of E. coli was M9 minimal medium with 4g/L glucose.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
11
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.2: All buffers and solutions used in the current study.
Buffer / Solution
Components [concentration]
Alkaline buffer
EDTA [10mM], NaCl[1M], Tris-HCl [20mM] - pH 7.5
BSA working reagent
Reagent A: Na2CO3 ∙H2O (0.8 g), NaOH (1.6 g),
C4H4Na2O6 (1.6 g), water, NaOH (10M) - pH 11.25 [25
parts], Reagent B: BCA (4.0 g), water [24 parts],
Reagent C: CuSO4 ∙5H2O (0.4 g), water [1 part]
Digestion buffer
Trypsin/ Lys-C mix [100μg], Trypsin buffer, AmBic [50mM]
Elution solutions for peptide
fractionation
Acetonitrile [in concentrations 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%,
17.5%, 20% and 50%] in 0.1% triethylamine
High pH buffer
EDTA [10mM],Na2CO3 [100mM], NaCl [100mM] - pH 11
Lysis buffer
Guanidinium hydrochloride [6M], TCEP [5mM], CAA
[10mM], Tris-HCl pH 8.5 [100mM]
NP-40 solution
2% solution of NP-40 [10% w/v] in PBS
PBS (Phosphate buffered saline)
NaCl [137mM], KCl [2.7mM], Na2HPO4 [10mM],
KH2PO4 [1.8mM]
Stage-tipping buffer A
Formic acid (FA) [0.1%], water
Stage-tipping buffer A’
CH3CN [3%], TFA [1%]
Stage-tipping buffer B
CH3CN [80%], FA [0/1%]
SDS solution
2% solution of SDS [10% w/v] in PBS
TCA buffer
100% Trichloroacetic acid [9M] in MQ water
TFA solution
10% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) [100%] in MQ water
Triton X-100 solution
2% solution of Triton X-100 [10% w/v] in PBS
Tris EDTA buffer
EDTA [10mM], Tris-HCl [20mM] - pH 7.5
Urea buffer
Urea [8M], Tris HCl [100mM] - pH 8.0
2.2
Membrane proteomics methods
To generate a strategy for membrane proteomics, several combinations of methods were
tested. An initial protocol was designed, while steps of the process were altered later to
achieve more accurate quantification.
Bacterial Growth & Sample preparation
All proteomics experiments were carried out in E. coli strain K12 MG1655. The strains were
grown in M9 cultures with 4 g/L glucose at 37◦C and 200 rpm till exponential phase. The
culture was harvested at an optical density (OD) of 1, while the total OD of each starting sam-
ple was equal to 4. Cells were disrupted using 3-mm zirconium oxide beads and lysis buffer
(table 2.2), samples were centrifuged (15,000 g for 10 minutes) and total protein concentra-
tion was measured using the Micro BCATM Protein Assay kit [CN #23235, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, US]. An aliquot of variable protein concentration, depending on the
version of the protocol, was used as starting material.
Protein solubilization
Thawed samples of known protein concentration were solubilised in either a high pH or a
high salt buffer and incubated for 30 minutes at 4◦C. Then, samples were subjected to buffer
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
12
==PAGE:20==
exchange and solubilised for the second time using a detergent solution. The detergents
used were Triton X-100, NP-40 and SDS, while all different combinations of buffer and deter-
gent solution were tested. Similarly to the first solubilisation, samples were incubated for 30
minutes at 4◦C and subjected to buffer exchange.
Buffer exchange
Between some protocol steps, samples were subjected to buffer exchange to remove aggres-
sive reagents which may influence the subsequent stages of sample preparation and render
them unsuitable for HPLC-MS analysis. Buffer exchange was performed by loading the sam-
ple in V-shape filtered tubes of a 3 kDa cutoff and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 minutes at
4◦C. After the whole sample was processed, additional wash steps were performed. During
a wash step, the tubes were filled up with lysis buffer (Table 2.2) and centrifuged at 15,000 g
at 4◦C till there was approximately 100 μL left of the sample on the filter unit.
Ultracentrifugation
A different method tested, not only as a buffer exchange step, but also for enrichment of
protein fractions is ultracentrifugation. To perform ultracentrifugation, samples were initially
solubilised in Tris EDTA buffer (Table 2.2) and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g and 4◦C for 60
minutes. The supernatant containing the soluble cytosolic proteins was collected, while the
pellet was resuspended in the appropriate buffer, as described in section ”Protein solubili-
sation”, to solubilise the remaining proteins. The samples were ultracentrifuged in the same
conditions (100,000 g, 4◦C, 60 minutes) between the two solubilisation steps and the su-
pernatant containing the fraction of peripheral membrane proteins was collected. Following
the second round of protein solubilisation, the samples were ultracentrifuged under the same
conditions and the supernatant containing the fraction of integral membrane proteins was col-
lected. Finally the cell pellet retrieved from the last ultracentrifugation step was resuspended
in 100 μL of lysis buffer.
Membrane protein precipitation
To perform membrane precipitation in the samples, 1 mL of the sample was mixed with 150
μL of 100% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and incubated on ice for one hour. Samples were
centrifuged at 14,000 g and 4◦C for one hour and supernatant was discarded, while the cell
pellet was further processed with 800 μL of -20◦C acetone, mixed thoroughly and sonicated
(3 cycles of 10 seconds each). After incubating the samples overnight at -20◦C, they were
centrifuged at 14,000 g and 4◦C for 30 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and cell
pellets were air dried for 30 minutes. At the final step of protein precipitation, cell pellets
were solubilised by adding 100 μL of lysis buffer and incubating at 60◦C for 30 minutes while
shaking at 600 rpm. To prepare the samples for the following steps 100 μL of 50 mM AmBic
was added to each sample.
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)
The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski and Rakus, 2014) was an-
other method tested for sample clean-up. Aliquots of 200 μg of protein were diluted in 300
μL of urea buffer (Table 2.2) in centrifugal ultrafiltration units with a cutoff of 30 kDa (cat.#
MRCF0R030) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 minutes. Eluates were discarded, 200 μL
of urea buffer was added to the filters and samples were centrifuged again at 14,000 g for
15 minutes. After discarding the eluates, 100 μL of urea buffer containing 30 mM Chloroac-
etamide (CAA) was added to the samples, which were then incubated in the dark, at 4◦C for
20 minutes. Samples were centrifuged in the same conditions and washed twice with 200
μL of urea buffer and twice with 150 μL of 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8). For each wash step, the
appropriate solution was added to the filter and samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g until
most of the solution was collected in the collection tube.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
13
==PAGE:21==
Protein digestion
Prior to protein digestion, the total protein content of each sample was measured using the
BCA assay kit in order to quantify the amount of enzyme mix required for digestion. Trypsin
buffer containing 0.1 μg/μl of trypsin and Lys-C mixture was prepared and added to the sam-
ples. All samples were incubated for 8 hours in 37◦C, while the reaction was stopped by
adding a solution of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuging at 14,000 g for 15 min-
utes. In case the samples were processed following the FASP protocol, digestion took place
by adding the appropriate quantity of enzyme mix on the filters and the released peptides were
collected by centrifuging twice at 14,000 g for 10 minutes. Prior to the second centrifugation,
40μL of Tris buffer (Table 2.2) was added to each sample.
Desalting
To clean up the samples prior to HPLC-MS analysis, an established protocol for desalting
using C-18 stage-tipping was used. The protocol can be found in Appendix A.2. For the final
steps of the process samples were vacuum-dried to reduce the ACN concentration and 40μL
of 0.1% FA in water was added prior to HPLC-MS analysis.
Peptide fractionation
Another way of desalting the samples is peptide fractionation. Beside sample clean-up, pep-
tide fractionation separate peptides in a sample based on hydrophobicity, therefore resulting
in a simplified protein pool of each fraction of a sample and allowing deeper analysis. To
perform peptide fractionation the PierceTM high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit
[CN #84868, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, US] was used. Similar to stage tipping
for the final steps, all sample fractions were vacuum-dried and 40 μL of 0.1% FA in water was
added to prepare the samples for HPLC-MS analysis.
HPLC-MS
Peptide samples were analysed on the Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC sys-
tem. A sample volume of 4 μL was injected on a xxx column using solvent A (water + 0.1%
FA) and solvent B (80% ACN + 0.1% FA) with a linear gradient with a flow rate of 1.2 μl/min
over a 60 minute run. The temperature of the column was maintained at 40◦C. The eluted
peptides were analyzed on the Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer
while data dependent acquisition (DDA) method was used. The MS scans were obtained
in positive polarity at resolution of 120,000 and maximum injection time of 3 ms, while the
mass range was set to 400 to 1250 m/z . The MS/MS scan was obtained at mass range 400
to 1250 m/z and at resolution of 30,000. The resulting spectra used to identify and quan-
tify membrane proteins were analysed with the Proteome Discoverer (PD) [Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, US] software.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
14
==PAGE:22==
3
Results & Discussion
The aim of the conducted experiments was to establish an optimal method for sample prepa-
ration prior to proteomics analysis of bacterial membrane proteins. An optimal method would
result in a high number of identified proteins, it should be cost effective, repeatable and repro-
ducible. In total, four different versions of the protocol were constructed and tested, and the
results were primarily assessed by the number of identified proteins. The second step was
the development of a suitable acquisition method in order to enhance the focus on peptides
of interest and thereafter the reproducibility.
3.1
Proteomics data: Protein Identification
In order to process the results derived from DDA analysis, in-house Python scripts were
applied. Initially three lists containing all the theoretical cytosolic, peripheral and integral pro-
teins, which have been identified in E. coli, were constructed based on the UniProt database
(EMBL-EBI, 2003). Advanced searches were made on UniProt by defining the organism
of interest (E.coli K12) and the subcellular location to Membrane [SL-0162] and Peripheral
membrane protein [SL-9903], respectively (Figure 3.1). The first list contains all the known
membrane proteins of E. coli, while the second list only contains the peripheral membrane
proteins. The two lists were compared using a Python script, and those proteins not found in
the list of peripheral proteins were listed as integral membrane proteins. To analyse the re-
sults derived from the experiments, an Python script was constructed which separates all the
proteins identified based on their nature (cytosolic, peripheral or integral) by going through
the three lists and identifying protein identifier matches between the theoretical lists and the
results of the experiment. The scripts also inform the user about the total number of cytosolic,
peripheral and integral proteins identified in the specific experimental sample and returns a
list of all the unique protein identifiers found.
Figure 3.1: UniProt advanced search for membrane proteins of E. coli
3.2
Development of sample preparation protocols
To evaluate the success of each sample preparation protocol, in terms of quantity of identified
membrane proteins, all results were compared to the results of a reference sample. The
reference sample was prepared and analysed by Shannara Taylor Parkins. The sample came
from an E. coli K12 MG1655 culture in M9 medium with 4 g/L glucose using the standard
sample preparation protocol, which includes the steps of cell lysis, total protein concentration
measurement by BCA assay, protein digestion and C-18 stagetipping as described in Section
2.2. An overview of all versions of the sample preparation protocol is given in Figure 3.2, while
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
15
==PAGE:23==
the number of peripheral and integral identified proteins for each protocol is shown in Figure
3.3.
Figure 3.2: Overview of the different experimental protocols developed in the present study. The first row de-
scribes the general idea behind the protocols while the steps highlighted with black outline were applied for
treatment of the reference sample.
Figure 3.3: Number of identified proteins in all samples resulted from the V2, V3, and V4 protocol.
3.2.1
Generation of an ultracentrifugation based protocol and resulting
bottlenecks
Version 1 (V1) of the sample preparation protocol was initiated by standard bacterial growth
and sample preparation, while aliquots of 1 mg of total protein were prepared as starting
material. Then samples were processed following the ultracentrifugation method and the su-
pernatant was collected three times for each sample. The supernatants which contained the
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
16
==PAGE:24==
peripheral and integral membrane protein fractions were further processed by protein precip-
itation. Total protein content was measured with the BCA assay for all three fractions of each
sample: the one containing cytosolic proteins and the two fractions with membrane proteins
derived after protein precipitation, and all samples were digested. After protein digestion sam-
ples were desalted following C-18 stage-tipping and the two fractions of membrane proteins
were combined prior to HPLC-MS analysis.
In total two samples were processed. Prior to the second ultracentrifugation, one sample
was processed with high pH buffer and the other with high salt buffer. For the next step,
both samples were processed with Triton X-100. Due to a malfunction of the ultracentrifuge,
the samples were not centrifuged under appropriate conditions resulting in substantial evap-
oration. All proteins were collected in the cell pellet and were resuspended in lysis buffer,
while the step of protein precipitation did not take place. Samples were further processed by
protein digestion, C-18 stagetipping and analysed by HPLC-MS as described in Section2.2.
This method resulted in the identification of 92 peripheral and 210 integral membrane pro-
teins, as well as 1493 cytosolic proteins and the two samples did not present any difference
in the number of identified proteins. There was no difference in the number of peripheral
proteins identified between the samples following the standard sample preparation and the
ones prepared based on the trialed protocol, while for the integral membrane proteins one
protein more was identified in the reference sample (Figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4: Number of identified proteins in Protocol V1 and the reference sample.
The applied buffers should promote the solubilisation of hydrophobic proteins, while the ul-
tracentrifugation steps allow the separation of the membrane proteins from the cytosolic pro-
teins. Due to the malfunction of the ultracentrifuge, the protocol was not completed success-
fully, therefore the results were not indicative of the method. To overcome this bottleneck,
a new strategy was developed which leveraged different combinations of buffers and deter-
gents to enhance the solubilisation of hydrophobic proteins. After HPLC-MS analysis of the
results, relatively high-intensity peaks were detected in late retention time on the HPLC chro-
matogram of both samples. These peaks likely originate from the detergent solutions, which
were possibly not efficiently removed by the desalting step of the sample preparation. A more
suitable clean-up step was therefore employed in the next version of the sample preparation
protocol to render the samples ready for HPLC-MS analysis. To acquire more accurate iden-
tification of a greater number of proteins, all samples were also processed with a peptide
fractionation kit as the final stage of the sample preparation. The peptide fractionation step
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
17
==PAGE:25==
allows for separation of the peptide samples in different fractions based on hydrophobicity.
Contamination peaks would hopefully be limited to some of the resultant peptide fractions,
and the remaining fractions would then offer a more in-depth view of the protein content of
the samples.
3.2.2
Advancements in the new version of the protocol focused on
membrane protein solubilisation and sample clean-up
The subsequent version of the protocol, version 2 (V2), had as primary goal the thorough
clean-up of the samples to remove most of the contamination likely originating from the de-
tergents. Different combinations of buffers and detergents were still applied, however their
efficacy in terms of membrane protein solubilisation could only be evaluated after appropriate
clean-up of the samples.
For the second version of the protocol, samples were initially prepared following the standard
bacterial growth and sample preparation method. After measuring total protein concentration
of the samples aliquots corresponding to 100 μg of protein were prepared as starting material,
while two technical replicates were made for each sample. The protein solubilisation process
was followed by testing a high pH and a high salt buffer in the first step and the detergents
Triton X-100 and NP-40 in the second. Buffer exchange was performed using V-shaped filter
tubes and the wash step was performed twice after each solubilisation step. In each sample,
100 μL of 50 mM AmBic was added and protein digestion was carried out. After digestion one
technical replicate of each sample was processed with C-18 desalting, while the second repli-
cate was processed following the peptide fractionation method. All samples were analysed
by HPLC-MS and the number of identified proteins was calculated as described in Section
3.1 for peripheral, integral and cytosolic proteins (Figure 3.5). The samples processed with
C-18 stagetipping are hereafter mentioned as unfractionated samples and samples treated
with the peptide fractionation kit are mentioned as fractionated samples.
Figure 3.5: Number of identified proteins, separated by category, in samples processed according to second
version of the protocol (V2).
During analysis of the samples, some peaks of high intensity were again found on the HPLC
chromatograms at a late retention time indicating contamination. For unfractionated samples
the contamination was substantial, only allowing for identification of 26 peripheral and 35 in-
tegral membrane proteins, while 494 cytosolic proteins were detected. No notable difference
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
18
==PAGE:26==
was detected between the four different samples in terms of confidence of detecting a protein
in a sample. Fractionated samples resulted in the identification of 101, 210 and 1625 periph-
eral, integral and cytosolic proteins, respectively (Figure 3.5). Fractionated samples resulted
in the identification of 71% more proteins than unfractionated samples, ranging between 70%
and 85% for the various protein categories.
The four samples showed very small differences between the identified proteins, with the
samples processed with Triton X-100 presenting higher confidence in protein identification
for both peripheral and integral proteins (Figure 3.6).
Figure 3.6: Confidence of identified protein peaks in the four different samples processed according to the second
protocol (V2) with the last step of peptide fractionation. The number of proteins identified with high confidence is
indicated with blue colour, the found peaks with orange while the amount of non found proteins with gray.
3.2.3
Implementation of additional wash steps and consequent sample loss
The third version (V3) of the protocol follows the same steps as the second version. During
solubilisation, a high pH and a high salt buffer were tested followed by Triton X-100 and NP-
40 solutions in the second step, again testing all the possible combinations of buffers and
detergents. Buffer exchange was performed in V-shaped filter tubes, only this time it was
followed by five washing steps after every solubilisation round. The extra wash steps were
added in order to improve the purity of the samples in terms of unwanted contaminants which
could affect the analysis. Samples were diluted with 100 μL of 50 mM AmBic, they were
digested and one technical replicate was desalted by C-18 stage tipping, while the other by
peptide fractionation. Standard HPLC-MS analysis was carried out.
Similar to the results retrieved from samples prepared with second version of the protocol,
contamination peaks were detected in the HPLC chromatograms. This protocol resulted in
the identification of 25 and 67 peripheral membrane proteins, as well as 32 and 111 integral
membrane proteins in unfractionated and fractionated samples, respectively (Figure 3.7).
The lower number of identified proteins, even in the fractionated samples, indicates that the
utilisation of five consecutive wash steps resulted in a loss of total protein without improving
the clean-up of the samples.
The interference of the potential contamination peaks in the unfractionated samples was sub-
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
19
==PAGE:27==
stantial, therefore many of the proteins in all four samples were not identified with high con-
fidence (Figure 3.8a). Fractionated samples resulted in slightly higher number of identified
proteins, however many of them were not detected with high confidence. Samples processed
with detergent solution NP-40 resulted in identification of more proteins with high confidence
compared to the samples treated with Triton X-100 (Figure 3.8).
Figure 3.7: Number of identified proteins in samples resulted from the 3rd version of the protocol separated in
peripheral, integral and cytosolic proteins.
(a) Samples processed with C-18 stagetipping.
(b) Samples processed with peptide fractionation.
Figure 3.8: Confidence of identified protein peaks in the four different samples processed according to the third
protocol (V3), separated based on the last step of the protocol followed. The number of proteins identified with
high confidence is indicated with yellow colour, the found peaks with gray while the amount of non found proteins
with green.
3.2.4
Incorporation of the FASP protocol in the method and a variety of
identified proteins between samples of different detergents
For the final version of the protocol (V4), bacterial growth and sample preparation was carried
out in the same way as the prior versions of the protocol. Total protein concentration was
measured and proteins were solubilised using high pH or high salt buffer initially and Triton
X-100, NP-40, or SDS detergent solutions at the second step. Similar to previous protocols all
combinations of buffers and detergents were tested, while buffer exchange was performed
with v-shaped filter tubes and two wash steps after every solubilisation step. Total protein
concentration was measured again in all samples and filter aided sample preparation (FASP)
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
20
==PAGE:28==
was applied afterwards to clean-up the samples from detergents. Proteins were digested by
adding the digestion enzyme mix on the filter as described in Section2.2. For the final step, 20
μg of each sample was further processed by C-18 stage-tipping and 100 μg of each sample
by peptide fractionation. All samples were subjected to standard HPLC-MS analysis.
The FASP protocol has been commonly used for sample clean-up from aggressive deter-
gents, especially SDS (Wiśniewski et al., 2009), which was included as a third detergent
solution to thoroughly examine the protocol’s efficacy. In comparison to all previous versions
of the sample preparation protocol, this approach resulted in the highest number of identified
proteins. Interestingly, all fractionated and unfractionated samples of version 4 resulted in
the identification of almost the same number of proteins (Figure 3.9).
Figure 3.9: Number of identified proteins in samples resulted from the fourth version of the protocol (V4) separated
in peripheral, integral and cytosolic proteins.
The V4 protocol produced better results by attaining more a thorough clean-up of the samples,
especially the samples processed with the NP-40 detergent. The last step of either C-18 stage
tipping or peptide fractionation did not have a large impact on the results as there were 95 and
103 peripheral proteins, 275 and 269 integral proteins and 1569 and 1523 cytosolic proteins
detected after the two methods, respectively (Figure 3.10). The number of proteins identified
with high confidence was significantly higher for samples treated with NP-40, while samples
treated with Triton X-100 or SDS had a large number of proteins which were not identified.
Similar results were retrieved from fractionated samples. Samples treated with SDS resulted
in identification of less than 50% of proteins compared to samples treated with different de-
tergents (Figure 3.11). Samples treated with the NP-40 detergent presented the best results,
in the number of identified proteins, while samples treated with the Triton X-100 detergent
resulted in many proteins identified with low confidence.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.10: Confidence of identified protein peaks in the six different samples processed according to the V4
protocol with the last step of C-18 stagetipping. The number of proteins identified with high confidence is indicated
with green colour, the found peaks with blue while the amount of non found proteins with gray.
Figure 3.11: Confidence of identified protein peaks in the six different samples processed according to the V4
protocol with the last step of peptide fractionation. The number of proteins identified with high confidence is
indicated with green colour, the found peaks with blue while the amount of non found proteins with gray.
During the fourth version of the protocol, the proteins in samples treated with SDS precip-
itated. Therefore, even though the FASP protocol has been optimised for SDS clean-up
(Wiśniewski et al., 2009), the efficacy of SDS clean up could not be evaluated. Due to the
precipitation, samples turned milky white and were more difficult to handle, resulting in sam-
ple loss. This is also supported by the absence of relatively high intensity peaks in the HPLC
chromatogram of the sample (Figure 3.12a). Even though the NP-40 detergent resulted in
the best quantification results among the three detergents in the current project, no assump-
tion can be made in terms of its overall solubilisation efficacy. The solubilisation efficacy
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
22
==PAGE:30==
of the Triton X-100 detergent could not be assessed due to the intense peaks in the HPLC
chromatograms from potential contamination (Figure 3.12b). These intense peaks were likely
caused by the detergent residues and therefore it seems more difficult to rid samples of Triton
X-100 compared to the other detergents.
(a) Sample processed with SDS detergent
(b) Sample processed with Triton X-100
Figure 3.12: HPLC chromatograms of samples derived from fourth version of the protocol, treated with with high
salt buffer
All the results, in terms of number of identified integral and peripheral proteins, derived from
the different protocol versions are compared in Figure 3.3. In the reference sample (Figure
3.13a), prepared without use of any solubilisation buffers or detergents, no potential contam-
ination peaks were detected. The HPLC analysis of the third version of the protocol, which
resulted in the lowest number of identified proteins, displayed obscure peaks compared to
the reference (Figure 3.13b). High intensity peaks were observed after the 42nd minute of
retention time with spaces of 1 to 1.5 minutes, suggesting contamination of the sample. The
intensity and occurrence of these peaks, combined with the potential sample loss due to the
five consecutive washing steps, resulted in identification of only a small number of proteins.
The sample obtained from the V4 protocol (Figure 3.13c) does not present such consecutive
peaks, indicating a more successful clean-up process. Thus, incorporation of the FASP ap-
proach might result in a more efficient sample clean-up than the other methods investigated
in this project.
The first objective of this project was the determination of a suitable combination of buffer
and detergent solution to improve the solubilisation of membrane proteins. The results of all
four versions did not show a notable difference between samples treated with either high pH
buffer or high salt buffer. Due to the potential contamination found in many of the samples, the
analysis could not be carried out in depth. Further development of the sample preparation
protocol and additional analysis would be required to determine the impact of the different
buffers. The different detergents cannot be compared in terms of efficacy, since there was
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
23
==PAGE:31==
no version of the protocol where the samples treated with different detergents were not likely
contaminated.
(a) Reference sample
(b) Sample resulted from V3 of the protocol treated with high salt buffer and NP-40 detergent
(c) Sample resulted from V4 of the protocol treated with high salt buffer and NP-40 detergent
Figure 3.13: HPLC chromatograms of unfractionated samples resulting from various versions of the method
3.2.5
Performance of the sample preparation protocols and influence of the
ultracentrifugation in the method
Even though implementation of the current method resulted in greater number of identified
membrane proteins compared to the reference sample, there is still room for improvement, as
the present study only covered approximately 26% of the predicted membrane proteome of
E. coli. In more detail, the protocol resulted in the identification of 62% of predicted peripheral
membrane proteins and 21% of the predicted integral proteins. This immense difference in the
percentage of identified proteins between the two categories is probably due to the fact that
integral proteins are strongly embedded in the inner membrane of gram-negative bacteria.
Moreover, a lot of integral proteins are transporters and specifically substrate transporters,
so they are only expressed under specific conditions.
To further evaluate the performance of the sample preparation protocols, the number of mem-
brane proteins identified after treatment with protocol V4 was compared to the actively ex-
pressed proteins in M9 medium with glucose. To identify the theoretically expressed proteins,
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
24
==PAGE:32==
data was collected from the GitHub repository precise-db (Rychel et al., 2020, https://github.c
om/SBRG/precise-db). The file ”log_tpm.csv” contains the expression level of genes from a
wild type E. coli culture in glucose M9 medium. Genes were matched to protein IDs while pro-
teins with an expression level above 3.0 were considered actively expressed. In this case,
a total of 746 integral proteins and 126 peripheral proteins were identified for E. coli. The
proteins identified after treatment with V4 protocol cover approximately 36% of integral and
75% of peripheral expressed proteins. Approximately 41% of the theoretically expressed
membrane proteins were identified in V4 samples, confirming the assumption that a large
percentage of the non identified proteins are not expressed under the specific conditions.
The development of methods targeted to membrane proteomics usually includes ultracen-
trifugation. The success of these protocols, as mentioned earlier, rests on the enrichment
of the membrane proteins during the ultracentrifugation step. During this project the idle ul-
tracentrifuge necessitated significant adjustments to the methodology. Different methods to
achieve enrichment of the membrane fractions of the cells such as sample processing with
colloidal silica beads or a two-phase system with PEG were taken into account (Kim et al.,
2011; Trötschel and Poetsch, 2015). Since a further goal of this project is the establishment
of a universal, high-throughput protocol for membrane proteomics and the aforementioned
methods lack in reproducibility, they were not taken into account for the additional develop-
ment of the protocol during this study.
3.3
In silico digestion of protein samples
Besides the development and optimisation of a sample preparation protocol, a suitable acqui-
sition method should be used to enhance the success of the method. The ability to perform
targeted acquisition in experiments would allow for better identification of membrane proteins,
since the analysis would only focus on the lower abundant membrane proteins (lower intensity
peaks), rather than the more intense peaks which correspond to the cytosolic proteins.
3.3.1
Development of a tryptic peptide list from E. coli
To develop the targeted acquisition method, a list containing quantotypic membrane tryptic
peptides was constructed by performing in silico tryptic digestion. The peptides on the list
were selected based on their flyability score for MS analysis. The Python script, which was
written to construct the list, can be found in Appendix B.1 and includes the following steps:
1. A FASTA file containing all the protein identifiers (IDs) and the protein sequences was
constructed for both peripheral and integral membrane proteins.
2. In silico tryptic digestion was performed in order to identify all possible tryptic peptides
from the membrane proteins. The script used was taken from the GitHub repository
trypsin [https://github.com/yafeng/trypsin] and modifications were made in the code in
order to be suitable for the project. Tryptic peptides were computed based on the repos-
itory code and a command checking the length of peptides was added. Proteins and the
corresponding peptides of appropriate length, 9-15 amino acids, were written to a file
and utilized for further steps of the code. The script also takes into account the amount
of missed cleavage sites allowed and they were set to zero.
3. The resulting file from step 2 is further analyzed and all peptides derived from the same
protein were separated in different lists of maximum length equal to 81. If a protein had
more than 81 tryptic peptides, a second list was made for the same protein ID. This step
prepared the data for the analysis of the detectability of peptides.
4. The in silico tryptic digestion tool was also used to analyse the whole E. coli genome in
order to identify unique peptides. All tryptic peptides were calculated and an extra step
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
25
==PAGE:33==
was added this time in order to get an output file of all the tryptic peptides that occur
more than once on the genome, while missed cleavage sites were set to zero.
5. All tryptic peptides were analysed based on their flyability in MS analysis. A script was
taken from the GitHub repository DeepMSPeptide [https://github.com/vsegurar/DeepMSPeptide]
and was modified as follows. The input for analysis of flyability was all the files resulted
from step 2, therefore the input was altered in order to parse through all the files. For
each and every peptide a prediction was made regarding the possibility of detecting
the specific peptide in real time MS analysis. A detectability threshold was set as input
from the user and was compared to the flyability prediction made for each peptide. All
peptides which scored above the threshold and were unique, i.e. did not match any of
the peptides in the list derived from step 4, were written in an output file containing the
protein ID, peptide sequence and detectability score. This file contained all the unique
peptides identified in silico which matched the length and threshold requirements.
6. The resulting file was processed further to identify as many different proteins as possible
with a high detectability score. Proteins with only one tryptic peptide were eliminated
from the list, while for proteins with more than 3 peptides with a high score, the top three
peptides with the highest detectability were chosen.
7. For the last step, the two lists which include the resulting peripheral and integral mem-
brane proteins were combined into one file. This script also informed the user about the
total number of peripheral and integral peptides, respectively, as well as the number of
unique proteins these peptides were derived from.
To choose the best list of quantotypic peptides, lists were initially evaluated based on the
number of peripheral and integral peptides and unique proteins each one of them contains.
Table 3.1 presents the number of unique peptides and proteins for four different values of the
threshold.
Table 3.1: Number of unique peripheral and integral membrane peptides and proteins contained on the list de-
pending on the probability threshold.
Peripheral
Integral
Total
Probability
threshold
Peptides
Proteins
Peptides
Proteins
Peptides
Proteins
0.85
323
118
1157
448
1480
566
0.90
235
90
663
263
898
353
0.91
202
77
569
226
771
303
0.95
60
27
164
73
124
100
3.3.2
Identification of actively expressed proteins of E. coli under specific
conditions
One more parameter which was taken into account during the construction of the peptide list
was the conditions under which the E. coli culture has been produced in the present study.
In order to limit the list to peptides derived from proteins which were actively expressed in
the specific conditions, an in-house Python script was written. The script can be found in
Appendix B.2 and it proceeds as follows:
1. The expression level of all genes in the chosen conditions was found based on data from
the GitHub repository precise-db (Rychel et al., 2020, https://github.com/SBRG/precise-
db). The file ”log_tpm.csv” was used, since it contains all genes with the gene number
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
26
==PAGE:34==
as identifier. A script was made to match each gene number with the protein ID using the
GitHub package Biopython (Cock et al., 2009, https://github.com/biopython/biopython).
The mean of expression for every gene was calculated and saved in a list identified by
both the protein ID and gene number.
2. For the next step an expression threshold was set by the user. The expression of all
proteins derived from the previous step were compared to the threshold. If the expres-
sion of a proteins was higher than the threshold, it was considered actively expressed
and the protein ID was saved in a new list.
3. The resulting list from step 2 was compared to the resulting file from part I, Section
3.3.1, which contained all the membrane tryptic peptides and their protein IDs. Proteins
which were found in both files and their peptides were derived as the resulting output
file, together with the total number of unique proteins and the total number of peptides
the file contained.
The final file which contained the sequences of the quantotypic peptides which are actively
expressed in the specific conditions and have a high, predicted detectability score, represents
the peptides with which a targeted acquisition method could be developed.
Many combinations of detectability threshold and expression threshold were tested and the
number of unique peptides and proteins found in each file is presented in Table 3.2. The
number of peptides and proteins refers to the summation of integral and peripheral membrane
proteins.
Table 3.2: The number of unique peptides and proteins found in a theoretical list depending on the probability
and expression threshold.
Probability threshold
Expression threshold
Peptides
Proteins
0.90
5.5
447
175
0.90
6.0
397
154
0.91
6.0
345
134
0.90
6.5
327
126
0.90
6.87 (Top 25%)
289
112
0.90
6.9
284
110
0.90
7.0
269
104
3.3.3
Identification of peptides detected in samples
The theoretical peptide list was evaluated by comparison with the peptides observed during
the DDA analysis of the experiment. The experimental results were examined using an in-
house Python script by counting the peptide matches between the theoretical list and the
experimental results. The output was the number of peptide matches between the two lists,
as well as the number of unique proteins they were derived from.
The number of peptide matches and therefore protein matches was initially compared be-
tween results of samples analysed with the second version of the protocol and the constructed
peptide lists. The results can be found in Table 3.3, where the values of peptides and proteins
refer to peptide or protein matches per total number of peptides or proteins identified in the
theoretical list, respectively.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
27
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.3: Number of peptide and protein matches between results of protocols V2 and V4, and the theoretical
list. The matches were calculated for various values of probability and expression threshold.
Protocol version & Last step:
V2 & Fractionation
V4 & C-18 Stagetipping
V4 & Fractionation
Probability
threshold
Expression
threshold
Peptides
Proteins
Peptides
Proteins
Peptides
Proteins
0.90
5.5
120/447
75/175
166/447
93/175
152/447
89/175
0.90
6.0
116/397
73/154
162/397
89/154
148/397
86/154
0.91
6.0
98/345
62/134
143/345
79/134
129/345
73/134
0.90
6.5
108/327
66/126
149/327
79/126
135/327
77/126
0.90
6.87 (Top 25%)
101/289
60/112
141/289
74/112
129/289
73/112
0.90
6.9
101/284
60/110
141/284
74/110
129/284
73/110
0.90
7.0
97/269
56/104
137/269
70/104
127/269
71/104
3.3.4
Selection of theoretical peptide list for development of a targeted
acquisition method
Since enrichment of the membrane protein fractions could not be achieved without the ul-
tracentrifuge, the identification of low-abundant peptides derived from membrane proteins
amongst highly abundant cytosolic proteins, could be suitable for targeted acquisition. Em-
ploying a targeted acquisition method provides the advantage of skipping over the highly
intense peaks of cytosolic peptides and selecting the peaks of membrane peptides. A pep-
tide list was constructed as described in Section 3.3, which could be used as a library for
the targeted acquisition in the form of a transition list. The parameters of the list were cho-
sen based on the amount of peptide matches between the theoretical list and the analysed
samples, as well as the number of unique proteins they derive from. On the other hand, the
theoretical list should not contain a large number of peptides as it would be more labor inten-
sive to set up and have a higher cost. For the theoretical list the parameters of probability
threshold 0.90 and expression threshold 6.9 were chosen. This list resulted in a high num-
ber of peptide matches derived from multiple different proteins, while also keeping the total
amount of peptides in the theoretical list low. The theoretical list resulting from the aforemen-
tioned parameters was ordered as a peptide pool of known total concentration and would be
available for future research.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
28
==PAGE:36==
4
Conclusions & Further research
The huge advancements made in the field of mass spectrometry paved the way for the im-
plementation of proteomics techniques which target the absolute quantification of proteins.
However, the quantification of membrane proteins and especially the employment of absolute
proteomics techniques remain a challenge. The current study describes the development of a
methodology for absolute membrane quantification of gram-negative bacteria, with E. coli as
model organism. The workflow focused on the solubilisation of the hydrophobic membrane
proteins and the choice of an appropriate acquisition method. These two crucial bottlenecks
need to be tackled in order to quantify, with high confidence, the lower abundant membrane
proteins amongst the highly abundant cytosolic proteins.
Nowadays, methodologies which target absolute quantification of bacterial membrane pro-
teins are mainly focused on the incorporation of one or more ultracentrifugation steps in the
protocol. In this project, the malfunction of the ultracentrifuge due to the incompetence of
the machine to maintain a high vacuum resulted in evaporation of the aqueous content of the
samples. Enrichment of the membrane fractions could not be carried out forcing an alteration
of the sample preparation method. The latest version of the protocol presents an alternative
method for membrane quantification, without the use of expensive ultracentrifugation equip-
ment. The protocol could be employed by the majority of laboratories with already existing
equipment, and is possible to carry out in a total of three days. Overall, samples treated with
the V4 protocol presented an 22% increase in the number of identified membrane proteins
compared to the reference sample.
Further development of the methodology should be carried out to achieve a repeatable and
reproducible protocol and test the efficacy of the different buffers and detergents. The im-
provement of the sample clean-up step should be the primary goal of additional work on the
method. A suggested step which could be tested, is the clean-up by buffer exchange in v-
shaped filter tubes followed by protein precipitation and resolubilisation of the proteins in lysis
buffer. The addition of protein precipitation step could aid the purification of the protein sam-
ples from possible contaminants and hopefully would result in the absence of obscure peaks
in the HPLC chromatograms and therefore improving the identification of proteins. The pro-
tocol could also be trialed for other gram-negative bacteria, such as Pseudomonas putida, to
evaluate its overall efficacy in membrane proteomics of gram-negative bacteria.
Additional investigation could also be carried out regarding the acquisition method. The de-
velopment of a targeted acquisition method could enhance the identification of membrane
proteins leading to absolute quantification of higher confidence. The ordered subset of the
peptide list would need to be analysed further by HPLC-MS to generate a transition list. Par-
allel reaction monitoring (PRM) method could then be utilised to target membrane peptides
present in the transition list and result in the quantification of membrane proteins.
In future research, all the results retrieved from the protocol can be further processed by
label-free quantification algorithms. Methods like APEX, LFAQ, x-Top could be investigated
in order to identify the most suitable algorithm for the current application. Moreover, a protein
shaving technique could potentially be utilised in order to identify a correction factor for the
quantification of membrane proteins. This technique involves shaving off cell membrane
peptides which are exposed to the surface, prior to further sample treatment and analysis
with HPLC-MS.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
29
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
Ahrné, E., Molzahn, L., Glatter, T., & Schmidt, A. (2013). Critical assessment of proteome-
wide label-free absolute abundance estimation strategies. Proteomics, 13(17), 2567–
2578.
Antelo-Varela, M., Aguilar Suárez, R., Bartel, J., Bernal-Cabas, M., Stobernack, T., Sura,
T., Van Dijl, J. M., Maaß, S., & Becher, D. (2020). Membrane modulation of super-
secreting “midi bacillus” expressing the major staphylococcus aureus antigen–a mass-
spectrometry-based absolute quantification approach. Frontiers in bioengineering and
biotechnology, 8, 143.
Antelo-Varela, M., Bartel, J., Quesada-Ganuza, A., Appel, K., Bernal-Cabas, M., Sura, T.,
Otto, A., Rasmussen, M., van Dijl, J. M., Nielsen, A., et al. (2019). Ariadne’s thread
in the analytical labyrinth of membrane proteins: Integration of targeted and shotgun
proteomics for global absolute quantification of membrane proteins. Analytical Chem-
istry, 91(18), 11972–11980.
Aslam, B., Basit, M., Nisar, M. A., Khurshid, M., & Rasool, M. H. (2017). Proteomics: Tech-
nologies and their applications. Journal of chromatographic science, 55(2), 182–196.
Batth, T. S., Singh, P., Ramakrishnan, V. R., Sousa, M. M., Chan, L. J. G., Tran, H. M.,
Luning, E. G., Pan, E. H., Vuu, K. M., Keasling, J. D., et al. (2014). A targeted pro-
teomics toolkit for high-throughput absolute quantification of escherichia coli proteins.
Metabolic engineering, 26, 48–56.
Bereman, M. S., MacLean, B., Tomazela, D. M., Liebler, D. C., & MacCoss, M. J. (2012).
The development of selected reaction monitoring methods for targeted proteomics
via empirical refinement. Proteomics, 12(8), 1134–1141.
Bruderer, R., Bernhardt, O. M., Gandhi, T., Xuan, Y., Sondermann, J., Schmidt, M., Gomez-
Varela, D., & Reiter, L. (2017). Optimization of experimental parameters in data-independent
mass spectrometry significantly increases depth and reproducibility of results. Molec-
ular & Cellular Proteomics, 16(12), 2296–2309.
Calderón-Celis, F., Encinar, J. R., & Sanz-Medel, A. (2018). Standardization approaches
in absolute quantitative proteomics with mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry re-
views, 37(6), 715–737.
Cappadona, S., Baker, P. R., Cutillas, P. R., Heck, A. J., & van Breukelen, B. (2012). Cur-
rent challenges in software solutions for mass spectrometry-based quantitative pro-
teomics. Amino acids, 43(3), 1087–1108.
Chang, C., Gao, Z., Ying, W., Fu, Y., Zhao, Y., Wu, S., Li, M., Wang, G., Qian, X., Zhu, Y., et al.
(2018). Lfaq: Toward unbiased label-free absolute protein quantification by predicting
peptide quantitative factors. Analytical chemistry, 91(2), 1335–1343.
Chen, J., & Turko, I. V. (2014). Trends in qconcats for targeted proteomics. TrAC Trends in
Analytical Chemistry, 57, 1–5.
Chen, Y., Kaplan Lease, N., Gin, J. W., Ogorzalek, T. L., Adams, P. D., Hillson, N. J., & Petzold,
C. J. (2022). Modular automated bottom-up proteomic sample preparation for high-
throughput applications. PloS one, 17(2), e0264467.
Cock, P. J. A., Antao, T., Chang, J. T., Chapman, B. A., Cox, C. J., Dalke, A., Friedberg,
I., Hamelryck, T., Kauff, F., Wilczynski, B., & de Hoon, M. J. L. (2009). Biopython:
freely available Python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics.
Bioinformatics, 25(11), 1422–1423. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
30
==PAGE:38==
Doellinger, J., Schneider, A., Hoeller, M., & Lasch, P. (2020). Sample preparation by easy
extraction and digestion (speed)-a universal, rapid, and detergent-free protocol for
proteomics based on acid extraction. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 19(1), 209–
222.
EMBL-EBI, P., SIB. (2003). Uniprot e.coli proteins. Retrieved March 15, 2022, from https:
//www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb?facets=model_organism%5C%3A83333&query=e%5C%
20coli
Everberg, H., Gustavasson, N., & Tjerned, F. (2008). Enrichment of membrane proteins by
partitioning in detergent/polymer aqueous two-phase systems. 2D PAGE: Sample
Preparation and Fractionation, 403–412.
Gevaert, K., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2000). Protein identification methods in proteomics. ELEC-
TROPHORESIS: An International Journal, 21(6), 1145–1154.
Hu, A., Noble, W. S., & Wolf-Yadlin, A. (2016). Technical advances in proteomics: New de-
velopments in data-independent acquisition. F1000Research, 5.
Ishihama, Y., Oda, Y., Tabata, T., Sato, T., Nagasu, T., Rappsilber, J., & Mann, M. (2005).
Exponentially modified protein abundance index (empai) for estimation of absolute
protein amount in proteomics by the number of sequenced peptides per protein* s.
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 4(9), 1265–1272.
Iwasaki, M., Masuda, T., Tomita, M., & Ishihama, Y. (2009). Chemical cleavage-assisted tryp-
tic digestion for membrane proteome analysis. Journal of Proteome Research, 8(6),
3169–3175.
Kanapin, A., Batalov, S., Davis, M. J., Gough, J., Grimmond, S., Kawaji, H., Magrane, M.,
Matsuda, H., Schönbach, C., Teasdale, R. D., et al. (2003). Mouse proteome analysis.
Genome research, 13(6b), 1335–1344.
Kawashima, Y., Watanabe, E., Umeyama, T., Nakajima, D., Hattori, M., Honda, K., & Ohara,
O. (2019). Optimization of data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry for deep
and highly sensitive proteomic analysis. International journal of molecular sciences,
20(23), 5932.
Kim, Y., Elschenbroich, S., Sharma, P., Sepiashvili, L., Gramolini, A. O., & Kislinger, T.
(2011). Use of colloidal silica-beads for the isolation of cell-surface proteins for mass
spectrometry-based proteomics. Immune receptors (pp. 227–241). Springer.
Lu, P., Vogel, C., Wang, R., Yao, X., & Marcotte, E. M. (2007). Absolute protein expression
profiling estimates the relative contributions of transcriptional and translational regu-
lation. Nature biotechnology, 25(1), 117–124.
Masuda, T., Saito, N., Tomita, M., & Ishihama, Y. (2009). Unbiased quantitation of escherichia
coli membrane proteome using phase transfer surfactants. Molecular & Cellular Pro-
teomics, 8(12), 2770–2777.
Masuda, T., Tomita, M., & Ishihama, Y. (2008). Phase transfer surfactant-aided trypsin di-
gestion for membrane proteome analysis. Journal of proteome research, 7(2), 731–
740.
Mirzaei, H., McBee, J. K., Watts, J., & Aebersold, R. (2008). Comparative evaluation of current
peptide production platforms used in absolute quantification in proteomics. Molecular
& Cellular Proteomics, 7(4), 813–823.
Mori, M., Zhang, Z., Banaei-Esfahani, A., Lalanne, J.-B., Okano, H., Collins, B. C., Schmidt,
A., Schubert, O. T., Lee, D.-S., Li, G.-W., et al. (2021). From coarse to fine: The ab-
solute escherichia coli proteome under diverse growth conditions. Molecular systems
biology, 17(5), e9536.
Nagaraj, N., Lu, A., Mann, M., & Wiśniewski, J. R. (2008). Detergent-based but gel-free
method allows identification of several hundred membrane proteins in single lc-ms
runs. Journal of proteome research, 7(11), 5028–5032.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
31
==PAGE:39==
Pan, S., Aebersold, R., Chen, R., Rush, J., Goodlett, D. R., McIntosh, M. W., Zhang, J.,
& Brentnall, T. A. (2009). Mass spectrometry based targeted protein quantification:
Methods and applications. Journal of proteome research, 8(2), 787–797.
Poetsch, A., & Wolters, D. (2008). Bacterial membrane proteomics. Proteomics, 8(19), 4100–
4122.
Rappsilber, J., Ryder, U., Lamond, A. I., & Mann, M. (2002). Large-scale proteomic analysis
of the human spliceosome. Genome research, 12(8), 1231–1245.
Roma-Rodrigues, C., Santos, P. M., Benndorf, D., Rapp, E., & Sá-Correia, I. (2010). Re-
sponse of pseudomonas putida kt2440 to phenol at the level of membrane proteome.
Journal of proteomics, 73(8), 1461–1478.
Rosenberger, G., Ludwig, C., Röst, H. L., Aebersold, R., & Malmström, L. (2014). Alfq: An
r-package for estimating absolute protein quantities from label-free lc-ms/ms pro-
teomics data. Bioinformatics, 30(17), 2511–2513.
Rychel, K., Sastry, A. V., & Palsson, B. O. (2020). Machine learning uncovers indepen-
dently regulated modules in the bacillus subtilis transcriptome. Nature communica-
tions, 11(1), 1–10.
Sánchez, B. J., Lahtvee, P.-J., Campbell, K., Kasvandik, S., Yu, R., Domenzain, I., Zelezniak,
A., & Nielsen, J. (2021). Benchmarking accuracy and precision of intensity-based ab-
solute quantification of protein abundances in saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proteomics,
21(6), 2000093.
Schubert, O. T., Ludwig, C., Kogadeeva, M., Zimmermann, M., Rosenberger, G., Gengen-
bacher, M., Gillet, L. C., Collins, B. C., Röst, H. L., Kaufmann, S. H., et al. (2015).
Absolute proteome composition and dynamics during dormancy and resuscitation of
mycobacterium tuberculosis. Cell host & microbe, 18(1), 96–108.
Schubert, O. T., Röst, H. L., Collins, B. C., Rosenberger, G., & Aebersold, R. (2017). Quanti-
tative proteomics: Challenges and opportunities in basic and applied research. Nature
protocols, 12(7), 1289–1294.
Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., & Sel-
bach, M. (2011). Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature,
473(7347), 337–342.
Scott, K. B., Turko, I. V., & Phinney, K. W. (2016). Qconcat: Internal standard for protein
quantification. Methods in enzymology (pp. 289–303). Elsevier.
Silva, J. C., Gorenstein, M. V., Li, G.-Z., Vissers, J. P., & Geromanos, S. J. (2006). Absolute
quantification of proteins by lcmse: A virtue of parallel ms acquisition* s. Molecular &
Cellular Proteomics, 5(1), 144–156.
Tan, S., Tan, H. T., & Chung, M. C. (2008). Membrane proteins and membrane proteomics.
Proteomics, 8(19), 3924–3932.
Ting, Y. S., Egertson, J. D., Payne, S. H., Kim, S., MacLean, B., Käll, L., Aebersold, R., Smith,
R. D., Noble, W. S., & MacCoss, M. J. (2015). Peptide-centric proteome analysis: An
alternative strategy for the analysis of tandem mass spectrometry data. Molecular &
Cellular Proteomics, 14(9), 2301–2307.
Trötschel, C., & Poetsch, A. (2015). Current approaches and challenges in targeted absolute
quantification of membrane proteins. Proteomics, 15(5-6), 915–929.
Vandermarliere, E., Mueller, M., & Martens, L. (2013). Getting intimate with trypsin, the leading
protease in proteomics. Mass spectrometry reviews, 32(6), 453–465.
Vuckovic, D., Dagley, L. F., Purcell, A. W., & Emili, A. (2013). Membrane proteomics by
high performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry: Analytical ap-
proaches and challenges. Proteomics, 13(3-4), 404–423.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
32
==PAGE:40==
Wang, X., Liang, Y., Liu, L., Shi, J., & Zhu, H.-J. (2016). Targeted absolute quantitative
proteomics with silac internal standards and unlabeled full-length protein calibrators
(taqsi). Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 30(5), 553–561.
Wiśniewski, J. R., & Rakus, D. (2014). Multi-enzyme digestion fasp and the ‘total protein
approach’-based absolute quantification of the escherichia coli proteome. Journal of
proteomics, 109, 322–331.
Wiśniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample prepara-
tion method for proteome analysis. Nature methods, 6(5), 359–362.
Wu, C. C., MacCoss, M. J., Howell, K. E., & Yates, J. R. (2003). A method for the compre-
hensive proteomic analysis of membrane proteins. Nature biotechnology, 21(5), 532–
538.
Zhang, Y., Fonslow, B. R., Shan, B., Baek, M.-C., & Yates III, J. R. (2013). Protein analysis
by shotgun/bottom-up proteomics. Chemical reviews, 113(4), 2343–2394.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
33
==PAGE:41==
A
Protocols
Appendix A.1 includes the detailed fourth version (V4) of the sample preparation protocol,
while appendix A.2 the standardize protocol to perform desalting by C-18 stagetipping.
A.1
Sample preparation protocol for HPLC-MS analysis of
membrane proteins - Version 4
Start with 4 mL of an OD 1 culture to ensure enough total protein. Pellet the cells, resuspend
in around 1 mL of supernatant, and transfer to a new Eppendorf tube. Pellet cells again,
remove supernatant and freeze at -80◦C.
Cell lysis
Preparation: Set Thermo mixer to 99◦C. Make lysis buffer according to number of samples.
(See preparation of lysis buffer). After making lysis buffer, transfer the buffer to Eppendorf
tubes and place in Thermo mixer at 99◦C. Take samples from -80◦C freezer and put on ice.
1. Add 2 (3-mm zirconium oxide) beads to the cell pellet (while on ice).
2. Add xxx µl of hot lysis buffer (99◦C) to the cell pellet. (Most likely 300 - 400 µL).
3. 5 min in Tissuelyser at 25 Hz.
4. Boil in heat block (99 ◦C) for 10 min while shaking/mixing at 1800 rpm.
5. Centrifuge at 15,000 g for 10 minutes.
6. Transfer xxx µl supernatant (most likely 20 µL) to a new Eppendorf tube and add the
same volume of xxx mM Ambic (ammonium bicarbonate) to measure whole-cell extract
protein concentration.
7. Vortex mix the samples.
The samples can be frozen from this step. (Remember to vortex mix after freezer)
Measure whole-cell extract protein concentration. Follow: SOP 2. - Protein concentration
determination plate.
Protein solubilization
1. Add aliquot xxx µL, corresponding to 300-400 μg of protein, of the whole-cell extract as
starting material in a 2 mL Eppendorf tube.
2. Fill up to 1 mL with either high-salt (10 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris−HCl, pH 7.5)
or alkaline carbonate (10 mM EDTA, 100 mM Na2CO3, 100 mM NaCl, pH 11) buffer.
3. Incubate the solution at 4◦C for 30 minutes on a bench rotator.
4. Centrifuge 500 μL of each sample using V-shape filter Eppendorf tubes at 15,000 g for
15 minutes at 4◦C, repeat until the whole sample has been processed.
5. Wash twice with up to 500 μL of lysis buffer and discard the eluates.
6. Transfer 100μg left in the filter to a new Eppendorf tube.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
34
==PAGE:42==
7. Add 900 μL of either 2% Triton X-100, NP-40, or SDS detergent solution and transfer
to a new Eppendorf tube.
8. Incubate the solution at 4◦C for 30 minutes on a bench rotator.
9. Centrifuge 500 μL of each sample using the same V-shape filter Eppendorf tubes at
15,000 g for 15 minutes at 4◦C, repeat until the whole sample has been processed.
10. Wash twice with up to 500 μL of lysis buffer and discard the eluates.
11. Transfer 100μg left in the filter on a new Eppendorf tube.
12. Add 100 µL of 50 mM Ambic.
Measure whole-cell extract protein concentration. Follow: SOP 2. - Protein concentration
determination plate.
The rest of the samples should be kept on ice while measuring the whole-cell extract protein
concentration
FASP
1. Add 200 μg protein to 200-300 μl of UA buffer on the FASP filters (max. capacity is 500
μl). (Proteins had been reduced with DTT or TCEP prior to FASP).
2. Centrifuge at 14,000 g until most of the liquid has gone through (this takes around 15
min). Discard the flow-through from the collection tube.
3. Wash filter units with 200 μl of UA buffer. Discard the flow-through from the collection
tube.
4. Add 100 µl UA with 30 mM Chloroacetamide (CAA, MW = 93.51 g/mol). (CAA is mildly
light sensitive, to protect from light).
5. Incubate for 20 min in the dark
6. Centrifuge at 14,000 g until most of the liquid has gone through
7. Add 200 μL of UA to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 g. Repeat this step 2x in
total
8. Add 150 μL of 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 g. Repeat
this step for 2x in total.
9. Change adapter tube
Protein digestion
1. Proteins were digested in 40 µl of 0.1 µg/µl of trypsin and Lys-C mixture on the filter
(see preparation of trypsin buffer).
2. Incubate the units in a wet chamber (use program 7 in Thermomixer; fixed 8 hours at
37◦C, followed by xxx hours at 4◦C).
NEXT DAY
3. Centrifuge at 14,000 g for 10 min and do not discard flow through.
4. Add another 40 μL of Tris buffer and centrifuge again to eluate the remaining peptides.
Collect the pooled peptide eluates
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
35
==PAGE:43==
The samples can be frozen from this step. (Remember to vortex mix after freezer)
Peptide fractionation
For protein fractionation take 100μg from sample (40μL)
Perform peptide fractionation according to: Peptide fractionation SOP
OR
Desalting
For stage tipping take 20μg, dilute 8μL of sample into an Eppendorf with 32 μL of amBic
(vortex & spin it down)
Perform stage-tipping C18 according the SOP: Stagetipping C-18.
A.2
Desalting: Stagetipping C-18
Put 4 C18 filter plugs into a 200 µl tip (C18 stagetips, using special syringe) for each sample.
To the following steps:
Never let them dry longer than 2 minutes! (Max capacity around 20 µg, loading more you will
elute more hydrophobicpeptides).
Activate the C18 filters with (If problems getting the solvent/sample through increase the g by
500 and increase the time to 2 min):
• 1x 20 µl MeOH (1 min at 1000g at 20◦C)
• 1x 20 µl buffer B (80% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) (1 min at 1000g at 20◦C)
• 2x 20 µl buffer A´ (3% CH3CN, 1% TFA*) (1 min at 1000g at 20◦C)
• Spin samples through C18 column (1500 g, 2 min at 20◦C, depending on volume)
• Wash 2x with 20 µl buffer A (0.1% FA) ( 1 min at 1000g (1500g) at 20◦C). Do not let
C18 dry!!
**Can be stored at this time.
Change plate to elution plate, or new 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes
• Elute with 2x20 µl buffer B, (1 min at 1000g).
Keep at 4◦C.
**If stored: Keep at 4◦C until MS time with the C18 filter covered in Buffer A, store at -80◦C
for prolonged times.
Solvents *The preparation of 3% CH3CN, 1% FA: 96 ml Milli Q Water, 3 ml CH3CN, 1 ml
TFA.
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
36
==PAGE:44==
B
Scripts
The following appendices B.1 and B.2 present the main scripts written for construction of the
peptide list and analysis of the data derived from the various experiments.
B.1
In silico digestion script
1 import sys
2 import os
3 import os.path
4 import getopt
5 from Bio import SeqIO
6 import warnings
7 import numpy as np
8 from tensorflow import keras
9
10 warnings.simplefilter(action='ignore', category=FutureWarning)
11
12 ###Functions###
13 # Tryptic digestion - performs in silico tryptic digestion for input sequence
14 def TRYPSIN(proseq,miss_cleavage):
15
peptides=[]
16
cut_sites=[0]
17
for i in range(0,len(proseq)-1):
18
if proseq[i]=='K' and proseq[i+1]!='P':
19
cut_sites.append(i+1)
20
elif proseq[i]=='R' and proseq[i+1]!='P':
21
cut_sites.append(i+1)
22
23
if cut_sites[-1]!=len(proseq):
24
cut_sites.append(len(proseq))
25
26
if len(cut_sites)>2:
27
if
miss_cleavage==0:
28
for j in range(0,len(cut_sites)-1):
29
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[j]:cut_sites[j+1]])
30
31
elif miss_cleavage==1:
32
for j in range(0,len(cut_sites)-2):
33
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[j]:cut_sites[j+1]])
34
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[j]:cut_sites[j+2]])
35
36
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[-2]:cut_sites[-1]])
37
38
elif miss_cleavage==2:
39
for j in range(0,len(cut_sites)-3):
40
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[j]:cut_sites[j+1]])
41
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[j]:cut_sites[j+2]])
42
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[j]:cut_sites[j+3]])
43
44
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[-3]:cut_sites[-2]])
45
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[-3]:cut_sites[-1]])
46
peptides.append(proseq[cut_sites[-2]:cut_sites[-1]])
47
else: #there is no trypsin site in the protein sequence
48
peptides.append(proseq)
49
return peptides
50
51
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
37
==PAGE:45==
52
53 # DeepMS - Predicts the detectability of input peptides using a single dimension
54 # Convolutionar Neural Network , based on Tensorflow 1.13.1
55 def load_pep_and_codify(file, max_len):
56
aa_dict={'A':1,'R':2,'N':3,'D':4,'C':5,'Q':6,'E':7,'G':8,'H':9,'I':10,'L':11,
'K':12,'M':13,'F':14,
57
'P':15,'O':16,'S':17,'U':18,'T':19,'W':20,'Y':21,'V':22}
58
with open(file, 'r') as inf:
59
lines = inf.read().splitlines()
60
pep_codes=[]
61
long_pep_counter = 0
62
newLines = []
63
for pep in lines:
64
if not len(pep) > max_len:
65
current_pep=[]
66
for aa in pep:
67
current_pep.append(aa_dict[aa])
68
pep_codes.append(current_pep)
69
newLines.extend([pep])
70
else:
71
long_pep_counter += 1
72
predict_data = keras.preprocessing.sequence.pad_sequences(pep_codes , value=0,
padding='post', maxlen=max_len)
73
return predict_data , long_pep_counter , newLines
74
75
76
77 # Comand -line arguments
78 if len(sys.argv[1:]) <=1:
### Indicates that there are insufficient number of
command -line arguments
79
print ("Example: python trypsin.py --input input_filename --miss 1 --
outputfolder output_folder --prob_threshold thres")
80 else:
81
options , remainder = getopt.getopt(sys.argv[1:],'', ['input=',
82
'miss=',
83
'outputfolder=',
84
'prob_threshold='])
85
for opt, arg in options:
86
if opt == '--input': input_file=arg
87
elif opt == '--miss': n=int(arg)
#number of miss cleavage allowed
88
elif opt == '--outputfolder': output_folder=arg
89
elif opt == '--prob_threshold': thres=arg
90
else:
91
print ("Warning! Command -line argument: %s not recognized. Exiting...
") % opt; sys.exit()
92
93
94
95 #Get all the protein sequences from input file and calculate tryptic peptides
96 handle=SeqIO.parse(input_file ,'fasta')
97 fileName = '{0}_tp.txt'.format(input_file.split('.')[0])
98 output_tp=open(fileName ,'w')
99 for record in handle:
100
proseq=str(record.seq)
101
peptide_list=TRYPSIN(proseq,n)
102
for peptide in peptide_list:
103
if len(peptide) >= 9 and len(peptide) <= 15:
104
output_tp.write("%s\t%s\n" % (record.id,peptide))
105 output_tp.close()
106 print("Tryptic peptides saved to {}".format(fileName))
107
108
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
38
==PAGE:46==
109 #Create output directory and the path to it
110 os. makedirs(output_folder+'_'+thres)
111 path = os.getcwd()+"\\"+output_folder+'_'+thres+'\\'
112
113
114 #Write all the tryptic peptides of each protein in different files of max
lenength = 81
115 (prot_output ,prot_files) = ([],[])
116 l = 0
117 with open(fileName ,'r') as infile:
118
p_id = infile.readline().split("\t")[0]
119
for line in infile:
120
protein_id = line.split("\t")[0]
121
peptide = line.split("\t")[1]
122
if protein_id != p_id:
123
prot_output.append(peptide)
124
completename = os.path.join(path, p_id+".txt")
125
prot_files.append(completename)
126
outfile = open(completename ,'w')
127
for pep in prot_output:
128
outfile.write(pep)
129
outfile.close()
130
prot_output = []
131
p_id = protein_id
132
l = 0
133
elif protein_id == p_id:
134
prot_output.append(peptide)
135
if len(prot_output) == 81:
136
l += 1
137
completename = os.path.join(path, p_id+"_"+str(l)+".txt")
138
prot_files.append(completename)
139
outfile = open(completename ,'w')
140
for pep in prot_output:
141
outfile.write(pep)
142
outfile.close()
143
prot_output = []
144
145
146 #Import all the non unique peptides
147 non_unique = []
148 with open("Ecoli_Nonunique_pep.txt","r") as f:
149
for non_pep in f:
150
non_unique.append(non_pep[:-1])
151 print("List of non unique peptides made")
152
153 #Load the model
154 model_2_1D = keras.models.load_model('model_2_1D.h5')
155
156 #Make peptide predictions
157 (i,loaded ,skipped) = (0,0,0)
158 for infile in prot_files:
#
Loading input peptides
159
i+=1
160
predict_data , skipped ,
lines = load_pep_and_codify(infile , 81)
161
loaded += len(lines)
162
skipped += int(skipped)
163
model_2_1D_pred = model_2_1D.predict(predict_data)
#
Making predictions
164
model_2_1D_pred = np.hstack((np.array(lines).reshape(len(lines), 1),
model_2_1D_pred)).tolist()
165
166
Pred_output = []
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
39
==PAGE:47==
167
protein = infile.split("\\")
168
protein_ident = (protein[-1]).split('.')[0]
169
if protein_ident[-2] == "_":
170
protein_ident = protein_ident.split("_")[0]
171
for pred in model_2_1D_pred:
172
if (float(pred[1]) <= float(1-float(thres)) and (pred[0] not in
non_unique)):
173
Pred_output.append([protein_ident ,pred[0], str(1-float(pred[1])), '1
'])
174
175
176 #Write the results in a file
177
outFile = thres+('_{0}_Predictions.txt'.format(fileName.split('.')[0]))
178
if os.path.exists(os.getcwd()+"\\"+outFile) is False:
179
with open(outFile , 'w') as outf:
180
outf.write('Protein\tPeptide\tProb\tDetectability')
181
outf.writelines('\n'+'\t'.join(i) for i in Pred_output)
182
elif os.path.exists(os.getcwd()+"\\"+outFile) is True:
183
with open(outFile , "a") as outf:
184
outf.writelines('\n'+'\t'.join(i) for i in Pred_output)
185
186
187 print("Succesfully loaded "+str(i)+" files in "+str(output_folder+'_'+thres)+"
folder.")
188 print('Succesfully loaded {0} peptides and skipped {1} peptides in total.'.format
(loaded ,skipped))
Listing B.1: Script to perform in silico tryptic digestion for detectability threshold of interest
B.2
Identification of expressed proteins script
1 import re
2 import pandas as pd
3 import sys,getopt
4 from Bio import ExPASy
5 from Bio import SwissProt
6
7 # Comand -line arguments
8 if len(sys.argv[1:]) <=1:
### Indicates that there are insufficient number of
command -line arguments
9
print ("Warning! wrong command , please read the mannual in Readme.txt.")
10
print ("Example: python expressed_prots.py --threshold thres --theoretical
infile --outfile output_name --pep_list pep_filename")
11 else:
12
options , remainder = getopt.getopt(sys.argv[1:],'', ['threshold=',
13
'theoretical=',
14
'outfile=',
15
'pep_list='])
16
for opt, arg in options:
17
if opt == '--outfile': outfile=arg
18
elif opt == '--threshold': thres=float(arg)
19
elif opt == '--theoretical': theor_file=arg
20
elif opt == '--pep_list': outfile_pep=arg
21
else:
22
print ("Warning! Command -line argument: %s not recognized. Exiting...
") % opt; sys.exit()
23
24
25 #Import all the proteins and their expression level
26 initial_df = pd.read_csv ('log_tpm.csv')
27 data = pd.DataFrame(columns=['ProteinID','Gene', 'wt_glc_mean'])
28
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
40
==PAGE:48==
29 #Read through file of all the theoretical membrane proteins of e.coli
30 mem_prot = []
31 with open("membrane -ecoli.txt","r") as infile:
32
for row in infile:
33
if row != None:
34
mem_prot.append(row[:-1])
35
36 unmatched = []
37 for prot in mem_prot:
38
r = SwissProt.read(ExPASy.get_sprot_raw(prot))
39
gene_info = r.gene_name
40
gene = re.search(r"\bOrderedLocusNames=(b[0-9]+)\b",gene_info)
41
if gene != None:
42
for row in range(0,initial_df.shape[0]):
43
if initial_df['Unnamed: 0'][row] == gene.group(1):
44
val1 = initial_df['control__wt_glc__1'][row]
45
val2 = initial_df['control__wt_glc__2'][row]
46
mean = float((val1+val2)/2)
47
data = data.append({'ProteinID': prot ,'Gene' : initial_df['
Unnamed: 0'][row], 'wt_glc_mean':mean},ignore_index=True)
48
elif gene == None:
49
unmatched.append((prot))
50
51 #Identify proteins with expression level higher than the threshold
52 valid_prot = []
53 for row in range(0,data.shape[0]):
54
if data['wt_glc_mean'][row] >= thres:
55
valid_prot.append(data['ProteinID'][row])
56
57 in_data = pd.read_csv (theor_file , sep='\t')
58 final = in_data.loc[in_data.Accession.isin(valid_prot)]
59 final.to_csv(outfile , sep ='\t', index=False)
60
61 #Count matches between expressed proteins and the theoretical list
62 total_prot = len(final.Accession.unique())
63 total_pep = final.shape[0]
64 print("Total peptides:",total_pep ,"\n")
65 print("Total proteins:",total_prot ,"\n")
66
67 #Save the matches in a file
68 header = ["ProtID"]
69 final.Peptide_Seq.to_csv(outfile_pep , sep ='\t', index=False, header=False)
Listing B.2: Script for identification of expressed proteins and comparison with proteins derived from performing
in silico digestion
Absolute quantitative membrane proteomics
41
==PAGE:49==
Technical
University of
Denmark
B220 Kemitorvet
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
