==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Numerical investigation of the wake-diffusion 
rotor concept
Dmitrij Mordasov
DTU Wind Energy-M-0500
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0500 
July 2022
Project period: 
November 2021 - July 2022
ECTS: 45
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Paul van der Laan
Mads Chr. Baungaard
DTU Wind Energy
Simon Watson
TU Delft
Andreas Knauer
Equinor
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education 
at the Technical University of 
Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Dmitrij Mordasov
Title: Numerical investigation of the wake-
diffusion rotor concept
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the growing global utilisation of wind energy, lowering of its levelised cost of energy
is pursued. This effort is hindered by wind turbine wakes and their detrimental effects on
wind farm profitability. Most currently researched wake mitigation methods are based on
wind farm system-level interventions, and there is a research gap on individual wind turbine
design wake alleviation measures.
This thesis investigates the wake-diffusion rotor concept, a wind turbine design with an
outboard shifted thrust distribution along the blade, and its effects on wake mitigation and
power generation in wind farms.
Three wind turbine rotors with equivalent thrust coefficient are modelled as actuator disks
in a RANS CFD software PyWakeEllipSys, corresponding to an inboard shifted thrust
distribution, a conventional thrust distribution, and an outboard shifted thrust distribution
representing the wake-diffusion rotor concept. Investigated scenarios include a single wind
turbine and rows of three and ten wind turbines aligned to the inflow. Compared to the
baseline case, outboard thrust distribution produces lower wake velocity deficits, increased
momentum transfer and increased turbulence generation. The wake-diffusion rotor concept
increases the wind farm power generation by 3.8 % and 2.5 % in the three and ten wind
turbine row scenarios respectively, with the largest relative gain in wind turbine power of
13.9 % for the second wind turbine in the row. Consecutive wind turbines in the experience
diminishing gains. The inboard shifted thrust distribution had opposite effects for all of these
aspects.
The benefits in wake mitigation and power generation in wind farms from using the wake-
diffusion rotor concept are concluded to come from higher turbulence mixing caused by the
outboard shifted thrust distribution. Recommendations on its use for maximum effectiveness
are given. Future research could focus on the design implementation of this concept, investigate
combinations with other wake mitigation methods and perform parametric wind farm AEP
studies.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
When Maarten Paul van der Laan sat in on my first meeting with another DTU senior
researcher, whom I was trying to set up my master’s thesis with, I took little notice of the ”Oh,
I just recently heard this talk at WESC about this interesting concept...” with which he first
introduced to me the concept that this thesis is based on. However, the idea had time to mari-
nate in my head, I recognised its ingenuity, and a month later I was reaching out to him to set
up this thesis. Some of the best things in life you just sort of stumble into, and I really can not
imagine that I could have had anyone better for my main supervisor than Paul. Your expertise
in this field, approach to scientific work and kindheartedness made your help and guidance the
best I could have asked for. Thanks to you, I enjoyed my master’s thesis experience immensely.
My most heartfelt thanks also go to my DTU co-supervisor Mads Christian Baungaard,
who listened to the same talk with Paul, explored the concept himself and came up with
the idea of turning this concept’s investigation into a thesis project in the first place. As a
finishing PhD student, you could sympathize with me like no one else, and provided me with
invaluable practical advice (not to mention code) - along with those nice coffee talks.
Special thanks to Andreas Knauer, the inventor of the concept investigated in this thesis,
who helped me immensely by discussing his inspiration and insights about the concept. I
am also grateful to Prof. Dr. Simon Watson, who supervised my thesis project on the TU
Delft’s side. I would be remiss in not mentioning DTU senior researcher Athanasios Barlas
who provided me with some relevant literature for the study.
None of this would be possible without all the support by my family throughout the years.
Thank you for letting me truly relax in those rare moments when I came back home, and my
dog Vajt´ık for always giving me a warm welcome.
Last but not least, I have nothing but love for everyone else who was a part of my life during
this milestone period of my life. This includes all my roommates, friends and co-workers.
Thank you for enduring my rants about debugging and failed CFD simulations.
Glory to God.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wake Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Study Aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Study’s Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Assumptions, Scope and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Wake Diffusion
5
2.1
Wind Turbine Wakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Wake Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Wake Research Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Wake Diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Method
15
3.1
PyWakeEllipSys and EllipSys3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Numerical Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Other parameters, controlled variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results and Discussion
29
4.1
Single Wind Turbine Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Row Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Design Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Conclusion
45
A Wake-diffusion Rotor Design
48
A.1 HAWC2S, PyWakeEllipSys Airfoil AD Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.2 WDR 10 MW Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.3 Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
References
57
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Greek Symbols
α
Angle of attack
[deg]
ϵ
Turbulent kinetic energy dissipation
[m2 s−3]
λ
Tip speed ratio
[-]
µ
Dynamic viscosity
[kg m−1 s−1]
ν
Kinematic viscosity
[m2 s−1]
δ
Dimensionless radial distance defined in Subsection 3.1.3
[-]
ρ
Density
[kg m−3]
Latin Symbols
⟨UAD⟩Disk averaged velocity
[m s−1]
Cµ
Turbulence model constant
[-]
CD
Drag coefficient
[-]
CL
Lift coefficient
[-]
CP
Power coefficient
[-]
CT
Thrust coefficient
[-]
D
Rotor diameter
[m]
fθ
Dimensionless azimuthal force
[-]
fT
Dimensionless thrust force
[-]
I
Turbulence intensity
[-]
k
Momentum transfer
[s−2]
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
[m2 s−2]
P
Power
[W]
iv
==PAGE:7==
R
Rotor radius
[m]
r
Radial distance along rotor blade
[m]
T
Thrust
[N]
UH
Freestream velocity at hub height
[m s−1]
x, y, z Main coordinate system - normal (streamwise), lateral and vertical
[m]
Abbreviations
AD
Actuator Disk
AEP Annual Energy Production
BC
Boundary Condition
BEM Blade Element Momentum
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics
DNS Direct Numerical Simulation
DRWT Dual Rotor Wind Turbine
DTU Technical University of Denmark (DAN: Danmarks Tekniske Universitet)
HPC High Performance Computing
LCoE Levelised Cost of Energy
LES
Large Eddy Simulation
MRWT Multi Rotor Wind Turbine
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory
RANS Reynolds-Averaged Navier Stokes
RWT Reference Wind Turbine
VLM Vortex Lattice Method
WESC Wind Energy Science Conference
WT
Wind Turbine
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this Introduction, the general context of this master’s thesis project is given in Section 1.1,
explaining the significance of wind energy science research today. This is followed by Section
1.2 with a description of the relevant research problems currently being examined in this
field, and the research gap present which this study fills. The aims of the study in the form
of research questions are given in Section 1.3, followed by the implications that answering
these questions would have in the field of wind science energy in Section 1.4. After listing
the main assumptions, limitations and scope of this investigation in Section 1.5, this chapter
finishes with Section 1.6, outlining the paper’s structure.
1.1
Motivation
Not only is there a push for low or no carbon electricity generation technologies in today’s
energy sector, but the electrification of still heavily fossil-fuel dependent energy sectors, such
as heating and transport, coupled with rapidly increasing global energy demand, all increase
the appeal of wind energy [1]. Wind energy is a low-cost, clean and proven mainstream
energy source, whose role in the energy mix is predicted to grow 15-fold by the year 2050,
from being responsible for 5 % of current global energy production to up to 33 % - with a
large portion of this possibly being from offshore wind [2, 3]. The science of wind energy
is identified to have three grand challenges to solve [1], the future research of which could
perhaps lead to wind energy even exceeding these current growth estimates [4].
The first two of these identified challenges pertain to 1) Improved understanding of atmo-
spheric and wind farm flow physics, and 2) Aerodynamics, structural dynamics, and offshore
wind hydrodynamics of enlarged wind turbines, with the third one being about electricity
grid integration. Wind turbine wakes are a phenomenon in which the energy extraction of a
wind turbine affects the flow downstream of the original wind turbine, causing downstream
wind turbines in a wind farm to experience this altered flow. The effects of these wakes are
mostly negative - they lower win turbine lifetimes, annual energy production and, overall,
the profitability of wind farms [5].
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Wake Research
2
1.2
Wake Research
Considering wind turbine wakes from the point of view of the first challenge, wakes are a key
aspect to understanding wind farm flow physics. Taking an aerodynamics perspective, the
extraction of energy by wind turbines leaves behind a flow with less kinetic energy to extract
- a wake with a velocity deficit, along with a more turbulent structure due to the forces the
first wind turbine exerted upon it. The pursuit of understanding and mitigating these wake
structures, and thus their effects, spawned large active areas of wake research. The proposed
wake mitigation strategies are often on a wind-farm level, and include the fields of layout
optimisation, wind farm level control schemes and more.
Researchers tackling the second challenge - that of individual wind turbine design - have a
different set of tools and problems. Their main goal could be characterised as, in the big
overall picture, trying to optimise the profitability of single wind turbines by trading off
power capture against the costs and lifetimes of the individual wind turbine components.
However, due to wakes, both power capture and wind turbine lifetimes suffer. The wind
turbines they design create the wakes that not only they, but also the researchers focusing on
the first challenge, have to solve.
Even though their overlaying objective - developing the field of wind energy - is shared
between the two respective challenge areas, there is a research gap present between these two
fields of research with different specific problems, goals and methodologies. However, what
if, just like Veers et al. [1] calls for, these challenges were combined and solved in a more
interdisciplinary manner?
It is this research gap that this study attempts to fill. The ’wake-diffusion rotor concept’
takes one of the main tools of the wind turbine designer, the wind turbine blade, and asks
- ”Can we design this blade to mitigate wakes?” Can the problem, the wind turbine rotor
causing the wake in the first place, also be the solution? By changing the blade geometry
and thus the aerodynamics of the wake, Knauer [6] in his patent of the wake-diffusion rotor
proposes exactly that.
The wake-diffusion rotor has intentionally minimal power extraction near the root of the
wind turbine blade, making it suboptimal for wind turbine power generation. However, this
design brings about ’ventilation’ of the wind flow through the rotor’s centre, and lets a jet of
high-energy wind, whose kinetic energy was not extracted, into the wake, accelerating wake
diffusion. The mitigated wakes, in a wind farm scenario, should theoretically lead to higher
power capture of the downstream wind turbines. If balanced well, the small cost in individual
wind turbine power generation could pay for itself in increased wind farm power generation [6].
1.3
Study Aims
For the purpose of this study, the wake-diffusion rotor concept is generalised to be a wind
turbine, which has the majority of its thrust distribution in the outer radial part of the rotor
==PAGE:10==
1.4 Study’s Significance
3
- that is outboard, closer to the edges of the blades. Inspired by this novel concept which
has gained very little research attention so far, this investigation could be considered to
be a feasibility study of the wake-diffusion rotor concept. The research questions could be
summarised to be:
• Can shifting the wind turbine’s rotor thrust distribution affect its wake dissipation?
• If so, how is this effect achieved?
• What is the order of magnitude of this effect in terms of power capture gains for wind
farms?
1.4
Study’s Significance
This study hopes to develop several insights for the field of wind energy science.
The evidence generated in this study and its analysis should ascertain the role that rotor
thrust distributions, and individual wind turbine design in general, play in wake management.
Subsequently, this study should provide a more solid theoretical starting ground for anyone
in the field of wind energy science interested in developing this concept further, providing
suggestions for future research.
Wake model developers could also use these insights to improve the fidelity of the existing and
future wake models, by taking the effects of thrust distributions of modelled wind turbines
into account.
If the concept addressed by this study has its feasibility proven and further developed, this
could provide wind turbine designers with a new parameter for their design space - the thrust
distribution across the wind turbine blades, and thus its effect on the wake. In the long run,
this follows in line with a shift from individual wind turbine design to that of wind farm
systems, as called for by Veers et al. [1].
1.5
Assumptions, Scope and Limitations
This study will confine itself to the aerodynamics aspects and implications of the wake-
diffusion rotor concept only, overlooking structural, dynamic, hydrodynamic and control
considerations. Some possible engineering ways of achieving the concept’s effects are theoreti-
cally explored. However, a design of the wake-diffusion rotor on any level extending above its
thrust distribution is not considered to be a deliverable of this study. The aerodynamic scales
of motion to be addressed will only be on the microscale level of wind farms, overlooking
mesoscale interactions.
The numerical investigation method used - a Reynolds-Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS)
based computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solver - is considered high fidelity enough to
confirm the validity of identified trends and the order of magnitude of supposed benefits.
However, the exact quantification of magnitudes of these benefits in terms of, for example,
==PAGE:11==
1.6 Thesis Outline
4
power generation, is left for future research.
1.6
Thesis Outline
Following this introduction, Chapter 2 gives the results of a conducted literature study,
featuring an overview of the required theoretical background to grasp this study. This is
followed by a description of this paper’s numerical investigation method in Chapter 3. The
results and their analysis, including a discussion, are in Chapter 4. The conclusions made
from the investigation and recommendations for further work are given in Chapter 5. Finally,
Appendix A contains a design exploration of the wake-diffusion rotor concept.
==PAGE:12==
5
Chapter 2
Wake Diffusion
This chapter contains theoretical background required for understanding the concept investi-
gated by this thesis, along with the results of the literature review conducted on this topic.
It is beyond the scope of this thesis to fully describe the physics of the wake phenomena
and its diffusion, along with listing all the possible wake diffusion methods. However, an
explanation that should make the reader better understand wakes and the problem posed
by them in a wind farm settings is given in Section 2.1. Current state of wake modelling is
described in Section 2.2, after which the main wake mitigation research areas are outlined in
Section 2.3, to better show the place of the wake-diffusion concept relative to the current
state of wake mitigation research. Wake diffusion as a concept is introduced in more detail in
Section 2.4, describing the wake-diffusion rotor concept and its inspiration, and includes a
review of methods which could be used to achieve it.
2.1
Wind Turbine Wakes
Two main engineering coefficients that non-dimensionalise the capabilities of a wind turbine
are used in the science of wind energy.
The first one, power coefficient CP, usually defined for a whole rotor, is presented in Equa-
tion 2.1, and represents the effectiveness of a wind turbine’s ability to extract power from
the wind [7]. To better understand it, a value of CP = 1 would mean complete extraction
of all kinetic energy from the freestream - a physical impossibility. A theoretical limit of
CP max = 0.593 was derived, known as the Betz limit [8]. P represents the power generated
by the wind turbine, ρ and U∞are the freestream wind density, and A represents the wind
turbine’s rotor area.
CP =
P
1
2ρU 3
∞A
(2.1)
The second coefficient - thrust coefficient CT - defined for a local thrust dT on an annular
element is given by Equation 2.2, in which r is the radial position along the rotor and R its
maximum radius [7].
CT =
Z R
0
dT
1
2ρU 2
∞2πrdr
(2.2)
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Wake Modeling
6
The wind turbine, in the simplest terms, generates power by extracting kinetic energy from
the freestream. The axial momentum lost in the wake is collected by the wind turbine
electrical generator attached to the rotor shaft [5], and is associated with this thrust force
due to the work done upon the rotor, so far considered as an actuator disk (AD). Wind
turbine wakes are a physical phenomenon, the consequence of this energy extraction process,
and the flow’s loss of momentum and the forces exerted upon it by the rotor result in a flow
with a velocity deficit and increased levels of turbulence. It is common to discern between
near and far wake regions, with the near wake (distance up to a few rotor diameters away)
being of high interest for research relating to individual wind turbine performance, and the
far wake being more relevant to studying the performance of wind farms [9]. The velocity
deficit and the increased turbulence negatively affect the downstream wind turbines, easily
reducing power output by 10-20 % in wind farms and increasing fatigue loads - which means
diminished profits and wind turbine lifetimes [5, 10].
The main parameters that wake losses depend on include inter-turbine spacings (most often
given in terms of rotor diameters in the field of wake research), wind speeds, wind direction,
turbulence intensity and atmospheric stability [5]. The presence of ground and complex
terrain also has its impact, as does the atmospheric stability [9].
On a deeper aerodynamic analysis, the tip vortices shed by the blade’s trailing edge, describing
helical trajectories immediately downstream of the rotor, have properties such as path, twist
angle and strength which impact the behaviour of the wake in the far region. This helix can also
be interpreted as a shear layer, separating the slower-moving wake and the outside freestream
air [9]. It is the destabilisation and consequent breakdown of this helix that allows for mixing
of the wake and the ambient flow, causing further breakdown of the vortices and kinetic
energy entrainment in the wake - a process which can be accelerated by higher turbulence [11].
This thesis will concern itself mainly with the wake-diffusion rotor concept, and thus the
cause and effect of the wake diffusion mechanism. Thus, the effect of the wake regions’
increased turbulence on wind turbine blade structural loads and fatigue damage, along with
other aspects, are to be considered outside the scope of the thesis. Where the significance of
varying wind turbine blade load distributions will be considered, it will be for the sake of the
wake aerodynamics. On top of the wake itself, power capture of wind turbine arrays will be
investigated as it is an easily quantifiable parameter which has significant implications on
wind farm profitability. There is an applicable rule of thumb that ”...each 1 % increase in
[wind farm] energy production reduces the LCoE by 1 %” that could be kept in mind [5].
2.2
Wake Modeling
In this relatively early stage of wind farm wake mitigation research, numerical studies dom-
inate the literature due to the associated difficulties and costs of physical measurement
campaigns, and will also be the main method employed in this thesis. For a simplified
overview of the applied numerical models, consider a scale going from low to high fidelity,
starting with engineering models, followed by computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods
ranging from RANS and large eddy simulations (LES) to direct numerical simulations (DNS).
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Wake Research Areas
7
A more thorough treatment of these CFD models is given in Subsection 3.1.1.
Low fidelity engineering models, especially considering the Jensen model [12] and its expanded
forms, are the widespread standard used for wake modelling currently. In the Jensen model,
the velocity deficit is a function of the upstream wind turbine’s overall thrust coefficient CT -
not its distribution. Whilst fine for certain purposes, in applications such as understanding
the effect of blade load distributions, active wake control or other wake flow phenomena, more
realistic and detailed descriptions of the flow, wake geometry, vorticity and further parameters
are required [5, 11]. There are certain parameters - such as the wake dissipation parameter in
Jensen’s model - that can be tuned to account for the specific characteristics of the wake for
the given scenario, one of which can be the wind turbine’s thrust distribution. This way, the
effect of thrust distribution could be included in these currently used models, even if indirectly.
A number of studies [13–15] remark the importance of thrust distribution on the behaviour
of the wake, noting especially the behaviour of the near-wake varying under changing thrust
distributions. One important note taken from the study is that in terms of wake velocity and
turbulence profiles, cases with higher background turbulence were captured more accurately,
thus emphasising the importance of including turbulence effects in wake analysis when running
similar simulations. The k-ε turbulence closure model was also found preferable to others for
its high agreement with the measured values [13] - whose improved version is used in this
study, as described in Subsection 3.1.2.
It could be noted that physical, scaled wind turbine models tested in wind tunnels have been
confirmed recently by Wang et al. [16] to produce wakes extremely similar to corresponding
full-scaled ones, especially above approximately x/D = 4, considering the most usual wake
metrics such as the wake deficit, turbulence intensity and shear stresses. However, often
due to the facilities available, the researched wake is confined to short distances, usually not
extending beyond x/D = 5 [17–19], and often much less. Despite this positive assessment,
the prohibitive costs and complexities of experimental aerodynamic campaigns explain the
research community’s preference for numerical studies.
2.3
Wake Research Areas
All the problems associated with wind turbine wakes have lead to the birth and growth of
many research areas into alleviating the wake and its effects on wind farms. What follows in
this section is an overview of the main wake mitigation methods found in the current relevant
literature.
2.3.1
Layout optimisation
Layout optimisation is currently a large and active field of research, focusing on varying wind
farm layouts (position and spacing of wind turbines) in order to maximise power capture
through minimising wake losses. An interested reader is pointed to the work of Herbert et al.
[20] for a comprehensive overview of the problem of wind farm design optimisation. It should
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Wake Research Areas
8
be noted that power capture is just a single aspect of multidisciplinary optimisation in this
area, as factors such as civil engineering infrastructure, electrical interconnections and more
often play part in the optimisation problem.
2.3.2
Sector Management
Sector management is a simple approach taken in wind farms with severe wake effects, consist-
ing of shutting down wind turbines in certain problematic conditions (e.g. a combination of a
high wind speed and a certain direction), preventing excessive fatigue loading and vibration
issues [5]. Increasing wind farm yields is also possible, as shown by Haces-Fernandez et al.
[21]. With more understanding of the wake effects for a given scenario, the strategy’s negative
impact on energy production can be lessened by for example derating the upstream wind
turbines only, which introduces the next wake mitigation means.
2.3.3
Axial Induction Control
Axial induction control is a wake management concept that tries to reduce the velocity
deficits of the wakes impacting downstream wind turbines by varying the induction factor of
upstream wind turbines, generally decreasing the production of the upstream wind turbines
whilst resulting in an overall power production increase over a wind farm [11]. However,
whilst the technique seems to be mainly based around lowering the wind turbine’s thrust, an
opposite approach of operating the wind turbines at higher thrust is explored by Mart´ınez
et al.[15] (highly reminiscent of the wake-diffusion rotor concept, treated in more detail
in Subsection 2.4.2). This research area seems to lack in high-fidelity simulations (studies
are mostly using engineering wake models rather than CFD) and field tests, along with a
consensus on the best practices of its implementation, but may have the potential to provide
single-digit percentage increases in wind farm annual energy production (AEP) [11].
2.3.4
Wake Steering (Yaw Control)
Wake steering through yaw control tries to maximise wind turbine array power production
through yawing upstream wind turbines, and thus ‘steering‘ the produced wake, once again
leading to increased power production of downstream turbines through either deflecting the
wakes or forcing their interaction. Appears to hold more promise than axial induction control
for power maximisation, due to higher quality of research at the present time [11].
2.3.5
Dynamic Induction Control
Dynamic induction control is a very recent wake management technique, in which a dynamic
set point for wind turbines is used in order to manipulate the wake instabilities and have
them interact in order to accelerate vorticity decay, increase turbulent mixing and thus speed
up wake recovery (well explained in Houck and Cowen [22], and investigated by Munters and
Mayers [23, 24]). Whilst there seems to be a large potential for power capture gain, there are
concerns over additional caused loads, and much more further research is required (especially)
for implementation in wind farms, but remains a possible future wake mitigation strategy [11].
==PAGE:16==
2.4 Wake Diffusion
9
In VerHulst and Menevau [25], a synthetic vertical forcing is applied to an AD model in a
LES simulation, conceptually mimicking ”...the effects of, e.g., rotor tilting or fast-acting
blade control schemes, which could generate net thrust components in the vertical directions
by suitably-controlled angle-dependent pitch variations.” The conclusion of the study was
that a significant increase in the wake kinetic energy entrainment could be gained thanks to
this unconventional actuator disk forcing, increasing power extraction [25].
An example of the above may be seen in a relatively novel investigation of Frederik et al.
[26], increasing downstream wake mixing by disturbing the wake through dynamic individual
pitch control - that is, actuating pitch servos on individual wind turbine blades. The study’s
results affirm this to be a viable approach for increasing power production in wind farms,
with possibly lower variations in power, thrust and thus loading than dynamic induction
control.
2.3.6
External Wind Farm Devices
In what may be the most avant-garde way to mitigate wake effects found in current literature
so far, an investigation by Bader et al. [27] claims that placing external devices (supported
stationary structures, mostly based on airfoils) in the wakes of wind turbines can have signifi-
cant wake mitigation potential. These could displace the upstream turbine’s wake away from
the one downstream, or in some cases even accelerate the wind impacting the downstream tur-
bine. This could be considered as an interesting take on wake steering through external means.
2.4
Wake Diffusion
In this section, the wake-diffusion rotor concept will be introduced, along with a selection of
literature pertaining to it. The investigated concept could be considered quite novel, and it
has garnered little attention in the current research community so far, such that evidence
for the concept’s working mechanism and possible means of achieving or utilising it must be
extracted from other insights in relevant fields. Many of these concepts have been found in
NREL’s multidisciplinary literature review ‘Investigation of Innovative Rotor Concepts for
the Big Adaptive Rotor Project‘, conducted by Johnson et al. [28].
2.4.1
The Wake-diffusion Rotor Concept
The wake-diffusion rotor concept, as described in the patent by Knauer [6] of Equinor, is the
inspiration that lead to the investigation in this thesis. The main idea behind the concept is
that a wind turbine blade, commonly optimised for power capture (coupled with structural,
aeroelastic and economic considerations), could rather be designed to produce a wind turbine
wake that would dissipate more quickly than for the conventional design. Whilst there would
be a small loss in the power capture of an individual wind turbine (as it would no longer be
optimised for power capture), on a wind-farm level, the faster-dissipating wake would lead
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Wake Diffusion
10
to consecutive downstream wind turbines to be able to extract more energy from the flow,
leading to higher overall AEP.
This rotor blade geometry would, at the root section (where the blade is often thicker and
with higher chord length due to structural reasons), ‘ventilate‘ the incoming wind - the
root section is no longer designed for optimum power extraction as in conventional design -
extracting less kinetic energy around the centre of the rotor plane and thus creating a jet
of fast flowing air in the centre of the wake. The outer part of the blades remains shaped
for maximum power extraction. This creates a load distribution on the rotor that produces
a wake in which the additional kinetic energy from the ventilated inner section produces
additional shear with the helical vortices shed by the wake, increasing turbulence, promoting
mixing of the wake and thus effectively mitigating it more quickly. The concept was first
successfully tested numerically, later followed by physical wind tunnel tests (on a 3-WT
model row) [6].
This concept, through personal correspondence with Knauer, was found to be inspired by
older research on bluff-body drag reduction as shown in Suryanarayana et al. [29], in which
a hole was made through the centre of the sphere at its stagnation point. The ventilation
provided by this has reportedly reduced the drag of the sphere by more than half, adding
additional mass, momentum and energy to the near wake, the width of which was reported
to be constantly changing (more than for a solid sphere), implying increased turbulence and
thus mixing.
2.4.2
Wind Turbine Rotors Under High Thrust
A most relevant proposed model can be found in Mart´ınez-Tossas et al. [15], which inves-
tigates the effect of increasing the thrust coefficient CT of the wind turbine to very high
levels. Increased wake turbulence and accelerated wake recovery is attributed to the higher
CT operation, and the distribution of this thrust along the blade was not neglected. Three
ways of achieving the high CT = 1.3 in this numerical investigation are utilised - varying
(1) turbine rotations per minute (RPM), (2) pitch or (3) prescribing constant CT along
the blade. Varying turbine RPM has been found to ”...generate the largest difference of
loading throughout the blade. This difference comes from the higher relative velocities from
increasing the rotational speed.” [15] The effect of this was a strongly outboard-shifted thrust
distribution along the wind turbine blade, resulting in the largest Reynolds stress production,
and faster wake dissipation than the other two operational modes with the same CT. This
further supports the notion behind the Equinor blade’s load distribution.
2.4.3
Dual-Rotor Wind Turbine
Dual-rotor wind turbines (DRWTs) have already been found to theoretically surpass the
well-known Betz limit of 59.3 % back in 1986 by Newman [30], showing that a DRWT of an
equivalent size to a conventional rotor can achieve a larger power coefficient CP, allowing
up to 64 % kinetic energy capture from the freestream wind. The analysis of the wake of
==PAGE:18==
2.4 Wake Diffusion
11
such a DRWT is one of the main goals of the investigation by Rosenberg et al. [31], in
which a DRWT is designed with both increased capture and faster wake recovery in mind.
A LES simulation of this concept does lead to an increased power generation (of about
4.6 %), yet does not find any conclusive evidence pertaining to wake recovery. However, the
simulation was run only for long enough for the wake to convect itself roughly once down the
computational domain (x/D = 8 long), and wake field variables are averaged over an even
shorter period of time, likely leading to a statistically unconverged solution that suggests
insufficiency of data for wake analysis purposes. This is highly unfortunate, as the higher
energy extraction in the middle of the rotor area near the root could have provided some
insight, being an ‘opposite‘ design modification compared to that of the wake-diffusion rotor
concept.
2.4.4
Multi-Rotor Wind Turbine
It could be argued that a multi-rotor wind turbine (MRWT) design mimics the proposed
wake diffusion mechanism by having a ’hole’ in its middle (near the root), where it lets
the freestream flow through, thus emulating a single rotor with a strongly varying load
distribution such as the Equinor concept. Faster wake recovery for a MRWT is found in
investigations of van der Laan et al. [32] (field measurement) and of Ghaisas et al. [33] (LES).
A prompt towards discerning the physical mechanism behind the faster wake recovery is
made in the latter, and it is likely that MRWTs share some similarity with the wake-diffusion
rotor concept in this case, as discussed in Subsection 4.2.3.
2.4.5
Blade geometry
In Kelley et al. [34], there are some very interesting insights found in a vortex-lattice method
(VLM) investigation of the wake of two different blade designs, having an identical integrated
CT over the blade yet different blade loads, with blade B being unloaded in the last 25 %
of the blade span near the tip. The wake produced by (conventional) blade A recovers less
quickly in the near wake (before x/D = 5) than the power-suboptimal blade B, and this
concludes that ”... larger spanwise gradients of bound circulation and larger induced angular
velocity exhibit shorter and faster mixing far-wakes...”, with evidence that it is not vertical
momentum transfer as much as the angular momentum of the wake leading to this faster
breakdown [34]. It should be noted that the velocity deficit of the more-loaded blade A does
become lower than that of B, but only in the far wake above x/D = 5. Design B wake width
decreases faster than that of design A. It is also interesting that this loading is basically
the opposite of the one in wake-diffusion rotor concept as presented by Knauer [6]. The
conclusions of this study are slightly questionable, as the VLM simulation was ran for such a
short time that it would have allowed for only roughly two passes of an air particle through
the wake domain, once again likely leading to statistically unconverged results (as in the
DRWT LES study mentioned before [31]).
This design relying on the decreased wake velocity deficit in the distance not so far from the
original wind turbine downstream has also been patented by the same Kelley et al. [35], with
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Wake Diffusion
12
much reasoning borrowed from the previous work [34]. It is interesting how both this and the
design by Knauer, whilst almost directly conflicting with how the thrust distribution for wake
diffusion is spread across the wind turbine blade, are both believed by their respective authors
to increase wind farm yields through the wake diffusion mechanism. Kelley et al. attribute
the said wake diffusion to increased tangential velocity or angular momentum stemming
from the increased inboard blade loading, leading to larger axial velocity gradients in the
near wake assumed to affect the wake’s stability. Do note that since the effect from the
given load distribution is confined to a shorter distance downstream, it is also the idea of the
patent to place the wind turbines in this region as well. However, as previously mentioned,
the insufficiency of the data in the original study [34] do raise doubts as to the conclusions
pertaining to the optimum thrust distribution for faster wake recovery. The investigation
present in this thesis can clarify this issue.
Moving on, the relatively recent study by Moghadassian and Sharma [36] shows great support
for the wake-diffusion rotor concept. In it, an inverse design approach is taken, varying rotor
geometry (chord length, twist) of wind turbines in order to optimise wind farm power capture.
Using a RANS AD model, it achieves about a 6.5 % CP increase (averaged over the wind
turbine array) in a 10-WT row. Analysing the farm-optimised blade geometry, the main
changes are made for the blade’s chord, in which its distribution changes such that the chord
decreases (compared to baseline NREL 5MW RWT) at the root, and increases near the tip.
The discussion in the study closely follows the reasoning of the wake-diffusion rotor concept,
mentioning the passing of high-momentum air into the wake to promote wake diffusion and
thus reduce the velocity deficit at downstream wind turbines.
A similar optimisation investigation is done by Allen et al. [37]. In one of the case studies
present, a blade chord distribution is optimised for the sake of increasing the entrainment of
kinetic energy for a single wind turbine, leading to the fastest wake re-energisation. This has
resulted, once again, in a chord distribution where the blade chord at the root was decreased
and increased near the tip. It should be noted that in this study, while the increased thrust
lead to higher velocity deficits in the near wake, the entrained kinetic energy resulted in
greater wake recovery (beyond x/D = 2) downstream.
A bioinspired swept blade design was recently experimentally investigated by Nafi et al. [19],
leading to a conclusion that such a design could be beneficial for use in wind farms. The
investigated blade design produced results which showed a significantly lower momentum
deficit and turbulent kinetic energy production compared to a conventional, straight wind
turbine blade. The swept design seems to benefit from reduced load fluctuations and lower
drag from a higher lift-to-drag ratio, bringing structural benefits, at the cost of possibly
inhibiting faster wake recovery due to the relatively low turbulent nature of its wake.
Yang et al. [14] conducted an LES investigation on the effect of spanwise load distribution
of two varying blade designs of equivalent CT. A conventional, power-optimised design
A is compared to design B in which the loads are shifted closer towards the root of the
blade, and it is found that the (power-suboptimal) design B has slower wake recovery
than design A. Thus, as blade B has opposite thrust distribution, it can be considered to
support the feasibility of the wake-diffusion rotor concept and its outboard thrust distribution.
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Wake Diffusion
13
2.4.6
Blade Tip Treatment
In Tobin et al. [17] an increase in CP and CT (8.2 % and 15.0 % respectively) on a scaled wind
turbine model in a wind tunnel test is achieved through the implementation of winglets on a
turbine blade, leading to increased mean shear in the near wake, and increased turbulence
and Reynolds stresses in the far wake. However, due to the theoretical treatment in that
study that uses the Jensen wake model [12] (which does not take the distribution of the CT
increase into account), the power capture increase is argued to come thanks to the increase in
CP at the cost of the increase in CT. Furthermore, whilst they found increased mean shear in
the near wake, and thus in the far wake a higher turbulence intensity and Reynolds stresses,
the wingletted turbine still leads to higher wake deficits in the measured regions (last one
between x/D = 4 and about x/D = 5.2), most likely explainable once again by the overall
increase in CT and thus momentum extraction from the flow rather than just a change in its
distribution over the wind turbine blade.
The effects of winglets and blade serrations on wake dissipation were investigated by Klim-
chenko and Jones [18]. The investigation focused on wing tip vortices, assuming that the blade
tip treatments could affect them, reducing their strength and accelerating their decay in order
to encourage wake mixing. Limited quantitative treatment was made for only up to x/D = 1.8
(physical, scaled wind turbine model in wind tunnel), which produced no discernible effect on
the wake deficit caused by the blade tip treatments. However, a qualitative difference in tip
vortex structure was noticed, prompting possible further investigation, especially beyond the
very-near wake region.
2.4.7
Flow Devices
A Gurney flap is a passive flow device that is able to increase individual wind turbine power
capture through controlling the flow over the airfoil, reducing flow separation and thus leading
to improved aerodynamic performance. A numerical investigation is conducted by Zhang
et al. [38], in which two Gurney flap configurations are applied near the root of the blade,
and it should be noted that these devices have significantly altered the local CT in the blade,
which could show promise as a potential design decision that could be tried to produce the
wake diffusion effect through altering blade thrust distribution. Analysis of wake behaviour
was not present in the study.
Whilst active wind turbine flaps seem to be mainly investigated for their potential in blade
load alleviation, they are also found to be able to increase wind turbine AEP by up to 1 %
by McWilliam et al. [39]. Trailing edge flaps and their effect on wake characteristics on top
of power capture are investigated by (a different) Zhang et al. [40]. Deflecting the trailing
edge flaps near the tip of the blade has resulted in increased velocity deficits in the wake, as
per their RANS simulation. Negative deflections of the trailing edge flap (leading to decrease
in camber of the airfoil shape of the blade, reducing the load and thus overall CT) have lead
to increased wake recovery. Another similarity of note is that positive deflection (higher
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Wake Diffusion
14
loading) did result in increased wake recovery, but only at x/D = 1, 12, 14, 16 downstream,
or the very near and far wake. These results suggest that, if not keeping the overall CT of
the blade constant, the benefits of increasing it on the blade may lead to inhibition of wake
recovery even though a more outboard thrust distribution is used (such as in Tobin et al. [17]).
The fact that the active flaps may increase or decrease the blade loads show the potential of
the concept in wake diffusion applications as well by the author’s opinion, supported by the
findings of VerHulst and Menevau [25].
2.4.8
Combined Approaches
Combined approaches, due to the lack of best practices or maturity of the single wake
mitigation methods, are still in a very early stage of research, but potentially can hold some
promise by alleviating the issues present in their component approaches. It is situated at the
end of this chapter due to the mentions of previously treated wake mitigation methods.
A combined approach popular in current research among the control solutions is the combi-
nation of axial induction control and wake steering, the state of which is reviewed by Houck
[11].
Hardware solutions can be complemented with control wake mitigation concepts, such as in
the case of using yaw steering with multi-rotor wind turbines in Speakman [41].
Of note should be the third case study in Allen et al. [37], in which a blade design optimisation
was performed that would balance wake deflection (yaw steering), kinetic energy entrainment
(leading to faster wake re-energisation) and individual turbine power output, leading to the
largest power capture of a two wind turbine configuration. The resulting blade design kept
its chord distribution at the root, and increased near the tip, thus increasing the outboard
thrust on the blade.
Stanley and Ning [42], in an attempt to optimise wind farm yields, couple wind turbine
design with layout optimisation, using nonhomogeneous wind turbine types (more than one
wind turbine type in a wind farm). The optimisation study explores varying hub heights,
rotor diameters, turbine ratings, tower diameters, tower shell thicknesses and blade chord-
and-twist distributions coupled with wind farm layout in order to maximise the wind farm’s
cost of energy. The superiority of this approach to sequentially optimised turbine design is
discovered, and a relevant conclusion is that small wind farms have the largest benefits from
coupled optimisation. Unfortunately, the chord-and-twist distributions in the study were
optimised for the purpose of limiting the blade mass in this study only, hence neglecting
the possible wake-diffusion effect. Moghadassian and Sharma [36] also argued for the in-
creased wind farm power capture through varying wind turbine blades across wind turbines in.
==PAGE:22==
15
Chapter 3
Method
In this chapter, the methodology of this numerical investigation of the wake-diffusion rotor
concept is given. This begins in Section 3.1 with a description of the simulation software and
the models used. Section 3.2 follows with a description of the baseline wind turbine used in
this study, and the modelling approach taken for it and for the wake-diffusion rotor. The
process and results of a grid independence study are presented in Section 3.3, and the chapter
concludes by giving an overview of controlled variables, assumptions and such information in
Section 3.4.
3.1
PyWakeEllipSys and EllipSys3D
PyWakeEllipSys is the CFD software package to be used for the numerical investigation. It
combines a RANS based wind farm flow model with PyWake, an open source AEP calculator,
with the RANS model being based on the general purpose flow solver EllipSys3D. This is a
Fortran/MPI based closed source licensed software, the development of which was initiated at
DTU by Sørensen [43] and Michelsen [44] and is continued by the DTU Wind Energy. Python
is the programming language used to interact with PyWakeEllipSys, and the simulations are
computed on the central DTU HPC cluster.
3.1.1
RANS Modeling
Fluid motion can be described by the Navier-Stokes equations, which mathematically express
the laws of conservation of mass (Equation 3.1, assuming incompressible flow) and momentum
(Equation 3.2).
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(3.1)
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂p
∂xi
+ ν ∂2ui
∂xj∂xj
+ fi
(3.2)
==PAGE:23==
3.1 PyWakeEllipSys and EllipSys3D
16
Where, using Einstein notation, the field variables u, p, ν and f represent the velocity,
pressure, kinematic viscosity (ν = µ/ρ, where µ and ρ are the fluid dynamic viscosity and
density respectively) and body forces of the flow field repectively.
No analytical solutions are known for the Navier-Stokes equations, due to the pressure-velocity
coupling (linear dependence of pressure on velocity and vice versa), which makes the partial
differential equation nonlinear. With certain simplifications, a general solution can be arrived
at, yet these would possibly make the result unrealistic for the given flow scenario, such as a
laminar flow assumption. When the inertia of a laminar flow becomes sufficiently large such
that viscous and other stabilising forces can no longer restrain small irregularities in the flow
field, the perturbations grow into highly convoluted, unsteady, seemingly chaotic ‘eddy‘ flow
structures in a phenomenon we call ‘turbulence‘.
Numerical solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations are possible through DNS, yet compu-
tationally expensive. This is due to the fact that without modeling the turbulence, DNS
models need to resolve the whole range of spatial and temporal scales of turbulence, requiring
very fine numerical grids, small time steps, and large memory storage requirements. For the
Reynolds number orders encountered in wind turbine wake modeling, the computational cost
is prohibitively high.
LES is a popular type of turbulence models in research, which makes these simulations
computationally feasible by skipping the resolution of the smallest flow length scales through
filtering. Used for its high fidelity, there is still a large computational cost associated with
this model.
RANS turbulence models, compared to LES, save on computational cost by roughly three
orders of magnitude [45]. For studying purely single wake characteristics, the higher fidelity
LES model could be argued for, yet RANS was chosen due to the wind turbine array analyses
planned in the initial scope of the thesis project, which would have proved prohibitively
computationally expensive. RANS models work on the basis of applying a Reynolds decom-
position - which describes the flow field as a combination of its mean and fluctuating part
(e.g. ui = Ui + u′
i), thus ‘time-averaging‘ the flow field.
This procedure, through the non-linearity of the convective term in the momentum equations,
produces a Reynolds stress tensor (consisting of six new Reynolds stress terms) in the RANS
equation:
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂pi
∂xi
+ ν ∂2ui
∂xj∂xj
−∂u′
iu′
j
∂xj
+ fi
(3.3)
In which u′
iu′
j are the Reynolds stresses, and the viscous term can be essentially ignored for
high Reynolds number flows such as the one in this study.
==PAGE:24==
3.1 PyWakeEllipSys and EllipSys3D
17
Just like normal materials have a property of viscosity, turbulence can be modelled by
assuming that in flows, the turbulent momentum transfers are similar to molecular ones -
done by introducing a νT ‘eddy viscosity‘ term using the Boussinesq hypothesis [46]:
u′
iu′
j = 2
3kδij −νT
∂Ui
∂xj
+ ∂Uj
∂xi

(3.4)
This helps model the U-momentum Reynolds stresses, (normal, u′u′) lateral (u′v′ and vertical
u′w′) the analysis of which (and especially their gradients), can help describe momentum
transport in the given flow scenario.
3.1.2
k-ε-fP Turbulence Model
Assuming an existence of an ’eddy viscosity’ νT as a property of the flow and then using
the Boussinesq assumption (see Equation 3.4), along with a turbulence model for the eddy
viscosity, the turbulence closure problem of the Navier-Stokes equation is solved and a solution
to the given flow can be calculated. The particular turbulence model to be used in this
investigation is the k-ε-fP model, a modified k-ε model ”...better suited for simulating wake
effects on the power production of wind farms” which is outlined in van der Laan [45]. By
directly using a correcting scalar function fP as in Equation 3.5, the eddy viscosity in flow
regions of high velocity gradients is dampened where it would usually be overpredicted by
the standard k-ε model - that is, usually at the wake boundary, leading to an underpredicted
velocity deficit [47].
νT = CµfP
k2
ε
(3.5)
3.1.3
Actuator disk model
In CFD simulations of wind farms (both RANS and LES), the resolution of the entire blade
geometry is not too feasible if one wants realistic computation times, as that would require
the resolution of complex, small-scale flows across the blade. Hence, methods that insert the
body forces fi that appropriately describe the wind turbine loading such actuator disk, line
and surface approaches exist [5]. All of these methods apply body forces in the flow solver by
first estimating the blade forces based on the specific model used and then redistributing
these in the computational domain.
The AD model, acting as a momentum source term in the RANS equation used by PyWa-
keEllipSys uses a disk polar coordinate grid, which is coupled with the main flow domain
grid as described in R´ethor´e et al. [48], with the forces being allocated as per Troldborg et al.
[49].
==PAGE:25==
3.1 PyWakeEllipSys and EllipSys3D
18
Joukowsky Rotor
Such an AD model, so called ‘Joukowsky‘1 AD as described in Sørensen et al. [50], is used in
this investigation. It is an analytical AD model for axial and tangential forces based on a
constant circulation assumption, corresponding to a Joukowsky rotor, modified with tip and
root corrections F (χ) and g (χ), where χ = r/R. The dimensionless thrust and azimuthal
surface forces fT and fθ are written as:
fT
ρU 2
0
= q0
gF
χ

λχ + 1
2q0
gF
χ

(3.6)
fθ
ρU 2
0
= uD
UH
q0
gF
χ
(3.7)
Where U0 and uD (r) are the inflow and axial velocity in the plane of the rotor respectively,
λ is the tip speed ratio, and q0 is the dimensionless reference circulation (see Equation 3.10).
Axial loading is integrated over the actuator disk for thrust T, and the associated thrust
coefficient CT can be expressed as:
T =
Z
AD
fTdA =
Z R
0
fT2πrdr = 2πR2
Z 1
0
χfTdχ
(3.8)
CT =
T
1
2ρπR2U 2
0
=
4
ρU 2
0
Z 1
0
χfT = 4q0λ
Z 1
0
gFχdχ + 2q2
0
Z 1
0
g2F 2
χ
dχ
(3.9)
As thrust coefficient and tip speed ratio are given, and writing Equation 3.9 as CT =
2a1q0 + 4λa2q0, the reference circulation is determined from Equation 3.10. Equations 3.6
and 3.7 are used to compute the AD force distributions.
q0 =
p
16λ2a2
2 + 8a1CT −4λa2
4a1
(3.10)
The classical Prandtl tip correction is used, as per Betz [8]:
F = 2
π arccos

−Nb
2
√
1 + λ2 · (1 −χ)

(3.11)
In which Nb = 3 is the number of blades. A vortex core of size δ is used in this model in
order to account for the influence of the hub and the inner non-lifting part of the rotor, with
the corresponding expression for the root correction:
g = 1 −exp
"
−a
χ
δ
b#
(3.12)
1The author, as an ethnic Russian, would like to note that the most proper transliteration is ’Zhukovsky’.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine
19
Where a and b are root correction coefficients, and δ = δ/R is the dimensionless radial distance
to the point of maximum azimuthal velocity, typically corresponding to the point where the
lifting surface of the rotor starts. It is through the manipulation of the vortex core size δ
that varying thrust distributions over the blade are achieved, with δ being an input variable
into the AD forcing model in PyWakeEllipSys. The thrust distribution, once prescribed,
remains fixed, and the azimuthal force distribution varies depending on the local axial velocity
in the rotor plane [50]. CT, CP and λ curves are an input into PyWakeEllipSys, see Section 3.2.
An implicit expression (a · b + 1) exp (−a) = a between the coefficients a and b is derived
from the fact that the tip correction is approximately unity at the root, and by default,
corresponding values of b = 4 and a = 2.335 are used due to their fit to the empirical nature
of the azimuthal velocity distribution at the rotor root [50].
For the purposes of the thesis, a variant of this AD forcing method will be used that takes
into account the tangential force (that induces wake rotation), along with wind shear and veer
effects. This is often disregarded in wind farm AEP calculations to save on computational
cost due to the negligible effect on the power deficit in neutral conditions [51]. Combined
effects of shear and wake rotation are expected to lead to an asymmetric wake deficit.
3.1.4
AD Model Control Method
An AD control method to model interacting wind turbines is employed by PyWakeEllipSys
[52]. The dependence on inflow wind speed and wind turbine size are removed in favour
of ambient (inflow) turbulence intensity, prescribed stability and the wind turbine thrust
coefficient distribution, resulting in a reduction of computational resources needed for AEP
calculations.
In this case, a C∗
T −⟨UAD⟩look-up table is made, in which C∗
T is a scaling coefficient and a
function of ⟨UAD⟩, the local velocity averaged over the AD disk. This is based on a calibration
procedure involving single wake simulations, where each simulation has a physically different
inflow (corresponding to freestream velocities between the wind turbine cut-in and cut-out,
uniformly spaced by 1 m s−1). The total AD forces of these simulations are prescribed and
⟨UAD⟩is extracted from the converged solutions [51].
3.2
DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine
The wind turbine used as a baseline for the investigation in this thesis is the DTU 10 MW
Reference Wind Turbine (DTU 10MW RWT), as described in Bak et al. [53]. This was
chosen due to the relevancy of the design towards the current industry trends of offshore
wind farms [3]. There are CT, CP and λ curves of this wind turbine available (closed source),
required as input into the PyWakeEllipSys model, along with freely available HAWC2S wind
turbine input data2 (see Section A.1). The rotor’s diameter D is equal to 178.3 m, and it has
2GitLab DTU 10 MW RWT project page, https://rwt.windenergy.dtu.dk/dtu10mw/dtu-10mw-rwt.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine
20
a hub height zH = 119 m.
3.2.1
Joukowsky AD Model δ Tuning
In Figure 3.1 it can be seen that with increasing the δ parameter shifts the thrust distribution3
over the wind turbine blade more towards the tip, decreasing the loads experienced at the
rotor root. This effect can be viewed as increasing the ‘ventilation‘ present in the centre of
the rotor disk, letting more air through and thus injecting a stream of energised air into the
wind turbine wake.
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
fT [−]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r/R [−]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
fθ [−]
δ=0.15
δ=0.2
δ=0.25
δ=0.3
δ=0.35
δ=0.4
δ=0.45
δ=0.5
δ=0.55
δ=0.6
Figure 3.1: Dimensionless thrust and azimuthal force distributions for the AD Joukowsky
model of varying δ.
3Non-dimensionalised by multiplying the force per unit length, extracted from the simulation, by 1/ρRU 2
H.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine
21
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
fT [−]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r/R [−]
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
fθ [−]
DES DTU10MW
HAWC2S DTU10MW
AD Joukowsky δ = 0.35
AD Airfoil DTU10MW
Figure 3.2: Dimensionless thrust and azimuthal force distributions along the blade for various
numerical model representations of the DTU10MW.
In Figure 3.2, a Joukowsky AD model with δ = 0.35 is found to empirically fit the detached
eddy simulation (DES) data and the airfoil AD (see Section A.1) the most, and is to be
considered the baseline for the Joukowsky rotor. It should be noted that this is the specific
case for the chosen DTU 10MW RWT, as, for example, the NREL 5-MW RWT (another very
popular reference wind turbine used in research, described in Jonkman et al. [54]) was found
to have a closer fit with δ = 0.25 by the author, and can be seen in Appendix A2 in work of
Baungaard [55]. The DES data was obtained from the DTU 10MW RWT project page4. A
small limitation of the Joukowsky AD model is the lac of representation of the nacelle in its
force distributions, which could lead to lower wake deficits at the centre of the wake [45].
A minimum value of δ = 0.15 is chosen as most current conventional wind turbine rotors do
not have high thrust in the root section, often consisting of a thick cylindrical section for
structural and aeroelastic reasons. A maximum value of δ = 0.60 is chosen, as it is difficult to
conceive a wind turbine blade with thrust spread even more outward than this - once again
due to structural and aeroelastic considerations that would arrive from the blade experiencing
such high forces this far from the root.
Finally, the effect of changing root correction coefficients a and b (see Equation 3.12 was
4See footnote 2.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Numerical Grid
22
found to have changed the gradients of thrust and azimuthal force distributions near their
inflection points, and the aforementioned values of a = 2.335 and b = 4.0 of were kept due to
the best fit to the modelled wind turbine.
3.3
Numerical Grid
The numerical grid to be used in this study is Cartesian, with uniform roughness and elevation
reminiscent of offshore wind farm conditions (see Subsection 3.4.1). It can be described to
consist mainly of two parts - a general, coarser flow domain, and a finer wake domain in the
vicinity of the wind turbines, which are represented by actuator disks (see Subsection 3.1.3).
A grid independence study is performed in order to arrive at converged solutions in Py-
WakeEllipSys of acceptable accuracy, whilst trading off for computational expense of the
simulations based on the level of grid fineness. With EllipSys3D being established software
in wind energy research at DTU, the author is thankful to have access to pre-existing body
of practical knowledge on the utilisation of the software for research purposes. This has
provided a good starting point, and reduced the number of required iterations ran in order
to begin the studies which are the main focus of this thesis [56].
A default flow domain grid with a cell expansion ratio of 1.2 is used in this investigation,
which takes up about 80 −90 % of the whole numerical grid (situated around the finer wake
domain, which contains the wind turbine and its wake). Since this investigation focuses on
the effect of varying force distributions along the blade and the effects on the wake, the
wake and the AD grids are considered to be important for the accurate resolution of wake
behaviour. Preliminary simulations have indeed found these to have a large effect on the
measured values of power and the velocity deficit in the wake, hence a grid study on these
parameters is undertaken. For the velocity deficit, the velocity across an AD grid of the same
size as the wind turbine rotor at x/D = 5 (see Subsection 3.4.2) was integrated and averaged
over the surface, to be compared to the inflow wind speed.
Power P and wake velocity deficit (⟨UAD/UH are probed at x/D = 5) of the DTU 10 MW
RWT using the AD airfoil model (see Section A.1), using the simulation parameters described
in this Chapter 3. These are used to calculate relative power and wake velocity deficit errors5
δP and δU respectively.
3.3.1
Wake Domain Grid Spacing
In a wake domain grid study performed in previous research [45], also using PyWakeEllipSys,
eight cells per rotor diameter were found to be sufficient for the investigation of wake
dissipation effects. For this study, a fine grid was defined to have 20 cells per rotor diameter,
128×128 AD cells (amount of cells in radial and azimuthal directions), ran at a residual
limit of 1e −05. Whilst eight cells per rotor diameter was found sufficient, a justifiable
5δv = 100 · |v −vf| /vf, where v is the calculated parameter, and vf is the parameter’s fine grid value for
the particular case.
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Numerical Grid
23
improvement in the converged results compared to a fine grid has been found when doubling
this amount to 16 cells per rotor diameter. Thus, 16 cells per rotor diameter will be used for
the simulations in this study.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
δP [%]
2
4
8
16
20
Wake domain cells per rotor diameter
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
δU [%]
Figure 3.3: Wake domain grid spacing relative error for power and AD velocity deficit.
3.3.2
AD grid
With the determined 16 cells per rotor diameter, an AD grid independence study was
performed. The results in Figure 3.4 show that a 64×64 AD grid seems to perform almost as
well as a 128×128 grid with four times less cells, hence a 64×64 AD grid will be used onward
in the study.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Numerical Grid
24
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
δP [%]
8 × 816 × 16
32 × 32
64 × 64
128 × 128
AD cells, radial × azimuthal
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
δU [%]
Figure 3.4: AD grid spacing relative error for power and AD velocity deficit.
3.3.3
Residuals resolution
Finally, a resolution limit of the velocity component of the RANS CFD simulation should be
chosen. In Figure 3.5 one may be deceived by the relatively small error in power when using
a resolution limit of 1e −02, yet further analysis of the wind turbine wake shows a large
discrepancy between this and the result of using a much finer resolution limit of 1e −06. A
resolution limit of 1e −04 is found to be sufficient for this study, yet on recommendation and
as per other investigations in PyWakeEllipSys, a conservative value of 1e −05 was chosen to
be used.
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Numerical Grid
25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
δP [%]
1e-02
1e-03
1e-04
1e-05
1e-06
Residual limit
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
δU [%]
Figure 3.5: Residuals limit relative error for power and AD velocity deficit.
3.3.4
Numerical Grid Size
In order to ensure full development of the inflow boundary layer, along with avoiding the
CFD tunnel blockage effect, the numerical grid is extended in all directions far from the
wake domain, with a grid radius of 100 rotor diameters. In the vertical direction, the height
of the first cell is 0.5 m, and this cell size increases exponentially, with the last cell being
situated at z/D = 25. In the wake domain, the wind farm radius is extended by a margin of
3, 12 and 1.5 rotor diameters in the upstream, downstream and lateral directions respectively.
The final numerical grid is visually represented in Figure 3.6, with the blue area showing
the wake domain, the red dot representing the wind turbine, and with labelled boundary
conditions. The coordinates x = 0, y = 0, z = zH in this thesis will be used to depict the
wind turbine position, both in single wind turbine simulations and for the first wind turbine
in row configurations (even though it is then shifted in the grid.)
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Other parameters, controlled variables
26
100
50
0
50
100
y/D
Periodic BC
Periodic BC
Inlet BC
Outlet BC
Grid Radius
Grid Radius
Grid Radius
Grid Radius
100
50
0
50
100
x/D
0
5
10
15
20
25
z/D
Inlet BC
Outlet BC
Inlet BC
Rough wall BC
Grid Height
3
0
12
12
1.5
1.5
0.0
1.5
1.5
Upstream x Margin
Downstream x Margin
y Margin
y Margin
Figure 3.6: Numerical grid for a single wind turbine simulation. Top row: View of the grid
from the top, with a zoomed in wake domain. Bottom row: View of the grid from the side.
To iterate, the grid study parameters arrived at by the grid independence study are collected
in Table 3.1, with the other parameters kept at their default values (see PyWakeEllipSys
documentation, closed source).
Table 3.1
Grid Parameter
Parameter Value
Cells per diameter
(wake domain)
16
AD grid cells
64 × 64
Resolution limit
1e −05
3.4
Other parameters, controlled variables
PyWakeEllipSys has many model settings that can affect the results of a simulation. Para-
metric studies on these variables are outside of the scope of this thesis, as each may present
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Other parameters, controlled variables
27
a research topic in and of itself. Thus, at the beginning of this study, the values of these
parameters were tuned, to be kept constant throughout the study, as controlled variables.
The values for these parameters, along with the reasons behind taking these, are given in
this section.
3.4.1
Terrain, inflow, turbulence intensity
Complex terrains are a possible input for PyWakeEllipSys, and are of interest for either
onshore or certain (nearer to obstructions such as coasts, other wind farms etc.) offshore wind
applications, both considered outside of the scope of this thesis. A flatbox grid, reminiscent
of an offshore sea terrain, was chosen in order to best keep the focus on the blade design
aerodynamics. This decision was further supported by the rising importance of offshore wind
turbines in the industry at the moment [3].
In this flat terrain, all ambient turbulence is generated at the bottom rough wall which is
defined by its roughness length [45]. Using the surface roughness length z0 for an open sea of
0.2 mm [57], equation Equation 3.13 was used to arrive at an equivalent ambient turbulence
intensity IH at a hub height zH of the examined wind turbine (119 m for the DTU 10 MW
RWT).
IH =
κ
r
2
3
C
1
4µ ln
zH + z0
z0

(3.13)
With the von K´arm´an constant κ = 0.4, and the turbulence model constant Cµ = 0.03. The
value of IH of 5.9 %, calculated for the aforementioned conditions, was rounded to 6 % in
the following investigation.
3.4.2
Wind turbine array spacing, layout, wind speed and
direction
In the upcoming wind turbine array studies, how close the wind turbines are to each other
is an important parameter to be considered. As the wake velocity deficit is the highest
right behind a wind turbine and slowly diffuses downstream, putting wind turbines too close
together would significantly decrease the wind turbine row yield, fully exposing the wind
turbine configuration to the effects of wake. However, putting the wind turbines too far
apart would on the other hand not be desirable in real life scenarios, as wind farm developers
want to increase their profits on their wind farms, and space is limited. Thus, the trade-off
between the capital cost of investment into the number of wind turbines they can fit into
their designated plot of land and the amount of energy produced, affected by the wakes, is
born, and is currently considered by the research field of layout optimisation (see Subsection
2.3.1). Observing standard industry practices, along with wake research conventions, a wind
turbine spacing of x/D = 5 is chosen for this investigation.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Other parameters, controlled variables
28
This is further complicated by the fact that as wind direction changes, and the wind farms
vary in size and their geometry, wind farm layouts lead to the wakes interacting with the wind
turbines in more complex ways. Thus, in the wind turbine array study in this investigation,
only straight rows of three and ten wind turbines are considered. The row configuration is
important from the perspective of showing extremes of the wake effect - as in real wind farms,
wakes are rarely stacked straight on top of each other just like the wind turbines, thus a row
configuration shows the highest possible loss of power due to the wake. This would thus allow
us to find the highest possible gain in power thanks to the wake-diffusion rotor concept.
A single wind speed UH of 8 m s−1 will be used. Furthermore, if wind direction is not directly
towards the wind turbine but at an angle, due to this yaw effect, the wake is strongly affected.
In order to sidestep the deep research field of wake steering (see Subsection 2.3.4, this investi-
gation considers a single wind direction with direct inflow on the wind turbine (zero yaw angle).
3.4.3
Atmospheric stability
The atmospheric boundary layer has a depth of about two kilometres, and a daily cycle
of wind, temperature and humidity fluctuations can be observed, all of which affect the
advection and the convection (horizontal and vertical movement) of the wind. Simplified and
only looking at temperature variations, in a stable atmosphere (e.g. nighttime, cold surface),
rising air parcels are pushed back by buoyant forces, thus suppressing turbulence. An unstable
atmosphere (e.g. day, hot surface) would have the opposite effect, further displacing rising
air parcels by buoyant forces, increasing turbulence [58].
As atmospheric stability is believed to influence power deficit in wind farm AEP calculations
[51], a neutral stability layer will be assumed in the numerical investigation. This is modelled
in the k-ε-fP with a tuned model turbulence constant Cµ of 0.03, calibrated for neutral
atmospheric surface layer flows.
==PAGE:36==
29
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
Three Joukowsky AD models of equivalent CT but varying thrust distributions along the
lengths of their blades are investigated, denoted δ = 0.15, δ = 0.35 and δ = 0.60. These
represent a wind turbine with an inboard shifted thrust distribution, a baseline - conventional
- wind turbine with a thrust distribution similar to that of the DTU 10 MW RWT, and a
wind turbine with a thrust distribution shifted outboard, representing the wake-diffusion
rotor concept, respectively. The simulations are run in a numerical grid representing offshore
conditions, with a turbulence intensity of 6 %, and a freestream velocity UH = 8 ms−1 at
hub height. A normalised height coordinate ˜z = z −zH is employed.
The focus of this study is how the wake-diffusion rotor concept, with its outboard thrust
distribution, affects the wake produced by the wind turbine. This study also want to see
possible benefits to using it compared to a baseline, standard wind turbine in terms of power
capture thanks to its effect on the wake. The results of these simulations for a single wind
turbine are presented in Section 4.1, after which the results for wind turbine rows of three
and ten wind turbines are shown in Section 4.2. The chapter concludes with a discussion of
relevant design considerations in Section 4.3.
4.1
Single Wind Turbine Study
A single wind turbine scenario is investigated first, in order to better understand the effects of
varying thrust distributions under equivalent CT on wake behaviour. The analysed parameters
include velocity (deficit and profiles), turbulence intensity and momentum transport terms.
4.1.1
Velocity Deficit
Probing the wind turbine wake velocity on the rotor centre line could produce values which,
due to the high locality and turbulence, do not represent the velocity deficit in the wake
accurately. Thus, the measure ⟨UAD⟩/UH of disk-averaged normalised velocity is used to
quantify the velocity deficit6 in this investigation, in which ⟨UAD⟩is the averaged velocity over
a fictitious, equivalent AD area to the wind turbine (just shifted upstream or downstream).
6A low value of ⟨UAD⟩/UH indicates a high velocity deficit and vice versa.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Single Wind Turbine Study
30
Thus, this represents what overall velocity a fictitious wind turbine placed at the given
location directly downstream of the wake would experience, which is strongly correlated
to the power that the wind turbine could extract from the flow, making it a very popular
measure in wake research due to its practicality.
The effects of increasing δ and thus shifting the thrust distribution along the blade more
outward is seen in Figure 4.1, clearly lowering the velocity deficit through an increased
wake recovery rate. This effect is especially pronounced in the near-wake region, where the
differences between the most inboard and the most outboard thrust distribution models
(δ = 0.15 and δ = 0.60) is the largest. This region is nonetheless of little interest for the
practical purposes of wind farms due to the large velocity deficit, which would severely
decrease the production of wind farm arrays. This is due to there not being enough distance
for the wake to mix with the surrounding flow and thus entrain ambient flow kinetic energy,
replacing that which was extracted by the wind turbine.
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
x/D [−]
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
­
UAD
®
UH
 [−]
δ = 0.15
δ = 0.2
δ = 0.25
δ = 0.3
δ = 0.35
δ = 0.4
δ = 0.45
δ = 0.5
δ = 0.55
δ = 0.6
Figure 4.1: Streamwise velocity averaged over a fictitious AD area directly upstream and
downstream of a wind turbine (x/D = 0) for varying δ.
At x/D = 5, a commonly probed distance downstream of the wind turbine in the field of
wake research, the AD velocity deficits are equal to 0.72 and 0.76 for δ of 0.15 and 0.60
respectively. As power in a flow is proportional to its velocity cubed (P ∝U 3), this leads to
a theoretical range of roughly 18 % difference 7 in possible power capture for a second wind
turbine, achieved just by manipulating the thrust distribution of the first upstream wind
7 Pδ=0.60
Pδ=0.15
∝
(⟨UAD⟩/UH)δ=0.60
(⟨UAD⟩/UH)δ=0.15
3
=
0.76
0.72
3
= 1.176
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Single Wind Turbine Study
31
turbine.
Further downstream (up to x/D = 20), the AD velocity deficits for the varying δ converge.
This is supported by the fact that - if a momentum balance point of view is taken - as the CT
is the same across all the δ models, the same amount of momentum is extracted, which should
lead to converged wake deficits in the very far wake. The opposite of this - a phenomenon
where, a certain distance from the wind turbine, the AD velocity deficit of a lower δ would
be lower than that of a higher δ - is seen in Kelley et al. [34] (which keeps the same CT
along the wind turbines, yet in which, the reader is reminded, the simulation has likely not
statistically converged) and Zhang et al. [38] (in which the CT is not kept the same), for the
highlighted reasons.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    U
UH  [−]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
    U
UH  [−]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Figure 4.2: Velocity deficit contour plots for the Joukowsky AD model of varying δ (at
x/D = 0). Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
The contour plots in Figure 4.2 depict the large differences of the velocity deficit across the
different δ models, showing the clear superiority of higher δ when it comes to wake-diffusion.
There is a small area in the near wake, near the centre of the rotor in which the wind velocity
remains high, surrounded on both sides by areas of very high velocity deficits closer to the
rotor edges. This wake deficit profile of δ = 0.60 is highly similar to the wake encountered by
Mart´ınez-Tossas et al.[15] for high thrust, high RPM scenario wind turbine with a similar
thrust distribution (for the Joukowsky AD model at this UH, CT = 0.82, compared to that
of CT = 1.3 of Mart´ınez-Tossas et al.) This wake structure is also comparable to that of
a multi-rotor wind turbine investigated by Baungaard [56] - in which the high thrust area
near the edge of the rotor could be considered equivalent to the multi-rotors. This suggests a
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Single Wind Turbine Study
32
similarity in their mechanisms of alleviating wakes.
The velocity deficits for δ = 0.60 are much higher near the rotor tip areas than for the
other δ cases, yet this higher velocity deficit dissipates much faster downstream of the near
wake above x/D = 2, as also witnessed for a similar blade by Allen et al. [37]. It should
be noted that, if integrated and averaged over a fictitious disk area, the velocity deficit of
δ = 0.60 is still lower than that of lower δ cases even in the very near wake as seen in Figure 4.1.
4.1.2
Velocity Profile
Velocity profiles across a vertical line at y = 0 for the varying δ Joukowsky AD models at a
set of distances upstream and downstream are shown in Figure 4.3. The first velocity profile
at x/D = −2.5 (upstream of the wind turbine) shows the inflow boundary layer profile (see
Subsection 3.4.1). At x/D = 0, that is, at the rotor, the most clear difference in the velocity
deficit can be seen, with the wake-diffusion model δ = 0.60 experiencing the largest velocity
deficits outboard on the rotor, closer to its edges. However, in the near wake at x/D = 2.5,
it is already noticeable that the velocity deficit for this δ also recovers the quickest, being
smaller by up to almost 15 % at hub height compared to δ = 0.15. Further downstream in
the far wake region, this difference quickly levels out.
1|0
0.5
1|0
0.5
1|0
0.5
1|0
0.5
1
U/UH [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
˜z/D [−]
x/D = -2.5
x/D = 0.0
x/D = 2.5
x/D = 5.0
x/D = 7.5
x/D = -2.5
x/D = 0.0
x/D = 2.5
x/D = 5.0
x/D = 7.5
x/D = -2.5
x/D = 0.0
x/D = 2.5
x/D = 5.0
x/D = 7.5
δ = 0.15
δ = 0.35
δ = 0.6
Figure 4.3: Streamwise velocity profiles along a line at y = 0 directly upstream and down-
stream of a wind turbine (x/D = 0) for the Joukowsky AD model of varying δ.
These findings about the wake-diffusion rotor’s higher (local) velocity deficit in the near
wake, yet lower ones in the actual area of interest where wind turbines in an array are placed,
signifies the importance of studying wake behaviour beyond the near wake. This is once again
another benefit of investigating the wake numerically as opposed to performing experimental
aerodynamic studies, due to their inherent physical set-up limitations which often limit the
possible investigated wake distance (see Section 2.2).
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Single Wind Turbine Study
33
4.1.3
Turbulence Intensity
A way of conceptualising the mechanism of wake diffusion offered by the outboard-shifted
thrust distribution is to consider it as a way of developing more turbulence (or ‘adding‘
turbulence [11]) in the flow, resulting in increased mixing of the wake with the surrounding
ambient flow and thus increasing kinetic energy entrainment into the wake.
Turbulent kinetic energy k (TKE) is a parameter that quantifies the kinetic energy associated
with the eddies in the investigated flow. Figure 4.4 8 shows more turbulence behind the near
wake (x/D > 2) for the δ = 0.60 model than for those with more inboard distributed thrust
forces. Right downstream of the rotor, the higher δ model produces less turbulence near the
root of the rotor (where there is less thrust), yet adds more turbulence near the rotor edges
compared to the lower δ models (as there is more thrust there).
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0872
0.1154
0.1436
0.1718
0.2000
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0872
0.1154
0.1436
0.1718
0.2000
Figure 4.4: Turbulence intensity contour plots for the Joukowsky AD model of varying δ (at
x/D = 0). Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
The wake-diffusion concept configuration of δ = 0.60 which produces such a turbulence
distribution in the wake thus seems to further promote the generation of higher turbulence
further downstream, but still in an area where in a wind farm, a wind turbine would not be
placed due to being too close to the first wind turbine. This should lead to more turbulent
mixing downstream of the first wind turbine, explaining the lower probed velocity deficits in
this area and further downstream. This result improves the outlook of using the wake-diffusion
rotor concept in, for example, offshore wind farms, where the turbulent intensity is (most
8In this study, k is extracted and non-dimensionalised as by
q
2
3 · k/UH, equivalent to turbulence intensity
I =
q
1
3 ∗u′
iu′
i/UH , often abbreviated as TI.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Single Wind Turbine Study
34
often) lower than in onshore ones, leading to longer-persisting wakes [59].
4.1.4
Reynolds Stresses and Stress Divergence
It is a common misconception to consider shear stresses the main cause of wake mixing in
turbulence modeling - rather than the gradients of the shear stress. The lateral and vertical
gradients of shear stress are the drivers of momentum transport throughout the wake as
reminded to us by van der Laan et al. [60].
The gradients of streamwise Reynolds stresses 9 (also called ‘stress divergence‘) are shown in
Figure 4.5, and the lateral and vertical ones are shown alongside each other in Figure 4.6.
All the plots clearly show higher magnitudes of the shear stress gradients for higher δ cases
in the wind turbine’s wake, signifying more momentum transport across it.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    −D
kref
u′u′
x
[−]
10.00
7.78
5.56
3.33
1.11
1.11
3.33
5.56
7.78
10.00
    −D
kref
u′u′
x
[−]
10.00
7.78
5.56
3.33
1.11
1.11
3.33
5.56
7.78
10.00
Figure 4.5: Streamwise momentum transport term contour plots for the AD Joukowsky
model of varying δ. Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
9Non-dimensionalised by −D/kref, where kref is the reference TKE at hub height upstream of the wind
turbine.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Single Wind Turbine Study
35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    −D
kref
u′v′
y
[−]
32.00
24.89
17.78
10.67
3.56
3.56
10.67
17.78
24.89
32.00
    −D
kref
u′w′
z
[−]
32.00
24.89
17.78
10.67
3.56
3.56
10.67
17.78
24.89
32.00
Figure 4.6: Momentum transport term contour plots for the AD Joukowsky model of varying
δ. Left column: lateral stress gradients, view from the top. Right column: vertical stress
gradients, view from the side.
To quantify the effect of the various δ cases on the amount of momentum transport, the
absolute values10 of the lateral and vertical momentum transports are integrated through
Equations 4.1 and 4.2, and summed over the investigated wake areas.
Mlateral =
Z y+
y−

∂u′v′
∂y
 dy
(4.1)
Mvertical =
Z z+
z−

∂u′w′
∂z
 dz
(4.2)
This was performed along the wake domain x = [−2D, 12D], using the limits of integration11
y−= −2D, y+ = 2D z−= 0, z+ = 1.5D. These were then normalised by the Mlateral and
Mvertical obtained for the baseline δ = 0.35 case, to see the relative difference in momentum
transfer across the wakes for the shifted thrust distribution cases.
This method of quantifying momentum transfer, inspired by the work of van der Laan [60],
shows a clear trend of both more lateral and vertical momentum transfer in the wake, with
a larger difference found for the vertical momentum transfer. These ranges indicate that
roughly between 20 −25% of the wake momentum transfer of the conventional design could
be gained or lost by shifting the wind turbine’s thrust distribution. The increased momentum
10Done because the momentum loss in the freestream, part of which is included in the limits of integration,
should be equal and opposite to the momentum gain in the wake.
11The limits of integration have an almost negligible difference on the relative differences of the M values
at these magnitudes.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Row Study
36
transfer of the δ = 0.60 case support the higher wake-recovering effect hypothesised for the
wake-diffusion rotor concept.
Table 4.1: Relative momentum transfer in the wake for the AD Joukowsky model of varying
δ.
δ
Mlateralδ=j
Mlateralδ=0.35
Mverticalδ=j
Mverticalδ=0.35
0.15
0.89
0.86
0.35
-
-
0.60
1.08
1.10
∆M Range [%]:
19
24
4.2
Row Study
In order to better quantify the potential benefits of the wake-diffusion concept for wind
farms, analysis should extend from single wind turbine wake studies to studies on the wake’s
behaviour in a row configuration, along with a focus on energy yield. The same simulation
parameters as in Section 4.1 are used, but now extended onto rows of three and ten identical
wind turbines (denoted 3-WT and 10-WT rows respectively), spaced five rotor diameters
apart (see Subsection 3.4.2).
4.2.1
Velocity Deficit
The velocity deficits shown in Figure 4.7 of the 3-WT row shows less development of a
velocity deficit for the more outboard thrust distributions of the higher δ models, which is
even more pronounced in the 10-WT row depicted in Figure 4.8. For δ = 0.60, the largest
lateral velocity deficit gradients are seen in the wake of the first wind turbine (x/D = 0),
where there is a large difference in the velocity deficit behind the rotor centre and the rotor
edges, just as described for the single wind turbine in Section 4.1. However, the consecutive
wind turbines, experiencing lower inflow velocity, no longer have such pronounced velocity
gradients in the wake along the rotor area, and the general distribution of the velocity deficit
gradient is similar for all wind turbines after the second one, with only the magnitude of the
velocity deficit gradually increasing.
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Row Study
37
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
5
10
15
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
5
10
15
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    U
UH  [−]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
    U
UH  [−]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Figure 4.7: Velocity deficits for a 3-WT row for AD Joukowsky model of varying δ. Left
column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    U
UH  [−]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
    U
UH  [−]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Figure 4.8: Velocity deficits for a 10-WT row for AD Joukowsky model of varying δ. Left
column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
A closer top view is shown in Figure 4.9, in which the velocity deficit development down the
10-WT row is most visible across the varying δ models. The general shape of the velocity
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Row Study
38
deficit field is more easily discernible, being largest between the first and second wind turbine,
whilst being very similar for all wind turbines after the second one. This further suggests
that the largest effect on the freestream flow in an array is exerted by the first wind turbine
in the row, the cause and effect of which is further explored by the analysis of the other flow
parameters. There seems to be insufficient energy entrainment by the wind turbine wake to
replace the energy extracted by the wind turbines, leading to a progressively increasing wake
deficit downstream.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
    U
UH  [−]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Figure 4.9: Velocity deficits for a 10-WT row for AD Joukowsky model of varying δ, view
from the top.
4.2.2
Power Generation
In an ideal scenario, having a wind turbine rated at, for example, 10 MW, one would like a
wind farm of N of these wind turbines to produce N · 10 MW at their rated wind speed (the
wind speed at which the wind turbine generates its rated power). However, in the worst case
scenario such as featured in this study, with wind turbine wakes directly impacting on con-
secutive wind turbines in a straight row, the losses are large, as shown in Figure 4.10. Whilst
the first wind turbine, unaffected by wakes, does produce energy (mostly)12 proportional to
the freestream wind speed, the same cannot be said for the others in the row.
12The first wind turbine does still experience wind farm blockage effects, a (small) reduction of upstream
wind speed caused by energy extraction of the wind turbines. This effect can be most clearly seen in Figure 4.1,
upstream of the wind turbine.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Row Study
39
Each consecutive wind turbine in the row produces less and less power, dropping nearly to just
30 % of the first wind turbine’s power by the tenth one for this worst case row scenario. That
is 30 % of the power a wind farm developer would at first expect to gain by purchasing such
a wind turbine for their project, when browsing the wind turbine manufacturer’s catalogue.
As the wake velocity deficit is not able to recover itself after each consecutive wind turbine,
it gradually increases, allowing consecutive wind turbines in the row to extract less and less
kinetic energy from the impinging flow, leading to less and less power capture.
A point of equilibrium, at which the wake deficit (and hence power generation) on the
consecutive wind turbines would remain constant downstream, is nearly - but not yet -
reached, as seen by the decreasing negative gradient near the last wind turbines in the row in
Figure 4.10. This equilibrium would be reached more quickly (at an earlier wind turbine №)
with increased wind turbine spacing.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Wind turbine 
 i
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Pi/P1 [−]
δ = 0.15
δ = 0.35
δ = 0.60
Figure 4.10: Power generation in a 10-WT row for the Joukowsky AD model of varying δ,
normalised by P1.
As shown in the results in Table 4.2, the 3-WT and 10-WT rows generate just 62.5 %
and 43.2 % (baseline design of δ = 0.35) of the ideal N · PUH MW scenario respectively,
reiterating the possible impact of badly managed wakes on wind farm power capture and
thus profitability. This worst case scenario wind directions highlights the relative importance
of wind turbine spacing and layout optimisation for wind farm wake management.
Due to the effect of the lower velocity deficit experienced by the consecutive wind turbines in
a row, it was assumed that using the wake-diffusion rotor concept (δ = 0.60) array would
have increased power capture over one using the baseline design - an assumption which is
confirmed by the results in Table 4.2. The power capture gains of using the wake-diffusion
rotor in 3-WT and 10-WT rows of 3.8 % and 2.5 % respectively, suggest a diminishing effect
along a wind turbine row of increasing size. The power capture losses incurred by using an
inboard shifted thrust distribution rotor also diminish for the 3-WT and 10-WT rows, by
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Row Study
40
−1.8 % and −1.1 % respectively.
One immediate insight from these results is that the smaller the array size, the more beneficial
a wake-diffusion rotor concept is for power capture, and the more disadvantageous it is to use a
design with a more inboard shifted thrust distribution. The potential disadvantages of δ = 0.15
drop off slightly more with increasing array size (a relative difference of 41 % ∆P loss in power
capture recovered by going from a 3-WT to a 10-WT row) than the advantages of δ = 0.60
(a relative difference of 34 % ∆P loss in power capture by going from a 3-WT to a 10-WT row).
Table 4.2: Wind turbine array power capture results. Left column: 3-WT row. Right column:
10-WT row.
3-WT row
δ
P [MW]
∆P [%]
0.15
16.62
-1.77
0.35
16.92
-
0.60
17.56
+3.79
∆P Range [%]:
5.56
10-WT row
δ
P [MW]
∆P [%]
0.15
38.56
-1.05
0.35
38.97
-
0.60
39.94
+2.49
∆P Range [%]:
3.54
The power generation of the wind turbines with outboard and inboard shifted thrust com-
pared to the baseline configuration are shown in Figure 4.11. Similar to the work of van der
Laan and Abkar [61], for a multi-rotor configuration with a similar wake-diffusion effect, the
largest increase in power is present in the second wind turbine of the row, and drops off with
subsequent wind turbines. The magnitude of the ∆Pi range should be pointed out for how
large it is - in using a wake-diffusion rotor concept, rather than one with an inboard shifted
thrust distribution, the power capture of the second wind turbine can be increased by up
to 21.3 % (from 0.926Pδ=0.35 to 1.139Pδ=0.35 for δ = 0.15 and δ = 0.60 respectively)13. This
finding is in line with the insight from the analysis of the velocity deficits of Subsection 4.2.1,
in that the wake-diffusion rotor concept has the largest impact on the wake of the first wind
turbine, with diminishing returns for the other wind turbines down the row.
Furthermore, the gradients ∆P of Figure 4.11 are interesting to analyse, with their general
shapes seemingly mirrored for the δ = 0.60 and δ = 0.15 models. The largest effect on power
capture for either of the cases is present for the second wind turbine, diminishes for the third
one, is the lowest at the fourth (δ = 0.15) or fifth one (δ = 0.60) which is a point of inflection,
after which the effect of either power gain or loss starts slowly rising for the two cases as the
row extends. Interestingly, for the δ = 0.15 case, there is almost no power loss compared to
the baseline case around the fourth wind turbine.
13This is higher than the 18 % power gain range first derived from the different velocity deficits in
Subsection 4.1.1, due to the nature of the CP curve of the DTU 10 MW RWT used in this case. Wind
turbines are designed to be most effective at kinetic energy extraction from the flow for certain ranges of
wind speeds, depending on the design goals based on supposed site wind distributions.
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Row Study
41
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Wind turbine 
 i
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
Pi, δ = j/Pi, δ = 0.35 [−]
δ = 0.15
δ = 0.35
δ = 0.60
Figure 4.11: Power generation in a 10-WT row for the Joukowsky AD model of varying δ,
normalised by Pi,δ=0.35.
There are multiple insights and possible recommendations stemming from these results. The
ones pertaining to the δ = 0.60 case could argue for possible use of the wake-diffusion rotor
concept either in larger wind turbine row arrays (due to its positive, increasing gradient seen
in Figure 4.11), or for very short rows (due to the largest ∆Pi in the first wind turbines). In
line with the concept of varying wind turbine types across a wind farm for maximum power
capture introduced in Subsection 2.4.8 [36, 42], use of such a wind turbine on the edges of
wind farms (where the wake-diffusion rotor would be the first wind turbine to experience
unperturbed wind) can be recommended as well, depending on the specific site climate for
maximum wake diffusion effect.
For the δ = 0.15 case, if the design were found to be superior to the wake-diffusion rotor for
economic reasons (e.g. production costs due to structural considerations), then the use of
them for the third-and-onwards wind turbine from the edge in medium-to-large wind farms
could be argued for, as there is little change in power capture from the baseline (that is, if
this effect persists in heterogenous wind turbine farm conditions).
4.2.3
Turbulence Intensity
In Figure 4.12 it can be seen that on encountering the first wind turbine, the flow experiences
a large increase in turbulence intensity (from 0.06 up to 0.16, or almost a 170 % increase
for the δ = 0.60 model). The second wind turbine, however, leads to a much lesser increase
(from 0.16 to 0.21, or almost a 30 % increase for the δ = 0.60 model). As the wake turbulence
dissipates further downstream of each rotor, the third wind turbine in the row adds in more
turbulence such that the peak TI area after it is larger than in the wake of the second wind
turbine, yet the maximum TI magnitude from the second wind turbine is not visibly increased,
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Row Study
42
leading to the lowest relative TI increase across the row.
This effect of adding turbulence is less pronounced for the models with thrust distribution
shifted more inboard. Relative to the low initial turbulence intensity of the undisturbed
flow (simulating offshore wind farm conditions), the effect of the first wind turbine on the
present turbulence is the most substantial. It is this first highest addition of turbulence
into the flow that has the most profound wake-diffusing effect, which explains the largest
relative gains in power capture of the second wind turbine and wake recovery as seen in
Subsections 4.2.2 and 4.2.1 respectively, and is a conclusion shared by van der Laan and
Akbar [61] in their work with the multi-rotor wake turbine. Thus, the consecutive wind
turbines in Figure 4.11 show much smaller differences in power capture, as no matter the
δ model used, the TI gain from which the outboard thrust distribution benefits the most
(thanks to the increased mixing effect on kinetic energy entrainment) at the first wind tur-
bine diminishes down the array, as the same absolute magnitude of TI is reached for the arrays.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
5
10
15
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
5
10
15
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0932
0.1274
0.1616
0.1958
0.2300
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0932
0.1274
0.1616
0.1958
0.2300
Figure 4.12: Turbulence intensity for a 3-WT row for AD Joukowsky model of varying δ.
Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
Figure 4.13 especially shows how a peak TI (highest magnitude along the highest area) seems
to be achieved by the third wind turbine, after which the TI (now both peak magnitude and
area size) starts dropping off downstream throughout the wind turbine row. This peak TI is
encountered at the third wind turbine for all three investigated values of δ. This explains
the diminishing effectivity of the wake diffusion concept in wind turbine arrays of increasing
size, if one were to take the wake-diffusion rotor concept as a turbulence contributor such as
described in Subsection 4.1.3.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Design Considerations
43
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.15
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
δ = 0.35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
δ = 0.6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
δ = 0.6
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0932
0.1274
0.1616
0.1958
0.2300
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0932
0.1274
0.1616
0.1958
0.2300
Figure 4.13: Turbulence intensity for a 10-WT row for AD Joukowsky model of varying δ.
Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
The increased turbulence in the wake, provided by the wake-diffusion rotor, whilst beneficial
for power generation, could lead to increased fatigue loads, not treated in this study [5].
Not only does this have structural implications for the wind turbine design, but a tradeoff
on the economic costs and benefits of this effect is called for, as these turbulence-induced
fatigue loads are considered one of the main factors which determines wind turbine lifetime [10].
With this evidence behind the physical mechanisms of the concept, the conclusive recommen-
dations of Subsection 4.2.2 are confirmed. The wake-diffusion rotor concept, for maximum
effectivity, should be either used for either the very small or the very large wind farms, or
possibly on the wind farm’s edges (as the first wind turbine).
4.3
Design Considerations
The Joukowsky AD rotor, taking CT and CP curves of the wind turbine as input, likely
differs in these compared to how a physical implementation of this concept would perform.
In Knauer [6], a small overall loss in power capture for a wake-diffusion rotor concept is
expected, as there is a focus on decreasing energy extraction near the root of the rotor,
without compensating for the loss in CT by increasing the thrust force and power generation
in the outer part of the rotor. The expectation is that a small power loss in individual wind
turbines using the wake-diffusion rotor concept would be offset by the larger power capture
in consecutive wind turbines in a wind farm configuration. A question thus arises - what is
the maximum amount of individual wind turbine power loss which would still be possible to
be offset by the wake-diffusion effect?
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Design Considerations
44
As with many such questions, the answer seems to be “it depends“. This thesis has clearly
identified several insights and trends pertaining to the wake-diffusion rotor design, which
can certainly come in handy for potential researchers meaning to realise this concept further.
Furthermore, this study features the investigation of a worst-case scenario, that is of a wind
turbine row with directly impinging wind turbine wakes, which in a realistic wind farm
scenario, may occur for only a fraction of a year. This raises the question of the magnitude
of the possible benefits of using a wake-diffusion rotor on AEP - that is, taking into account
the wind farm layout, along with varying wind speeds and directions over a year. Knowing
the results of this study, it seems certainly possible that for certain combinations of wind
farm layouts and wind climates, using wake-diffusion rotors could increase AEP. However, if
the wake-diffusion rotor design implied individual wind turbine power loss, then depending
on the magnitude of that loss the design could surely become disadvantageous for certain
scenarios.
==PAGE:52==
45
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to explore the potential benefits of the wake-diffusion rotor concept, which
can be described as a wind turbine design with a thrust distribution that is shifted outboard
on the rotor, closer to the edges of the blades. A literature study is conducted, and based on
a quantitive and qualitative analysis of numerical simulations, several conclusions are made
on this concept.
An analytical actuator disk model in a RANS CFD flow solver (PyWakeEllipSys) is used,
which can model wind turbines with differently distributed thrust across the wind turbine
blade whilst keeping the overall CT the same. A single wind turbine simulation is performed
to study the wake behaviour of three thrust distributions - a conventional design, a design
with inboard shifted thrust distribution, and an outboard shifted thrust distribution, repre-
senting the wake-diffusion rotor concept. Shifting the thrust distribution across the blade
more outboard leads to a reduction of the wake velocity deficit downstream of the rotor.
This effect on the velocity deficit is strongest around the near wake region (x/D = 2) and
slowly dissipates further downstream, with the velocity deficits converging for all types of
investigated thrust distributions in the very far wake. The wake-diffusion rotor concept also
produces more turbulence and momentum transfer in the wake.
In row studies of three and ten wind turbines, the largest differences in the wake behaviour
are found downstream of the first wind turbine. The wake-diffusion rotor concept row is
compared to the baseline case. Total power generation was found to be higher (3.8 and
2.5 % for the 3-WT and 10-WT rows, respectively), with the highest relative gains in power
capture found in the second wind turbine in the row (13.9 %). This power gain from using a
wake-diffusion rotor concept is also present, although in a smaller magnitude, in consecutive
wind turbines down the row. An analysis of turbulent kinetic energy in the row’s wake found
the wake-diffusion rotor concept adding the most turbulence into the flow with the first wind
turbine. Peak levels of turbulence are reached around the third wind turbine for each thrust
distribution model, and then slowly decrease down the row. The largest gain in turbulence
in the wake of the first wind turbine is proposed to be the reason behind the largest power
gain observed in the second wind turbine in the row, and the attainment of peak turbulence
and its consecutive drop-off is considered to explain the diminishing benefits of using the
wake-diffusion rotor concept down the row. Given the fidelity of RANS model used in this
investigation, it can be concluded single digit percentage increases in power generation could
==PAGE:53==
46
be expected for certain scenarios.
The inboard shifted thrust distribution shows the opposite effects of the wake-diffusion rotor
concept, leading to larger velocity deficits, less added turbulence, less momentum transfer and
lower power capture (−1.8 and −1.1 % for 3-WT and 10-WT rows respectively, compared to
baseline case) in a row configuration - with the highest relative losses in power capture in the
second wind turbine (−7.9 %). The absolute magnitudes of the disadvantages caused by an
inboard shifted trust distribution are lower than the possible benefits gained by an outboard
shifted one (with the baseline case defined as in this study).
The outboard shifted thrust distribution of the wake-diffusion rotor concept, causing large
shear stress gradients due to large thrust near the rotor edge and small thrust near the root,
leads to more momentum transfer in the wake and thus turbulent mixing. This is considered
to be responsible for faster breakdown of helical vortex tip structures, subsequent increased
kinetic energy entrainment of the wake and thus the wake diffusion effect.
Multiple ways of changing the wind turbine blade forces, ranging from blade geometry design
to using flow devices on the blade and individual wind turbine control schemes are high-
lighted in the literature study. These are considered for their potential use in achieving the
wake-diffusion rotor concept thrust distribution. On top of these, an overview of wind-farm
level wake mitigation methods is also given, the combination of which with the wake-diffusion
rotor concept could likely lead to even larger power capture gains across wind farms.
From the results of this study, recommendation can be made in using the wake-diffusion rotor
in either very small or large wind farms. Using the wake-diffusion rotor wind turbines on the
edges of wind farms to maximise the power capture gains of the second wind turbine in the
free stream flow is also a possibility. Wind farms with layouts and wind climates that lead
to strong and frequent wake interactions between the turbines, similar to the row scenario
investigated in this study, are likely to gain more benefits compared to other scenarios. The
benefits should also prove to be the highest for sites with low ambient turbulence intensity,
such as offshore wind farms, and lower for sites with higher turbulence intensity, such as
onshore ones.
Future Work
The shifting of the thrust distribution outboard through changes to blade geometry, flow
devices or individual wind turbine control schemes bring along aeroservoelastic concerns that
were not addressed in this study, which focused on the aerodynamics of the wake. Optimal
ways of achieving this thrust distribution could be investigated.
The various ways of wind-farm level control schemes and other wake alleviating methods
could be investigated in combination with the wake-diffusion rotor concept in order to arrive
at a combined, multi-level approach at alleviating the negative effects of wakes on wind farms.
This analysis could extend from simple power generation to load alleviation and ancillary
==PAGE:54==
47
grid services.
The importance of modeling the thrust distribution in order to better predict the wake
behaviour is confirmed by the study, and could be considered valuable information for both
developers and users of engineering wake models. Existing engineering wake models could
have their parameters tuned in order to account for varying thrust distributions, which
provides a possible future avenue of research.
Whilst the benefits of the wake-diffusion rotor concept have been confirmed, if such a design
would come at a cost in individual wind turbine power generation, the concept would become
highly dependent on the particular wind farm layout and wind climate. First, the acceptable
level of individual wind turbine power generation that would still bring benefits in wind
farms could be investigated. Furthermore, investigation could be done on wind turbine
spacing, wind farm layout, turbulence intensity, atmospheric stability, and wind climate
(considering different combinations of wind speeds and directions) and their effects on the
power capture in wind farms using the wake-diffusion rotor concept. Using higher fidelity
turbulence models than RANS (e.g. LES) could be considered, to better increase the accuracy
of the possible effects. With these insights, and a more realised wake-diffusion rotor de-
sign, full wind farm AEP simulations should be performed to quantify the possible AEP gains.
The turbulence-adding effect of the wake-diffusion rotor concept shows promise in being
beneficial for power capture if used at the edges of the wind farms, and the quantification
of these benefits associated with its use in nonhomogeneous wind turbine type wind farms
could be investigated to greater depth. The higher turbulence may come at the cost of higher
fatigue loads on consecutive wind turbines in its wake, which would benefit from research
that would help in trading off the aerodynamic gains against the lower wind turbine lifetime
associated with fatigue loading.
==PAGE:55==
48
Appendix A
Wake-diffusion Rotor Design
Although not considered in the original scope of the study due to how large of an undertaking
a more feasible and complete wake-diffusion rotor design would be, some exploration of the
concept’s design was conducted nonetheless. The numerical tools and models used for this
design exploration are explained in Section A.1. The design process is described in Section
A.2, and the results and discussion of this redesigned wind turbine’s wake are given in Section
A.3.
A.1
HAWC2S, PyWakeEllipSys Airfoil AD
Model
HAWCStab2 is a frequency based aeroservoelastic code for steady states computation, most
often used for stability analysis of wind turbines. HAWC2S is a command line version of
this code, and was chosen to be used in this investigation as a part of a design tool for the
wake-diffusion rotor, as a more verified and validated alternative to writing a new blade
element momentum (BEM) code for the study.
Simply speaking, compared to PyWakeEllipSys, HAWC2S could be considered to be a higher
fidelity code when it comes to single wind turbine performance, yet PyWakeEllipSys is
superior for investigating the wake due to the RANS CFD code present within. The quick
rotor performance evaluation allowed by HAWC2S was necessary for iterative design purposes
(i.e. simulation runtime of seconds compared to tens of minutes).
As the airfoil AD forcing method in PyWakeEllipSys (described in the following Section
A.1) does not model aeroelastic effects and assumes rigid blades, it is chosen not to include
aeroelastic effects in the HAWC2S analysis of the wind turbine. The simple HAWC2S model
further uses a normal BEM dynamic induction method and a Prandtl tip loss model. No
dynamic stall model is used, as this phenomenon is not present for the investigation in question.
A Python design tool is written and used for the purposes of this investigation, which
incorporates HAWC2S. This tool takes the HAWC2S DTU 10 MW RWT blade geometry
input file (along with others), allows the user to change the blade geometry, evaluates the
==PAGE:56==
A.2 WDR 10 MW Design
49
new wind turbine’s performance using HAWC2S, and outputs blade geometry files for the
new design that can be used in subsequent PyWakeEllipSys simulations, to investigate wake
behaviour.
PyWakeEllipSys Airfoil AD Model
PyWakeEllipSys has a blade-geometry based AD forcing method working on similar principles
to blade element momentum (BEM) codes, such as the one found in Hansen [7]. The input
files required by this model include airfoil descriptions (lift, drag and momentum coefficients
tables at various angles of attack) along with a blade geometry description (chord length,
blade twist angle and relative thickness distributions). This AD model is used for both the
DTU 10 MW RWT and the redesign for simulation of the wake behaviour in PyWakeEllipSys.
A.2
WDR 10 MW Design
The DTU 10 MW RWT wind turbine was redesigned in this investigation, the process of
which provided useful insights on the wake-diffusion rotor concept. This redesign will be
referred to as the WDR 10MW onward, its name inspired by its predecessor. It should be
emphasised that a feasible design for a wake-diffusion rotor was not the goal nor a desired
deliverable of this investigation, due to the size of the undertaking, and is considered outside
of this project’s scope. Aeroservoelastic and production aspects of the design are not taken
into account, due to a pure focus on the aerodynamics of the wake. The design space was
confined to the blade’s chord and twist, with the airfoil distribution of the DTU 10 MW
RWT untouched.
The shaft tilt and the precone angles (5°and 2.5° respectively) were removed from the DTU 10
MW RWT for the purposes of the redesign, as PyWakeEllipSys can not take these as an input.
Over thirty designs were produced, with subsequent analysis of their wake velocity deficits
at x/D = 5. The insights on the most effective wake-diffusion producing blade alterations
coincided with input from Knauer [6], based on personal correspondence. The design strategy
that was found to lead to the highest increase in the wake-diffusion effect, at the lowest cost
of the individual wind turbine power loss, was to decrease the energy extraction from the
flow by the rotor root area as much as possible. This was attained through finding an angle
of attack α that minimise both the coefficients of lift and drag (CL, CD) of the airfoils near
the root (found to be α = −2°).
The length of the blade up to which the ‘ventilating‘ portion with low thrust is to extend
was found to be an important design parameter by this investigation. The wake-diffusion
rotor’s patent gives ranges for the radially-inner, ventilating portion of the blade of between
15 −40 %, more preferably 20 −30 % and most preferably between 20 −25 % of the
blade [6]. There is expected loss of individual wind turbine power associated with mak-
ing the radially-inner area near the root of the rotor suboptimal in power capture, letting
a jet of high-energy air through into the wake. This individual wind turbine power loss
is however justified by the potential gain in downstream wind turbine energy generation,
==PAGE:57==
A.2 WDR 10 MW Design
50
expecting a lower wake deficit, and thus more kinetic energy in the wind which it could extract.
To better determine the exact length of the blade to be made a ventilating portion - in which
the energy extraction was to be minimised - the power contribution along the blade of a DTU
10 MW RWT was analysed, as depicted in Figure A.1, for a similar simulation scenario of
Section 4.1. The results of Figure A.1 are also presented in Table A.1, and help see why values
above 40 % are not considered by Knauer due to the high possible power losses. The first 25 %
and 40 % of the blade makes up for 6 and 20 % of the rotor’s area respectively. The 20−25 %
range seem to be considered the ideal part for the ventilating portion of the blade, as the poten-
tial power losses are still quite low, and almost double in magnitude were one to extend further.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r/R [−]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Power [%]
Power Contribution
Cumulative Power
Figure A.1: DTU 10 MW RWT power generation contributions along the rotor.
Table A.1: Cumulative power contributions of the DTU 10 MW RWT rotor up to given r/R.
r/R [−]
Cumulative Power [%]
0.15
0.2
0.20
1.4
0.25
3.2
0.30
6.2
0.35
9.9
0.40
14.2
0.50
24.4
This minimum energy extraction angle of attack at the root of the blade was achieved through
an iterative design process of twisting the blade, and the chord length at the root of the blade
was also decreased (by up to 1 m). The resulting chord and twist distributions, compared to
the DTU 10 MW RWT, are presented in Figure A.2. The force distributions along the WDR
==PAGE:58==
A.2 WDR 10 MW Design
51
10 MW blade shown in Figure A.3 depict the large intended decrease in thrust force on the
root of the blade. The large twist of the WDR 10 MW comes from the angles of attack ex-
perienced by the DTU 10 MW RWT at the root of up to 60°, where the blade is very cylindrical.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Chord [m]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r/R [−]
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
Twist [deg]
DTU 10 MW RWT
WDR 10 MW
Figure A.2: WDR 10 MW chord and twist distributions along the blade length.
==PAGE:59==
A.3 Results and Discussion
52
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
fT [−]
DTU 10 MW RWT
WDR 10 MW
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
fθ [−]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r/R [−]
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
α [deg]
Figure A.3: WDR 10 MW thrust and azimuthal non-dimensionalised force distribution, angle
of attack along the blade length.
A.3
Results and Discussion
Figure A.4 shows faster wake velocity deficit recover for the WDR 10 MW design. Analysis
of turbulence intensity data depicted in Figure A.5 confirms that the redesign is superior in
turbulence generation.
==PAGE:60==
A.3 Results and Discussion
53
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DTU 10 MW RWT
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
DTU 10 MW RWT
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
    U
UH  [−]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
    U
UH  [−]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Figure A.4: Velocity deficit contour plots for the DTU 10 MW RWT and WDR 10 MW. Left
column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DTU 10 MW RWT
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
DTU 10 MW RWT
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
\tilde{z}/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0872
0.1154
0.1436
0.1718
0.2000
    I [−]
0.0590
0.0872
0.1154
0.1436
0.1718
0.2000
Figure A.5: Turbulence intensity contour plots for the DTU 10 MW RWT and WDR 10 MW.
Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
Both Figures A.6 and A.7 show that the design of WDR 10 MW produces larger Reynolds
shear stress gradients in the wake. Using the same method of analysis of momentum transport
==PAGE:61==
A.3 Results and Discussion
54
as in Subsection 4.1.4, the wake of the WDR 10 MW is found to contain 25 and 27 % more
lateral and vertical momentum transfer than the DTU 10 MW RWT - values larger than
even the biggest range between δ = 0.15 and δ = 0.60 for the Joukowsky AD model. This is
likely due to the extreme measure of the thrust distribution’s reduction near the root for the
WDR 10 MW’s design.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DTU 10 MW RWT
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
DTU 10 MW RWT
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
    −D
kref
u′u′
x
[−]
10.00
7.78
5.56
3.33
1.11
1.11
3.33
5.56
7.78
10.00
    −D
kref
u′u′
x
[−]
10.00
7.78
5.56
3.33
1.11
1.11
3.33
5.56
7.78
10.00
Figure A.6: Streamwise momentum transport term contour plots for the DTU 10 MW RWT
and WDR 10 MW. Left column: view from the top. Right column: view from the side.
==PAGE:62==
A.3 Results and Discussion
55
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DTU 10 MW RWT
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
DTU 10 MW RWT
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
y/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
0
1
2
3
4
5
x/D [−]
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
˜z/D [−]
WDR 10 MW
    −D
kref
u′v′
y
[−]
32.00
24.89
17.78
10.67
3.56
3.56
10.67
17.78
24.89
32.00
    −D
kref
u′w′
z
[−]
32.00
24.89
17.78
10.67
3.56
3.56
10.67
17.78
24.89
32.00
Figure A.7: Momentum transport term contour plots for the DTU 10 MW RWT and WDR
10 MW. Left column: lateral stress gradients, view from the top. Right column: vertical
stress gradients, view from the side.
The overall thrust coefficients CT of the DTU 10 MW RWT and the WDR 10 MW are
0.93 and 0.91 respectively, with a ∆P of −3.4 and −2.7 % from HAWC2S and PyWakeEl-
lipSys14 for the WDR 10 MW compared to the DTU 10 MW RWT. The decrease in the
wake velocity deficit ⟨UAD⟩/UH at x/D = 5 of the WDR 10 MW should lead to a roughly
6.3 % gain in possible power capture of the second wind turbine - keep in mind though that
this is a gain in power relative to the suboptimal redesign (unless different wind turbine
types were used downstream, of course). Simulations of power capture in arrays were not
conducted, as the explorative nature of the redesign and its focus neglected overall power
optimisation of the wind turbine, both individually and in arrays. Control considerations
would need to be taken into account to provide new optimised pitch and rpm curves. Thus,
results generated by row studies would hold little strength on which to base conclusions upon
without more work, that was already considered outside the scope of the project to begin with.
It should be noted that the overall CT is not kept as a controlled variable across the two
designs, which does lead to a possible conclusion for the accelerated wake recovery effect
outside that of the wake-diffusion rotor concept. This other hypothesis would be that the
accelerated wake diffusion found for the WDR 10 MW simply stems from the fact that there
is less integrated total drag force generated by the redesigned blade. It is difficult to quantify
how much this wake-diffusion effect comes from either of these two proposed mechanisms
(even though the CT difference and thus its influence could be argued to be very low), and
14A difference likely caused by the different implementations of BEM codes in these two software tools,
see Section A.1.
==PAGE:63==
A.3 Results and Discussion
56
thus there is no conclusion made on this case.
However, the analysis of turbulence and Reynolds stress gradients still showed higher gen-
eration of turbulence and momentum transport for the redesign. The accelerating effects
on wake-diffusion of these aspects are not only confirmed by this study but also present in
current literature (see Section 2.1), giving more ground to the feasibility of the wake-diffusion
rotor concept.
To re-emphasize, this redesign process was not a systematic, rigorous endeavour, but more of
an exploration of the concept examined in this study. Optimisation of power generation for
the redesign was not pursued, but rather a confirmation of the wake-diffusing properties of
the concepts of ’ventilation’ in the inboard rotor section and the thrust distribution in general.
This exploration was halted due to being outside the scope of this paper, the time-consuming
nature of the iterative design process and its simulations, and the complexity of the task.
Good wind turbine design is a difficult endeavour by itself - even without taking the wake
into account - and the development of an optimal wake-diffusion rotor remains as a future
work suggestion. It is the hope of the author that this Appendix nonetheless provides useful
insights both for the understanding of the wake-diffusion rotor concept, and helps anyone
interested in pursuing the task of designing such a rotor further.
==PAGE:64==
References
57
References
[1]
P. Veers et al., “Grand challenges in the science of wind energy,” Science, vol. 366,
no. 6464, October 2019. doi: 10.1126/science.aau2027. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.aau2027.
[2]
Dnv’s energy transition outlook 2021, [Accessed: 29/07/2022]. [Online]. Available:
https://eto.dnv.com/2021.
[3]
Offshore wind outlook 2019 – analysis, [Accessed: 29/07/2022]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iea.org/reports/offshore-wind-outlook-2019.
[4]
K. Dykes et al., “Results of iea wind tcp workshop on a grand vision for wind energy
technology,” 2019, Technical Report NREL/TP-5000-72437. [Online]. Available: www.
nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/72437.pdf.
[5]
T. Burton, N. Jenkins, E. Bossanyi, D. Sharpe, and M. Graham, Wind Energy Handbook.
John Wiley & Sons, 2021, 3rd edition. doi: 10.1002/9781119451143.
[6]
A. Knauer, “Rotor blade shaped to enhance wake diffusion,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://patents.justia.com/patent/10975837.
[7]
M. O. L. Hansen, “Aerodynamics of wind turbines,” 3rd edition, 2015.
[8]
A. Betz, “Schraubenpropeller mit geringstem energieverlust. mit einem zusatz von l.
prandtl. nachrichten von der gesellschaft der wissenschaften zu g¨ottingen,” Mathematisch-
Physikalische Klasse 193-217, 1919.
[9]
L. J. Vermeer, J. N. Sørensen, and A. Crespo, “Wind turbine wake aerodynamics,”
Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 39, pp. 467–510, 6-7 2003, issn: 03760421. doi:
10.1016/S0376-0421(03)00078-2.
[10]
A. J. Brand, J. Peinke, and J. Mann, “Turbulence and wind turbines,” Journal of
Physics: Conference series 318, pp. 409–425, 1 2011. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/318/
7/072005.
[11]
D. R. Houck, “Review of wake management techniques for wind turbines,” Wind Energy,
2021, issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.2668.
[12]
N. O. Jensen, “A note on wind generator interaction,” Risø National Laboratory, 1983.
[13]
N. Simisiroglou, S. P. Breton, and S. Ivanell, “Validation of the actuator disc approach
using small-scale model wind turbines,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 2, pp. 587–601, 2
Jul. 2017, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-2-587-2017.
[14]
X. Yang, A. Boomsma, F. Sotiropoulos, B. R. Resor, D. C. Maniaci, and C. L. Kelley,
“Effects of spanwise blade load distribution on wind turbine wake evolution,” 2015. doi:
10.2514/6.2015-0492.
==PAGE:65==
References
58
[15]
L. A. Mart´ınez-Tossas et al., “Numerical investigation of wind turbine wakes under
high thrust coefficient,” Wind Energy, 2021, issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.2688.
[16]
C. Wang, F. Campagnolo, H. Canet, D. J. Barreiro, and C. L. Bottasso, “How realistic
are the wakes of scaled wind turbine models?” Wind Energy Science, vol. 6, pp. 961–981,
3 Jun. 2021, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-6-961-2021.
[17]
N. Tobin, A. M. Hamed, and L. P. Chamorro, “An experimental study on the effects
of winglets on the wake and performance of a model wind turbine enhanced reader,”
Energies, vol. 8, 2015, issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en81011955.
[18]
V. Klimchenko and A. R. Jones, “An experimental study of the effects of winglets
and serrations on the wake of a wind turbine,” American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics Inc, AIAA, 2015, isbn: 9781624103438. doi: 10.2514/6.2015-1493.
[19]
A. S. Nafi, K. Krishnan, A. K. Debnath, E. E. Hackett, and R. Gurka, “Wake charac-
teristics of a freely rotating bioinspired swept rotor blade,” Royal Society Open Science,
vol. 8, 7 Jul. 2021, issn: 20545703. doi: 10.1098/rsos.210779.
[20]
J. F. Herbert-Acero, O. Probst, P. E. R´ethor´e, G. C. Larsen, and K. K. Castillo-Villar,
A review of methodological approaches for the design and optimization of wind farms,
2014. doi: 10.3390/en7116930.
[21]
F. Haces-Fernandez, H. Li, and D. Ramirez, “Improving wind farm power output through
deactivating selected wind turbines,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 187,
pp. 407–422, May 2019, issn: 01968904. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2019.03.028.
[22]
D. R. Houck and E. A. Cowen, “Can you accelerate wind turbine wake decay with
unsteady operation?,” American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc, AIAA,
2019, isbn: 9781624105784. doi: 10.2514/6.2019-2084.
[23]
W. Munters and J. Meyers, “An optimal control framework for dynamic induction
control of wind farms and their interaction with the atmospheric boundary layer,” Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, vol. 375, 2091 April 2017, issn: 1364503X. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2016.0100.
[24]
W. Munters and J. Meyers, “Towards practical dynamic induction control of wind farms:
Analysis of optimally controlled wind-farm boundary layers and sinusoidal induction
control of first-row turbines,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 3, pp. 409–425, 1 January
2018, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-3-409-2018.
[25]
C. VerHulst and C. Meneveau, “Altering kinetic energy entrainment in large eddy
simulations of large wind farms using unconventional wind turbine actuator forcing,”
Energies, vol. 8, pp. 370–386, 1 2015, issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en8010370.
[26]
J. Frederik, B. Doekemeijer, S. Mulders, and J. W. V. Wingerden, “On wind farm wake
mixing strategies using dynamic individual pitch control,” vol. 1618, IOP Publishing
Ltd, Sep. 2020. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1618/2/022050.
[27]
S. H. Bader, V. Inguva, and J. B. Perot, “Improving the efficiency of wind farms via
wake manipulation,” Wind Energy, vol. 21, pp. 1239–1253, 12 December 2018, issn:
10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.2226.
==PAGE:66==
References
59
[28]
N. Johnson et al., “Investigation of innovative rotor concepts for the big adaptive rotor
project,” 2019, National Renewble Energy Laboratory, NREL/TP-5000-73605. [Online].
Available: www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/73605.pdf.
[29]
G. K. Suryanarayana, H. Pauer, and G. E. Meier, “Bluff-body drag reduction by passive
ventilation,” Experiments in Fluids, vol. 16, pp. 73–81, 2 December 1993, issn: 07234864.
doi: 10.1007/BF00944909.
[30]
B. G. Newman, “Multiple actuator-disc theory for wind turbines,” 1986, pp. 215–225.
[31]
A. Rosenberg, S. Selvaraj, and A. Sharma, “A novel dual-rotor turbine for increased wind
energy capture,” vol. 524, Institute of Physics Publishing, 2014. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/524/1/012078.
[32]
M. P. van der Laan et al., “Power curve and wake analyses of the vestas multi-rotor
demonstrator,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 4, pp. 251–271, 2 2019, issn: 23667451. doi:
10.5194/wes-4-251-2019.
[33]
N. S. Ghaisas, A. S. Ghate, and S. K. Lele, “Large-eddy simulation study of multi-rotor
wind turbines,” vol. 1037, Institute of Physics Publishing, Jun. 2018. doi: 10.1088/
1742-6596/1037/7/072021.
[34]
C. L. Kelley, D. C. Maniaci, and B. R. Resor, “Horizontal-axis wind turbine wake
sensitivity to different blade load distributions,” AIAA, vol. 5800, 2015. doi: 10.2514/
6.2015-0490.
[35]
C. L. Kelley, D. C. Maniaci, and B. R. Resor, “Wind turbine blades, wind turbines,
and wind farms having increased power output,” Patent No.: US 10,400,743 B1, 2015.
[36]
B. Moghadassian and A. Sharma, “Designing wind turbine rotor blades to enhance
energy capture in turbine arrays,” Renewable Energy, vol. 148, pp. 651–664, April 2020,
issn: 18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.10.153.
[37]
J. Allen, E. Young, P. Bortolotti, R. King, and G. Barter, “Blade planform design
optimization to enhance turbine wake control,” Wind Energy, January 2022, issn:
1095-4244. doi: 10.1002/we.2699. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/we.2699.
[38]
Y. Zhang, V. Ramdoss, Z. Saleem, X. Wang, G. Schepers, and C. Ferreira, “Effects of root
gurney flaps on the aerodynamic performance of a horizontal axis wind turbine,” Energy,
vol. 187, November 2019, issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.115955.
[39]
M. K. McWilliam, T. K. Barlas, H. A. Madsen, and F. Zahle, “Aero-elastic wind
turbine design with active flaps for aep maximization,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 3,
pp. 231–241, 1 January 2018, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-3-231-2018.
[40]
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Shen, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, and X. Zhang, “Cfd studies of wake
characteristics and power capture of wind turbines with trailing edge flaps,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 7349–7361, 2020, issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2964620.
[41]
G. A. Speakman, M. Abkar, L. A. Mart´ınez-Tossas, and M. Bastankhah, “Wake steering
of multirotor wind turbines,” Wind Energy, vol. 24, pp. 1294–1314, 11 November 2021,
issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.2633.
==PAGE:67==
References
60
[42]
A. P. Stanley and A. Ning, “Coupled wind turbine design and layout optimization with
nonhomogeneous wind turbines,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 4, pp. 99–114, 1 January
2019, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-4-99-2019.
[43]
N. N. Sørensen, “General purpose flow solver applied to flow over hills,” 1995, Risø-R-
827(EN).
[44]
J. A. Michelsen, “Basis 3d — a platform for development of multiblock pde solvers,”
1992, Technical Report AFM 92-05.
[45]
M. P. van der Laan et al., “An improved k-ε model applied to a wind turbine wake
in atmospheric turbulence,” Wind Energy, vol. 18, pp. 889–907, 5 May 2015, issn:
10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.1736.
[46]
J. Boussinesq, “Essai sur la th´eorie des eaux courantes,” 1887, M´emoires pr´esent´es par
divers savants `a l’Acad´emie des Sciences 23 (1): 1-680.
[47]
M. P. van der Laan and S. J. Andersen, “The turbulence scales of a wind turbine wake:
A revisit of extended k-epsilon models,” vol. 1037, Institute of Physics Publishing, Jun.
2018. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1037/7/072001.
[48]
P.-E. R´ethor´e, M. P. van der Laan, N. Troldborg, F. Zahle, and N. N. Sørensen,
“Verification and validation of an actuator disc model,” Wind Energy, vol. 17, pp. 919–
937, 6 2014, issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.1607.
[49]
N. Troldborg, N. N. Sørensen, P. E. R´ethor´e, and M. P. van der Laan, “A consistent
method for finite volume discretization of body forces on collocated grids applied to
flow through an actuator disk,” Computers and Fluids, vol. 119, pp. 197–203, Sep. 2015,
issn: 00457930. doi: 10.1016/j.compfluid.2015.06.028.
[50]
J. N. Sørensen, K. Nilsson, S. Ivanell, H. Asmuth, and R. F. Mikkelsen, “Analytical body
forces in numerical actuator disc model of wind turbines,” Renewable Energy, vol. 147,
pp. 2259–2271, March 2020, issn: 18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.09.134.
[51]
M. P. van der Laan et al., “The k-ε-fP model applied to wind farms,” Wind Energy,
pp. 2065–2084, 18 2015. doi: 10.1002/we.1804.
[52]
M. P. van der Laan, S. J. Andersen, and P. E. R´ethor´e, “Brief communication: Wind-
speed-independent actuator disk control for faster annual energy production calculations
of wind farms using computational fluid dynamics,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 4,
pp. 645–651, 4 December 2019, issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-4-645-2019.
[53]
C. Bak et al., “Description of the dtu 10 mw reference wind turbine,” 2013, DTU -
Department of Wind Energy Report I-0092.
[54]
J. Jonkman, S. Butterfield, W. Musial, and G. Scott, “Definition of a 5-mw reference
wind turbine for offshore system development,” 2009, Technical Report NREL/TP-500-
38060.
[55]
M. Baungaard, M. P. van der Laan, and M. Kelly, “Rans modelling of a single wind
turbine wake in the unstable surface layer,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 7, pp. 783–800,
2022. doi: 10.5194/wes-2021-94.
[56]
M. C. Baungaard, “Modeling of aerodynamic rotor interaction for multi-rotor wind
turbines,” Jul. 2019, DTU Wind Energy-M-0271, MSc Thesis.
==PAGE:68==
References
61
[57]
I. Troen and E. L. Petersen, “European wind atlas,” Risø National Laboratory, 1989.
[58]
R. Stull, “Meteorology for scientists & engineers,” 3rd edition, 2017, Univ. of British
Columbia. isbn 978-0-88865-178-5.
[59]
S. Ivanell, R. Mikkelsen, J. N. Sørensen, and D. Henningson, “Stability analysis of
the tip vortices of a wind turbine,” Wind Energy, vol. 13, pp. 705–715, 8 2010, issn:
10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.391.
[60]
M. P. van der Laan, M. Baungaard, and M. Kelly, “Brief communication: A clarification
of wake recovery mechanisms,” Technical University of Denmark, DTU Wind Energy,
2022. doi: 10.5194/wes-2022-56.
[61]
M. P. van der Laan and M. Abkar, “Improved energy production of multi-rotor wind
farms,” vol. 1256, Institute of Physics Publishing, Jul. 2019. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/1256/1/012011.
