==PAGE:1==
Mean Field Games & Adaptive dynamics
in Evolutionary Models
Master Thesis
Juli 2022
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
Master Thesis
Juli, 2022
ECTS: 30
Duration: 5 months
By
Tobias Rønlev-Knudsen
Under supervision of
Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis studies mean field games [LL07] in the context of an evolutionary model using
methods from adaptive dynamics, partial differential equations, optimisation and func-
tional analysis. We focus on closed-loop control systems derived from the Feynman-Kac
formula. The controls we consider belong to function spaces, i.e. are infinite-dimensional.
Our primary result is an algorithm for determining Nash equilibrium controls for this this
type of system. This algorithm utilises stationarity of an analogue of the so called canoni-
cal equation of function valued adaptive dynamics [DHP06]. Inherently this is a necessary
condition of optimality and we apply the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation in order to
validate solutions. The algorithm was implemented using the FEniCS and dolfin-adjoint
libraries for Python. We apply the algorithm to a case study of a size-structured popu-
lation in which animals compete for mating rights. In particular, we investigate model
structures under which the size-spectrum becomes bimodal and numerically establish a
Nash equilibrium. As a secondary result, we discuss connections of our approach with
the Pontryagin Maximum Principle and Hamiltonian systems. Our findings are relevant
within theoretical ecology and applied mathematics, in particular stochastic evolutionary
models studying optimal strategies.
ii
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Deppartment of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. It corresponds to a
workload of 30 ECTS.
This thesis would not have been possible without my supervisor Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen,
whom has my gratitude for allowing me to study the interesting mix of subjects that this
thesis deals with, and for many good discussions.
Tobias Rønlev-Knudsen
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
HJB
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
MFG Mean-field game
PDE
Partial Differential Equation
PMP
Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle
SDE
Stochastic Differential Equation
Frequently used symbols
λ
adjoint state
E
Expectation
P
Probability
A
Infinitesimal generator
K∗
Mortality augmented forward Kolmogorov operator
K
Mortality augmented backward Kolmogorov operator
L∗
Forward Kolmogorov operator
L
Backward Kolmogorov operator
Ω
Size domain
τ
Foraging activity
e
Constraint operator
I
Cost/reward functional
J
Expected fitness (fitness functional)
L2
Square integrable functions
N
Solution (a size spectrum for each fixed time)
S
Size × time domain
U
Control space
u
control
V
Solution space (function space)
v
state
iv
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Mathematical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Adaptive dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Framework
12
3.1
The game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
The canonical equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Adjoint of an unbounded operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Case
19
4.1
Model structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
The adjoint equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Model data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Algorithm & implementation
31
5.1
Stationarity of the canonical equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Weak formulations & numerical schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Results
37
6.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Main results & comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Synthesis
44
7.1
Perspectives on the adjoint approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Appendices
55
A
Alternate derivation of the adjoint equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B
Dirac delta
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C
Computation of functional derivative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
D
Explanation of code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
E
Numerics of boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
F
Supplementary plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The primary purpose of this thesis is to study the coupling of mean field games and
adaptive dynamics in the context of an evolutionary game. In particular, we pose a mean-
field game considering a size-structured population, in which individual animals optimise
their fitness under influence from the population size-spectrum. We seek to characterise
the optimal strategy, i.e. the Nash equilibrium of this game and understand it in terms of
evolutionary benefits.
The motivation for this thesis is twofold. Firstly, from the viewpoint of theoretical ecology,
we build models in order to describe ecosystems and to predict behaviour, possibly under
the influence of external inputs. In order to predict behaviour, it is essential to understand
the incentives and reasons that drive change. This thesis provides a model that illuminates
the incentive and the behaviour of animals that compete for mating rights.
In the context of evolutionary models, the definitive motivation is fitness. It is a basic
principle of evolution, that natural selection optimises biological traits in order to maximise
fitness. What is optimal is highly dependent on the context, in particular the environment
which an organism finds itself in.
The development and optimisation of traits under
the interplay of organisms and environment is a central notion to the field of adaptive
dynamics. In turn, adaptive dynamics ties closely with the relatively novel area that is
mean field games. This connection enables the application of a wide array of subjects
within applied mathematics, which mean field games rely on. This leads us to the second
motivation for the thesis.
A range of subjects within applied mathematics are related through the study of mean field
games. Application of optimal control theory to games described in terms of dynamical
systems may be used to motivate mean field games. In the case that trajectories of the
dynamical systems are stochastic processes, these systems rely on the notion of stochas-
tic differential equations (SDEs). For Markov processes, the computation of transition
probabilities relies on certain partial differential equations (PDEs). In turn, optimisation
problems subject to PDE constraints have been studied separately under the name PDE-
constrained optimisation. These subjects are connected intimately within the setting of
functional analysis. This thesis seeks to connect these various fields and further existing
methods by exploring equivalence of problems.
Problem formulation
By evolutionary game, we understand a game in which a number of players compete in
a shared environment in an effort to maximise their fitness. Under influence from the
environment, each player utilises a trait or strategy in order to accomplish this goal and
in doing so they affect the environment.
Adaptive dynamics describe the evolution of the strategies and the environment as natural
selection proceeds. It provides a framework and a set of methods for analysing evolutionary
dynamics and for classifying certain strategies of particular interest. For certain combi-
nations of environment and strategy, evolution may come to a halt at so called singular
strategies. A certain type of singular strategy, is the Nash equilibrium. Loosely speaking,
the Nash equilibrium is a strategy which rational players have no incentive to deviate
from. Thus, a (stable) Nash equilibria it is the type of strategy we expect to observe
in nature. Under reasonable assumptions, the Nash equilibrum is characterised as the
solution of a mean field game. This term was coined by J.M. Lasry and P.L. Lions in
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
1
==PAGE:10==
their work [LL07]. A mean field game is a differential type game considering a large num-
ber of identical rational decision makers. The governing equations in a MFG is given in
terms of the mean-field system. This system consists of a pair of equations; 1) a forward
Kolmogorov equation and 2) a generalised Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation.
We will consider a worked case in which the Feynman-Kac formula yields the forward
Kolmogorov equation governing the densities of a size-structured population. The strategy
which we will consider is the foraging activity level which is given in terms of a function
on the size × time domain.
Our primary interest in the mean-field system is to determine the Nash equilibrium so-
lution. In order to do so, we will consider the canonical equation of functional-valued
adaptive dynamics [DHP06]. Specifically, stationarity of the canonical equation suggests
an algorithm that allows for numerical determination of physically relevant Nash equilib-
ria.
The above description is the primary motivation for our problem statement included below.
Problem Statement Mean field games and adaptive dynamics are closely related in the
context of evolutionary models. It is of interest to characterise the Nash equilibrium of
an evolutionary mean field game using adaptive dynamics and numerical computations,
and to investigate model conditions for intraspecific competition begetting bimodal size
distributions.
In order to solve this problem we will need a way to quantify the dependence of fitness
on strategies. This is a functional derivative, which in order to be understood, requires
the notion of the Fréchet derivative.
Furthermore, to compute the derivative, we will
need the notion of the adjoint equation of a partial differential equation. For numerical
simulations, we may get reasonably far by relying heavily on the Python libraries FEniCS
and dolfin-adjoint. However, in the interest of building a deeper understanding, we
will study the mathematical framework in some detail. This allows us to reach interesting
conclusions, that have valuable implications pertaining to theory as well as application.
State of the art
To the best of the knowledge of this author, the explicit coupling of the canonical equation
of adaptive dynamics with a mean field game is novel. Within theoretical ecology and
adaptive dynamics, function-valued optimal strategies have already been studied using the
canonical equation [DHP06]; [PDH06]; [PHD13]. Mean field games have been applied to
a variety of topics. The original work [LL07] focused on economic models, whereas [AL19]
used mean field games to model crowd motion. Works considering mean field games in an
ecological and evolutionary context also exist in the current literature. Vertical migration
of animals in the ocean have been studied in the context of mean field games [TM22],
more recently including random fluctuations [MT22]. A similar model considering a mean
field game for a size-structured population was recently devised as part of a masters thesis
[Knu22].
This thesis considers a system similar to these, and aims to introduce a new approach
to solving these types of systems using methods inspired by existing theory on adaptive
dynamics.
2
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
In this section, we review some important topics ranging from fundamental concepts of
functional analysis to stochastic optimal control and adaptive dynamics.
2.1
Mathematical background
We begin by reviewing the required mathematical background. We prepare by consider-
ing some fundamental concepts from functional analysis which serve as background for
introducing the remaining topics. We then move to defining the Fréchet and Gâteaux
derivatives, which we shall need in order to understand the adjoint equation of the fol-
lowing section. Finally, we consider optimally controlled stochastic processes and their
relation to mean-field games.
2.1.1
Functional analysis
We provide a brief survey of some fundamental topics within functional analysis to remind
ourselves of some relevant results and to establish notation. This survey is loosely based
on [Kre89] and [Hin+09] which should be referred to for a proper review.
In this project, we will mainly restrict ourselves to constructions for Hilbert spaces, i.e.
Banach spaces that are equipped with an inner product ⟨·, ·⟩and are complete with respect
to the metric induced by it. Furthermore, we will only consider real Hilbert spaces, allowing
us to ignore complex conjugation when considering inner products.
Of great interest is the Hilbert space L2. Let S ⊆Rn for n ∈N, then for f : S 7→R we
define the norm ∥·∥L2 as
∥f∥L2 =
Z
S
f(s)2 ds
 1
2 .
The space L2(S) is then given by the square integrable functions i.e.
L2(S) := {f : S 7→R | ∥f∥L2(S) < ∞}.
L2(S) is a Hilbert space with inner product given by
⟨f, g⟩L2 =
Z
S
f(s)g(s) ds,
This inner product induces the norm ∥f∥L2 = ⟨f, f⟩
1
2
L2, with respect to which, L2 is
complete.
We now define a functional ϕ, as a mapping from a function space X (e.g. X = L2(S))
to the real numbers,
ϕ : X 7→R.
Note, that we do not require functionals to be linear - if they are linear it will be specified
explicitly.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
3
==PAGE:12==
For normed spaces X, Y let B(X, Y ) denote the set of bounded linear operators mapping
X to Y . Then, we define the dual X′ of X, as the set of bounded linear functionals on X,
that is
X′ = B(X, R).
An important result within functional analysis is the Riesz representation theorem. If H is
a Hilbert space (for instance L2), the Riesz’s representation theorem allows us to identify
H with its dual, H′ = H. In particular for f ∈H′ there exists a unique z ∈H such that
fz(x) = ⟨x, z⟩
∀x ∈H,
and we may identify fz = z. Thus, when relevant, we will use z and fz interchangeably,
tacitly understanding that z has been identified with fz.
Given Hilbert spaces H1, H2 and a bounded linear operator T ∈B(H1, H2), we define the
Hilbert adjoint T ∗∈B(H2, H1) by
⟨Tx, y⟩= ⟨x, T ∗y⟩
∀x ∈H1, ∀y ∈H2.
In the context of unbounded linear operators, we may generalise the concept of the Hilbert
adjoint to so called densely defined operators. Here we consider only a single Hilbert space
H. The operator T is said to be densely defined in H if its domain D(T) is dense in H.
In this case we associate the linear Hilbert adjoint T ∗: D(T ∗) 7→H with,
D(T ∗) = {y ∈H | ∃y∗s.t. ⟨Tx, y⟩= ⟨x, y∗⟩for all x ∈D(T)},
and we define
y∗= T ∗y.
2.1.2
Gâteaux and Fréchet derivatives
Throughout the project, we will need the notions of Gâteaux and Fréchet differentiability.
We will use the definitions from [Hin+09], restated here with notation adapted for use in
this project.
For Banach spaces X, Y , U ⊂X open, the operator F : U ⊂X 7→Y is said to be
directionally differentiable at x ∈V , in direction δx ∈X if the limit
d F(x, δx) = lim
ϵ→0+
F(x + ϵδx) −F(x)
ϵ
(2.1)
exists for all δx ∈X. If the directional derivative F ′(x) : X ∋δx →d F(x, δx) ∈Y is
linear and bounded i.e. F ′(x) ∈B(X, Y ), then F is Gâteaux differentiable.
Similarly, F is said to be Fréchet differentiable at x ∈U if i) F is Gâteaux differentiable
and ii)
F(x + δx) −F(x) −F ′(x)δx
 = o(∥δx∥)
for ∥δx∥→0.
(2.2)
4
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:13==
If F is Fréchet differentiable at all x ∈V ⊂U then it is said to be Fréchet differentiable
in V .
We will denote F ′(x) ∈B(X, Y ) as the Gâteaux or directional derivative, whereas F ′ :
X 7→B(X, Y ) is the Fréchet derivative. Furthermore we will use the usual derivative
notation
d
dxF(x) and F ′(x) interchangeably.
A useful result for Fréchet differentiable operators is that the chain rule holds, i.e. if F
and G are differentiable at G(x) and x respectively, then
d
dxF(G(x)) = F ′(G(x))G′(x).
If a function F : X×Y 7→Z is Fréchet differentiable at (x, y) ∈X×Y then we may consider
the partial derivatives of F(·, y) and F(x, ·) as ∂xF(x, y) and ∂yF(x, y) respectively. Here
it holds that the total derivative is given as.
F ′(x, y)(δx, δy) = ∂xF(x, y)δx + ∂yF(x, y)δy.
Example
For a function x ∈X = L2([0, 1]), consider the functional
F(x) = ⟨x, x⟩.
We find a candidate for the Fréchet derivative, F ′ ∈X′ by computing the Gáteaux
derivative F ′(x) in direction δx ∈X. From (2.1), we have the equivalent
d F(x, δx) = d
dϵF(x + ϵδx)|ϵ=0
= d
dϵ
Z
X
(x(t) + ϵδx(t))2 dt|ϵ=0
=
Z
X
2ϵδx(t) + 2x(t)δx(t) dt|ϵ=0
=
Z
X
2x(t)δx(t) dt
= ⟨δx, 2x⟩
that is we have the candidate
F ′ : x 7→F ′(x) = ⟨·, 2x⟩.
We check that this is indeed the Fréchet derivative by considering
F(x + δx) −F(x) −F ′(x)δx
 =
Z
X
δx(t)2 dt
= ⟨δx, δx⟩
= o(∥δx∥)
for ∥δx∥→0.
As X is a Hilbert space, we identify X = X′, and in particular the Riesz representation
F ′(x) = 2x ∈X as equivalent to F ′(x) = ⟨·, 2x⟩∈X′.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
5
==PAGE:14==
In the special case of a (possibly nonlinear) functional, i.e. a mapping F : X 7→R we have
that
F ′ : X 7→B(X, R)
so that by identifying X′ = X we may write F ′(x) ∈X (consider the example). This allows
us to equate functional derivatives with elements belonging to their argument space, as
we usually do when we consider differential equations. This will be vital in later sections.
2.1.3
The adjoint equation
We now introduce the adjoint equation as a means to determine a functional derivative of
a state variable subject to constraints. [Hin+09] provides two distinct approaches for the
derivation of the adjoint equation, the first of which is reviewed in appendix A and the
second, using a Lagrange relaxed functional which we describe here.
Based on the more general results of [Hin+09], we consider the setting of a functional
I : U × V 7→R and a constraint operator e : U × V 7→Z with U, V , Z Hilbert spaces.
The constraint operator is defined in order to impose the constraint equation
e(u, v) = 0,
where u ∈U is a control and v ∈V the state governing function.
Our goal is then
to determine the derivative
d
duI(u, v) such that e(u, v) = 0. Assume that the constraint
e(u, v) = 0 uniquely defines v = v(u) and define
ˆI(u) = I(u, v(u)),
then we may equivalently determine ˆI′(u). For λ ∈Z′ introduce the Lagrange relaxed
objective functional
L(u, v, λ) = I(u, v) + λe(u, v).
(2.3)
Then, by definition of ˆI we have
ˆI(u) = L(u, v(u), λ).
This implies that
ˆI′(u) = ∂uL(u, v(u), λ) + ∂vL(u, v(u), λ)v′(u).
(2.4)
We note that we can express ∂uλe(u, v(u)) as
λ∂ue(u, v)δu = ⟨λ, ∂ue(u, v)δu⟩
= ⟨∂ue(u, v)∗λ, δu⟩,
i.e. λ∂ue(u, v) = ∂ue(u, v)∗λ and by the same argument λ∂ve(u, v) = ∂ve(u, v)∗λ. Thus,
∂uL(u, v(u), λ) = ∂uI(u, v(u)) + ∂ue(u, v(u))∗λ
∂vL(u, v(u), λ) = ∂vI(u, v(u)) + ∂ve(u, v(u))∗λ.
6
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:15==
Choosing λ = λ(u) so that ∂vL(u, v(u), λ) = 0, we obtain the adjoint equation
∂ve(u, v(u))∗λ = −∂vI(u, v(u)).
(2.5)
For equation (2.4), using the above result for ∂uL we may then determine,
ˆI′(u) = ∂uI(u, v(u)) + ∂ue(u, v(u))∗λ(u).
(2.6)
This approach to computing the derivative ˆI′ has the advantage, that we do not need to
compute v′(u) which we consider a diﬀicult task.
2.1.4
Stochastic optimal control
The theory of optimal control seeks to determine optimal strategies (controls) in order
to maximise (or minimise) a given cost-functional dependent on a dynamical system. We
here review some basic concepts of controlled stochastic differential equations. Most of the
following review is based on [Thy21], with some details, in particular the Feynman-Kac
formula taken from [Øks98].
We will use the setting of a state variable x ∈Ω⊆Rn and independent variable time
t ∈[t0, tf]. We consider a stochastic process {Xt : t0 ≤t ≤tf} taking values on Ωand
Markov control u defined on S = Ω× [t0, tf]. For functions f, g consider the controlled
stochastic differential equation
dXt = f(Xt, u(Xt, t)) dt + g(Xt, u(Xt, t)) dBt,
(2.7)
where {Bt} is standard Brownian motion. Furthermore, we impose the initial condition
Xt0 = xt0 and note that f and g are to be understood as functions on S, and may depend on
Xt and t through the control u considered a parameter. We may equivalently write f(u) =
f(·, u(·, ·)), g(u) = g(·, u(·, ·)) or include u as a prameter i.e. f(·; u), g(·; u). The equation
(2.7) refers to the Itô interpretation, i.e.
for stochastic processes Ft = f(Xt, u(Xt, t))
Gt = g(Xt, u(Xt, t)) we require that
Xt = X0 +
Z t
0
Fs ds +
Z t
0
Gs dBs
(2.8)
is an Itô process. This imposes some technical requirements for the measurability of Ft
and in particular that Gt should be Itô integrable. Furthermore, in order to guarantee
uniqueness and existence of solutions of (2.7), we require that f should be Lipschitz
continous in x and that f and g satisfy linear growth bounds.
For the process Xt with control u, we associate an infinitesimal generator Au. Intuitively,
this operator associates for each function h : Ω7→R an initial growth rate of h(Xt) for t
near t0 in terms of a function depending on xt0 ∈Ω. In the context of optimal control,
h may depend on u in the same manner as f and g. For simplicity we restrict ourselves
to h ∈C2
0(Ω) (twice continuously differentiable functions with bounded support). Then,
since {Xt} is an Itô process, it is an established result that,
Auh = ∂h(u)
∂x f(u) + 1
2g(u)2 ∂h
∂x2 .
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
7
==PAGE:16==
It follows from another important result, Dynkin’s formula, that the generator may be
used to compute expectations of the sort EXs=xh(Xtf ). The equations governing these
expectations, are partial differential equations, one of which is the backward Kolmogorov
equation. For w, v functions on Ωand fixed control u, define the operators Lu, L∗
u by
Luw = ∂w
∂x f(u) + 1
2g(u)2 ∂w
∂x2 ,
L∗
uv = −∂
∂x (f(u)v) + 1
2
∂
∂x2

g(u)2v

,
as the backward and forward Kolmogorov operators respectively. We note that under the
given assumptions, the operator Au coincides with the backward Kolmogorov operator.
These operators let us pose the backward and forward Kolmogorov equations,
∂tv = L∗
uv,
−∂tw = Luw.
(2.9)
It is a consequence of the Dynkin formula, that if we impose the terminal condition
w(x, tf) = h(x) for the backward equation, then for s ≤tf we obtain,
w(x, s) = EXs=xh(Xtf ).
We say that the forward and backward equations are adjoint, since for an appropriate
choice of boundary conditions, the operators L∗
u and Lu are adjoint on L2(Ω). If the initial
and terminal conditions are chosen as probability distributions, these equations describe
the transition densities p(s →t, x →y) of {Xt}. In particular, for fixed initial condition
(s, x), the forward equation governs the probability density v(t, y) = p(s →t, x →y),
whereas for fixed terminal condition (t, y) the backward equations governs the likelihood
w(s, x) = p(s →t, x →y). Note, if the densities are not defined as functions but rather as
distributions, the above formalism may still be applied by considering it in a weak sense.
We will need to consider an extension of the above framework in form of the Feynman-
Kac formula. Intuitively, we may kill the stochastic process {Xt} at some random time
td ≤tf, after which the state Xt leaves Ω. In the context of determining expectations of
some function h ∈C2
0, this corresponds to seeking instead,
˜w(x, s) = EXs=x

exp

−
Z tf
s
m(Xt, t; u) dt

h(x)

,
(2.10)
where the killing rate m(u) ∈C(Ω) is lower bounded. The Feynman-Kac formula states
that we should consider the augmented generator,
˜
Auh = Auh −m(u)h.
and the augmented Kolmogorov equations,
∂tv = L∗
uv −m(u)v,
−∂tw = Luw −m(u)v.
(2.11)
In particular, solving the backward equation for w with the terminal condition w(x, tf) =
h(x) the desired relation (2.10) holds. It is simple to show that these equations are adjoint
in the same sense as the original Kolmogorov equations, see the example below.
8
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:17==
Example: adjoint equations.
We consider the augmented Kolmogorov equations (2.11), and show that the opera-
tors, Ku, K∗
u, given by
Kuw = Luw −m(u)w,
K∗
uv = L∗
uv −m(u)v,
are indeed adjoint on L2(Ω).
This is a trivial extension of the established result,
that the backward and forward Kolmogorov operators are adjoint. We show this for
homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions, i.e.
we assume v, w = 0 on ∂Ω.
To
keep notation light, we omit the explicit inclusion of u for functions f, g and m. Let
primes indicate partial derivative with respect to x ∈Ω, i.e. ∂xh = h′, then repeated
application of integration by parts yields
⟨Kuw, v⟩L2(Ω) =
Z
Ω
 w′f + Dw′′ −mw
 v dx
=
Z
Ω
w′fv dx +
Z
Ω
Dw′′v dx −
Z
Ω
vmw dx
=
Z
Ω
−w(fv)′ dx −
Z
Ω
w′(Dv)′ dx −
Z
Ω
vmw dx
=
Z
Ω
w
 −(fv)′ + (Dv)′′ −mv
 dx
= ⟨w, K∗
uv⟩L2(Ω).
In the context of optimal control, one typically considers a running reward h(Xt, u(Xt)) ∈
R and a terminal reward k(Xtf , tf). Then, conditioning on our chosen strategy u and
initial condition (t0, x0) = (s, x), we define the performance objective
P(x, s, u) = Eu,Xs=x

k(Xtf , tf) +
Z tf
s
h(Xt, u(Xt)) dt

,
(2.12)
i.e. the expected total reward. We then state our problem as that of finding u = µ ∈U
as to maximise P given the system dynamics (2.7) with initial condition as above. Note,
the performance objective P is also often known as a cost/reward-function or functional.
Within the field of stochastic optimal control, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Belmman (HJB) equa-
tion is a key result.
It enables us, to verify the optimality of a control, given a cost
functional. The equation governs the value function
W(x, s) = sup
u∈U
P(x, s, u),
which if the optimal control u = µ exists implies that W(x, s) = P(x, s, µ). The HJB
equation can now be stated as
∂W
∂t + sup
u∈U
(AuW + h(u)) = 0,
in S
W(·, tf) = k.
(2.13)
If an optimal control exists, the corresponding value function should satisfy the HJB
equation. To accommodate the extension of the problem in which we include a killing rate
m, we accordingly replace the generator Au with ˜
Au in the HJB equation.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
9
==PAGE:18==
We conclude our review of stochastic optimal control, by noting a connection with PDE
constrained optimisation. In particular, given a control u and an initial condition (x0, t0),
let v(x, t) = p(x0 →x, t0 →t) be the transition probabilities of the corresponding stochas-
tic process {Xt}. Introduce δ¯t as the Dirac delta on [t0, tf] located at ¯t ∈{t0, tf}. We use
a definition of the Dirac delta satisfying,
Z tf
t0
δ¯tp(t) dt = p(¯t),
for ¯t ∈{t0, tf},
for p defined on [t0, tf]. Since this is not the usual definition of Dirac delta we include a de-
tailed justification in appendix B. With these conventions, seeking to maximise P(x0, t0, u)
with respect to u, we may equivalently define,
I(u, v) = ⟨h + δtf k, v⟩L2(S),
where the density v is governed by the forward Kolmogorov equation ∂tv = L∗
uv, subject to
initial distribution v(·, t0) = v0 induced by x0. The equivalence follows, since expectation
is computed through integration. Specifically, for initial condition (x, s) ∈S fixed we have
P(x, s, u) =
Z
Ω
k(x, tf)v(x, tf) +
Z tf
s
h(u)(x)v(x, t) dt dx
= ⟨δtf k + h, v⟩L2(S).
2.1.5
Mean field systems
We introduce a mean field system as a coupling of the (mortality augmented) forward
Kolmogorov (2.11) and HJB (2.13) equations.
The coupling is motivated as a game of n →∞players, controlling the processes {Xt}i,
i = 1, 2, ..., n governed by equations of the type (2.7). We assume that all players are
identical in the sense that the terms f and g and the control u are shared throughout
all the governing SDEs. Accordingly, we may focus our attention on a single arbitrary
player and drop the index i in notation. Each player seeks to maximise their performance
measured by some performance objective, subject to the state of the remaining players i.e.
the mean field. This type of system was presented by [LL07] whom showed that in the
limit n →∞, the Nash equilibrium is governed by a so called mean field system. The first
equation of the system, the forward Kolmogorov equation, governs for each control u ∈U
the densities of the states v. The second equation, a generalised HJB equation, forces the
optimality of the control through the value function W. The novelty of the HJB equation
in the mean field system comes from the performance objective, which may depend on the
density v. Analogously to (2.12), define
P(x, s, u; v) = Eu,Xs=x

k(Xtf , tf; v(·, tf)) +
Z tf
s
h(Xt, u(Xt); v(·, t)) dt

.
(2.14)
This performance objective incorporates the mean field by inclusion of the distribution
of the states of the remaining players in terms of the density v.
The dependence on
the mean field is expressed through the running and terminal rewards h and k which
we modify accordingly. This modification has direct consequences for the HJB equation,
which consequently couples with the forward Kolmogorov equation.
10
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:19==
Parameter dependence
In the following we will often see functions and functionals with a parameter depen-
dence on a control or state. Since it is not always convenient to express this explicitly,
we allow alternate notation. Specifically, we will use subscripts of functions and func-
tionals interchangeably with parameter dependence, e.g. Pv(x, s, u) = P(x, s, u; v) or
simply omit the parameter entirely if it is not essential in the given context.
2.2
Adaptive dynamics
Within evolutionary game theory, adaptive dynamics provides a means to investigate the
development and selection of traits over evolutionary time scales using dynamics systems.
Original results were focused on finite-dimensional traits, whereas more recent studies have
extended this formalism to infinite dimensions, i.e. function-valued traits, see in particular
[DHP06]. The following short description of adaptive dynamics is based on [Now06] and
[Die04].
In adaptive dynamics, the notion of the invasion exponent, or equivalently the invasion
fitness, is central in determining the evolutionary dynamics. To explain this concept, we
consider an environment and a resident population, with trait uR ∈U, having reached its
ecological equilibrium. Here U is the trait-space, which is a function-space in the cases we
will consider. As time passes, small mutations in the resident population occur and a new
trait may arise. This new trait uI may invade the population depending on its ability to
increase in frequency. This ability is described by the invasion exponent E : U × U 7→R.
The invasion exponent E(uI, uR) is defined as the expected growth rate of the rare mutant
with trait uI in an environment dominated by the resident population with trait uR. If
the invasion exponent is negative, the potential invader fails, whereas a positive invasion
exponent means the invader has a chance at invading and possibly replacing the resident.
Since the invasion exponent is defined for populations that have reached equilibrium, it is
a natural consequence that E(uR, uR) = 0.
We define the selection gradient, as the derivative of the invasion exponent with respect
to the invader evaluated at the resident strategy, i.e. ∂1E(uR, uR). The selection gradient
indicates the direction in which traits change with evolution.
We say that a trait u = ˆu is an evolutionary singular strategy, if the selection gradient
vanishes,
∂1E(ˆu, ˆu) = 0 =⇒ˆu is a singular strategy.
Singular strategies may have different characteristics by which they are classified. For
example, an evolutionary stable strategy (ESS) (also known as an unbeatable strategy), is
a singular strategy ˆu for which no rare mutant can invade, corresponding to a maximum
in the invasion exponent. Of interest is also the continuously stable strategy, which is an
ESS and an attractor of the evolutionary dynamics.
Closely related to the ESS, is the Nash equilibrium. In the context of game-theory, it is
defined as the strategy, that if adopted by all players, provides no incentive for any of the
players to change their strategy. Any ESS is a Nash equilibrium, but the converse may
not be true. We will return to the concept of a Nash equilibrium in section 3.1.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Framework
3.1
The game
We now outline the main goal of this project as that of finding a Nash equilibrium in a
mean-field game. We introduce a generic framework for the type of model we will consider,
but leave out much detail in order to keep some generality for the sake of later results.
The basis of the mean-field game is a controlled stochastic differential equation. We will
consider a domain Ω= [xmin, xmax], S = Ω× [t0, tf] and consider stochastic processes
{Xt}i, i = 1, 2, .., n, with (Xt, t)i ∈S governed by the same SDE (2.7) based on different
realisations of Brownian motion.
Applying the abstraction of a mean field game, we
let n →∞and consider a common control u : S 7→R. We accompany the stochastic
differential equation(s) by a performance objective P(·; v) as in (2.14).
Here v is the
density we find by solving the (mortality augmented) forward Kolmogorov equation (2.11).
In the context of a mean field game, we interpret v in two ways. Firstly, as the probability
density of the individual player, second, as the distribution of states in the population, i.e.
the mean field. For any given player we then seek to maximise P(x0, t0, u; v) with respect
to u ∈U. The performance objective may equivalently be written conveniently as
I(u, v; v) = ⟨hv(u) + δtf kv, v⟩L2(S),
(3.1)
where we understand hv(u) = h(·, u; v), kv = k(·, tf; v(·, tf). Note how the density v is
included according to its interpretations, 1) as the density of the individual player which
we integrate against when computing the expected reward and 2) as an indicator of the
mean field, determining the rewards hv, kv. Define the constraint operator e : U × V 7→Z
e(u, v) = K∗
uv −∂tv,
(3.2)
then we may impose the forward Kolmogorov equation as e(u, v) = 0. Under appropriate
restrictions for the functions f and g defining the Kolmogorov operators, we assume that
e(u, v) = 0 for each u ∈U uniquely defines a solution v = v(u). Accordingly we define
ˆIu(u) = I(u, v(u); v(u)).
In this notation, a Nash equilibrium control u = µ is characterised by
ˆIµ(µ) = sup
u
ˆIµ(u).
(3.3)
To this problem corresponds a mean-field system of the type described in section 2.1.5.
For some initial condition of the forward equation v(·, t0) = v0 this is given by,
(K∗
µv −∂tv = 0,
v(·, t0) = v0,
∂tW + KµW + hv(µ) = 0,
W(·, tf) = kv,
(3.4)
where the optimal u = µ satisfies
12
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:21==
KµW + h(µ; v(µ)) = sup
u∈U
(KuW + h(u; v(u))) .
In the remainder of our work, the primary focus is that of solving the system (3.4) and
thus to determine the optimal control µ.
Function spaces and notation:
In section 2.1.3 we used U, V to denote the control and solution spaces, while Z
was the space in which our constraint was formulated. We will continue to use this
notation, but assume specifically that U = S = V = L2(S), where S = Ω×[t0, tf] and
Ω= [xmin, xmax]. These assumptions are convenient, but for many applications they
may be too harsh. Some generalisations follow readily, for example we may easily
extend our results to Ω⊆Rn by simply repeating our argument for each dimension.
When considering derivatives of functions, we tacitly assume that the functions in-
volved are suﬀiciently smooth. Further restrictions of the L2 space may occur when we
require that states satisfy certain boundary and initial or terminal conditions. Within
PDE theory it is common to incorporate these conditions explicitly in the notation
for the state-space V . Since we will be considering a variety of conditions, we choose
to note these separately, and keep the notation for V simple.
For the sake of generality, the above description of the mean field game, was not attached
to any particular physical setting. Nonetheless, in our further work we will be motivated
by methods within adaptive dynamics and thus we briefly relate the above to this context.
We may speak of evolutionary games, as organisms in a common environment seek to
maximise their fitness, possibly at the expense or to the benefit of others. This is closely
related with the mean field interpretation of optimal control in which we consider a per-
formance objective of the type (2.14) or equivalently (3.1). We may connect the two by
letting the players of the mean-field game be organisms in the evolutionary game. Conse-
quently the mean field is the mass of players acting on each individual thus constituting
an environment. Accordingly, in the notation of section 2.2, we let ˆIuR(uI) be the invasion
exponent associated with the rare strategy uI in a population dominated by the resident
strategy uR. Thus, the Nash equilibrium u = µ directly corresponds to that discussed
in section 2.2 and is a singular strategy of the adaptive dynamics. This consolidation of
the evolutionary and mean field game assumes that the organisms in question are similar.
Many ecologically relevant games are played between vastly different species in which the
mean-field abstraction does not immediately apply, e.g. a predator-prey scenario where
two distinct types of players appear. Our primary interest is that of modelling competi-
tion of conspecifics, where we may reasonably assume that players are identical. In this
context, the environment or mean field describes the type and amount of competition
that an individual faces. More generally, we consider the case in which rare invaders play
a game against the resident population, with the prize being the ecological niche that
the given species occupies. At any given evolutionary time, the population is reasonably
assumed homogeneous, but with evolutionary time the adaptive dynamics slowly advance
the strategy u.
3.2
The canonical equation
We now propose an indirect approach to determine a Nash equilibrium of the mean-
field system (3.4). This approach is inspired by the canonical equation of function-valued
adaptive dynamics described in [DHP06]. Loosely speaking, the canonical equation governs
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
13
==PAGE:22==
the evolutionary dynamics of a function-valued trait. Equilibrium points of the canonical
equation are traits where evolution comes to a halt. [DHP06] describe three distinct types
of equilibria; covariance-induced, extinction-induced and selection-induced. We will focus
our study on the latter, and completely ignore the influence of covariance relating to the
mutation process.
Consider S, U, V and Z as before. Define
˜U := {˜u : R × S 7→R | ˜u(T, ·) ∈U}
such that for ˜u ∈˜U, for each evolutionary time T ∈R, ˜u(T, ·) ∈U specifies a control. In
the following, we will consider functions u, ˜u satisfying u = ˜u(T, ·). For a fixed resident
strategy, we model the invasion exponent of section 2.2 using the reduced functional ˆI :
U 7→R as described in section 3.1. For the underlying functional I : U × V 7→R we then
consider the equation,
∂T ˜u(T, ·) = d
duI(u, v)
s.t. e(u, v) = 0.
(3.5)
That is, at evolutionary time T, the change in the control ˜u is given by the functional
derivative of I with respect to the fixed-evolutionary time control u for some function v
satisfying the (partial differential) equation e(u, v) = 0. Considering again ˆI as in section
3.1, the equation (3.5) can the be written as
∂T ˜u(T, ·) = ˆI′(u)
(3.6)
In order to justify that the equation makes sense, we will need to consider relevant function
spaces. For the left hand side of (3.6), by definition of the partial Fréchet derivatives we
have that
∂T ˜u : R × S 7→R′
so that by identifying R′ = R
∂T ˜u(T, ·) : S 7→R.
For the right hand side, we have
ˆI′ : U 7→B(U, R) = U′.
Using that U is a Hilbert space, we can identify U′ = U, so that
ˆI′(u) ∈U,
i.e. ˆI′(u) maps S to R and equation (3.6) makes sense on U.
Now, let
E : U × U 7→R
14
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:23==
so that for fixed uR ∈U, E(uI, uR) is the invasion exponent for invader uI ∈U. Here R
is used to indicate that uR is the control of the resident, that in the context of the game
of section 3.1 determines the environment. For arbitrary fixed uf ∈U this corresponds to
setting
ˆIuf (u) = E(u, uf).
Allowing the notation ˜u′(T) = ∂T ˜u(T, ·), recalling that u = ˜u(T, ·) and considering uf = u
(as a parameter), the equation (3.6) can be written succinctly as
˜u′(T) = ˆI′
u(u)
(3.7)
which we will henceforth refer to simply as the canonical equation. To clarify the notation
ˆI′
u(u), consider
ˆI′
u(u) = ∂1E(u, u),
i.e. the subscript u is to be treated as a ”fixed” parameter when taking derivatives.
Of particular interest, are stationary points of the canonical equation. A stationary point
u = ˆµ ∈U is a control such that
ˆI′
ˆµ(ˆµ) = 0.
Stationarity of the canonical equation provides a necessary condition for Nash equilibria.
To show this, assume that u = µ is a Nash point then
ˆIµ(µ) ≥ˆIµ(u),
∀u ∈U.
(3.8)
and necessarily ˆI′
µ(µ) = 0.
If this was not the case, i.e.
ˆIµ(µ) ̸= 0 then for ϵ > 0,
ν = ϵ˜ν ∈U, write
ˆIµ(µ + ν) = ˆIµ(µ) + ⟨ν, ˆI′
µ(µ)⟩+ O(ϵ2),
so that for ˜ν = ˆI′
µ(µ) and ϵ > 0 suﬀiciently small
ˆIµ(µ + ν) −ˆIµ(µ) = ϵ⟨ˆI′
µ(µ), ˆI′
µ(µ)⟩+ O(ϵ2)
> 0.
But this contradicts (3.8), so µ must be a stationary point.
This necessary condition suggests that we may find a candidate Nash equilibrium by
solving the canonical for stationary points (vectors).
This provides an alternative to
solving the mean field system (3.4) directly. Once a candidate solution u = ˆµ is obtained,
we may compute the corresponding density ˆv = v(ˆµ). If indeed ˆµ is a Nash equilibrium,
it should satisfy the HJB equation of (3.4) with rewards hˆv(ˆµ) and kˆv. This allows us to
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
15
==PAGE:24==
verify that the problem has been solved and that ˆµ is a Nash equilibrium of the mean-field
game.
In order to solve the canonical equation, we require the functional gradient ˆI′
u(u), which
we will compute using the adjoint equation and the framework of sections 2.1.3. In order
to further discern equations (2.5) and (2.6), we will need to require a specific form of the
constraint operator e and the functional I.
3.3
Adjoint of an unbounded operator
Unboundedness of the constraint operator e from section 2.1.3 poses a technical problem,
when we attempt to derive the adjoint equation using the arguments presented so far. In
particular, our efforts will focus on the case in which e is a (linear) differential operator
in its second argument, and thus unbounded. This means that the partial derivatives
∂ve(u, v) and the adjoint operators derived from this, may not be well posed.
3.3.1
Adjoint of densely defined linear operator
In the case that e is linear in its second argument, we may circumvent the problem, by
following the Lagrange-formalism of section 2.1.3 with slight modifications.
To begin, we need the assumption that for each fixed u ∈U, e(u, ·) is a densely defined
operator in V . For linear differential operators defined on L2(S) this is the case, since
smooth functions with compact support are dense in L2 (see for example [Chr10]). This
allows us to write equation (2.3) as
L(u, v, λ) = I(u, v) + ⟨λ, e(u, v)⟩
= I(u, v) + ⟨e∗(u, λ), v⟩.
Here we have identified λ ∈Z′ to its dual space and e∗(u, ·) is the adjoint of e(u, ·). This
lets us rewrite the partial derivative ∂vL as
∂vL(u, v(u), λ)δv = ∂vI(u, v(u))δv + ∂v⟨e∗(u, λ), v⟩δv
= ∂vI(u, v(u))δv + ⟨e∗(u, λ), δv⟩.
Letting ∂vL(u, v(u), λ) = 0 the adjoint equation in its strong form becomes,
e∗(u, λ) = −∂vI(u, v(u)),
(3.9)
which, since we only need to consider the adjoint for perturbations δv, should formally be
understood as,
⟨e∗(u, λ), δv⟩= −⟨∂vI(u, v(u)), δv⟩.
3.3.2
Adjoint equation of time-dependent PDE
In order to ease our later work, we provide an example derivation of the adjoint equation
for a generic controlled PDE. For simplicity, let the setting be as in section 3.1. Let u ∈U
be the control, v ∈V be the state and c : U ×V 7→R some differential operator. Consider
the generic time dependent PDE
16
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:25==
∂tv(x, t) = c(u(x, t), v(x, t)),
subject to initial condition v(·, t0) = v0 and arbitrary boundary conditions on ∂Ω. Letting
e(u, v) = c(u, v)−∂tv the PDE (without initial condition) may be expressed as e(u, v) = 0
and we are within the formalism discussed above. If we aim to determine the adjoint
operators ∂ue(u, v)∗, e∗(u, v) we will need the the inner product on S given by
⟨p, q⟩=
Z
Ω
Z tf
t0
p(x, t)q(x, t) dt dx.
Generically we have
∂ue(u, v)δu = ∂uc(u, v)δu,
∂ue(u, v)∗= ∂uc(u, v)∗.
For the operator e∗(u, v) we let z ∈Z and v ∈V , then the adjoint, can be computed as
⟨e(u, v), z⟩= ⟨c(u, v), z⟩−⟨∂tv, z⟩
= ⟨v, c∗(u, z)⟩−⟨∂tv, z⟩,
where c∗(u, ·) : Z′ 7→V ′ is the adjoint of c(u, ·). We focus now on the second term, that is,
the adjoint of the differential operator (u, v) 7→∂tv. Using integration by parts we have
that
⟨∂tv, z⟩=
Z
Ω
vz|tf
t0 −
Z tf
t0
v(x, t)∂tz(x, t) dt dx.
In order to express this as an inner product, again use the Dirac delta δt defined at the
boundaries t = t0 and t = tf (see appendix B). Using the Dirac delta, the above may be
written as,
⟨∂tv, z⟩=
Z
Ω
Z tf
t0

δtf (t) −δt0(t)

v(x, t)z(x, t) −v(x, t)∂tz(x, t) dt dx
= ⟨v,

δtf −δt0

z −∂tz⟩.
Thus,
⟨e(u, v), z⟩= ⟨v, c∗(u, z)⟩−⟨v,

δtf −δt0

z −∂tz⟩
We conclude that the adjoint operator e∗(u, ·) is given by,
e∗(u, z) = c∗(u, z) +

δt0 −δtf

z + ∂tz.
Since the adjoint equation is given in terms of perturbations of v ∈V we only need to
consider e(u, δv), where δv is a permissible perturbation. In particular, for any v ∈V we
have (v + δv)|t=t0 = v0 so that necessarily δv(·, t0) = 0. With this in mind, we can express
⟨e(u, δv), λ⟩= ⟨c∗(u, λ) −δtf λ + ∂tλ, δv⟩,
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
17
==PAGE:26==
which for objective functional I : U × V 7→R implies that the adjoint equation reduces to
c∗(u, λ) −δtf λ + ∂tz = −∂vI(u, v(u)).
(3.10)
It is important to note, that when considering equations as the above, they should formally
be understood in a weak sense in terms of the inner product (with the perturbation δv).
18
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:27==
4
Case
We now outline the setting for our case study. In order to do so, we assume the setting
described at the end of section 3.1. We wish to study the optimal behaviour of animals in
a cohort competing for mating rights. As the stereotypical case in nature concerns males
competing for the right to female mates, we focus our attention on the male population and
consider the female population fixed. The model should thus not be considered descriptive
of the female population, for which a different model structure may be relevant. In order
to predict competitive success of males, we consider the size (mass) of the individual male
and the size spectrum of the male cohort. In particular, we consider population (cohort)
dynamics on size × time domain S as in section 3.1. Since we consider only positive sizes
we chose xmin = 0, and fix the starting time naturally at t0 = 0.
The observable behaviour of the male is decided by the control variable u, affecting the size
of the male by controlling foraging activity τ. The value of τ ∈(0, 1) is decided by each
individual based on the current time t and the individuals size. It represents the fraction
of time an individual spends searching for food. A large feeding activity entails increased
growth, but also exposes animals to increased danger, more so for smaller individuals.
For simplicity, we will assume that the cohort is homogeneous in age and unaffected
by other specimens of the same species from other cohorts and of different age.
This
assumption reduces model complexity and allows us to model fitness as a pure terminal
reward. At the terminal time tf mating occurs and fitness rewards are distributed to the
males in the cohort according to their reproductive success, where increased size correlates
with increased success. This assumption is fitting for semelparous animals, i.e. animals
that reproduce once in their lifetime and die shortly thereafter.
Our goal is a qualitative description of optimal behaviour in the context of the above,
as opposed to a precise description of a specific case. Of particular interest, are model
conditions that allow for alternate mating strategies. In the context of a size-structured
population, this concerns males that may gain mating rights by merit other than size. If
model conditions allow for such alternate strategies, we expect to observe a dimorphism
in the size spectrum, i.e. a bimodal distribution. This behaviour is not inherently unique
to any particular species and in the following sections we will thus not refer to any. If the
reader is so inclined, they may consider various species of salmon, as they fit the above
assumptions reasonably well [HS67]; [BM85].
Timescales
We need to be somewhat careful, when discussing time scales in our model. Specif-
ically, we consider three distinct timescales. The shortest time-scale is the foraging
activity τ which expresses the fraction of time (per day) that an animal spends search-
ing for food. The second time-scale denoted t, is the time scale of population dynamics
under which the size-spectrum develops. Finally, the evolutionary time-scale denoted
T governs the dynamics of the control u (and thus τ) as it changes due to natural
selection.
4.1
Model structure
We will now discern the model by explicitly stating the constraint operator e : U ×V 7→Z
and the invasion exponent E : U × U 7→R. We do this for a fixed evolutionary time, and
consider the population size spectrum N ∈V and control u ∈U.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
19
==PAGE:28==
4.1.1
Forward equation
We motivate our choice, by considering the Itô diffusion (2.7), where the stochastic variable
Xt taking values in Ωrepresents size. The drift term f then models growth, and the
diffusive term g random fluctuations of Xt due to various random background effects. In
this model, we consider a random killing time td and consider only the process {Xt, t ∈
[0, td]} which for the sake of simplicity we refer to as {Xt}. The time td corresponds to
a random time of death of an individual male. The corresponding mortality-augmented
forward Kolmogorov operator K∗: U × V 7→Z, is explicitly given by
K∗
uN = −∂
∂x (f(u)N) + 1
2
∂2
∂x2

g(u)2N

−m(u)N
(4.1)
where,
f(u), g(u), m(u) ∈Z,
i.e. f, g, m map U to Z. The mortality term m incorporates the random killing time td as
described in section 2.1.4. Note, we have defined the operator K∗so that it requires the
control u as an input. For each fixed u we may consider K∗
u : V 7→Z with u a parameter,
but emphasise that we will retain the interpretation of K∗as an operator with two inputs.
Defining the constraint operator as in (3.2), the constraint e(u, N) = 0 defines the PDE
∂N
∂t + ∂
∂x (f(u)N) −1
2
∂2
∂x2

g(u)2N

+ m(u)N = 0,
in S
N = 0 on ∂Ω,
N(·, t0) = N0.
(4.2)
Here we have added necessary boundary and initial conditions in order to have uniqueness
of solutions. We will tacitly consider these as extra conditions that follow with the function
space V . Note that N does not govern a probability density function, as mass is lost
through the mortality term m. The ”missing” probability mass may be interpreted as the
probability of the given player being eliminated before the considered time.
4.1.2
Invasion exponent
In order to model the invasion exponent, consider the fitness functional J : U × V 7→R,
associating with each control-density pair (u, N) the fitness J(u, N). For each fixed control-
density pair (uR, NR) we let IuR : U × V 7→R be given as
I(u, N; uR) = J(u, N; NR) −J(uR, NR; NR)
s.t. e(uR, NR) = 0.
(4.3)
We will always assume that the resident satisfies the constraint e(uR, NR) = 0. We make
this choice of I in order to model invasion fitness. Following our previous discussion, we
make the obvious choice and define
ˆJ(u) = J(u, N)
s.t. e(u, N) = 0,
allowing us to express
ˆIuR(u) = ˆJ(u; uR) −ˆJ(uR; uR).
(4.4)
20
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:29==
This choice corresponds to choosing the invasion exponent,
E(uI, uR) = ˆIuR(uI).
Clearly this choice satisfies the required E(u, u) = 0 so that there is no advantage for
an invader to invade a similar resident. In order to specify J explicitly, we consider the
fitness of an individual player. We model the fitness of a player as a pure terminal reward
depending on size, awarded to players who survive until terminal time. Accordingly, for
player i we define the fitness function F as
F({Xt}i; W) =
(
0
ti
d < tf
W(Xi
tf )
otherwise .
Here W : Ω7→R+ is a weight indicating the reward for a given size which in the context
of section 3.1 corresponds to the terminal reward k. Let NI and NR be such that the
constraints e(uI, NI) = 0, and e(uR, NR) = 0 hold. In the context of mean field games, we
choose to let W depend on the resident population NR and use the notation W = W(NR)
to indicate this. We then model ˆJ as the expected fitness of an individual, which for given
control uI and resident control uR is given by
ˆJuR(uI) = EXt0=x0F({Xt}uI; W(NR))
or equivalently, omitting the resident and invader in notation,
J(u, N; W) =
Z
Ω
WN(tf, ·) dx
s.t. e(u, N) = 0
(4.5)
In the context of the canonical equation, we will consider the case in which the invader
and resident are equal, but where the prior is used as the argument in J and the latter for
determining the weight W. In this case we omit the resident in the notation and simply
write J(u, N) in place of J(u, N; W), which when subject to e(u, N) = 0 is equivalent to
ˆJ(u) and ˆJu(u).
4.2
The adjoint equation
We now derive an explicit expression for the derivative of the reduced functional. Using
(2.6), this is given as
ˆI′
u(u) = ∂ue(u, N(u))∗λ + ∂uI(u, N(u)),
(4.6)
where the adjoint state λ ∈Z′ can be computed from the adjoint equation (3.9),
e∗(u, λ) = −∂NI(u, N(u)).
(4.7)
This derivation follows the example of section 3.3 closely.
Let z ∈Z′ = Z and assume that N ∈V vanishes at the boundaries of Ω. This allows us
to use integration by parts in order to obtain
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
21
==PAGE:30==
⟨e(u, N), z⟩= ⟨K∗
uN −∂tN, z⟩
= ⟨(δt0 −δtf )z, N⟩+ ⟨∂tz, N⟩+ ⟨Kuz, N⟩
where, analogously to the forward operator we let the mortality-augmented Kolmogorov
backward operator K : U × Z 7→V be given as
Kuz = Luz −m(u)z.
We then have
e∗(u, z) = (δt0 −δtf )z + ∂tz + Kuz.
A similar argument can be made for the adjoint of ∂ue(u, N). We see that the operator
∂ue(u, N) ∈B(U, Z) is
∂ue(u, N)(δu) = (∂uK∗
uN)(δu).
where for each (u, N) ∈U × V we have that ∂uK∗
uN ∈B(U, Z) is given by
(∂uK∗
uN)(δu) = −∂
∂x
 f′(u)δuN
 + ∂2
∂x2
 g′(u)δuN
 −m′(u)δuN.
Let δu ∈U, then using that N vanishes at the boundaries of Ωwe have
⟨∂ue(u, N)δu, z⟩= ⟨(∂uK∗
uN)δu, z⟩
= −⟨∂x(f′(u)δuN), z⟩+ ⟨1
2∂xx(2g′(u)δuN), z⟩−⟨m′(u)δuN, z⟩
= ⟨f′(u)δuN, ∂xz⟩+ ⟨1
22g′(u)δuN, ∂xxz⟩−⟨m′(u)δuN, z⟩
= ⟨δu, f′(u)N∂xz + g′(u)N∂xxz −m′(u)Nz⟩
= ⟨δu, (∂uKuz)N⟩.
where ∂uK : U ×Z 7→B(U, V ) is the (partial) Fréchet derivative of the backward operator
K with respect to u, that is
(∂uKuN)δu = ∂xNf′(u)δu + ∂xxNg′(u)δu −Nm′(u)δu
Accepting the above, we find that
∂ue(u, N)∗z = (∂uKuz)N,
Note, in the above we would require that N ∈U or more loosely that (∂uKuz) be considered
a function with a well defined product with N so that the inner product in the above makes
sense. This in turn relies on f′(u), g′(u) and m′(u) being identified with their dual space
Z.
22
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:31==
Consider again the fitness functional J defined in (4.5). For each fixed resident uR (omitted
in notation) we have that
∂uI(u, N) = ∂uJ(u)
∂NI(u, N) = ∂NJ(u, N).
Since there is no explicit dependence of u in J(u, N) when defined defined as in (4.5), we
have ∂uJ(u, N) = 0. For the partial derivative with respect to N, let δN ∈V , then
∂NJ(u, N)δN =
Z
Ω
δNW dx.
Using the Dirac delta, this can be written in terms of the inner product on L2(S)
∂NJ(u, N)δN = ⟨δN, δtf W⟩,
and we see that we can identify ∂NJ(u, N) = δtf W ∈Z, which is zero almost everywhere
in S.
Using equation (4.7), we may naively write the adjoint equation as
∂tλ + Kuλ = −δtf W −

δt0 −δtf

λ.
This equation should formally be understood in terms of the inner product with a permis-
sible perturbation ϕ of N ∈V , that is
⟨∂tλ + Kuλ, ϕ⟩+ ⟨δtf (W −λ), ϕ⟩= 0
∀ϕ ∈V s.t. ϕ|t=t0 = 0.
We see that we may obtain a solution of the above by requiring that
∂tλ + Kuλ = 0,
in S
λ = 0 on ∂Ω, λ(·, tf) = W,
(4.8)
which is simply the backward Kolmogorov equation with terminal condition W. Equation
(4.6) then allows us to compute the gradient of the invasion exponent as ˆI′(u) = ˆJ′(u)
given by
ˆJ′(u) = (∂uKuλ)N
(4.9)
where N satisfies e(u, N) = 0. We see that the gradient scales with the density N, this
will be important in the context of the canonical equation.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
23
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Model data
We now consider in detail the model data and discern the structure of the so far unspecified
features. The choice of functions and parameters for the system dynamics and the weight
function are primarily based on a conversation with Ken Haste Andersen and Uffe Høgsbro
Thygesen, April 4, 2022.
We choose to work with the normalised density in the size spectrum, so that N is dimen-
sionless and consequently the forward equation is stated in terms of the dimension T −1
(per time, population dynamical time-scale). Throughout most of the model, we will use
a scaling factor γ, which was introduced in order to reduce the dimensionality of certain
parts of the model. Since we do not attempt to model population dynamics of any specific
animal, we will not be particularly concerned with units of the parameters. In table 4.1
we list chosen parameter values and note their dimensionality.
4.3.1
Dynamical components
We have previously chosen equation (4.2) to model the dynamics of the population size
spectrum. In order to fully specify the equation, we will need to choose the growth v, the
mortality m, the noise g and the initial condition N0. Both growth and mortality depend
on the control u through the foraging activity τ, parameterised by
τ =
1
1 + exp (−u).
(4.10)
We model the growth as
f(x, τ) = γx
3
4 (fr(τ) −fd)
where fd > 0 is a natural decline in size with time, γ > 0 is a scaling parameter and
fr(τ) =
τβ/γ
τβ/γ + 1
models the growth reward from actively feeding. Let fpot = f(1) be the potential growth
from feeding, then
fpot =
β/γ
β/γ + 1
so that we may express
β
γ =
fpot
1 −fpot
.
This allows us to write fr in terms of the more easily understood parameter fpot
fr(τ) =
τfpot
1 + (τ −1) fpot
,
and the growth f accordingly. Using the same scaling parameter γ, we model the mortality
as
24
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:33==
m(x, τ) = γ

τmpx−1
4 + m0

,
with mp, m0 > 0 parameters describing feeding-related and background mortality respec-
tively.
The noise is chosen as
g(x) = (σ0 + σ1x) .
Finally, for the initial condition we first let
Nshape(x) =



0
x < ϵs
exp

−1
as (x −x0)2
otherwise .
with as > 0 indicating the spread of the initial condition. Then, we normalise this to
N0 =
Nshape
R
ΩNshape(x) dx.
name
description
dimension
value
γ
scaling factor
M
1
4 T −1
1
fpot
potential growth
-
0.6
fd
growth decline
-
0.2
t0
initial time
T
0
tf
terminal time
T
10
xmin
lower boundary
M
0
xmax
upper boundary
M
100
σ0
background noise
MT −1
2
0.2
σ1
noise
T −1
2
0.035
m0
background mortality
T −1
0.1
mp
arena mortality
-
0.4
x0
initial distribution centre
M
2
as
initial distribution spread
M−2
10−2
ϵs
initial distribution truncation
-
10−14
Table 4.1: Parameters of population-dynamical model components. Dimensions are M:
mass and T: time.
As can be seen from equation (4.2), we have chosen homogeneous Dirichlet boundary
conditions for the spatial domain Ω. Reasonably, any animal should have a size x > 0, so
that at x = 0, the density should be zero, thus explaining the left boundary condition. For
the right boundary, it is less clear what condition should be implied, as the natural upper
limit to size is more so a ”soft” constraint, in the sense that exceedingly large size is unlikely
and ineﬀicient rather than physically inconceivable. By such an argument, we may arrive
at the abstraction of a homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition at infinity, that is for
xmax →∞then N(xmax, ·) →0. Physically, this may be interpreted as allowing animals
to become arbitrarily, but not infinitely large. As an approximation of this condition, we
may leave xmax finite but large and use N(xmax, ·) = 0.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
25
==PAGE:34==
0
10
20
30
x
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
f(x, τ)
Growth
0
10
20
30
x
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
m(x, τ)
Mortality
τ = 0
τ = 1/2
τ = 1
Figure 4.1: Plot of model components with parameters as in table 4.1.
0
10
20
30
x
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2g(x)2
Noise
0
1
2
3
4
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
N0(x)
Initial distribution
Figure 4.2: Plot of model components with parameters as in table 4.1.
26
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:35==
4.3.2
Weight function
The final component we need to specify in order to complete the model description, is
the ”weight-function” W from (4.5) which governs the fitness reward for a given size x at
the terminal time. We describe three different cases to be used for simulations which we
denote as the baseline, quantile and sigmoid models respectively.
In order to motivate the following, we consider the population at the terminal time tf at
which mating takes place. The mating process is assumed to be suﬀiciently brief, that
on the population dynamical time scale it is reasonably modelled as being instantaneous.
Nonetheless, on the finer time scale we consider a fixed time interval in which mating takes
place. Then, at a given time in this interval, for each free female we consider a number of
male suitors. Every male suitor seeks to win the female but only one may succeed. Let M
be the (random) number of individuals courting a given female. Let i ∈I = {1, 2, ..., M}
denote a given male and X1, X2, ..., XM denote their respective sizes. For each male we
then associate the competition variable
Ci = C(Xi).
Here, both Xi and Ci should be regarded as random variables. We now assume that the
”best” competitor wins, that is
i’th male wins iff Ci ≥Cj for all j ∈I.
Now, for a fixed player of size X = x, let
p(x) = P(player wins | X = x).
We now assume that M is distributed according to the Poisson distribution,
M ∼Pois(α),
so that on average M = α males will be competing. Then, with the abstraction of an
infinitely large population, any given male will similarly face a number of competitors
distributed according to a Poisson distribution with rate parameter α. This is the conse-
quence of established results for the Poisson distribution.
Define for each t ∈[t0, tf] the time-normalised density,
¯N(x, t) =
N(x, t)
R
ΩN(x, t) dx.
(4.11)
Assume further that all Xi are i.i.d. with density ¯N(·, tf) then we can define FC(·) =
P(Cj ≤·) and we have
p(x) =
Y
j∈I
P(Cj ≤C(x))
= EFC(C(x))M.
Then, using that M is Poisson distributed we have that
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
27
==PAGE:36==
p(x) =
∞
X
i=0
FC(C(x))αie−α
i!
= exp (α(FC(C(x)) −1)) .
Let r : Ω7→R so that r(x) is the fitness of a winning player with Xtf = x, then, the
expected fitness of the player is
W(x) = r(x)p(x)
With these assumptions, we can specify W by choosing the random variable C and reward
r in terms of size.
As our baseline model, we will consider
Wbaseline(x) = x
(4.12)
corresponding to C some random variable independent of X and r(x) = αx. This way,
all individuals win on average 1/α of the contests they are involved in and are rewarded
proportionally with their size. Note, that this reward should not be confused with the
advantages size imposes on survival. The survival rate is indeed affected by size, leading to
a change in J, but any such change is conveyed through a decrease in the mortality m and
thus an increase in the size spectrum N rather than directly through W. Instead, we may
interpret (4.12) as relating size to overall health and success rate in reproduction. The
linear relationship which Wbaseline suggests is unlikely to hold in most realistic settings
and we prefer to view it as a simplistic approximation for more complex dynamics under
which individuals are motivated to balance size and mortality while attempting to increase
in size.
Letting C(X) = X, we find that FC = FX, and since X is drawn randomly from ¯N, i.e.
X ∼¯N, in particular
FX(x) =
Z x
0
¯N(y) dy.
With this choice, individual size relative to the population is the deciding factor in whether
a given male will win. Accordingly, FC = FX describes the size quantile of the given
individual, which for each x is the probability that x is larger than the size of a randomly
drawn male. This leads us to define (omitting argument x),
Wquantile = r exp (α(FX −1))
= r exp

α
Z x
0
¯N(y) dy −1

This model captures the notion, that size is a solid predictor of competitive success, since
competitions in nature often rely on brute force (an example of this is given in [HS67]
describing how male salmon defend their redds). This model however, does not convey
the idea that larger size does not guarantee success.
28
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:37==
In order to account for random deviations of the above, we may let
C(X) = X + ϵ
where ϵ is some continuously distributed random variable with zero mean. This variable
represents random properties of the individual or the situation, influencing competitive
edge and allowing individuals to win by merit other than size. With this setup, let Y ∼¯N
and consider X = x given. Then for C(x) = x + ϵ1, C(Y ) = Y + ϵ2 and Z = ϵ1 −ϵ2 with
ϵ1, ϵ2 i.i.d. we have
FC(x) = P(C(Y ) ≤C(x))
= P(Y ≤x + Z)
= EY (1 −P(Z ≤Y −x)) .
Let ℓ: Ω7→[0, 1] denote the cumulative distribution function (CDF) , of Z, i.e. ℓ(z) =
P(Z ≤z), so that
FC(x) = EY (1 −ℓ(Y −x))
Then we find that
Wsigmoid(x) = exp (α (EY (1 −ℓ(Y −x)) −1))
= exp (−αEY (ℓ(Y −x)))
= exp

−α
Z
Ω
ℓ(y −x) ¯N(y) dy.

As we are not interested in the exact distribution of ϵ, but rather the smoothing properties
of the difference Z, we approximate ℓas the logistic function,
ℓ(z) ≈
1
1 + exp (−ℓsz)
where the parameter ℓs > 0 is the steepness of the curve, with increasing values cor-
responding to decreasing variance of ϵ. With ℓs small, the balance of the game shifts,
making smaller size relatively more viable and excessive focus on increasing size should be
less appealing.
For both the quantile and sigmoid models we will use a reward of the form
r(x) =
r0x
r1x + 1.
(4.13)
Here r0 > 0 is the asymptotic reward for x →∞, whereas r1 > 0 is the steepness of
the curve. This is a simple parameterisation which we use to model male fecundity. In
particular, we conjecture that larger males typically are more fertile and may thus expect
increased gains in reproductive success until some upper boundary is reached. Note, for
r0 = 1, r1 = 0, the equation (4.13) for r is equivalent to the baseline case.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.2 contains parameters to be considered for numerical simulation. These parameters
were chosen largely based on trial and error.
description
baseline
quantile
sigmoid
r0
reward
1
20
20
r1
reward
0
0.7
0.7
α
competition intensity
-
1.5
1.5
ℓs
competition noise
-
-
1/3
Table 4.2: Weight function parameters.
Reward scaling
The choice of the reward scaling parameter r0 deserves a comment. Specifically, this
parameter serves to scale the canonical equation, but does not change its stationary
points. Hence, the values in table 4.2 were chosen based primarily on considerations
for the numerical solution of the canonical equation, in which the relative scaling of
parameters is important.
30
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:39==
5
Algorithm & implementation
5.1
Stationarity of the canonical equation
In order to numerically establish a Nash equilibrium, we employ a numerical integration
scheme for the canonical equation. The overall algorithm for this involves solving the
forward equation, solving the backward equation, computing the invasion fitness derivative
and time-stepping the canonical equation, see figure 5.1. The forward model is solved using
FEniCS directly, whereas the backward solve and the gradient computation is automated
by dolfin-adjoint. For a simplistic example of this, in which we compute analytically a
functional derivative and compare with implementation in Python, see appendix C.
We begin by noting, that we do not seek to accurately describe an (evolutionary) trajectory
of the canonical equation, but rather to characterise a stationary solution of the equation.
Assuming uniqueness, this allows for some flexibility in choice of method, in particular we
may freely scale the state of the canonical equation, i.e. we multiply ˜u(T) = u : S 7→R
with some function a : S 7→R+. Clearly this does not change the equilibrium solution(s),
as
˜u′(T) = 0 ⇐⇒ˆI′
u(u) = 0 ⇐⇒aˆI′
u(u) = 0.
The inclusion of an appropriate scaling factor a has proven important for the timely con-
vergence to a stationary point. In particular, the functional derivative ˆI′(u) was previously
shown to scale with the density N, meaning that selection slows down in less densely pop-
ulated parts of the size spectrum.
5.1.1
Discretisation of the canonical equation
In order to discretise the canonical equation (3.7), we use the Heun scheme (see for example
[Thy21]). In particular, consider times Ti for i = 0, 1, 2, ..., n with Ti = Pi−1
k=0 ∆Tk, ∆Tk =
Tk+1 −Tk and let ui = ˜u(Ti, ·). For any u ∈U, introduce the scaled gradient estimate
ˆ∇u = a(u)ˆI′(u)
where a : S 7→R+ is given by
a(u) =
1
N(u) + ϵa
.
(5.1)
Here, as before, N = N(u) solves e(u, N) = 0 and we let ϵa > 0 be a small regularising
parameter. Now, given ui let ∆ui
E = ∆Ti ˆ∇ui, then the scaled Euler approximation of
ui+1 is
ui+1
E
= ui + ∆ui
E.
This lets us compute the scaled Heun gradient estimate
ˆ∇Hui = 1
2
 ˆ∇ui + ˆ∇ui+1
E

,
the scaled Heun step ∆ui
H = ∆Ti ˆ∇Hui and the approximation,
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
31
==PAGE:40==
backward equation
canonical equation
forward equation
N
ˆI′(u)
u
Figure 5.1: schematic outline of the algorithm used to numerically establish a Nash equi-
librium. Starting with an initial control u the forward equation may be solved in order to
obtain the density N. The backward may then be solved for the adjoint state, allowing
for computation of the gradient ˆI′(u). The gradient may finally be used to time-step the
canonical equation governing the control, thus updating u.
ui+1
H
= ui + bi∆ui
H.
(5.2)
Here bi : S 7→R+ is a trust factor, which for bi = 1 simply yields the Heun scheme
with scaled gradient estimates. We introduce this factor as a heuristic for choosing an
appropriate step size and define it as,
bi =
bmax
1 + bwdi ,
with bmax > 0 a parameter indicating the maximum trust di being a measure of the
relative deviation of the gradient estimate and bw > 0 a weight parameter. In particular,
for ϵd > 0 a small regularising parameter, we define
di =
ˆI′(ui) −ˆI′(ui+1
E )

L2(S)
∇ui
H

L2(S) + ϵd
.
In order to compute ˆI′(ui), we first solve the forward equation (4.2). After solving the
forward equation to obtain the density Ni = N(ui), we focus our attention on the terminal
time tf. Here, the terminal density Ni(·, tf) is interpreted in two ways, 1) as the density
indicating the probability density of an individual obtaining a given size and 2) as the
distribution of the population (the mean field) at the terminal time. We will need the
latter interpretation in order to compute the weight-function W i = W(Ni) (see section
4.3) which is the terminal condition for the backward equation (4.8). It is important to
keep in mind, that when computing the derivative of ˆI, W should be considered fixed, that
is, independent of N as in the first interpretation. Thus, when computing the functional
derivative, we take the partial derivative with respect to u and N concerning the individual,
not the mean field. In general the tie between the adjoint (backward) equation and the
original state equation may be more involved, however in the case at hand the connection
32
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:41==
reduces to dependence through the terminal condition. Subsequently, the adjoint equation
is solved and the derivative ˆI′(ui) may be computed using equation (4.9).
With a way to compute the functional derivative, we may time-step the canonical equation
using the modified Heun update (5.2) to arrive at a new estimate u = ui+1. This procedure
is repeated n times, with n depending on some convergence criteria to be met and the
final estimate is then taken to be the estimate of the Nash equilibrium of (3.3).
As a general note, we already found that ˆI′(u) = J′(u) for the model choices made so
far. Since the procedure sketched in the above only depends on ˆI through its derivative,
we may instead for the sake of simplicity chose J as the primary functional of interest.
Abiding this choice, we may outline the procedure as seen in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: adjoint canonical solver
1. Require model data f, g, m, J and initial condition u0
2. initialise u = u0 and i = 0
3. loop while not converged
(a) Solve equation (4.2) for N
(b) Compute weight function W from N
(c) Solve equation (4.8) for λ
(d) Compute ˆI′(u) = J′(u) from (4.9)
(e) Compute ui+1 from (5.2)
(f) Update u = ui+1, i = i + 1 and check for convergence
In algorithm 1 we have not yet taken advantage of the possibilities Python, FEniCS and
dolfin-adjoint offer, despite the problem formulation being tailored towards this kind
of implementation. The discretised weak formulation of the forward equation is readily
implemented using FEniCS via. ufl and dolfin. The dolfin-adjoint library provides a
convenient way of both constructing and solving the adjoint equation as well as computing
the functional derivative. We use this to greatly reduce our effort in implementing the
functional derivative - in fact, with the the proper setup, steps 3.c and 3.d may be solved
in a single line of code. Throughout, we store solutions (discretised analogues of functions
in L2(S)) as lists of FEniCS function objects. Specifically, for each discrete time ti, i =
1, ..., nt we associate a finite-element representation on Ω, that is a set of coeﬀicients
representing the function in terms of basis-functions of Ω.
Updates of the discretised
canonical equation (5.2) thus involves summing a fixed number nt of pairs of weighted
finite-element representations. For further details on implementation, refer to appendix
D.
5.2
Weak formulations & numerical schemes
5.2.1
Numerical solution of the forward equation
We now derive a weak formulation of the forward problem (4.2) for use with FEniCS.
This formulation, will not follow the theoretical problem exactly, as we will employ a
no-flux boundary in place of the upper Dirichlet boundary condition. This choice was
made heuristically, as it tends to allow for greater numerical stability of solutions using a
smaller mesh. In particular, for small meshes, the abstraction of xmax →∞seems better
approximated by a no-flux boundary condition, than by the corresponding homogeneous
Dirichlet boundary condition on the same mesh (see appendix E).
Following the approach of [LL16], we work towards eliminating second order derivatives
and begin by multiplying our constraint equation e(u, N) = 0 by a test function ϕ and
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
33
==PAGE:42==
integrating over Ω,
Z
Ω
ϕe(u, N) dx = 0,
∀ϕ ∈Z.
(5.3)
Consider the Dirichlet boundary condition N(0, ·) = 0 as well as the no-flux condition

f(u)N −1
2∂x(g(u)2N)

|x=xmax = 0. These imply that every test-function ϕ should vanish
at the left boundary so that
ϕ

f(u)N −1
2∂x(g(u)2N)

∂Ω
= 0
(5.4)
Together with (5.3), using integration by parts we find
Z
Ω
ϕe(u, N) dx =
Z
Ω
ϕ

∂tN + ∂x (f(u)N) −1
2∂xx

g(u)2N

+ m(u)N

dx
=
Z
Ω
ϕ (∂tN + m(u)N) dx +
Z
Ω
ϕ

∂x(f(u)N) −1
2∂xx(g(u)2N)

dx
=
Z
Ω
ϕ (∂tN + m(u)N) dx +
Z
Ω
∂xϕ
1
2∂x(g(u)2N) −f(u)N

dx
+ ϕ

f(u)N −1
2∂x(g(u)2N)

∂Ω
=
Z
Ω
ϕ (∂tN + m(u)N) dx +
Z
Ω
∂xϕ
1
2∂x(g(u)2N) −f(u)N

dx = 0
(5.5)
We now discretise time, and consider ti = ∆t · i for i = 0, 1, ..., n, with ∆t = 1/tf so
that t0 = 0, tn = tf. Then, letting Ni = N(·, ti), we use the implicit Euler scheme to
approximate
∂tNi+1 ≈1
∆t(Ni+1 −Ni).
Accordingly, we let ui = u(·, ti), fi = f(ui), gi = g(ui) and mi = m(ui) so that by inserting
into (5.5) we obtain the weak, discretised formulation
Z
Ω
ϕ
 1
∆t(Ni+1 −Ni) + mi+1Ni+1

+ ∂xϕ
1
2∂x

(gi+1)2Ni+1
−fNi+1

dx = 0,
subject to the mixed Dirichlet, no-flux condition (5.4), explicitly only present as the Dirich-
let boundary condition.
5.2.2
Numerical solution of the HJB equation
In order to validate results obtained using algorithm 1, we solve the HJB equation. As-
sume that the optimal control exists and that we have some candidate solution ˆµ with
corresponding density N = N(ˆµ). In order to solve the HJB equation, we first need to
determine
µ = arg max
u∈U KuW.
34
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:43==
Note that there is no running reward, thus the above maximisation is a compromise
between growth and mortality. Using the one to one correspondence between u and τ
(section 4.3), we opt to find the maximum with respect to the simpler ˜τ = τ(µ). In this
context, we slightly abuse notation and write ˜τ in place of µ for the various operators and
functions taking u as input. To obtain ˜τ, we use the specific model structure of section
4.3. Differentiating K˜τW + h(˜τ) with respect to ˜τ and setting equal zero, we obtain two
possible solutions for ˜τ,
˜τ =
−(1 −fpot)Wmp ±
q
(1 −fpot) W∂xWfpotmpx
Wmpfpot
(5.6)
Assuming that W > 0 and ∂xW > 0 the ”-” solution is non-positive and may be ruled out
since we require τ ∈(0, 1). We then solve the HJB equation,
∂W
∂t + K˜τW + hN(˜τ) = 0,
in S
W(·, tf) = kN, W(x0, ·) = kN, ∂xW(xmax, ·) = 0,
for the value function W and subsequently compute ˜τ. Here, the mixed Dirichlet and
Neumann boundary conditions in the HJB equation, were chosen such that its weak for-
mulation should match the weak formulation of its adjoint, the forward equation, discussed
in the previous section. As for the forward eqation, we need to determine the weak formu-
lation of the HJB equation in order to solve it with FEniCS. Using integration by parts,
for test function ϕ we find
Z
Ω
ϕ (−∂tW + f(˜τ)∂xW −m(˜τ)W) −1
2∂x

ϕg(τ)2
∂xW dx = 0.
We discretise using a semi-implicit Euler method backwards in time. Let t0 = tf, ti =
tf −∆t · i for i = 0, 1, ..., n with ∆t = 1/tf so that tn = 0. Then for W i = W(·, ti) we
approximate,
∂tW i+1 = −1
∆t

Ni+1 −Ni
.
Let ˜τi be the positive solution from (5.6) using W = W i and introduce the shorthand
fi = f(˜τi), gi = g(˜τi), mi = m(˜τi). Then we write the discretised weak form as
Z
Ω
ϕ

−1
∆t(W i+1 −W i) + fi∂xW i+1 −miW i+1

−1
2∂x

ϕ(gi)2
∂xW i+1 dx = 0.
This formulation is implemented and solved in FEniCS. Starting with the terminal value
W 0 = kN, we compute ˜τi from W i and solve for W i+1. Repeating this n times we obtain
an estimate of ˜τ, which may be compared with the candidate ˆτ = τ(ˆu).
Constraints and finite element representations
Preliminary runs of the HJB solver implemented in Python displayed irregular be-
haviour. Further investigation revealed that small imprecision’s of the finite element
representations of the strategy τ permitted that it take on negative values, thus mak-
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
35
==PAGE:44==
ing computations nonsensical on the real numbers when taking the square root. Hence,
in practice we truncate the finite element representation of τ to non-negative values,
which appears to resolve the problem. We note that this heuristic merely addresses
numerical issues, as for ∂xW > 0 the feasible solution τ is in theory non-negative.
description
value
nx
Number of mesh cells (space)
1000
nt
Number of time steps
30
ϵa
regularisation parameter
1 × 10−5
ϵd
regularisation parameter
1 × 10−14
bmax
Heun trust factor
10
bw
Heun grad. deviation weighting
5
nT
Number of canonical equation steps
100
Table 5.1: Algorithm and numerical solver parameters.
36
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:45==
6
Results
We now present results of simulations of the model cases described in section 4.3. For
all simulations we have used the same initial guess of u0 = 0 on S corresponding to a
value of τ = 0.5. Results will be presented in terms of the size-spectrum densities N,
the estimated strategies τ = τ(unT ), the value functions W and the gradient estimates
ˆI′(u).
In particular, for each model (baseline, quantile and sigmoid), we consider the
candidate strategy given in terms of the feeding time τ. To each candidate we associate
the corresponding size spectrum N(τ) obtained by solving the forward equation as well
as a value function W obtained by solving the HJB-equation with terminal condition
determined by N(τ). Finally, the value function determines a (possibly different) strategy
which we term the validation strategy. For easier reference, we denote the candidate Nash
strategy ˆτ and the validation strategy by ˜τ as in section 5.
For the following model simulations, we use model parameters as in tables 4.1, 4.2 and
solver parameters as in table 5.1. We note, that the number of iterations of the algorithm
is fixed throughout the cases. This reflects, that we do not have a predefined convergence
criteria in terms of an absolute tolerance. Instead we resort to measuring the norm of the
gradient ˆI′ at u = u0 and u = unT and subsequently computing the reduction from start
to end.
6.1
Baseline
For the baseline model, we start by turning our attention to figure 6.1. In the left pane,
we see the candidate of the optimal strategy as estimated using algorithm 1 and on the
right, the corresponding size spectrum. The candidate strategy requires immediate at-
tention as an abrupt change from high to low values are observed along the outer parts
of the plotted domain. Comparing with the right pane, we note that the contours in the
candidate strategy roughly correspond to those of the size spectrum with low density areas
corresponding to values of τ around 0.5.
The low density-areas present in the size-spectrum become more apparent when we con-
sider the time-normalised density (see equation 4.11) for t in the truncated range [5, 10]
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
τ
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N(x, t)
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
10−14
10−11
10−8
10−5
10−2
Figure 6.1: (Baseline) left; candidate strategy, right; corresponding size spectrum.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
37
==PAGE:46==
6
8
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
Normalised density
0
25
50
75
100
i
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
norm
99.6% reduction
Gradient norm
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 6.2: (Baseline) left; time-normalised density ¯N, right; norm of ˆI′(ui) on L2(S).
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
W
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
τ
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 6.3: (Baseline) left; value function for N(·, tf), right; validation strategy ˜τ.
as in figure 6.2. Comparing with the strategy-surface, we see that outside the elevated
regions in the size-spectrum, τ does not seem to have not changed from the initial con-
dition.
When comparing with the result of the HJB equation in figure 6.3, we notice
that the solutions are similar inside the density-elevated regions but not outside of them.
Thus, the constant value in the low-density regions cannot be attributed to the optimal
solution, rather, it is likely a feature of algorithm 1. Considering the results of section 4.2
concerning the scaling of the gradient with N, and our later treatment of the subject in
section 5.1, this comes as no surprise. Despite attempts to avert the poor scaling of the
gradient it seems the problem persists at least to some degree. Running the algorithm
with varying scaling factor ϵa as in equation (5.1), it was observed that smaller values
resulted in quicker convergence of the algorithm until some critical value after which the
algorithm became unstable.
As it stands, it seems algorithm 1 converges to the Nash equilibrium provided that the
density in the region of interest is suﬀiciently large. In order to quantify the similarity of
the candidate and validation solutions, we introduce a measure of similarity,
38
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:47==
ξ(ˆτ, ˜τ) = ⟨ˆτ, ˜τ⟩
∥ˆτ∥∥˜τ∥.
That is, if we let θ be the angle between ˆτ and ˜τ in their abstract function space, then
ξ(ˆτ, ˜τ) = cos(θ). Thus, if the functions are similar, we expect the angle to be near zero and
thus ξ near one. Based on our findings of the scaling, we wish to restrict our comparison to
the density-elevated regions. To this end, introduce the indicator function 1 ˜
N : S 7→{0, 1}
by
1 ˜
N =
(
1
N(ˆτ) ≥ϵtrunc
0
otherwise,
where ϵtrunc > 0 is a truncation margin, below which we consider the population too small
for reasonable comparison of the solutions. Accordingly, we will use the modified similarity
measure,
ξtrunc = ξ(1 ˜
N ˆτ, 1 ˜
N ˜τ).
We provide this value for our primary simulations in table 6.1. We see that for the baseline
simulation we obtain ξtrunc ≈0.999, indicating that solutions are highly similar. On a less
positive note, in figure 6.3, we note the poor contrast in colours. This is due to the solution
changing drastically at the lower boundary x = 0, see section 7.2 for further comments.
For a better contrast plot, we may restrict ourselves to a smaller interval on the x-axis,
see appendix F.
The estimated optimal strategy indicates that an individual animal should maintain an
almost constant, slightly increasing effort throughout its life-time and sizes. This is rea-
sonable seeing that the expected reward for a given size increases with time as indicated by
the value function in figure 6.3. Generically, the control value is the result of a compromise
between mortality and expected reward.
6.2
Main results & comparison
6.2.1
Quantile
For the quantile model, we obtain strategy and density as in figure 6.4. By comparison
with the solution obtained through the HJB equation, figure 6.6, we again see that the τ
estimates match in regions where the population density is non-negligible.
We see from figure 6.5 (right), that the gradient is initially larger compared to the baseline,
corresponding to a larger incentive for change of strategy. This has direct consequences
for the candidate and validation strategies seen in figures 6.4 (left) and 6.6 (right). Here
we observe a central region of high effort, surrounded by more relaxed states. For the
validation strategy, this is followed by an increasing effort associated with very small size.
We interpret this central area as a ”region of competition”, in which individuals are suf-
ficiently large that they expect to be able to compete due to their size, and suﬀiciently
small that they are not yet certain of winning. By actively feeding, individuals falling into
this region may significantly increase their chance of winning a mate. Depending on their
size, they may also benefit from an increased reward independently of the mean field as
indicated by the reward structure (4.13). Individuals who fall above this region are confi-
dent that they will win the mate in an encounter with other animals from the population,
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
39
==PAGE:48==
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
τ
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N(x, t)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
10−14
10−11
10−8
10−5
10−2
Figure 6.4: (Quantile) left; candidate strategy, right; corresponding size spectrum.
6
8
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
Normalised density
0
25
50
75
100
i
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
norm
99.9% reduction
Gradient norm
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 6.5: (Quantile) left; time-normalised density ¯N, right; norm of ˆI′(ui) on L2(S).
and are typically so large that they cannot increase their potential reward much further.
As a consequence, they reduce their effort and thus the mortality induced by high activity.
Those who fall below the region resort to a low-risk low-reward strategy, in which they
maintain a reasonably sized potential reward and otherwise rely on the somewhat unlikely
event of finding an uncontested mate. Considering the validation strategy, we see that
if individuals fall far behind in size, their reward is reduced further due to the reward
structure, hence they are strongly motivated to maintain some size. This trend, as well
as strategies pertaining to particularly large sizes are not distinguishable in the solution
obtained from algorithm (1) as only a minimum of individuals reside here.
Compared with the baseline, the density for the quantile model is less centralised and does
not peak as high, i.e. more individuals are either large or small and relatively fewer are
of medium size.
6.2.2
Sigmoid
Finally, for the sigmoid model, we obtain results as in figures 6.7, 6.8 and 6.9. Again
we notice from figures 6.7 (left) and 6.9 (right), comparing with figure 6.7 (right) that
strategies only match in regions of elevated density.
Furthermore, the initial gradient
norm (figure 6.8 right) was reduced compared to the quantile model but is larger than
40
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:49==
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
W
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
τ
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 6.6: (Quantile) left; value function for N(·, tf), right; validation strategy ˜τ.
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
τ
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N(x, t)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
10−14
10−11
10−8
10−5
10−2
Figure 6.7: (Sigmoid) left; candidate strategy, right; corresponding size spectrum.
the baseline. This corresponds to some intermediate incentive for change in strategy, well
reflecting the more so stochastically influenced mean field game.
The candidate strategy appears similar to that of the quantile model, and we may, with
some modifications, argue similarly regarding ecological implications. Compared with the
quantile model, we notice that the strategies span a smaller range of values and generally
suggest less feeding activity. Qualitatively, the added noise of the sigmoid model seems to
have had a smoothing effect allowing for more relaxed, low-risk behaviour. Noticeably, the
candidate strategy seems to agree with the validation for small sizes. Consulting figure
6.7 (right), we see that a small but non-negligible part of the population resides at these
values. Generally, the inclusion of a size-independent random variable seems to shape
a more forgiving environment, in which even relatively small individuals have a chance
at reproducing. This trend is vaguely visible when comparing the value functions of the
sigmoid an quantile models, the prior of which is somewhat more homogeneous than the
latter.
Of particular interest is the size spectrum, which for the sigmoid model admits a bimodal
distribution, most prominently expressed for t > 7. Due to diffusion and mortality affect-
ing the population, the bimodality is diﬀicult to observe when considering the density N
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
41
==PAGE:50==
6
8
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
Normalised density
0
25
50
75
100
i
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
norm
99.8% reduction
Gradient norm
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 6.8: (Sigmoid) left; time-normalised density ¯N, right; norm of ˆI′(ui) on L2(S).
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
W
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
τ
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 6.9: (Sigmoid) left; left; value function for N(·, tf), right; validation strategy ˜τ.
on all of S. Considering instead the time-normalised density on a constrained region cf.
figure 6.8 (left), the bimodal structure becomes more visible. For a clear view, we restrict
ourselves to two dimensions and consider only N(·, tf) as in figure 6.10.
6.2.3
Result summary
In figure 6.10 (left) we compare the population size of the solutions N corresponding to the
candidate strategies. In the right pane we plot the terminal time distributions. Comparing
population sizes we see that the increased activity required by the quantile models results
in a greater mortality compared with the sigmoid which is more forgiving. In the right, we
see that the baseline admits a clear monomodal distribution whereas the sigmoid model
displays a bimodality. The quantile model seems to stretch the terminal density, and whilst
not bimodal, we may suspect that the mechanism of competition which it provides are
fundamental to the distinct splitting of groups observed in the sigmoid model. Comparing
population sizes, we see that the smaller foraging activity of the sigmoid model has resulted
in reduced mortality and increased population size.
If we are to asses the physical reasonableness of the results, both the quantile and sigmoid
model suffer, in that they allow for individuals to become, what we deem exceptionally,
small. Indeed, the diffusion terms in the governing PDE implies that we may, however
42
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:51==
7
8
9
10
t
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
size
Population size
baseline
quantile
sigmoid
0
10
20
30
x
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
N(x, tf)
Terminal density
Figure 6.10: Summary of primary simulations. Left; total population size matching can-
didate strategies. Right; terminal time size spectrum.
unlikely, observe individuals at extreme values. More problematically, we observe from
the size spectrum that a reasonably large part of the population barely increases in size
(compare with figure 4.2).
Despite issues regarding the physical reasonableness of the results, it seems that the algo-
rithm 1, with some reservations, has been successful. In particular, it seems fair to conclude
that the candidate solutions are equivalent to Nash equilibria within the density-elevated
regions of S.
baseline
quantile
sigmoid
ξtrunc (ϵtrunc = 10−8)
0.999
0.989
0.991
Terminal time population size
7.97%
7.599%
9.29%
Relative gradient reduction
99.6%
99.9 %
99.8%
Table 6.1: Solution statistics.
Note, ξtrunc ∈[0, 1] is a measure of similarity between
candidate and validation solutions, with values near one indicating high similarity.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
43
==PAGE:52==
7
Synthesis
7.1
Perspectives on the adjoint approach
In the interest of building a deeper understanding of mathematical framework we present
some findings relating to the canonical equation. The ideas of the following section were
developed during discussions with Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen and are inspired by a draft
written by said author. The contents of the section ties intimately to the Lagrangian
formalism for the adjoint equation presented in [Hin+09] and reviewed in section 2.1.3.
The problem which we will discuss below, can be seen as a sub-problem of the mean-field
system of section 3.1, in which we fix the mean field and leave it out in notation. This
type of sub-problem, is exactly what we have used in algorithm 1 in order to reduce the
complexity of the problem.
Let U, V , Z and S be as in 3.1 and consider as in section 3.3 a problem with constraint
e : U × V 7→Z and cost I : U × V 7→R given as,
e(u, v) = c(u, v) −∂tv,
I(u, v) = ⟨h(u) + δtf k, v⟩.
(7.1)
Here c : U ×V 7→Z gives for each (u, v) the right hand side of a generic dynamical system
with control u. We will assume that for each fixed v ∈V that c(·, v) ∈B(U, Z) and
conversely for each fixed u ∈U that c(u, ·) : V 7→Z is a linear differential operator. We
supply the constraint with an arbitrary boundary condition and initial condition v(·, t0) =
v0. The cost-functional I : U × V 7→R is a bounded operator which consists of a running
reward h(u) : S 7→R (depends on control) and a terminal reward k : S 7→R.
This
definition of the cost functional is inspired by typical problems of optimal control, see
for example [Lib11] for deterministic problems and [Thy21] for stochastic analogues. As
previously, define the the reduced functional ˆI : U 7→R by ˆI(u) = I(u, v(u)) where v(u)
is given by the constraint mapping u 7→v(u) with (u, v) satisfying e(u, v) = 0.
Since I is linear in v the operator ∂vI(u, v) can be identified as
∂vI(u, v) = h + δtf k.
Let λ ∈Z′ be the adjoint state, then since equation (3.10) applies, we have the adjoint
equation
c∗(u, λ) + ∂tλ −δtf λ = −h −δtf k.
Formally, this should hold for all permissible perturbations ϕ ∈V , ϕ(·, t0) = 0, in the
sense that,
⟨c∗(u, λ) + ∂tλ + h, ϕ⟩+ ⟨δtf (k −λ) , ϕ⟩= 0.
(7.2)
If we require λ(·, tf) = k, the second term vanishes and we recognise (7.2) as a weak form
of
44
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:53==
c∗(u, λ) + ∂tλ + h = 0,
in S
λ(·, tf) = k.
(7.3)
where the boundary conditions should be chosen as to satisfy (7.2), e.g. for homogeneous
Dirichlet boundary conditions on v, λ should also satisfy homogeneous Dirichlet boundary
conditions.
By equation (2.6) we then have
ˆI′(u) = ∂uI(u, v(u)) + ∂uc(u, v(u))∗λ.
(7.4)
Define now the Hamiltonian functional H : U × V × Z′ 7→R by
H(u, v, λ) = I(u, v) + λc(u, v).
(7.5)
The partial derivatives of H, provide a set of familiar relations, indeed for δu ∈U
∂uH(u, v, λ)δu = ∂uI(u, v)δu + ⟨λ, ∂uc(u, v)δu⟩
= ∂uI(u, v)δu + ⟨∂uc(u, v)∗λ, δu⟩
so that
∂uH(u, v, λ) = ∂uI(u, v) + ∂uc(u, v)∗λ.
(7.6)
For the v derivative, we apply the same argument as in section 3.3 to identify λc(u, v) =
c∗(u, λ)v. With this in mind, we notice that in fact H is linear in its second argument,
and we identify
∂vH(u, v, λ) = h + δtf k + c∗(u, λ).
(7.7)
Finally for the λ derivative we have
∂λH(u, v, λ) = c(u, v).
(7.8)
The equations (7.6), (7.7) and (7.8) provide a means of reclaiming the derivative ˆI′(u),
the adjoint equation and the constraint equation. In particular the system of equations
∂uI(u, v) = ∂uH(u, v, λ),
∂tλ = −∂vH(u, v, λ),
∂tv = ∂λH(u, v, λ),
(7.9)
correspond to equations (7.3) and (7.4) when imposing the terminal condition λ(·, tf) = k.
To see this, choose v = v(u) to satisfy the third equation, that is the constraint e(u, v) = 0.
This leaves us with the two first equations,
ˆI′(u) = ∂uH(u, v(u), λ),
−∂tλ = ∂vH(u, v(u), λ),
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
45
==PAGE:54==
where the latter is subject to the same terminal condition as before.
The Hamiltonian formalism suggests a connection with Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle
(PMP) with which we will pursue an analogy. As before, define the Lagrange relaxed
objective functional
L(u, v, λ) = I(u, v) + λe(u, v).
(7.10)
From sections 2.1.3 and 3.3 we already know, that this form implies equations (7.3), (7.4)
and thus also the system (7.9). Considering only the two latter equations of (7.9), we have
−∂tλ = ∂vH(u, v, λ),
∂tv = ∂λH(u, v, λ),
(7.11)
which we recognise as a Hamiltonian system. Assume that the pair (u, v) = (¯u, ¯v) max-
imises I, then necessarily I should be stationary with respect to infinitesimal perturbations
in u, i.e.
d
duI(¯u, ¯v) = 0. This eliminates the equation for
d
duI(u, v) in (7.9), leaving us with
(7.11) as a necessary condition for the optimal control u = ¯u and state v = ¯v. Just as in
the finite-dimensional case, the Hamiltonian function defined in (7.5) serves as a shortcut
to generate the necessary conditions of optimality for the optimisation problem pertaining
to the Lagrange functional (7.10) with Lagrange multiplier λ.
As the reader may have noticed, the Hamiltonian defined in (7.5) is closely related to the
Lagrange relaxed objective functional L, indeed it was the prime motivator for choosing
the functional form. In the classical literature, the Hamiltonian is typically a function
of the state and independent variable which distinguishes it from (7.5).
This has the
consequence, that the analogy to the PMP comes with a caveat; the equations derived
through the functional Hamiltonian are given in a weak sense.
Clearly, if a classical
solution exists, they satisfy the weak form, whereas the converse may not be true.
Turning our attention to the HJB equation, we may instead wish to define the Hamiltonian
as a function. Thus, for each u ∈U, λ ∈Z′ we define the Hamiltonian function, ˜H(u, λ) :
S 7→R as
˜H(u, λ) = h + Auλ.
Here Au is the generator of the underlying stochastic process {Xt} for which v is a density.
Let u = µ be optimal, i.e.
˜H(µ, W) = sup
u∈U
˜H(u, W),
then the HJB equation may be expressed as,
∂tW + ˜H(µ, W) = 0
in S
W(·, tf) = k.
(7.12)
If the constraint is of the type discussed in section 3.1, we have that the generator Au =
c∗(u, ·). For any test function ϕ ∈V satisfying ϕ(·, tf) = 0, we see from (7.5) that
46
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:55==
H(u, ϕ, λ) = ⟨h + δtf k + c∗(u, λ), ϕ⟩
= ⟨˜H(u, λ), ϕ⟩+ ⟨δtf k, ϕ⟩
= ⟨˜H(u, λ), ϕ⟩.
Then we may express the weak form HJB equation in terms of inner products as,
⟨∂tW, ϕ⟩+ H(µ, ϕ, w) = 0
in S
(7.13)
We note that the strong and weak forms of the HJB equation (7.12), (7.13) are closely
related to the adjoint equations. Indeed, from equation (7.7) we see that ∂vH(u, v, λ) =
H(u, ·, λ) and consequently the adjoint equation may be expressed as
⟨∂tλ, ϕ⟩+ H(u, ϕ, λ) = 0,
which is solved by requiring
∂tλ + ˜H(u, λ) = 0
in S
λ(·, tf) = k.
From this perspective, the adjoint and the HJB equation are identical up to the choice of
control u, in which the HJB equation requires optimality. This indicates a close relation
between the states W and λ, indeed W is equivalent to λ(u) when the choice of u is
optimal.
In the context of mean field games, we allow the running and terminal rewards h(u)
and k to depend on v solving the forward equation e(u, v) = 0. If we assume this type
of dependence and wish to maximise I(u, v) under the constraint e(u, v) = 0, we arrive
at the original problem formulation in section 3.1.
The approach using the canonical
equation may then be described as a series of sub-problems approximating the original
mean-field system in terms of an increasingly accurate mean field. Letting i denote the
steps in this approach, the i′th sub-problem considers the adjoint equation for the i′th
approximation of the mean-field vi in order to compute the gradient ˆI′
vi(ui).
It does
not solve the corresponding optimisation problem with necessary condition ˆI′(ui) = 0
(i.e. the solution ui is not the best response), but rather indicates a direction in which
the control should change in order to improve the performance ˆI.
As the gradient is
reduced, the discrepancy from the mean-field game in which ˆI′(u) = 0 is reduced, and the
approximation (ui, v(ui)) approaches some equilibrium (µ, v(µ)). If the gradient vanishes,
and the constraint e(ui, v(ui) = 0 is satisfied, we have a stationary solution, verifiable as
a Nash equilibrium through the HJB equation with v = vi fixed.
We conclude, that for the specific choices of the constraint e and cost-functional I, requir-
ing stationary in I the adjoint approach reduces and has a clear analogy with PMP. In the
context of determining the functional derivative ˆI′(u), the applicability of the Hamiltonian
formalism persists as a means to express the weak formulation of the adjoint and the HJB
equations.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
47
==PAGE:56==
7.2
Discussion
The existence and uniqueness of Nash equilibria are fundamental questions we have not yet
addressed. The primary result known to us concerning these questions, is that of [LL07].
Here, uniqueness was shown for solutions of a mean field system under the assumption of
a convex Hamiltonian and certain monotonicity conditions on the mean field components.
We do not attempt to show this for our worked case and acknowledge that this is a
gap to be filled. We cover the question of existence in a pragmatic way by noting that
numerical results indicate that we have indeed obtained a solution of the mean field system,
hence existence is plausible. A notable problem with this argument is, that we have no
guarantee that the numerical scheme we have implemented converges. In particular, the
true underlying problem is inherently infinite-dimensional and thus not feasibly solved
directly on a computer. By discretising, we create a numerical approximation, which we
suppose converges to the original problem for increasing fidelity. Considering that our
results appear well behaved, we proceed under the assumption that existence holds and
that our numerical approximation is accurate without further proof.
A second issue, that we have been somewhat negligent about, concerns the constraints
on the foraging activity level τ. Specifically, we assumed that τ, was parameterised by a
sigmoid function (4.10). This way, τ is restricted to the open interval (0, 1) and may not
take on the extreme values of 0 and 1 despite these being physically sensible. If we use
the sigmoid parameterisation of τ and optimise with respect to u, then we are unable to
achieve strategies outside (0, 1) in any finite number of steps of the canonical equation. On
the other hand, if we directly optimise with respect to τ using the formulation introduced
so far, there is no mechanism to impose the restriction τ ∈[0, 1]. When implementing the
prior approach, for algorithm 1, we do not expect this to be an issue as strategies may
get arbitrarily close to the ends of the interval thus allowing for any desired numerical
precision. In practice this issue seems even less problematic, as the estimated strategies
tend to be contained in a subset of the interval (0, 1). The exceptions to this, are the
strategies derived from the solution of the HJB equation, for which τ increases drastically
near zero size. This is not clearly represented in the figures of section 6 in which we have
truncated solutions to the unit interval. We defend this decision, by appealing to the
physical boundaries of the strategy, but note that for small sizes, the solution of the HJB
equation with no upper constraint is not represented accurately in current figures. A more
complete treatment of the interval constraint of τ would require the explicit introduction
of these in the governing equations.
In section 7.1 we discussed how the PMP approach could be used to motivate the adjoint
equation by establishing an analogy with the Lagrange approach discussed in section 2.1.3
under the assumption that the cost-functional was stationary, i.e.
∂uI(u, v) = 0.
A
slightly different approach was taken by [MT22], whom applied a functional equivalent of
the method of Lagrange multipliers in order to establish Nash equilibria of a MFG in the
context of diel vertical migrations. Here, a Lagrange relaxed functional L was defined in the
same way as in section 7.1, and a mean-field system was establish by requiring stationarity
of its partial derivatives ∂uL, ∂vL and ∂λL. The equivalence of the Lagrange approach
discussed in section 2.1.3 with the PMP was already established when requiring that
the gradient ˆI′(u) = 0. With this same assumption, the connection between the Lagrange
approach and the method of Lagrange multipliers becomes apparent. Indeed, from section
2.1.3 we know that setting ˆI′(u) = 0 is equivalent to requiring ∂uI(u, v, λ) = 0 if we assume
that the adjoint equation is satisfied for λ and that v satisfies the forward equation. The
adjoint equation is a direct consequence of the choice ∂vL(u, v, λ) = 0, and it is easy to
see that the constraint e(u, v) can be expressed as ∂Lλ(u, v, λ) = 0. Thus, ignoring the
48
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:57==
somewhat technical details of the initial, terminal and boundary conditions, we see that
the method of Lagrange multipliers connects well with the methodology discussed so far.
Throughout this thesis, we have focused on methods and the qualitative structure of the
size-spectrum model. Exact parameter values and details of the ecological setting have
been only of secondary importance to us. This has consequences for the real world re-
liability of our simulation results. Some parameter values that we have used, may not
be optimal. In particular the fitness-functional parameters (table 4.2) did not reveal any
obvious choices. Instead, these parameters were hand-tuned, in order to investigate model
behaviour with a focus on generating bimodal size-distributions. It was observed that a
large range of values yielded what might be deemed reasonable behaviour. Different cases
were also explored by varying the common model parameters γ and m0. Together with
the three different simulation cases (baseline, quantile and sigmoid), we are faced with a
large number of possible permutations. With no solid incentive to indicate any particular
choice, the task of finding reasonable parameter combinations is daunting. The simulation
results presented in section 6 are the outcome of a time-consuming process, in part due to
moderate simulation times and in part due to the lack of direction when searching the pa-
rameter space, apart from conjecture. It is likely that there exists parameter combinations
that are more befitting. This is to some degree confirmed by the somewhat implausible
results observed in the quantile and sigmoid simulation cases, in which a large fraction of
the population remains remarkably small in size.
In order to improve the applicability of the model and our numerical approach, we sug-
gest a three-fold solution. Firstly, a deeper ecological case-study may reveal important
parameters and grant insight into some parameter values. Second, a sensitivity analysis
of certain parameters with respect to the optimal strategy may prove useful in order to
understand some of the more elusive model parameters and thus guide decisions on their
values. A sensitivity analysis for this type of problem is inherently diﬀicult, as the original
problem is already somewhat computationally heavy. This leads us to the final suggestion
- optimisation of the algorithm and numerical solvers. Whether by hand or automated, a
sweep of the parameter space will be much more viable using a faster algorithm.
We initiate a discussion on the first suggestion. In section 6 we saw that simulation results,
while allowing for interesting behaviour, displayed tendencies to allow for non-negligible
densities in the very low end of the size-spectrum.
By trial-and-error, different varia-
tions of the most recent model structure have been simulated numerically and assessed.
Throughout, it was a general trend, that solutions for which bimodalities emerged in the
size spectrum, suffered from this effect. Accordingly, in order to improve the model, it
may be worth-wile to modify the incentives a small-sized male faces when deciding their
foraging activity levels. The current model addresses part of the problem, which was more
severe for previous iterations. It does so by arguing that smaller males are less fertile than
moderate or large individuals as described by equation (4.13). As a different approach,
we may argue that smaller individuals are also exposed to further increased mortality. As
it stands, the model incorporates size-dependency of the mortality only through feeding
activity. Here, higher feeding activity implies higher mortality, reduced for larger size. A
more reasonable model may include a term to describe situations in which size relates to
general safety and thus decreased mortality. This way, small individuals would perish at
a higher rate and the size-spectrum may be pushed towards larger values.
Throughout section 6 we observed that candidate strategies obtained using algorithm 1
only matched in regions for which the population density was non-negligible. This is a
feature of the canonical equation since the selection gradient scales with the population
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
49
==PAGE:58==
density. Physically, this has the sensible interpretation, that traits are selected only when
they are relevant to a suﬀicient number of individuals. Any finite population may only
occupy a bounded subdomain of S, thus in any realistic setting, extreme values undergo
little to no selection. The HJB equation is unaffected by these properties and thus solutions
may not correspond to stationary points of the canonical equation. This implies that the
candidate solutions we have found through algorithm 1 may not, strictly speaking, be
Nash equilibria. For any region of S of practical interest however, this is not a problem.
Furthermore, if one desires the true Nash equilibrium, it may be obtained by post-solving
the HJB equation as we have done here.
A limitation of the algorithm developed in this thesis is computation time, most noticeable
during study of the parameter dependence of the optimal control. To alleviate this issue,
it may be beneficial to consider a Newton-like method, employing the second derivative of
the functional ˆI with the goal of speeding up convergence. Furthermore, second functional
derivatives may prove useful in the study of convergence and stability of strategies in the
canonical equation as described by [DHP06].
The theoretical framework for the adjoint equation described in this thesis, was chosen
in order to make the presentation as self-contained and simple as possible. One of the
steps taken to ensure this is the assumption that the differential constraint operator e
should be densely defined and linear in the state v. If this was not the case, our argument
in deriving the adjoint equation breaks down and we need to resort to other theory. In
the case of stochastic optimal control using the Kolmogorov operators, one may resort to
semi-group theory in order to describe the adjoint equation. Another approach might use
PDE theory, indeed this is the approach used by [Hin+09] when considering certain PDE
constrained optimisation problems. The latter tends to pose the constraint operator e as
the weak formulation of the forward equation. Under reasonable assumptions, in particular
by restricting to appropriate Sobolev spaces this operator achieves the desired properties.
In general, this approach requires a much more elaborate piece of theory, which in the end
may yield a more rigorous justification of our methods than what has been provided so far.
Much of this is primarily PDE theory, which is part of the functional analytic machinery
we have already begun employing in this thesis. Since the systems of interest in this thesis
are primarily stochastic, a broader functional analytic background may prove particularly
attractive. Whereas the theory of PDEs, optimal control and stochastic processes may
at first appear fairly distinct, a shared treatment using a unified language in a functional
analytic context now seems appealing.
7.3
Conclusion
The coupling of mean field games and adaptive dynamics has revealed a rather useful
algorithm for numerically determining Nash equilibria.
Starting with an Itô diffusion subject to Markov controls and a performance objective given
in terms of a fitness functional, the Fréchet derivative was used to establish a stationarity
condition for the canonical equation of function-valued adaptive dynamics. Through the
use of the Feynman-Kac formula, we derived the forward and backward equations. For each
fixed control, solving these equations allowed for the computation of the fitness functional
derivative.
Using a modified Heun’s method, we discretised the canonical equation, enabling us to
time-step the equation until stationarity. Each of these steps required that the forward
and backward equations to be solved and the fitness derivative computed. Through the
use of the sophisticated FEniCS and dolfin-adjoint libraries for Python, this algorithm
50
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:59==
was implemented fairly eﬀiciently, without the need to explicitly construct the backward
equation.
In order to validate solutions, we posed the HJB equation using the mean field obtained
from the stationarity condition.
We applied the algorithm to a case study in which males of a size-structured population
compete for mating rights. Here the fitness functional was modelled as a terminal reward,
granting larger individuals a competitive edge. We found that optimal strategies revealed
a competitive region in the size × time domain, in which individuals displayed high foraging
activity levels. Outside of this region, individuals would generally employ lower activity
levels. By introducing random variations influencing the competitive ability of individuals,
we arrived at a model under which a bimodal size distribution emerged.
Qualitatively, results were physically sensible, however in order for this claim to extend
to quantitative realism, some adjustments should be made to parameters and possibly
model structures. This is particularly true for the mortality sub-model which may not be
reasonable for small sizes.
We compared candidate solutions obtained by requiring stationarity of the canonical equa-
tion with solutions obtained through the HJB equation. Solution estimates agreed in re-
gions of the size × time domain, in which population densities were non-negligible. This
feature was explained by considering the adjoint equation, which revealed that the fitness
derivative scales with population density. For regions in which densities are close to zero,
we argued that solutions are practically irrelevant, but may nonetheless be estimated by
solving the HJB equation in the same manner as we did in order to validate solutions.
By pursuing an analogy of the forward and backward equations with the PMP we discov-
ered close ties between various fields of applied mathematics, and in particular a different
perspective for motivating stationarity of the canonical equation as a necessary condition
for a Nash equilibrium.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
51
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[AL19]
Yves Achdou and Jean-Michel Lasry. “Mean Field Games for Modeling Crowd
Motion”. en. In: Contributions to Partial Differential Equations and Applica-
tions. Ed. by B. N. Chetverushkin et al. Vol. 47. Series Title: Computational
Methods in Applied Sciences. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019,
pp. 17–42. isbn: 978-3-319-78325-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-78325-3_4.
[BM85]
Terry D Beacham and Clyde B Murray. “Variation in length and body depth of
pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) and chum salmon (O. keta) in southern
British Columbia”. In: Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42.2
(1985). Publisher: NRC Research Press Ottawa, Canada, pp. 312–319.
[Chr10]
Ole Christensen. Functions, Spaces, and Expansions. en. Boston: Birkhäuser
Boston, 2010. isbn: 978-0-8176-4980-7. doi: 10.1007/978-0-8176-4980-7.
[DHP06]
Ulf Dieckmann, Mikko Heino, and Kalle Parvinen. “The adaptive dynamics
of function-valued traits”. en. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology 241.2 (July
2006), pp. 370–389. issn: 00225193. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.12.002.
[Die04]
Odo Diekmann. “Beginner’s guide to adaptive dynamics”. In: Banach Center
Publications (2004), pp. 47–86.
[Hin+09]
Michael Hinze et al., eds. Optimization with PDE constraints. eng. Mathemat-
ical modelling: theory and applications 23. New York: Springer, 2009. isbn:
978-1-4020-8839-1.
[HS67]
Arthur J Hanson and Howard D Smith. “Mate selection in a population of
sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) of mixed age-groups”. In: Journal of
the Fisheries Board of Canada 24.9 (1967). Publisher: NRC Research Press
Ottawa, Canada, pp. 1955–1977.
[Knu22]
Thøger Engelund Knudsen. “A mean field game in the size spectrum”. MA
thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2022.
[Kre89]
Erwin Kreyszig. Introductory functional analysis with applications. eng. Wiley
classics library ed. Wiley classics library. New York: Wiley, 1989. isbn: 978-0-
471-50459-7.
[Lib11]
Daniel Liberzon. Calculus of variations and optimal control theory: A concise
introduction. eng. Publication Title: Calculus of Variations and Optimal Con-
trol Theory: a Concise Introduction. Princeton University Press, 2011. isbn:
978-0-691-15187-8.
[LL07]
Jean-Michel Lasry and Pierre-Louis Lions. “Mean field games”. en. In: Japanese
Journal of Mathematics 2.1 (Mar. 2007), pp. 229–260. issn: 0289-2316, 1861-
3624. doi: 10.1007/s11537-007-0657-8.
[LL16]
Hans Petter Langtangen and Anders Logg. Solving PDEs in Python. en. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2016. isbn: 978-3-319-52462-7. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-52462-7.
[MT22]
Maksim Mazuryn and Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen. “Mean field games for diel ver-
tical migration with diffusion”. en. Submitted. 2022.
[Now06]
M. A. Nowak. Evolutionary dynamics: exploring the equations of life. OCLC:
ocm64688986. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
2006. isbn: 978-0-674-02338-3.
[Øks98]
Bernt Øksendal. Stochastic Differential Equations. en. Universitext. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998. isbn: 978-3-662-03620-4. doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-03620-4.
52
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:61==
[PDH06]
Kalle Parvinen, Ulf Dieckmann, and Mikko Heino. “Function-valued adaptive
dynamics and the calculus of variations”. en. In: Journal of Mathematical Bi-
ology 52.1 (Jan. 2006), pp. 1–26. issn: 0303-6812, 1432-1416. doi: 10.1007/
s00285-005-0329-3.
[PHD13]
Kalle Parvinen, Mikko Heino, and Ulf Dieckmann. “Function-valued adaptive
dynamics and optimal control theory”. en. In: Journal of Mathematical Biology
67.3 (Sept. 2013), pp. 509–533. issn: 0303-6812, 1432-1416. doi: 10 . 1007 /
s00285-012-0549-2.
[Thy21]
Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen. Lecture Notes on Diffusion and Stochastic Differential
Equations. English. Polyteknisk Boghandel og Forlag, 2021. isbn: 978-87-7125-
120-3.
[TM22]
Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen and Maksim Mazuryn. “Ideal free flows of optimal
foragers: Vertical migrations in the ocean”. en. In: Theoretical Ecology (May
2022). issn: 1874-1738, 1874-1746. doi: 10.1007/s12080-022-00538-w.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:63==
Appendices
A
Alternate derivation of the adjoint equation
We include a special case of the first approach employed by [Hin+09] for establishing the
adjoint equation. We do so in order to illustrate the necessity of section 3.3.
For this approach, we will need the fact that for bounded linear operators S, T mapping
a Hilbert space H onto itself, then (ST)∗= T ∗S∗.
We let U, V , Z e, I and ˆI be as in section 2.1.3. Our goal is to determine the derivative
ˆI′(u). Assuming that the directional derivative ∂ve(u, v(u)) ∈B(V, Z) is invertible, with
bounded inverse, so that v′(u) exists by the implicit function theorem, we find that for
each δu ∈U,
ˆI′(u)δu = ∂uI(u, v(u))δu + ∂vI(u, v(u))v′(u)δu
= ⟨δu, ∂uI(u, v(u))⟩U + ⟨v′(u)δu, ∂vI(u, v(u))⟩V
= ⟨δu, ∂uI(u, v(u))⟩U + ⟨δu, v′(u)∗∂vI(u, v(u))⟩U.
Here we identified ∂uI(u, v(u)) and ∂vI(u, v(u)) with their dual elements and considered
the adjoint of v′(u). The above implies that
ˆI′(u) = ∂uI(u, v(u)) + v′(u)∗∂vI(u, v(u)).
(1)
By the implicit function theorem, we have that
v′(u) = −∂ve(u, v(u))−1∂ue(u, v(u)),
so that by taking the adjoint on both sides,
v′(u)∗= −∂1e(u, v(u))∗∂2e(u, v(u))−∗.
Letting λ ∈Z′ be the solution of the adjoint equation
∂2e(u, v(u))∗λ = −∂2I(u, v(u)),
then we can rewrite (1) as
ˆI′(u) = ∂1I(u, v(u)) + ∂1e(u, v(u))∗λ.
This approach requires that ∂ve(u, v) ∈B(V, Z) in order for the Fréchet derivatives to
make sense. This is not the case for for e a differential operator in v, hence we need a
different approach as described in section 3.3.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
55
==PAGE:64==
B
Dirac delta
Analogously to the usual definition, we define the Dirac delta on boundaries of a bounded
domain X = [xmin, xmax], as a means to create functionals with boundary contributions.
Consider in the plane X×R the triangle with corner points (x, y); (xmin, y0), (xmin+w, y0)
and (xmin, y0 + 2
w), i.e. a right triangle with height 2
w, width w ≤xmax −xmin and area
1. Explicitly, this triangle is given by
δw
xmin :=
( 2
w −(x −xmin) 2
w2
x ∈Xw
0
otherwise ,
where we let Xw = [x0, x0 + w]. Define now the Dirac delta centred at the lower boundary
x = xmin by,
δxmin := lim
w→0 δw
xmin.
(2)
Defined this way, δxmin has the property that for any continuous f : X 7→R,
Z
X
δxmin(x)f(x) dx = f(xmin).
Indeed, for any w > 0, using that
R
X δw
xmin(x) dx = 1,

Z
X
δw
xmin(x)f(x) dx −f(xmin)
 =

Z
X
δw
xmin(x) (f(x) −f(xmin)) dx

≤
Z
X
δw
xmin(x)|f(x) −f(xmin)| dx.
Taking xw ∈Xw to satisfy,
max
x∈Xw |f(x) −f(xmin)| = |f(xw) −f(xmin)|,
and noting that δw
xmin is zero outside Xw, we find that

Z
X
δw
xmin(x)f(x) dx −f(xmin)
 ≤
Z
Xw
δw
xmin(x)|f(xw) −f(xmin)| dx
= |f(xw) −f(xmin)| →0 for w →0.
Here the limit follows due to the continuity of f and that necessarily xw →0 as w →0.
This definition of the Dirac delta is so far limited to the left boundary, it is clear however,
that it may easily be extended to the right boundary by considering the mirrored triangle
located at xmax and letting w < 0 approach 0 from the left.
We tacitly assume this
argument when using the Dirac delta, and simply write δs where s is either boundary of
the domain.
56
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:65==
C
Computation of functional derivative
In order to understand how dolfin-adjoint computes functional derivatives, we provide
a simple example, amenable to analytic as well as numerical work. Specifically, we pose
a simple PDE with associated functional and compute analytically its derivative.
We
then include code snippets illustrating the equivalent solution using dolfin-adjoint and
compare final results.
In order to keep some resemblance of the forward Kolmogorov equation, we consider the
system
∂N
∂t + ∂
∂x (uN) −D∂2N
∂x2 = 0,
in [0, 1] × [0, ∞)
N = 1,
on {0, 1} × [0, ∞)
(3)
where both the control u and state N are mappings from [0, 1] × [0, ∞) to R. In order to
simplify, we consider the steady state of (3), i.e. ∂N
∂t = 0. We thus end up with the system
∂
∂x (uN) −D∂2N
∂x2 = 0
(4)
and boundary conditions as in (3). We choose the functional
J(u) =
Z
Ω
xN(u) dx
(5)
where N = N(u) solves (3). We now wish to determine the directional derivative J(µ)˜µ
for some fixed u = µ and perturbation ˜µ. If we let u = µ = 0 in (4) we trivially obtain
the solution N = 1. We expand the functional (5) around µ in terms of v
J(v) = J(µ) + J′(µ)v + O(v2)
(6)
So that for v near 0
J′(µ)v ≈J(v) −J(µ)
= J(v) −
Z
Ω
x dx
= J(v) −1
2
(7)
We now perturb u in the direction of ˜µ by setting ν = µ + ϵ˜µ for ϵ > 0 small. This allows
us to expand N around N(µ),
N = N(µ) + ϵ ˜N + O(ϵ2)
≈1 + ϵ ˜N
(8)
Then we substitute u = ν, N as above, into the left hand side of (4) to get
∂
∂x

ϵ˜µ

1 + ϵ ˜N

−D ∂2
∂x2

1 + ϵ ˜N

= ϵ∂˜µ
∂x −ϵD∂2 ˜N
∂x2 + O(ϵ2)
(9)
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
57
==PAGE:66==
The perturbation ˜N is then found by solving
∂˜µ
∂x −D∂2 ˜N
∂x2 = 0
(10)
with boundary condition ˜N = 0. We now let ˜u = cos(nπx) for some n ∈N. This ordinary
differential equation is then solved by
˜N =
1
nπD sin(nπx)
(11)
We then substitute v = ν, N = 1 + ϵ ˜N in (7). Using that for n ∈N, sin(nπ) = 0, we find
J′(µ)ν =
Z
Ω
xN(ν) dx −1
2
≈
Z
Ω
x

1 + ϵ ˜N

dx
=
Z
Ω
x dx + ϵ
Z
Ω
x ˜N dx −1
2
= ϵ
Z
Ω
x
nπD sin(nπx) dx
= −ϵcos(nπ)
n2π2D
(12)
Clearly J′(µ)ν = ϵJ′(µ)˜µ and we find the directional derivative
J′(µ)˜µ = −cos(nπ)
n2π2D
(13)
Substituting D = 1, n = 2 we find that the directional derivative evaluates to approxi-
mately −0.0253.
We may equivalently solve the PDE (4) in Python using FEniCS and compute the direction
derivative using dolfin-adjoint. In order to do so, we first import the relevant libraries
(python code)
from fenics import *
from fenics_adjoint import *
Then we need to define a mesh and a function-space,
mesh = IntervalMesh(100, 0, 1)
V = FunctionSpace(mesh, 'CG', 2)
The Dirichlet boundary condition can be implemented by calling
BC = DirichletBC(V, Constant(1), "on_boundary")
Then we define a function for returning the weak formulation of (4),
F = lambda u, N: (v*(u*N).dx(0) + v.dx(0)*(D*N).dx(0))*dx
where v is a test-function,
v = TestFunction(V)
58
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:67==
Then, we define u and N as functions on V ,
u = Function(V)
N = Function(V)
Note, the above definition per default assigns the value 0 to the functions. We can then
call
solve(F(u,N) == 0, N, BC)
in order to solve the weak form PDE for N, thus assigning a value to it. We then define a
functional,
w = project(Expression("x[0]", degree = 1),V)
J = lambda N: assemble(w*N*dx)
here the project call constructs a finite-element representation of the expression ”x”.
dolfin-adjoint then allows for convenient computation of the functional derivative J′(u)
by calling
dJdu = compute_gradient(J(N), Control(u),
options = {"riesz_representation": "L2"})
In order to implement the perturbation ˜u we call
ut = project(Expression("cos(n*pi*x[0])", n = n, pi = pi, degree = 2), V)
which then allows us to compute the direction derivative by calling
dJdu_ut = assemble(dJdu*ut*dx)
Indeed, when using D and n as before, we find dJdu_ut ≈−0.0253 agreeing with the
analytical result up to a very small margin of error. For the full code used, refer to the
attached file minimal_example.py.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
59
==PAGE:68==
D
Explanation of code
All numerical work was carried out using Python with the FEniCS and dolfin-adjoint
libraries. The code is spread out in four separate files, auxiliary.py, functions.py,
misc_functions.py and main.py. The auxiliary file contain some basic classes, definitions
and helper functions used throughout the remaining three files. The function file contains
the definitions most central to the implementation of algorithm 1 and the solution of the
HJB equation. The miscellaneous functions file contains helper functions for running the
content of the functions file and provides functions for plotting and saving figures. Finally,
the main file is the driver in which the algorithm is run and figures are generated.
Central to the code are the classes STFunction, ForwardModel, ADModel, Model and
HJBModel. We briefly describe their functionality.
STFunction
Moniker for ”space-time” function, the STFunction is the object used to discretise func-
tions on the space-time domain S = [xmin, xmax] × [t0, tf].
For each time-step in the
time-domain, this object contains a FEniCSfunction object on the space domain Ω. For
use with the canonical equation and general ease of use, a series of methods were defined
to carry out computations involving this object.
ForwardModel
This class contains the essential data for solving the forward Kolmogorov equation with
mortality. It has methods defined, that allows for the convenient computation of a solution
N in terms of a STFunction using the implicit Euler scheme.
ADModel
Analogous to the ForwardModel, the adaptive-dynamics model keeps track of the steps
in the canonical equation and contains methods that enables the user to easily time-step
the control u using the modified Heun method. The control variable which the canonical
equation governs, is stored as an STFunction.
Model
The Model class provides a way to simultaneously keep track of a ForwardModel and a
ADModel, while providing the component linking them in terms of a method computing
the very important functional derivative using dolfin-adjoint. The class also provides
methods for plotting the latest iterate of the ADModel as well as the corresponding density.
HJBModel
The HJBModel is a standalone class governing HJB equation. It requires that the model
is of a specific structure as described in section 5 and is thus not part of the more general
Model framework. The class stores essential model data for the HJB equation and provides
methods for obtaining solutions in terms of the strategy τ.
60
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:69==
E
Numerics of boundary conditions
We here provide a practical argument for choosing a no-flux upper boundary for the
discretised weak form forward equation (5.5) in place of homogeneous Dirichlet boundaries.
We do so by applying algorithm 1 for three variations of the baseline model. The first
variation (a) considers homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions for a large value of the
upper boundary xmax in order to naively approximate the boundary discussed in section
4.3.1. The second variation (b) considers homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions for
a much smaller upper boundary xmax. The third variation (c) considers again the smaller
value of xmax but imposes a no-flux upper boundary. Of the two latter variations, we
prefer the one which is most similar to variation a, which we consider the most truthful
representation of our model.
We use parameters as for the original baseline model with the exception of nT = 50 and
space discretisation parameters as in table 1.
Variation
a
b
c
xmax
150
30
30
nx
1750
350
350
Table 1: Parameter values used for comparison of boundary condition implementations.
Note, nx has been chosen in order to provide the same cell-densities for meshes used to
discretise space.
The candidate strategies and corresponding size spectra obtained with these models can
be seen in figure 1. By comparing the strategies, we note that variations b and c indicate
that activity levels should be reduced near the upper boundary xmax = 30. This is most
prominent in variation b, which thus seems less similar to variation a. Intuitively, this
effect has a reasonable physical interpretation.
If a given individual of the considered
population reaches a Dirichlet boundary, they are effectively killed. This of course implies
a harsh penalty on the expected fitness so that the optimal behaviour avoids these bound-
aries. This is not the case for the no-flux boundary, in which individuals are ”bounced”
off, meaning that actively foraging while near the boundary is pointless rather than detri-
mental. Based on these observations, we prefer a no-flux rather than Dirichlet condition
for the upper boundary.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
61
==PAGE:70==
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
τ
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N(x, t)
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
10−14
10−11
10−8
10−5
10−2
(a) Dirichlet boundary at xmax = 100.
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
τ
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N(x, t)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
10−14
10−11
10−8
10−5
10−2
(b) Dirichlet boundary at xmax = 30.
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
τ
0
5
10
t
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
N(x, t)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
10−14
10−11
10−8
10−5
10−2
(c) No-flux boundary at xmax = 30.
Figure 1: left column; candidate strategies, right; corresponding size spectra.
62
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:71==
F
Supplementary plots
We here provide a series of supplementary plots.
In figure 2 we include a plot of the value function and validation strategies for the baseline
model in a restricted region of S.
0
5
10
t
5
10
15
20
x
W
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
t
5
10
15
20
τ
5
10
15
20
0.600
0.605
0.610
0.615
0.620
Figure 2: Restriction of 6.3 (baseline) to smaller domain for improved contrast. Left; value
function for N(·, tf) in fig. 6.1, right; corresponding validation strategy ˜τ.
For each of the primary simulations (baseline, quantile and sigmoid), we provide additional
plots to investigate the convergence of the algorithm 1. The left column of figure 3 is the
time-average of the gradient estimates of the canonical equation for each step i of algorithm
1. For the baseline model this plot is somewhat uninteresting, but the two latter indicate
that the motivation of individuals to change their strategy changes throughout the iterates
depending on their size. The right column of plots indicates (in yellow) the area for which
we compare the candidate solutions of τ from algorithm 1 with the solution obtained from
the HJB equation. This truncation of the functions is made with tolerance ξtrunc from
table 5.1.
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
63
==PAGE:72==
25
50
75
100
i
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
Gradient time-average
2
4
6
8
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
x
Area of comparison
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
(a) (Baseline)
25
50
75
100
i
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
Gradient time-average
2
4
6
8
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
x
Area of comparison
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
(b) (Quantile)
25
50
75
100
i
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x
Gradient time-average
2
4
6
8
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
x
Area of comparison
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
(c) (Sigmoid)
Figure 3: left column; time-average of |ˆI′(ui)| for each x, right; indicator function 1 ˜
N
(purple: 0, yellow: 1).
64
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
==PAGE:73==
Mean field games and adaptive dynamics in evolutionary models
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
