==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Combined Impacts for Beams casted with Fine and
Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates
Theory, Experiments, and Assessment of Carbon Footprint
Including Annex E - Further investigation of concrete mixes F-RCA80 and F-RCA100
due to low compressive strengths
Cecilie Kristensen, s155942 & Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Combined Impacts for Beams casted with Fine and Coarse Recycled Con-
crete Aggregates
Master’s Thesis, May 2022
Authors:
Cecilie Kristensen, s155942
Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
Education:
Architectural Engineering, MSc
Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
Supervisors:
External Lecturer Egil Borchersen, DTU Civil Engineering
External Supervisor Lars Zenke Pørlov Hansen, NIRAS A/S
PhD Student Louise Green Pedersen, DTU Civil Engineering
Date
Cecilie Kristensen
Date
Jelena Kuburovic
==PAGE:4==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The current master thesis concerns the use of recycled concrete aggregates, RCA, as a replacement of natural
aggregates, NA, in the production of concrete. In the building industry the awareness of the necessity of
designing sustainable buildings is continuously growing, and as concrete is the world’s most used building
material it is pertinent to investigate the possibilities of optimizing concrete with regard to sustainability.
The amount of construction and demolition waste, CDW, from the building industry has been steadily
increasing during recent years. CDW has proven to be a potential source of aggregates for concrete, seeing
that the material properties of RCA are to some extent aligned with those of NA.
A characterization of both coarse recycled concrete aggregates, C-RCA, and ﬁne recycled concrete aggre-
gates, F-RCA, is carried out to document the properties of the aggregates in order to create concrete mix
designs with varying replacement ratios of RCA. The experiments conducted are the determination of par-
ticle size distribution, density and water absorption, water content, and cement content, after which ﬁve
concrete mixes are investigated with respect to workability, air content and compressive strength. Here it
is found that the properties of the C-RCA are in alignment with NA, whereas the water absorption differs
signiﬁcantly for F-RCA in comparison with NA. Furthermore, it is concluded that it is possible to obtain a
desired mean compressive strength of 20MPa, and that the strength decreases upon an increase of RCA.
To investigate the yield condition derived for beams casted with F-RCA and C-RCA, nine beams are casted
using the concrete mix design F-RCA50. The concrete mix F-RCA50 has an aggregate distribution of 60%
coarse aggregates and 40% ﬁne aggregates, where the entire coarse fraction is C-RCA and the ﬁne fraction
is 50% F-RCA and 50% NA. In reference to the beams casted with RCA three beams are casted using
the reference mix design F-NA40, where the aggregate distribution is 60% coarse NA and 40% ﬁne NA.
The beams are tested in three different test conﬁgurations, where the beams are subjected to a combination
of bending, shear, and torsion. In conclusion the beams in all conﬁgurations exhibited a similar material
behavior in alignment with traditional concrete and well-known theory, which indicates that RCA is a
suitable alternative to NA.
Furthermore, the environmental impacts of concrete casted with RCA compared to traditional concrete is
quantiﬁed through a life cycle assessment, LCA. The LCA is simpliﬁed to solely consider the production
stage of the concrete, and results in a decrease of 2% in global warming potential, GWP, between F-NA40
and F-RCA50.
==PAGE:6==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was carried out at the Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark in cooperation with NIRAS A/S. The work was ﬁnalized during the spring semester of 2022 and
serves as the completion of the MSc in Architectural Engineering. During the project work both authors
have contributed equally to the experimental work and the current report corresponding to 30 ECTS credits.
Additionally, Jelena Kuburovic is responsible for an Annex E corresponding to further 5 ECTS credits.
For the experimental work crushed concrete aggregates were kindly provided by Norrecco A/S, cement by
Aalborg Portland A/S, and remaining materials by the Department of Civil Engineering at DTU, and for
this the authors would like to express their appreciation.
Regarding the characterization of the crushed concrete aggregates thanks are due to Ebba Cederberg Schnell
and to Ditte Jul Valentin. In addition the authors want to express sincere gratitude for all help and encour-
agement received by the laboratory staff, especially to Kristian Riskær, Klaus Bræmer, Jørn Lykke Jensen,
Christian Rasmussen, and Troels Kristensen. Without your valuable input and willingness to help the ex-
perimental work would not have been successful. Furthermore, gratitude is due to Ian Rasmussen, Michael
Ramskov, and Tim Larsen for assistance throughout the experimental work.
Finally, the authors would like to sincerely thank Lars Zenke Pørlov Hansen from NIRAS A/S for fre-
quent meetings, valuable input, and his interest and availability to the project, which is greatly appreciated.
Additionally, acknowledgement is owed to external lecturer at the Department of Civil Engineering Egil
Borchersen for motivation, guidance, and assistance throughout the project and to PhD Student Louise
Green Pedersen for her input on crushed concrete aggregates.
Cecilie Kristensen & Jelena Kuburovic
Kongens Lyngby, May 2022
==PAGE:8==
This page is left blank intentionally
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Structure of Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of the Art
5
3
Theory
7
3.1
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Theory of Plasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Combined Impacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Method
25
5
Analysis of Experimental Work
26
5.1
Characterization of Aggregates and Cylinder Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Strength of Reinforcement and Beam Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Environmental Footprint
40
7
Discussion
41
8
Conclusion
46
9
Further Work
47
10 Bibliography
49
Appendix A - Reinforcement Degree
A1
Appendix B - Theoretical Load Carrying Capacity
B1
Appendix C - Load Carrying Capacity Calculated with Yield Strength
C1
Appendix D - Load Carrying Capacity Calculated with Failure Strength
D1
i
==PAGE:9==
Appendix E - Yield Conditions for Beams
E1
Annex A - Mean Value and Standard Deviation
Annex B - Characterization of Crushed Concrete Aggregates and Cylinder Testing
Annex C - Yield Strength of Reinforcement and Beam Testing
Annex D - Life Cycle Assessment of Concrete Cylinders Casted with RCA
Annex E - Further Investigation of Concrete Mixes F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 due to low Com-
pressive Strengths
ii
==PAGE:10==
List of Symbols
As
Cross sectional area of stirrups
Ak
Conﬁned area
Asc
Cross sectional area of compressive reinforcement
Ass
Cross sectional area of stirrup
Ast
Cross sectional area of tensile reinforcement
b
Width
bef
Effective width
bw
Width of stirrup
c
Cohesion
csc
Concrete cover from top to compressive reinforcement
cst
Concrete cover from bottom to tensile reinforcement
d
Effective height in bending
Es
Young’s modulus of the reinforcement
Fc
Force in concrete
Fsc
Reinforcement force
Fss
Capacity of stirrup
Fst
Force in the tensile reinforcement
fc
Compressive strength
fu
Tensile strength
fy
Yield strength
h
Height
hef
Effective height
hw
Height of stirrup
M
Moment
MRd
Load carrying capacity pure bending
n
Number of stirrups
P
Load
PRd
Failure load
R
Reaction
s
Distance between stirrups
iii
==PAGE:11==
T
Torsion
TRd
Load carrying capacity pure torsion
tef
Effective thickness
V
Shear
VRd
Load carrying capacity pure shear
x
Height of compression zone
z
Internal lever arm
λ
Reduction factor
λx
Reduced height of compression zone
'
Angle of friction
"c
Strain at maximum compressive stress
"cu
Yield strain
"sc
Strain in the compressive reinforcement
"st
Strain in the tensile reinforcement
⌫
Effectiveness factor
⌧
Shear stress
⌧T
Shear ﬂow caused by torsional moment
⌧V
Shear ﬂow caused by shear force
µ
Coefﬁcient of friction
σ
Stress
σs
Stress of the stirrups
σsc
Stress in concrete
σsc
Stress in the compressive reinforcement
σst
Stress in the tensile reinforcement
σsy
Stress of the stirrups
✓
Angle between horizontal and diagonal compression ﬁeld
iv
==PAGE:12==
List of Abbreviations
CDW
Construction and Demolition Waste
EDP
Environmental product declaration
GWP
Global Warming Potential
LCA
Life cycle assessment
NA
Natural Aggregates
RCA
Recycled Concrete Aggregates
C-RCA
Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-RCA
Fine Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-NA40
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 60/40
F-RCA50
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 50% NA 0-4mm, 50% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA80
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 20% NA 0-4mm, 80% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA100
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 100% F-RCA 0-4mm
v
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
1.1 Structure of Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1 Stress-Strain Relation for Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2 Stress-Strain Relation of Hot-Rolled Reinforcement Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3 Idealized Uniaxial Stress-Strain Relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4 Comparison between plastic and real stress-strain relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5 Cylinder Specimen Exposed to Pure Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6 The Modiﬁed Coulomb’s Failure Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7 Depiction of the Uniqueness Theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.8 Static System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.9 Stress and Strain Distribution for Pure Bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.10 Beam Subjected to a Point Load and The Corresponding Compression Stress Field
. . . .
18
3.11 The Diagonal Shear Stress Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.12 Shear Flow Arising from Torsional Moment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.13 Stresses Imposed by Combined Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.14 Longitudinal Forces of Reinforcement and Concrete Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1 Overview of Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2 Mean Compressive Strength of Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3 Comparison of Stress-Strain Relations with DS/EN 1992-1-1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4 Illustration of the Considered Beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5 Utilization of Bending and Shear at Varying Torsional Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.6 Force-Displacement Curves Found in Section 4.3 in Annex C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7 Yield Condition for VM1-B-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.8 Yield Condition for each Load Conﬁgurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.9 Scatter Plot Showing The Actual Failure Load against The Theoretical Failure Load . . . .
36
5.10 Results of VM1 and VM2 in Comparison with Tests by H. Granholm and M. Exteberria . .
38
7.1 Effective Compressive Strengths of the Concrete Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2 Concrete Production in Denmark, 2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
vi
==PAGE:14==
A.1 Veriﬁcation of Reinforcement Degree of Theoretical Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A1
E.1 Yield Condition for VM1-B-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E1
E.2 Yield Condition for VM1-B-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E2
E.3 Yield Condition for VM1-B-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E2
E.4 Yield Condition for VM1-B-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E3
E.5 Yield Condition for VM1-B-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E3
E.6 Yield Condition for VM2-B-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E4
E.7 Yield Condition for VM2-B-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E4
E.8 Yield Condition for VM2-B-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E5
E.9 Yield Condition for VMT-B-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E5
E.10Yield Condition for VMT-B-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E6
E.11Yield Condition for VMT-B-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E6
E.12Yield Condition for VMT-B-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E7
vii
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
5.1
Mean Yield and Failure Strength of Reinforcement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Theoretical Load Carrying Capacities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Load Carrying Capacities and Actual Load at Failure for VM1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Load Carrying Capacities and Actual Load at Failure for VM2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Load Carrying Capacities and Actual Load at Failure for VMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
Load Carrying Capacity and Actual Failure Load for VM1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.7
Load Carrying Capacity and Actual Failure Load for VM2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.8
Load Carrying Capacity and Actual Failure Load for VMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
viii
==PAGE:16==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:17==
1
|
Introduction
Worldwide focus on green transition is increasing as governments are implementing solutions that aim
towards reducing the environmental footprint such as carbon footprint and use of non-renewable resources
amongst others. The construction industry is no exception with the world’s increasing population and the
urbanization along with the industrialization of different countries; the demand of structures and buildings
is only increasing [18]. Globally, the construction industry is accountable for approximately 40% of the
world’s yearly carbon emissions, of which 28% are caused by building operations throughout their life
time, and the remaining 12% are related to the mining and production of materials, transport, construction,
and reuse of building materials. In contrast the aviation industry is responsible for about 2-3% of the yearly
global carbon emissions [5].
The largest culprit to the environmental footprint arising from waste generated by demolition of buildings
and infrastructure is concrete, which is sensible seeing that concrete is the world’s most commonly used
building material as it can be locally sourced almost anywhere since it consists of water, cement, and ag-
gregates [31]. Other factors that add to the widespread use of concrete are the functionality, aesthetics, low
energy consumption, and durability of concrete, which all contribute to concrete often being an economi-
cally sound option for structural purposes [3]. Studies show that the two main contributors to the carbon
emission of buildings are to be found in the erection and the operation respectively, and during recent years
the erection of buildings tend to increase its share of the total carbon emission, which is due to optimisations
of energy resources and transitioning into green energy options [28]. Thus, it is now more than ever relevant
to take the mining of raw products, production of structural materials, and the construction of buildings into
consideration from an environmental perspective.
Today, the European building industry is responsible for the generation of approximately 850 million tonnes
of construction and demolition waste, CDW, per year, which corresponds to 31% of the total waste gen-
eration i Europe [25]. In Denmark a similar tendency is observed, however it is slightly increased as the
construction industry is accountable for 35% of the total waste generation [7], where up to 25% are directly
related to concrete [29]. The total yearly amount of CDW in Denmark is not known, however it is assessed
to be around 2 million tonnes, which is handled either by being disposed in landﬁlls causing environmental
pollution or alternatively being sorted and crushed and then used to replace aggregates in road ﬁll or in
new concrete [29]. With increasing environmental challenges it is relevant to assess whether the building
1
==PAGE:18==
industry can make better use of the generated CDW. Seeing that the largest amount is related to concrete
it is pertinent to investigate the opportunity of increasing the use of CDW in new concrete by crushing
the concrete waste into aggregates resulting in recyclable concrete aggregates. The recycled concrete ag-
gregates, RCA, are divided into a coarse and a ﬁne fraction which makes the aggregates applicable as an
alternative to natural aggregates, NA. Upon replacing NA with RCA in structural concrete it is important
to obtain knowledge about the properties that characterize the aggregates as this is essential in creating mix
designs that comply with given requirements of the building industry. Similarly, it is paramount to obtain
information of the behaviour of structural members casted with recycled concrete in the ultimate limit state.
1.1
Problem Statement
Currently, the design codes allow replacement ratios of NA with RCA depending on the knowledge of the
RCA and the exposure class of the new concrete. For normal strength concrete these replacement ratios are
given as 10% and 20% for the ﬁne and coarse fractions of NA respectively, and a number of general and
supplementary requirements need to be documented to carry out the replacement. Upon wishing to increase
these replacement ratios further documentation of the material properties of the RCA is required [12]. The
purpose of this master thesis is to investigate the inﬂuence of replacing larger ratios of NA with RCA in the
production of new concrete than what is permitted during design today. Consequently, the current thesis
is based on experimental work combined with literature studies and calculations based on plasticity theory
due to reinforcement and concrete being considered ideally plastic materials.
As the interest and demand of sustainability in the building industry are continuously growing it is important
to examine alternatives to traditional concrete. Hence, this project aims to document the yield condition
for concrete beams casted with ﬁne and coarse crushed concrete aggregates, denoted F-RCA and C-RCA
throughout the thesis, where the following research questions will be examined:
• What inﬂuence does the amount of replaced F-RCA have on the material properties of concrete?
• How does the behavior of beams casted with F-RCA and C-RCA differentiate from the behavior of
beams casted with traditional concrete?
• Is the yield condition for traditional concrete and thereby the well known calculation methods appli-
cable for beams casted with F-RCA and C-RCA?
• What inﬂuence does the use of RCA have on the overall environmental impact of structural concrete?
2
==PAGE:19==
1.1.1
Delimitation
This thesis is limited to RCA that originate from CDW, whereas usally RCA also cover the surplus from
concrete productions both on site and from concrete obtained in precasting processes. In the work with
the concrete mixes the current thesis focuses solely on the replacement of NA with RCA, and the use of
additives such as ﬂy ash, microsilica, and plasticizer is disregarded. Furthermore, the thesis is limited to
only include the passive environmental class of concrete as this is commonly used for structures above
ground in the industry. Additionally, the focus is on beam behaviour in the ultimate limit state, and thereby
not considering the serviceability limit state. Concrete behavior related to creep and shrinkage is also
disregarded.
1.2
Structure of Report
As this report aims to document the yield condition for concrete beams casted with F-RCA and C-RCA,
it is based on literature studies, theoretical considerations, and experiments with concrete cylinders and
beams. Therefore, a great extent of the project work carried out is experimental, and for the sake of clarity
the results of the experiments are collected in annexes belonging to the current report. Additionally, the life
cycle assessment that forms the basis of evaluating the sustainability of the concrete mixes appears in an
independent annex. Thus, the structure of the report is shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Structure of report
3
==PAGE:20==
The section of theory provides relevant information on concrete, reinforcement, plasticity theory, and com-
bined impacts of beams resulting in a theoretical yield condition. Next, the methods that form the basis
of the project work are brieﬂy described. The results section consists of an analysis of the experimental
work executed in Annexes B and C, where the contents of Annex A are used in the data processing of
Annexes B and C. The experimental work in Annex B contains a series of experiments which constitutes
the characterization of the crushed concrete aggregates and thereby forms the basis of the cylinder testing.
Similarly, Annex C contains a series of beam experiments and the determination of the yield strength of
reinforcement. Additionally, the work is compared to theoretical considerations and further elaborated by a
comparison with test results of experiments carried out in other projects. Furthermore, the sustainability of
the recycled concrete is evaluated in comparison with regular concrete, which is presented in Annex D and
further elaborated in the main report. All ﬁndings are discussed in a larger context related to the objective
of increasing sustainability of concrete in the building industry. Finally, a conclusion will present answers
to the research questions stated above.
Annex E corresponds to 5 ECTS credits belonging to Jelena Kuburovic, which consists of a further investi-
gation of the results found in Annex B.
4
==PAGE:21==
2
|
State of the Art
The theory of beams with regard to bending and shear is often credited to Bernoulli and Euler for their
works on ﬂexural strength and stiffness, and additionally both Galileo, Coulomb, and several others have
contributed to what is known as beam theory today. Furthermore, Coulomb performed some of the ﬁrst
well known studies on torsion, which were later described and enhanced by Timoshenko and Saint-Venant
amongst others [20]. Thus stating that theoretical considerations regarding the impacts beams may be
subjected to have been developed throughout several hundred years with contributions from all over the
world.
The behavior of structural members is governed by the impacts that the members are subjected to, and often
different impacts occur simultaneously, which can be detrimental for a structure if not taken into account.
Previous studies regarding combined impacts of reinforced concrete structures have been carried out in
Sweden [20] and USA [30] amongst others, and the superiority of these studies are based on the theory of
plasticity.
During the past decade several researchers and scientists have investigated the possibilities of using ag-
gregates from construction demolition waste, CDW, as a replacement of natural aggregates, NA, in new
concrete, and in this regard it is relevant to examine both the geometrical and mechanical properties of
crushed concrete aggregates. Extensive research projects have been carried out all around the world, and
countries such as China [17], the Netherlands [15], Serbia [25] and Spain [23] have contributed to the ﬁnd-
ings of structural behavior of concrete casted with recycled concrete aggregates, RCA. In general current
research regarding the subject of RCA has primarily focused on the coarse fraction, and the possibilities
of using coarse recycled concrete aggregates, C-RCA, as an alternative to the natural coarse fraction. The
ﬁndings showed no signiﬁcant change in compressive strength when replacing up to 30% of the coarse
natural aggregates, whereas the strength is decreasing with a largely increasing amount of C-RCA [9]. An
investigation showed that the largest decrease was found to be 7.2% which corresponds to a replacement of
100% of the coarse fraction, found for a concrete aiming for 25MPa and a water to cement ratio of 0.55[22].
The possibility of using the ﬁne fraction of the recycled concrete aggregates as an alternative is investigated
to a lesser extent, seeing that the ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA, may cause shrinkage effects
5
==PAGE:22==
and contain large amounts of attached mortar [24]. Also, the high water absorption of the ﬁne fraction of
recycled concrete aggregates may result in a more permeable cement paste [23], which can jeopardize the
mechanical properties of the new concrete.
In a variety of the research articles published on the subject of RCA the structural behaviour of beams is
investigated when casted with varying amounts of RCA. Amongst others M. Exteberria, A. R. Marí, and E.
Vázquez have examined full scale beams exposed to shear failure and found that the inﬂuence of replacing
NA with RCA is only minor when looking at the coarse fraction of aggregates, and that the failure loads
are similar for the beams tested, which include a reference beam casted with only natural aggregates and
three different concrete mixes with varying contents of RCA being 25%, 50%, and 100% respectively [23].
However, despite the inﬂuence of increasing the amount of C-RCA is minor, it still causes the compressive
strength of the concrete to slightly decrease. From the literature reviewed in this regard it is found that
regardless of bending and shear being investigated in different series of experiments, the combination of
impacts exposed to beams casted with RCA is not evaluated.
Besides from the research and experiments carried out actual construction projects have successfully been
executed in countries such as China [17] and Denmark [19]. In 2010 in Shanghai, China, a four storey
building named the Eco-House was made with recycled concrete, where the total amount of coarse aggre-
gates were replaced with RCA with compressive strengths of 30MPa and 40MPa. Furthermore, at Prags
Boulevard in Amager, Copenhagen, a demonstration project was carried out in 2015 for the Pelican Self
Storage building in coorporation between Pelcon A/S and Lendager. Here, RCA was used for on site casting
of ground slabs and walls, where it was avoided adding extra cement to the concrete mix, thus exemplifying
that using RCA in structural concrete does not necessarily result in an increase of the cement content seeing
that the incorporation of ﬂy ash into the concrete mix design was sufﬁcient in this case.
Based on the literature reviews the following observations are made; C-RCA is investigated and proved
applicable in new concrete to a certain extent, whereas F-RCA has shown some disadvantageous properties,
and furthermore experiments on beams subjected to combined impacts are limited. Therefore, the current
project contributes to the investigations and the lack of knowledge on certain aspects by considering the
C-RCA as a suitable alternative to the coarse NA. Additionally, the F-RCA fraction is investigated by
replacing the ﬁne NA with different amounts of F-RCA. Furthermore the structural properties of beams
casted with recycled concrete aggregates are investigated when subjected to combined impacts of bending,
shear, and torsion. Finally, the environmental impact related to the processes of extracting and producing
NA is compared to the processes found for RCA.
6
==PAGE:23==
3
|
Theory
The current chapter consists of a theoretical description of the materials concrete and steel, where the
composition of concrete and the stress-strain relations for both concrete and steel are elaborated. This is
followed by an elaboration of the theory of plasticity, including Coulomb’s failure hypothesis, the upper
and lower bound theorems, and the uniqueness theorem. Finally, the theory behind bending, shear, torsion
and the combination of these impacts is presented.
3.1
Concrete
Concrete in its simplest form consists of cement, water, and aggregates. The most widely used cement is
Portland Cement, which consists of a variety of types such as Basis Cement, Rapid Cement and Futurecem
[2]. The cement is a dry powdered substance that hardens when reacting with water. The water and the
cement compose the cement paste, which works as a binder of the aggregates and thereby forms concrete.
The aggregates consist of different sized sand and gravel, which are usually dredged from pits, rivers or the
seabed, thereby the name natural aggregates. These aggregates are divided into two fractions namely the ﬁne
and the coarse fractions, which correspond to sand and gravel respectively. The ﬁne fraction represents grain
diameters of 0-4mm, where the coarse fraction covers the range from 4-32mm. The aggregate constitutes
the largest part of the concrete composition, with a percentage usually around 65-75% of the total mass. [8]
The composition of the different components has a great inﬂuence on the properties of the concrete and
is dependent on the purpose of the speciﬁc concrete. The distribution of the ﬁne and the coarse fractions
inﬂuences the workability of fresh concrete. A concrete mixture consisting of mainly the ﬁne fraction
results in a dry consistency which reduces the workability of the concrete. Contrarily, concrete consisting
of a great amount of the coarse fraction will make the concrete less homogeneous, due to the voids between
the gravel and the cement paste. The ratio between the ﬁne and the coarse fractions along with the grading
of the aggregates are therefore important parameters to consider when designing a concrete mix. The
aggregate grading, which is determined by the particle size distribution of the aggregates, ensures that the
aggregates are packed sufﬁciently and thereby form a homogeneous concrete where the smaller particles
ﬁll the voids around the larger grains. [31]
7
==PAGE:24==
Other factors of inﬂuence for the concrete composition is the density of the aggregates. A concrete mixture
is made based on the masses of the different components, where the density of the aggregates is relevant for
the determination of how much the aggregates constitute of the total mass of the concrete. Another factor
is the aggregates’ ability to absorb water, and depending on the state of the aggregates, the aggregates may
absorb water from the concrete mixture. If the aggregates are very dry the particles will absorb the water
that should be reacting with the cement and work as the binder, which will affect the water to cement ratio.
The water to cement ratio has a crucial impact on the compressive strength of the concrete. A low water to
cement ratio leads to a stronger concrete, whereas a higher ratio leads to a lower compressive strength [31].
The increased water content induces a porous concrete, due to the excess water evaporating over time and
leaving air pores in the concrete, the air pores thereby reducing the strength of the concrete [6].
3.1.1
Compressive Strength
The compressive strength is commonly used to characterize concrete and can be determined by uniaxial
compression tests of cylinders, where the characteristic strength, denoted fc, is found. The usual relation
between stresses and strains in concrete is shown in Figure 3.1, where the compressive strain is shown
positive. The relation applies for normal strength concrete, which spans from 12-50MPa, whereas high
strength concrete is determined by compressive strengths larger than 50MPa [6].
Figure 3.1: Stress-strain relation for concrete [11]
From the ﬁgure above it is apparent that the stress-strain relation is linear for small stresses, where the
concrete behaves elastically and the displacements are reversible. The relation becomes nonlinear as the
stresses increase, after which the displacements become irreversible. The peak is found where the maximum
stress is reached which corresponds to the compressive strength of the concrete, fc. At the peak stress the
8
==PAGE:25==
strain is denoted "c, and after this point failure will occur where the yield strain, denoted "cu is found.
According to the current standard a theoretical value of 2h is chosen as the strain corresponding to the
maximum compressive stress, whereas the yield strain is 3.5h [11].
Thus, concrete is characterized by the pronounced formable and durable properties, and a great compressive
strength, which makes concrete useful in many different constellations, these are some of the advantages
of concrete. However, certain limitations of concrete are found in its low tensile strength and low ductility,
which is the reason for introducing reinforcement in the concrete when considering concrete as a structural
material.
3.1.2
Reinforcement steel
Upon combining concrete and reinforcement a structural material with both good compressive and tensile
strengths is obtained. One of the advantages of combining reinforcement and concrete is that both materials
expand and contract by approximately equal amounts during temperature ﬂuctuations [13]. This allows for
an adequate bond to be established between the reinforcement and the concrete, thus acting like a composite
material, an effect which is only ampliﬁed with the use of ribbed bars and stirrups. The yield strength, fy,
of the reinforcement is the resistance to failure by deformation, whereas the tensile strength, fu, is the
resistance to failure by fracture. Reinforcement steel is divided into three ductility classes, A, B, and C, in
which class A is low-ductility steel, class B is medium-ductility steel, and class C is high-ductility steel.
For structural steels in ductility grade B a ratio between the yield strength and the tensile strength of 1.08 is
deemed satisfactory according to current standards [11], which secures adequate ductility of the reinforced
concrete.
Figure 3.2: Stress-strain relation of hot-rolled reinforcement steel [11]
9
==PAGE:26==
The ratio between the yield and tensile strengths is apparent from Figure 3.2 above, where the actual stress-
strain relation for hot-rolled reinforcement steel is shown as well as the ideal-plastic relation commonly used
for calculations within the theory of plasticity. The yield strength of reinforcement steel is determined from
the stress-strain relation curve created upon a tensile test of the reinforcement and it is deﬁned as the largest
stress prior to the ﬁrst decrease in stress. Until the stresses reach this point reinforcement steel usually
exhibits a linear relation between stress and displacement. The yield strength, fy, will ﬂuctuate between an
upper and a lower yield strength before the stress-strain relation curve will have another peak due to strain
hardening of the steel. When the deformations become plastic they are permanent due to dislocations being
introduced in the steel, which cause ﬂaws to occur in the crystalline structure. These ﬂaws contribute to
an increase in the yield stress since additional stresses are needed to move the dislocations further. Thus,
strain hardening is the increase in stress that is required to cause an increase in strain in a material that
is deforming plastically. This next peak value will occur prior to failure and is known to be the ultimate
tensile strength, fu, of the reinforcement. The strain at which ultimate tensile strength occurs is known as "u.
Eventually, due to necking the stress will decrease and failure will occur, and at this point the reinforcement
no longer has structural capacity [1].
3.2
Theory of Plasticity
Throughout the current report the reinforced concrete beams are treated based on the theory of plasticity,
thus assuming the reinforced concrete to behave as a rigid plastic material. A yield condition of a material
is an expression of the combination of stresses that allow the material to yield. For a material to yield the
strain is increased without an increase in stress, and therefore the theory of plasticity deals with materials
that can deform plastically when the load becomes sufﬁciently high. Thus, plasticity is a time independent
material, non-linear phenomenon. [27]
Figure 3.3: Idealized uniaxial stress-strain relation
10
==PAGE:27==
In reality rigid plastic materials do not exist, however, the theory of plasticity is considered applicable for
materials where the plastic strain is substantially larger than the elastic strain. Such an idealisation of rigid-
plastic behaviour is depicted in Figure 3.3. The rigid-plastic model is an idealisation of reality due to elastic
strains occurring before the yield stress is reached. Plastic deformations will eventually transpire in parts
of a structure affected by a load, and generally a further increase of load is possible as the stresses are able
to increase in the remaining parts of the structure. Upon reaching the yield stress in a sufﬁciently large
part of the structure the load carrying capacity is exhausted seeing that strains will then increase without an
increase in stresses. [27]
As concrete is usually regarded a brittle material it is to some extent unﬁt for plasticity analysis, and the
ductile properties of reinforcement steel is the main reason that reinforced concrete can be considered a
plastic material. Making use of the plastic properties of reinforced concrete is not a new phenomenon as
this goes back to the beginning of the 20th century [27], and this is practical due to the ability to predict
failure of a structural element. Continuous loading of such an element will eventually lead to failure when
the material in question is no longer able to withstand the stresses that occur as a consequence of the loading.
However, crack growth will indicate an upcoming failure, and this is desirable as it allows for precautions
to be taken.
For calculations within the theory of plasticity it is therefore a requirement that the material considered has
sufﬁcient plastic properties, and thus the assumption that the reinforced concrete behaves as a rigid plastic
material is the basis of calculations carried out in the current report. In order to apply the theory of plasticity
the behavior of concrete is assumed ideal-plastic, and since concrete has poor plastic properties a correction
factor is introduced.
Figure 3.4: Comparison between ideal-plastic and real uniaxial stress-strain relation [27]
The correction factor is also called the effectiveness factor, ⌫, and is determined by comparing the real
uniaxial stress-strain relation found by tests and the ideal-plastic stress-strain curve. In Figure 3.4 both
11
==PAGE:28==
curves are illustrated, where the black curve depicts the real stress-strain relation and the red curve depicts
the ideal-plastic relation. The effectiveness factor is determined by implying that the areas under the curves
are equivalent, and the correction of the compressive strength has shown a good correlation between tests
and plastic calculations [4]. The expression of the effectiveness factor differs depending on the different
impacts bending, shear, and torsion respectively, where the expressions are given below [6]
⌫m = 0.98 −fc
500
(3.1)
⌫v = 0.7 −fc
200
(3.2)
⌫t = 0.7(0.7 −fc
200)
(3.3)
3.2.1
Coulomb’s Failure Hypothesis
Coulomb’s frictional hypothesis is developed from an observation that friction and cohesion affect failure
occurring along a yield plane, which is sensible seeing that friction is the force arising between sliding sur-
faces and therefore works in the direction opposite to the movement of the yield plane. Similarly, cohesion
is determined by the structure of the molecules of the material considered, as the cohesion is the inter-
molecular force that binds particles together. Upon observing failure along a yield plane the relative motion
between the particles of the failure surface is assumed parallel to the failure surface, which is known as
sliding [27]. Therefore, the frictional hypothesis expresses a combination of shear and normal stresses that
will cause failure of a material as yielding will arise when the shear stresses exceed the sliding resistance
given by
|⌧| = c −µσ
(3.4)
⌧
is the shear stress
c
is the cohesion
µ
is the coefﬁcient of friction
σ
is the normal stress counted positive as a tensile stress
For a Coulomb material exposed to pure compression it can be shown that failure planes may form an angle
of 45° −1/2 ' parallel with the axial force as apparent from Figure 3.5, where ' is the angle of friction.
[27]
12
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Cylinder specimen exposed to pure compression [27]
Additionally, when observing the yield condition of a Coulomb material depicted on a stress-shear curve the
stresses meet in a point corresponding to zero strain, and the angle in between these lines is corresponding
to two times the angle of friction. Thus, knowing the coefﬁcient of friction in the relation above the angle
of friction is determined as shown below
tan(') = µ
(3.5)
'
is the angle of friction
µ
is the coefﬁcient of friction
3.2.2
The Modiﬁed Coulomb’s Failure Hypothesis
Upon application of Coulomb’s failure hypothesis to concrete too large uniaxial tensile strength is obtained,
and therefore the application of a tension cutoff results in the modiﬁed Coulomb’s failure hypothesis, which
is the basis of determining a yield condition in the current project. The tension cutoff is a limitation of the
largest principal stress, and two failure modes are taken into consideration; namely that the uniaxial tensile
strength of concrete is governed by separation failure and that the uniaxial compressive strength of concrete
is governed by sliding failure. [27]
13
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.6: The modiﬁed Coulomb’s failure hypothesis
Above, Figure 3.6 can be used to determine whether a speciﬁc state of stress will lead to failure and which
kind of failure will occur. The stress state is depicted using principal stresses and Mohr’s circles, which
indicates that a stress state corresponding to the intersection between separation and sliding failure is not
possible to obtain.
3.2.3
The Lower Bound Theorem
The lower bound theorem is used to determine values of a load that is less than or equal to the yield load
of a structural member. Thus, using the lower bound theorem will result in a safe and statically admissible
stress distribution, that satisﬁes the equilibrium conditions and the statical boundary conditions for the load.
This means that a load found by the lower bound theorem will not be able to result in a collapse of the
structure for which the load is determined.
3.2.4
The Upper Bound Theorem
Similarly, the upper bound theorem is used to determine values of a load that is larger than or equal to the
yield load of a structural member by making use of the work equation. While considering an arbitrary ge-
ometrically possible displacement ﬁeld that corresponds to the strains that are possible in accordance with
the geometrical boundary conditions an upper bound value of a load can be determined by requiring the in-
ternal work to be in equilibrium with the external work. Upper bound solutions are often applied in practice
despite being theoretically unsafe, which is due to membrane actions being neglected in most calculation
methods. However, accounting for membrane actions upper bound solutions are often considered to be safe
[27], which is due to the theory of plasticity only taking changes in strain by yielding into account, and
membrane actions are caused by changes in strain before yielding.
14
==PAGE:31==
3.2.5
The Uniqueness Theorem
From the uniqueness theorem it is given that the actual load carrying capacity of a structural member will
be somewhere between the highest lower bound value and the lowest upper bound value as shown in Figure
3.7. Therefore, the uniqueness theorem states that only one load can be determined to which it applies,
that both the stress distribution is statically admissible and corresponding to stresses within or on the yield
surface and that the strains corresponding to these stresses can be determined from a geometrically possible
displacement ﬁeld [27]. Upon meeting these two conditions when the lower and the upper bound theorems
coincide an exact failure load can be determined.
Figure 3.7: Depiction of the uniqueness theorem
3.3
Combined Impacts
The following section aims to determine the load carrying capacity of reinforced concrete beams subjected
to combined moment, shear, and torsion on basis of the theory of plasticity. Equilibrium equations are
derived with contributions from both the concrete and the reinforcement, and it is presumed that the tensile
strength of the concrete is equal to zero. Throughout the following the static system considered applies to
four point bending as shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Static system
15
==PAGE:32==
3.3.1
Bending
For structural members subjected to pure bending compressive stresses will occur where the load is ap-
plied and tensile stresses on the side opposite of the load, after which cracks will transpire and a failure
mechanism will take form.
For the impact of pure bending a rectangular cross section with both tensile and compressive reinforcement
is considered, and in this case the compressive reinforcement is in tension due to the height of the compres-
sion zone being smaller than the concrete cover of the rebars. The cross section has a height, h, and a width,
b, and the concrete cover is denoted csc and cst depending on which longitudinal reinforcement it refers to.
The distance from the upper part of the cross section to the tensile reinforcement is the effective height,
d, whereas the height of the compression zone is denoted x. The cross sectional areas of the compressive
and tensile reinforcement are denoted Asc and Ast respectively, and the stress and strain distributions of the
cross section considered are apparent from Figure 3.9 below. Additionally, the ﬁgure below presents the
reduced height of the compression zone, λx, where the reduction factor is denoted λ. This is introduced in
order to take the actual stress state of the concrete into account, as this forms a parabola in reality and not
a square as what is used in the derivation below. For normal strength concrete the value of λ is set to 0.8,
which is empirically determined and ought to cause good coherence between the resultants of the parabolic
and squared stress states and the placement of the resultant in each stress state [26].
Figure 3.9: Stress and strain distribution for pure bending
The tension forces of the reinforcement are given by
Fsc = Asc σsc
(3.6)
Fst = Ast σst
(3.7)
16
==PAGE:33==
Where it is assumed that yielding occurs in the bottom tensile rebars, thus σst = fy. Similarly, the resulting
compressive force of the concrete is determined as
Fc = λxbσc
(3.8)
For the cross section horizontal equilibrium can be established by
Fc −Fsc −Fst = 0
(3.9)
The yield moment in bending is determined by moment equilibrium around the tensile reinforcement given
as
−Fsc (d −csc) + Fc
✓
d −λx
2
◆
= M
(3.10)
In the equations given above both the height of the compression zone and the compressive stress of the
reinforcement are unknown. However, the compressive stress can be expressed using Hooke’s law and the
height of the compression zone as shown below
"sc = "cu
x −csc
x
(3.11)
σsc = "cu
x −csc
x
Es
(3.12)
When inserting the stress of the upper rebars into the horizontal equilibrium equation the height of the
compression zone may be determined, and upon knowing the height of the compression zone the moment
capacity and the strain state of the cross section can be calculated. In similarity to the situation consid-
ered above a number of different stress distributions are possible, in example where the upper longitudinal
rebars are in compression or where the distribution is elastic and thereby triangular or partly triangular
corresponding to part of the cross section being plastic and part being elastic.
3.3.2
Shear
The shear capacity is determined based on the lower bound theorem using the method of diagonal com-
pression stress ﬁelds. A simply supported beam with longitudinal and shear reinforcement subjected to
four point bending as shown in Figure 3.8 is considered. Note, that only the left shear span of the beam is
shown in Figure 3.10 due to symmetry. The vertical load P is transferred to the reaction R by the stirrups
17
==PAGE:34==
and through concrete compression. The load induces compressive stresses in the concrete, σc, with an in-
clination of ✓with respect to the longitudinal beam axis. The horizontal forces in the compression zone
and tensile reinforcement are idealized as stringers with the mutual spacing z, corresponding to the internal
lever arm, which is illustrated on the right hand side of Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Beam subjected to a point load and the corresponding compression stress ﬁeld
In the case of pure shear the concrete and the vertical stirrups contribute to the shear capacity, and therefore
a diagonal compression stress ﬁeld is examined as shown in Figure 3.11 as well as the capacity gained
from the stirrups. Below, the concrete stresses are determined in the x- and y-directions respectively, and
from here the shear stresses are used to determine the distance between the stirrups, whereas the diagonal
compression stress needs to be smaller than the plastic compressive strength of the concrete. The inclination
of the diagonal stress ﬁeld is determined by the angle ✓.
Figure 3.11: The diagonal shear stress ﬁeld along with horizontal and vertical sections
As apparent in Figure 3.11 the concrete stress in the y-direction can be determined by evaluating a horizontal
section with vertical projection positive in the y-direction given by
":
−σc sin(✓) b sin(✓) −σcy b = 0
)
σcy = −σc sin2(✓)
(3.13)
18
==PAGE:35==
Similarly, the concrete stress in the x-direction is determined by evaluating a vertical section with horizontal
projection positive in the x-direction as shown below
!:
σc cos(✓) b cos(✓) + σcx b = 0
)
σcx = −σc cos2(✓)
(3.14)
Additionally, the shear stresses are determined by evaluating the vertical section with vertical projection
given by
":
σc sin(✓) b cos(✓) −⌧cxy b = 0
)
⌧cxy = σc cos(✓)sin(✓)
(3.15)
Thus, the concrete stresses in the cross section are determined, and in addition to these the stirrups contribute
to the stresses in the y-direction due to them being vertical. The contribution from the stirrups is determined
as
σsy = As σs
b
(3.16)
where
σsy
is the stress of the reinforcement stirrups in the y-direction
As
is the cross sectional area of the stirrups per length unit of the beam
σs
is the stress of the reinforcement stirrups
b
is the width of the beam
The stresses are dependant on the inclination of the diagonal stress ﬁeld, which also determines how many
stirrups will theoretically be active during shear failure as shown below
n = zcot(✓)
s
(3.17)
where
n
is the number of stirrups
z
is the distance between the tension and compression stringers
✓
is the angle between horizontal and the diagonal compression ﬁeld
s
is the distance between the stirrups
19
==PAGE:36==
The number of active stirrups is used to determine the shear capacity of the reinforcement over the distance
zcot(✓) given by
Fss = nAss fy
(3.18)
where
Fss
is the capacity of the stirrups over the distance zcot(✓)
n
is the number of stirrups
Ass
is the cross sectional area of one stirrup
fy
is the yield strength of the stirrups
Likewise, the shear force affecting the cross section can be determined from
V = ⌧bh
(3.19)
where
V
is the shear force affecting the cross section
⌧
is the shear stress
b
is the width of the cross section
h
is the height of the cross section
The allowable shear stress can be determined by setting the capacity of the stirrups equal to the shear force
as shown below
⌧= Ass fy
sb
cot(✓)
(3.20)
where
⌧
is the allowable shear stress
Ass
is the cross sectional area of one stirrup
fy
is the yield strength of the stirrups
s
is the distance between the stirrups
b
is the width of the cross section
✓
is the angle between horizontal and the diagonal compression ﬁeld
20
==PAGE:37==
3.3.3
Torsion
Torsion is apparent in structural members subjected to eccentric loads, and the torsional capacity is based
on the lower bound theorem for solid cross sections [6]. A solid cross section with a height, h, and a width,
b, as shown in Figure 3.12 is considered.
Figure 3.12: Shear ﬂow arising from torsional moment
In addition Figure 3.12 underlines that the torsional moment is almost exclusively carried by the outer parts
of the cross section, hence the inner portion is neglected. The applied torsional moment will be equivalent
to the moments of the forces in the four walls of the beam, thus resulting in a shear ﬂow [20] that will result
in a state of pure shear. The torsional capacity of the concrete is determined from the shear ﬂow, which is
deﬁned as the resultant of the shear stresses over the wall thickness and takes a constant value in all walls
of the section. Thus, torsional equilibrium yields
T = ⌧(hef −2tef)2
✓bef
2 −tef
2
◆
+
⌧(bef −2tef)2
✓hef
2
−tef
2
◆
+
⌧4 1
2 tef
2
✓hef
2
−tef
3
◆
+
⌧4 1
2 tef
2
✓bef
2 −tef
3
◆
+
(3.21)
where
T
is the torsional moment
⌧
is the shear stress
hef
is the effective height of the cross section
bef
is the effective width of the cross section
tef
is the effective thickness
21
==PAGE:38==
When determining the torsional moment the force resultant of the triangular corners are placed one third
from the top, bottom, and sides of the cross section. However, a simpliﬁcation of this distance, by assuming
the lever arms to have the same distances for the triangles as for the ﬂanges of the cross section, results in
what is commonly known as Bredt’s formula given by
⌧=
T
2Ak tef
(3.22)
where
⌧
is the shear stress
T
is the torsional moment
Ak
is the area conﬁned by the perimeter
tef
is the effective thickness
As pure torsion results in shear stresses the torsional capacity is determined using the shear stress state of
the concrete from Equation 3.15 as shown below
T = σc cos(✓)sin(✓)2Ak tef
(3.23)
3.3.4
Combined Impacts
Structural elements can be subjected to a combination of the previously mentioned impacts bending, shear,
and torsion, and in such a case the load carrying capacity is determined based on an assumption of a speciﬁc
failure mode. The considered failure mode has a compression zone in the top of the cross section from
being subjected to a positive bending moment, and as large cracks develop yielding of the reinforcement is
presumed. The stress distribution for each impact of the considered cross section is shown in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Stresses imposed by combined impacts
22
==PAGE:39==
The considered beam with a rectangular cross section is subjected to a combination of bending, shear, and
torsion, and reinforced with vertical stirrups as well as tensile and compressive longitudinal bars. The cross
section is as for pure torsion reduced to concern only the outer parts, where the inner part of the cross section
is neglected. In the considered failure mode, the outer parts are divided into four segments namely the top,
bottom, left, and right hand sides. The bending moment is considered obtained by the top and bottom
segments, where the compression is taken in the top and the tension is obtained by the reinforcement in the
bottom of the cross section. The shear force is obtained in the left and right segments, whereas the torsional
moment is impacting all the segments. The stresses caused by the shear force, V, in the vertical segments
are given as ⌧V , and the shear ﬂow per unit length is
⌧V =
V
2hw
(3.24)
where
V
is the shear force
hw
is the height of the stirrup
The shear ﬂow per unit length, ⌧T , caused by the torsional moment, T, is given by
⌧T =
T
2hw bw
(3.25)
where
T
is the torsional moment
hw
is the height of the stirrup
bw
is the width of the stirrup
When considering the impacts induced by the torsional moment, forces from the longitudinal reinforce-
ment are introduced and denoted Fsc and Fst for the compressive and tensile reinforcement respectively.
Additionally, forces imposed by the concrete compression are apparent, and a resulting horizontal force is
determined for each segment Fct, Fcb, Fcl, and Fcr for the top, bottom, left, and right side respectively. The
concrete compression forces are inclined by an angle ✓with the beam axis, x, which is denoted ✓i, where
i denotes the position of the segment. The considered cross section and the forces are illustrated in Figure
3.14.
23
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.14: Longitudinal forces of reinforcement and concrete compression
An expression of the combined impacts is derived by the use of equilibrium equations by taking moment
around the compressive reinforcement Fsc. Thus, moment equilibrium yields
M = 2Fst hw −Fcb cos(✓cb)hw −Fcl cos(✓cl) hw
2 −Fcr cos(✓cr) hw
2
(3.26)
In the expression above the horizontal projected concrete compression forces and the longitudinal reinforce-
ment forces are unknown. However, by implementing yielding of both the stirrups and the longitudinal
reinforcement, the expression can be simpliﬁed to the following
1 =
M
2Fst hw
+
1
2Fst
· s
Fw
(⌧T
2 (hw + bw) + ⌧V
2 hw)
(3.27)
Finally, the expression is further simpliﬁed by inserting the shear ﬂows given in Equations 3.24 and 3.25.
Next, the load carrying capacities of pure bending, shear and torsion are introduced, and thereby the fol-
lowing expression for the combined impacts is derived, where M, V, and T are the impacts and MRd, VRd,
and TRd are the load carrying capacities. For a more detailed elaboration of the derivation see [20].
M
MRd
+
✓V
VRd
+
T
TRd
◆2
1
(3.28)
24
==PAGE:41==
4
|
Method
This section describes the considerations that form the basis of how the current project is approached with
regard to the methodology of collecting and analyzing data in the examination of the research questions
stated in Section 1.1.
A substantial part of the current report is based on well-known theory and calculations of structural capacity
with regard to bending, shear, and torsion, and these are to a large extent essential for the conclusions of
the research questions. Comprehensive literature studies are carried out in order to acquire knowledge on
previous observations of beam behaviour, thus allowing for an unbiased comparison between the reference
beams and the beams casted with recycled concrete aggregates.
The scientiﬁc method is an approach of studying things that are measurable and observable, and the purpose
of carrying out experiments is to obtain proof of the hypothesis that concrete casted with recycled concrete
aggregates has a behaviour similar to the behaviour of common concrete. Therefore, these experiments aim
to provide empirical evidence that can be interpreted in relation to the theory of plasticity with regard to
reinforced concrete. Consequently, great effort is put into the description and execution of the experimental
part of the current project, seeing that the results of the tests need to be reproducible and veriﬁable in order
to perceived as scientiﬁc explanations. During the project the yield condition is investigated in order to
determine how the combination of impacts inﬂuence the structural capacity of a beam casted with recycled
concrete aggregates. Afterwards, the observations, evidence, and conclusions are analysed in order to
decrease potential weaknesses of the experiments.
25
==PAGE:42==
5
|
Analysis of Experimental Work
The current section highlights and further investigates the results found from the experimental work ex-
ecuted in the Annexes B and C, as these form the basis of deriving a yield condition for concrete casted
with ﬁne and coarse recycled concrete aggregates. Additionally, the results of experimental work are held in
comparison to the theoretical considerations described in Section 3 with regard to the compressive strengths
of the concrete mixes, the friction angles observed from the compressive tests of cylinders, and the bending,
shear, and torsional capacities that deﬁne the yield condition for beams subjected to combined impacts.
5.1
Characterization of Aggregates and Cylinder Testing
In Annex B a particle size distribution is determined to evaluate the applicability of recycled concrete
aggregates, RCA, versus natural aggregates, NA, in concrete mix designs. Next, physical properties of the
aggregates such as density, water absorption coefﬁcients, and water content at the day of the casting along
with the cement content found in the F-RCA fraction are determined. The investigation of the physical
properties of NA and RCA respectively forms the basis of ﬁve concrete mixes F-NA50, F-NA40, F-RCA50,
F-RCA80, and F-RCA100, that are designed for a compressive strength of 27MPa to accommodate a mean
compressive strength of 20MPa. The design of each concrete mix is described in detail in Annex B, and in
Figure 5.1 an overview of the distribution of NA and RCA in each concrete mix is provided.
Figure 5.1: Overview of mix designs
26
==PAGE:43==
Brieﬂy described the name of each concrete mix is based on the content of the ﬁne fraction of aggregates,
seeing that this is the only varying parameter between the concrete mixes. Thus, they all have the same
water to cement ratio, and for the reference mixes the distribution is named according to the distribution
between ﬁne and coarse aggregates, namely by F-NA50 containing 50% ﬁne NA and by F-NA40 containing
40% ﬁne NA. The distribution of 60% coarse aggregates and 40% ﬁne aggregates provided a concrete with
satisfactory workability, and therefore this distribution is chosen for all mix designs with RCA, resulting in
the RCA mixes being named according to the distribution between ﬁne NA and F-RCA in each mix due
to the entire coarse NA fraction being replaced with RCA. Thus, the ﬁne fractions constitute 40% in each
concrete mix, and these are distributed into 50% ﬁne NA and 50% F-RCA for F-RCA50, 20% ﬁne NA and
80% F-RCA for F-RCA80, and ﬁnally 100% F-RCA for F-RCA100 as apparent from Figure 5.1.
From each mix design four cylinders are casted and tested in uniaxial compression to determine the com-
pressive strength of the concrete mixes after 28 days of curing. Furthermore, during casting the air content
is determined and slump tests for each mix design are carried out to evaluate the workability of the con-
crete and thereby the applicability of the concrete in practical use. Additionally, the friction angle of each
cylinder is compared to the commonly used value of 37°[27], which is usually used for traditional normal
strength concrete. The values of the friction angles found for each concrete mix are rather similar, which
indicates that the material behavior during failure is similar to what is present for traditional concrete. This
implies that the theory and calculation methods are applicable for concrete casted with varying ratios of
RCA. Seeing that the compressive strength of concrete is most wide spread parameter to characterize con-
crete, it is crucial to evaluate when comparing traditional concrete and recycled concrete. Ultimately, the
compressive strength of concrete determines the applicability of the different concrete mixes as a structural
materials within the passive environmental class. Thus, the mean compressive strength of each mix design
as determined in Section 9 in Annex B is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Mean compressive strength of mix designs after 28 days of curing in water
27
==PAGE:44==
Some of the peculiarities of the results include the fact that the concrete mixes comply with the requirement
of a minimum compressive strength of 20MPa with an exception of F-RCA80 as apparent in Figure 5.2.
It seems rather strange that the replacement of the entire coarse and ﬁne fractions with RCA, F-RCA100,
results in a higher compressive strength than the replacement of 80% of the ﬁne NA fraction with RCA. On
the basis of this observation the mix design F-RCA80 was repeated in order to evaluate whether an error may
have occurred during casting of the cylinders. The repetition indicated that the casting procedure was not
the issue, seeing that the concrete was very wet and heterogeneous, which was an unfortunate discovery as
this stipulates that the issue of F-RCA80 is related to the mix design itself. Presumably, the low compressive
strength of F-RCA80 is the result of the water content in the mix design being too high, however, this does
not explain why the F-RCA100 mix design obtains a higher compressive strength. Therefore, both mix
designs F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 are to be further investigated in Annex E, that will be an independent
addition to the current project.
Based on the results of Annex B it is determined to cast beams using two concrete mixes, namely F-NA40
and F-RCA50 of which F-NA40 will be used in order to provide a reference to the F-RCA50 mixture.
Therefore, the behaviour of the cylinders casted with these mix designs is evaluated against the current
standard DS/EN 1992-1-1 [11], where the stress-strain relations of the two mix designs are compared to the
behaviour of the idealised stress-strain relation for structural concrete as apparent in Figure 5.3. Below, the
stress-strain relations for the concrete mixes F-NA40 and F-RCA50 are the mean values determined from
the data processing carried out in Section 9 Annex B. The corresponding stress-strain curve is determined
using the relation between the compressive stress and the shortening strain, equation 3.14 in DS/EN 1992-
1-1 [11], with the maximum compressive strength of F-NA40 and F-RCA50 respectively as apparent in
Figure 5.2.
(a) F-NA40 in comparison with DS/EN 1992-1-1
(b) F-RCA50 in comparison with DS/EN 1992-1-1
Figure 5.3: Comparison of stress-strain relations with DS/EN 1992-1-1
28
==PAGE:45==
From Figure 5.3 it is observed that the reference concrete mix F-NA40 experiences less strain at the maxi-
mum stress compared to the tendency obtained from DS/EN 1992-1-1, furthermore the peak is found prior
to the prescribed value of 2 h given in DS/EN 1992-1-1. Contrarily, the peak of F-RCA50 is found closer
to the prescribed value, thereby concrete mix F-RCA50 is more aligned to the tendency of DS/EN 1992-1-1.
Furthermore, it is detected that the F-RCA50 has a more plastic behaviour than both F-NA40 and DS/EN
1992-1-1. Looking at F-NA40 in comparison to the standard it is conservative seeing that larger stresses
can be obtained by the F-NA40 mix design than what is the basis of non-linear calculations given in DS/EN
1992-1-1, a tendency which is not present for F-RCA50. However, as F-RCA50 behaves more plastic this
has advantages upon theoretically resulting in a less brittle failure than F-NA40. In general both F-NA40
and F-RCA50 are in rather good correspondence with the theoretical stress-strain relation, which underlines
that the material behaviour of concrete casted with RCA is comparable to that of regular concrete; and po-
tentially even better as it is advantageous that the behaviour becomes increasingly plastic upon increasing
the amount of RCA, which is apparent from Figure B.G.7 in Annex B.
The decision of casting beams with mix design F-NA40 and F-RCA50 is supported by the coherence be-
tween the behaviour of the concrete mixes in relation to DS/EN 1992-1-1, that underlines that the concrete
mixes are theoretically applicable in the building industry, which is further examined during the testing of
beams.
5.2
Strength of Reinforcement and Beam Testing
In Annex C a total of 12 equally reinforced beams are tested, where nine beams are casted with F-RCA50
and three are casted with F-NA40, the beams are tested in three different load conﬁgurations. The properties
of the reinforcement and the beam tests form the basis of the determination of the yield condition derived
for beams casted with RCA. The reinforcement consists of ribbed bars and stirrups that are in accordance
with DS/EN 10080, in ductility class B and have a speciﬁed yield strength of 550MPa. As this yield strength
is a minimum value the actual yield strength and ultimate strength of the reinforcement are determined in
Annex C for the longitudinal reinforcement with a diameter of 8mm. The results are summarized in Table
5.1 below, and are presumed to also be applicable for the reinforcement bars and stirrups with a diameter
of 6mm.
Table 5.1: Mean yield and failure strength of reinforcement
Id
Mean Yield Strength [MPa]
Mean Ultimate Strength [MPa]
Tensile Reinforcement Ø8
575
621
29
==PAGE:46==
The reinforcement layout of the beams casted with F-NA40 and F-RCA50 respectively results in the beam
cross sections being normally reinforced, which allows for an assumption of yielding of the tensile rebars
along with crushing of the concrete simultaneously. A calculation verifying that the reinforcement layout
is normally reinforced is apparent from Appendix A and the reinforcement layout is apparent from Figure
5.4.
Upon, obtaining a yield condition for beams casted with RCA, a theoretical yield condition is obtained
based on the theoretical load carrying capacities. The investigations are based on prerequisites equal to the
ones found in Annex C, where a simply supported beam subjected to four-point bending is considered with
a width, b, of 125mm and a height, h, of 250mm. The point loads are placed with a distance between the
support and the point load, a, of 400mm. Furthermore, the point loads are placed with an eccentricity of
20mm to induce torsional stresses in the beam. The considered beam along with the geometry is illustrated
in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Illustration of the considered beam
The theoretical load carrying capacities are determined for a concrete compressive strength of 20MPa, and a
yield strength of the reinforcement of 550MPa. The determined load carrying capacities for bending, shear,
and torsion in the theoretical case are shown in Table 5.2, where the corresponding calculations are to be
found in Appendix B.
Table 5.2: Theoretical load carrying capacities
Moment, MRd [kNm]
Shear, VRd [kN]
Torsion, TRd [kNm]
Theoretical load carrying capacity
10.6
90.4
9.0
The yield condition illustrated in Figure 5.5 is plotted based on the correlation between the theoretical values
found for the moment and shear utilization. The yield condition plot is based on the expression found for
beams subjected to combined impacts described in Section 3 equation 3.28. The x-values are given as the
utilization degree for bending, uM, where the shear utilization degree uV is given as the y-values which are
determined by
30
==PAGE:47==
M
MRd
+
✓V
VRd
+
T
TRd
◆2
1
)
uV = ±
p
−uM + 1
(5.1)
where
M
is the moment
V
is the shear force
T
is the torsional moment
MRd
is the load carrying capacity in pure bending
VRd
is the load carrying capacity in pure shear
TRd
is the load carrying capacity in pure torsion
uV
is the utilization degree in pure shear
uM
is the utilization degree in pure bending
In Equation 5.1 the torsional moment is set equal to zero, which corresponds to the red curve on Figure
5.5, whereas the remaining curves correspond to a variety of potential torsional moments ranging from
0.5-1.5kNm. From the plot it is observed that the load carrying capacity is decreased upon an increase in
torsional moment. Thus, all combinations of utilization of shear and bending capacity that fall within the
level curves can be sustained by the cross section of the beam, whereas the combinations of bending and
shear utilization that fall outside the level curves will theoretically result in failure.
Figure 5.5: Utilization of bending and shear at varying torsional moments
31
==PAGE:48==
The approach above is used in the further treatment of the test results found in Annex C. In total 12 beams
casted with F-RCA50 and F-NA40 respectively are tested in three different test conﬁgurations, which are
named according to the impacts the speciﬁc beam is subjected to. These impacts are moment and shear for
VM1 and VM2, where the difference is found in the length of the shear span, a. Lastly, test conﬁguration
VMT results in each beam being subjected to a combination of bending, shear, and torsion. In all test
conﬁgurations a simply supported beam is subjected to four-point bending, as shown in Figure 5.4, where
VM1 and VMT have a shear span of 400mm, and a shear span of 600mm is used for VM2. Furthermore,
VMT has an eccentricity, e, of 20mm. Figures 5.6a, 5.6b, and 5.6c show the force-displacement curves
determined in data processing Section 4 in Annex C.
(a) Force-displacement curve for VM1
(b) Force-displacement curve for VM2
(c) Force-displacement curve for VMT
Figure 5.6: Force-Displacement curves found in Section 4.3 in Annex C
32
==PAGE:49==
The curves above show a coherence with the stress-strain relation found for hot-rolled reinforcement steel
as shown in 3.2, where strain hardening is introduced after the yield strength is reached. This tendency can
be transferred to the force-displacement curves found for all test conﬁgurations, where the vertical displace-
ment and the force applied are increasing linearly in the beginning, after which the relation bends followed
by a further increase until failure is reached and the force drops. Some small discrepancies are detected in
the linear increase in the beginning, and these are caused by the initiation of cracks in the concrete. How-
ever, the tendency that the failure of the beams is governed by the failure of reinforcement shows that the
failure strength, fu, is relevant to take into consideration in the further work, where a comparison of the load
carrying capacities is carried out.
Additionally, the curves show that the stiffness of the reference beams casted with F-NA40 is larger than
the stiffness of the beams casted with F-RCA50, which is sensible due to the larger compressive strength of
the F-NA40 concrete mix.
Furthermore, Annex C Table 4.4 contains the failure load of each beam, and these are used to calculate the
actual shear force, V, and moment, M, occurring during failure. The values are apparent from Tables 5.3,
5.4, and 5.5 for conﬁguration VM1, VM2, and VMT respectively. Additionally, the tables show the load
carrying capacities determined by using the compressive strength found for the appertaining cylinder and
the failure strength of the reinforcement in correspondence with the considerations regarding the failure
strength of the reinforcement. The determination of MRd, VRd, and TRd is found in Appendix C using the
yield stress of the reinforcement and Appendix D using the failure stress of the reinforcement.
Table 5.3: Load carrying capacities and actual load at failure for VM1
VM1
MRd [kNm]
VRd [kN]
M [kNm]
V [kN]
VM1-B-1
12.7
103.5
13.2
32.9
VM1-B-2
12.7
103.5
13.0
32.5
VM1-B-3
12.7
103.6
13.6
34.0
VM1-B-4
12.8
104.3
13.9
34.7
VM1-B-R
12.8
104.0
14.0
35.1
Table 5.4: Load carrying capacities and actual load at failure for VM2
VM2
MRd [kNm]
VRd [kN]
M [kNm]
V [kN]
VM2-B-1
12.7
103.6
13.6
22.7
VM2-B-2
12.6
103.5
13.8
23.0
VM2-B-R
12.9
104.5
14.0
23.4
33
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.5: Load carrying capacities and actual load at failure for VMT
VMT
MRd [kNm]
VRd [kN]
TRd [kNm]
M [kNm]
V [kN]
T [kNm]
VMT-B-1
12.8
104.0
12.8
13.8
34.4
0.69
VMT-B-2
12.9
104.7
13.7
12.0
31.4
0.63
VMT-B-3
12.8
103.9
12.7
13.8
34.5
0.69
VMT-B-R
13.0
105.4
14.8
14.1
35.5
0.71
For each beam investigated in Annex C a yield line is plotted for the speciﬁc beam, where the compressive
strength obtained for the appertaining cylinder given i Appendix C.A in Annex C and the mean ultimate
strength of the reinforcement given in 5.1. The yield line is plotted along with the corresponding points
where the utilization of bending and shear is determined for both the yield strength, fy, and the failure
strength ,fu, of the reinforcement. Appendix C and D contains the load carrying capacities of each beam
determined using both the the yield strength and the failure strength of the reinforcement respectively.
Figure 5.7 shows the plot for VM1-B-1. Similarly, to avoid showing excessive amounts of plots, the yield
condition and actual utilization of shear and bending is depicted for all the remaining beams in Appendix
E.
Figure 5.7: Yield condition for VM1-B-1
Upon combining the theoretical yield condition with the actual utilization of the cross section of each beam
during failure, it is conﬁrmed that the failure load always results in a combination of utilization of shear
and bending that falls outside the yield condition as shown for beam VM1-B-1 in Figure 5.7. From the
34
==PAGE:51==
ﬁgure it is also apparent that using the failure strength for the reinforcement results in a smaller deviation
from the theoretical yield condition, which is sensible seeing that rupture of the reinforcement was current
in multiple test specimens. Also, the moment capacity is increased upon being calculated with the failure
strength of the reinforcement, thus resulting in a smaller utilization of moment capacity, which causes the
deviation to decrease. This tendency is observed for all beams tested in the three different conﬁgurations.
Upon determining the utilization of shear and bending in the test conﬁgurations VM1 and VM2 a com-
parison of the beams in each conﬁguration is carried out, which is apparent from Figure 5.8a and Figure
5.8b.
(a) Yield condition for VM1
(b) Yield condition for VM2
(c) Yield condition for VMT
Figure 5.8: Yield condition for each load conﬁgurations
35
==PAGE:52==
In the ﬁgures above the yield condition of each reference beam is plotted against the mean yield condition
determined for the beams casted with RCA, referred to as VM1-B-M and VM2-B-M respectively, and the
utilization at failure is presented for each of the beams tested. It is noticeable that the yield conditions
are coinciding, which is due to to the graphs in Figures 5.8a and 5.8b being normalised. Furthermore it is
apparent from Figure 5.8b that the different beam results are placed relatively close, which indicates that the
beam behavior is similar regardless of beams being casted with F-RCA40 and F-NA50. The tendency is not
as apparent for VM1 and VMT, which indicates a greater deviation between the tested beams. Analogously,
the utilization of shear, bending, and torsion is resulting in a yield condition for conﬁguration VMT as
shown in Figure 5.8c. This yield condition does not begin and end in a utilization of 1 for pure bending
and shear respectively, seeing that the load carrying capacity of the beams is reduced when also taking the
utilization of the torsional capacity into account, which is in coherence with Figure 5.5.
In order to asses the load carrying capacities of the beams against theory a comparison between the theo-
retically determined failure load, PRd, and the actual failure load, P, is carried out. This is shown in Figure
5.9, where P and PRd are plotted as x-values and y-values respectively. Thus, the theoretical and experi-
mental failure loads for each load conﬁguration and thereby each beam are plotted along with the line of
best ﬁt. This results in a scatter plot which is intended to provide an overview of the correlation between
the theoretical values and the actual values found by the beam experiments. Points close to the line of
best ﬁt correspond to higher correlations, whereas points further away from the line are depicting lower
correlations between theory and practice.
Figure 5.9: Scatter plot showing the actual failure load versus the theoretical failure load along with a line of best ﬁt
36
==PAGE:53==
Ideally, the experimental values should be equal to the theoretical values corresponding to a linear corre-
lation, plotted as the black line in Figure 5.9. However, from the ﬁgure it is apparent that all values are
below the line, which indicates that the determined load carrying capacities are conservative. From the ﬁg-
ure it is also apparent that the beams tested in load conﬁguration VM2 are placed closer to the line of best
ﬁt, which indicates that the theoretical calculation methods are corresponding to the experimental observa-
tions. A lower correlation is registered for the beams tested in load conﬁguration VM1 and VMT where the
points are further from the ideal line and more scattered. Below, the Tables 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8 summarize the
load carrying capacities determined for each beam as well as the actual failure load for each beam and the
corresponding utilization degrees.
Table 5.6: Load carrying capacity and actual failure load for VM1
VM1
VM1-1
VM1-2
VM1-3
VM1-4
VM1-R
Actual failure load, P [kN]
65.8
64.9
67.9
69.3
70.1
Theoretical load carrying capacity, PRd [kN]
58.3
58.3
58.4
59.0
58.7
Degree of utilization [-]
1.13
1.11
1.16
1.17
1.19
Table 5.7: Load carrying capacity and actual failure load for VM2
VM2
VM2-1
VM2-2
VM2-R
Actual failure load, P [kN]
45.4
46.1
46.7
Theoretical load carrying capacity, PRd [kN]
40.7
40.5
41.2
Degree of utilization [-]
1.12
1.14
1.13
Table 5.8: Load carrying capacity and actual failure load for VMT
VMT
VMT-1
VMT-2
VMT-3
VMT-R
Actual failure load, P [kN]
68.8
62.7
69.0
71.0
Theoretical load carrying capacity, PRd [kN]
57.3
53.5
57.2
58.5
Degree of utilization [-]
1.20
1.17
1.21
1.21
The degrees of utilization found in Tables 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8 respectively show that the theoretical load carry-
ing capacities are underestimated, which is an indication of the theoretical calculations being conservative
and thereby on the safe side in regard to failure.
As a veriﬁcation of the determined load carrying capacities the results are compared to a test series of beams
casted with traditional concrete and a series of beams casted with RCA. The comparison does not include the
37
==PAGE:54==
results found for VMT since none of the tests series include torsional moments. Below, Figure 5.10 depicts
the results of the beam tests of conﬁgurations VM1 and VM2 plotted in comparison with experiments of
beams exposed to bending and shear carried out in 1959 by Hjalmar Granholm at Chalmers University
of Technology in Gothenburg, Sweden [16]. In these experiments the beams are normally reinforced and
exposed to four point bending with a shear span of approximately 0.97m, and from this information the
shear force at failure is calculated. As only the moment capacity of H. Granholm’s experiments is given for
the beams, the shear capacity is determined using the compressive strength of the concrete of each beam
and the yield stress of each beam using the same method as the calculation of shear capacity in the current
project. Similarly, the results of beams casted with varying ratios of C-RCA by Miren Exteberria in 2007
are depicted in Figure 5.10. In these experiments the utilization degree in shear is given, and from knowing
the failure loads, the shear span of 1.0m, and the geometry of the beams the moment utilization degree is
calculated.
Figure 5.10: Results of VM1 and VM2 in comparison with tests by H. Granholm and M. Exteberria
Above, it is visible that some of the beams tested by H. Granholm are in alignment with the results of the
experiments carried out in the current project, whereas some are utilized signiﬁcantly more in shear. In
his line of experiments no beams tested have the same reinforcement layout, and due to this it is possible
for H. Granholm to introduce larger variations of the utilization of the beams in bending and shear respec-
tively, than what has been possible due to the circumstances regarding the test set-up of the current project.
Furthermore, it is observed from [16] that some of the reinforcement stirrups in the beams tested have an
inclination that increases the shear capacity, which has not been possible to take into account in Figure 5.10
38
==PAGE:55==
seeing that the inclination of the stirrups is not given in [16]. Had this been considered it is presumable
that the results of H. Granholm’s beam tests would align more closely to the results of the beam tests in
the current project. Furthermore, it is observed from Figure 5.10 that the results of M. Exteberria’s experi-
ments are also in coherence with the results obtained in the current project, however in contradiction to the
remaining results the utilization degrees are signiﬁcantly higher in shear than bending. This is due to the
cross sections being heavily reinforced longitudinally, which results in shear failure due to large bending
capacity.
From the comparison it is apparent that all test results are outside the theoretical yield condition, which
shows that the yield condition is conservative regardless of the test conﬁguration, reinforcement degree and
concrete mixture. This underlines the ﬁnding that beams casted with RCA have similar properties as beams
casted with traditional concrete.
5.2.1
Summary
Regarding the tested beams it is observed that the failure is dependent on yielding of the reinforcement and
not the concrete strength, which indicates that the use of RCA in the current mix design is applicable. This
is emphasized by the properties of the aggregates determined in Annex B, that applies to RCA as aggregates
in both fresh and hardened concrete.
The derived yield condition showed a desirable tendency seeing that the test results are all conservative,
which is further emphasized by the utilization degrees found to be approximately 10-20% higher than the
theoretically determined values. Although the results seem to show a desirable tendency, a more compre-
hensive investigation of the yield condition would have been desirable, seeing that the test conﬁgurations
VM1 and VMT provided almost indistinguishable results due to the limitations in the test set-up with regard
to inducing torsion. Furthermore, it had been beneﬁcial for the experiments if the yoke used to distribute
the loads had been longer as it was not possible to induce shear failure of the beams. Thus, the test facilities
available at DTU were not sufﬁcient to investigate to the yield condition fully.
In the theoretical determination of the capacities of the beams the self weight of beams and the mass
of the devices used to induce a torsional moment in the VMT test conﬁguration are neglected as these
are not considered to have signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁndings of the experiments. Furthermore, during
calculation procedures the presumed stress states that form the basis of determining the capacity of the
beams are considered constant, despite minor errors potentially being introduced by crack formation or
bending deformations as such sources of error are neglected.
39
==PAGE:56==
6
|
Environmental Footprint
The current section elaborates the results obtained from the life cycle assessment, LCA, carried out in Annex
D, that seeks to investigate whether replacing natural aggregates, NA, with recycled concrete aggregates,
RCA, in structural concrete introduces a possibility of reducing the environmental footprint of concrete.
As described in Annex D the environmental footprint of concrete is determined by considering seven dif-
ferent impact categories, where the global warming potential, GWP, is found to have the greatest impact
of all seven categories. GWP is a measure of the footprint of greenhouse gases, which is the most com-
monly used parameter when considering environmental impacts. Based on the observations in Annex D
where GWP constitutes the largest share of the environmental footprint of concrete, solely this parameter is
further investigated in the following section. Upon considering GWP all greenhouses gases are taken into
account and held in relation to carbon dioxide, due to this being the most emitted greenhouse gas in terms
of quantities released and of the total global warming impact [21]. Therefore, in the following the emission
of greenhouse gases is referred to as GWP, which is also commonly known as the carbon footprint.
As the concrete mix design F-RCA50 is the primary focus of the current report due to its material properties
being in good coherence with the reference concrete F-NA40, and seeing that it complies with the functional
unit stated as the basis of the LCA study, it is chosen to only elaborate on the results of F-NA40 and F-
RCA50. Looking at the environmental footprint of these two mix designs a decrease of 2% in GWP is
observed upon replacing NA with RCA. This decrease in GWP is not signiﬁcant, however, when taking the
amounts of concrete yearly produced in the Danish building industry into account, it is still considered a
potential to reduce the environmental footprint of concrete.
Based on the ﬁnding that the reduction of GWP is not large, it is relevant to examine the potential of avoid-
ing extraction of nonrenewable resources such as sand and gravel which constitute 65-75% of structural
concrete. On a yearly basis around 7.3 million m3 natural aggregates are mined from seabeds and excava-
tion pits in Denmark used in concrete for the building industry [7]. It is difﬁcult to determine when danish
natural resources will no longer be available, but with a steadily increasing need of concrete in the building
industry, it is highly relevant to consider the use of RCA as an alternative to NA.
40
==PAGE:57==
7
|
Discussion
In the present thesis the results acquired from the experimental work, which are described in detail in Annex
B and Annex C, are discussed and compared to previous ﬁndings and research from existing literature.
Furthermore, the results of Annex D are used to clarify the possibilities of decreasing the environmental
footprint of structural concrete.
The experimental studies involving a full replacement of coarse recycled concrete aggregates, C-RCA,
and varying replacement ratios of ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA, corroborated the observation
from existing literature that increasing amounts of RCA in structural concrete decreases the compressive
strength of the concrete. However, despite large amounts of both fractions of aggregates being replaced in
the experiments, the mean compressive strength in two of three concrete mixes is still in compliance with the
minimum requirement of 20MPa. As the material behaviour of concrete can vary across batches the industry
commonly uses the 5% fractile to prescribe a certain compressive strength of a concrete mix, and therefore
a substantially larger amount of cylinders had ideally been investigated to obtain better statistical proof of
the claim that the compressive strength of the concrete batches is indeed as desired. Upon considering the
compressive strengths found for the appertaining cylinders tested in Annex C a mean value of 31MPa is
found for the nine cylinders, which conﬁrms that it is possible to reach the desired strengths. Additionally,
the standard deviation of 1.9 indicates that it is possible to make concrete mixes with uniform properties.
Note that the compressive strength is higher that the mean strength found for the cylinders in Annex B due
to the duration in curing being larger for the cylinders in Annex C.
When comparing the different concrete mixes F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100, the behaviour
of F-RCA50 is in better compliance with the reference concrete F-NA40 than the remaining two mixes F-
RCA80 and F-RCA100. This suggests that the replacement ratio of the ﬁne fraction has a crucial effect on
the properties of both the fresh and the hardened concrete. The observed challenges of using substantial
replacement ratios of F-RCA may be related to the high water absorption levels of F-RCA, higher porosity
of F-RCA, or the large amount of ﬁne particles observed in F-RCA, which consists of residual cement paste
as well as small crushed particles.
Furthermore, the water absorption for the ﬁne fraction is determined using the methodology of determining
water absorption for sand, as no standard currently exists for determining the absorption of F-RCA. Due
41
==PAGE:58==
to the difference in the shape of particles and porosity of the ﬁne NA and F-RCA it is to be expected that
the method used for determining the water absorption of F-RCA is not necessarily sufﬁcient. Therefore, it
is likely that the value used for the water absorption of the F-RCA fraction may be severely overestimated
in the mix designs, thus resulting in a higher water to cement ratio and consequently a lower compressive
strength.
In general it is to be taken into consideration that the experiments carried out with regard to the ﬁne fraction
of RCA are all in coherence with the current standards for sand, which is anticipated to cause deviations.
This tendency underlines the necessity of reevaluating and updating the standards that deﬁne how material
properties are to be determined, as knowing the properties of the F-RCA allows for a higher degree of
homogeneity in the concrete mixes. For the coarse fraction of RCA the coherence between NA and RCA
is signiﬁcantly better than for the ﬁne fraction, and the deviations in material properties are thought to be
minor in most cases. Alternatively, an iterative approach is beneﬁcial to employ when designing concrete
mixes as a lot can be learned from a trial and error process.
Evaluating the performance of the aggregates used in the experiments it is found that it is sensible to
continue the experimental work regarding the casting of beams with the concrete mix F-RCA50 as this is
considered a good and reliable alternative to traditional concrete. The behaviour of the remaining concrete
mixes casted with RCA is more questionable, and this underlines the advantages of carrying out several
iterations during the process of designing each concrete mix, which has unfortunately not been possible
due to the time schedule of the current project. In general the observations made for the different concrete
mixes are to be considered having in mind that the ﬁndings are applicable for RCA of a certain strength
and quality, seeing that the RCA material used in the present project is observed to contain little to no
contaminants and known to have a strength of 50-55MPa [10].
A challenge that poses with regard to the building industry is the current building regulations and standards
where maximum amounts of replaced aggregates are subscribed in a manner that is very conservative, when
the results of the current project are considered. This obstacle is not easily dealt with as special permissions
have to be granted from public instances in order to legally replace larger amounts of aggregates than the
standards allow [12], which can be a lengthy process and requires a lot of documentation. In general the
requirements of using RCA are extensive, and from the current standard it is given which properties of
the RCA that are to be documented upon replacing different ratios of NA with RCA, which acknowledges
the importance of characterizing the donor concrete in the creation of new mix designs with RCA. Conse-
quently, the results of the cylinder tests imply that it is realistic to increase the allowed amount in the current
standards of both fractions of RCA in new concrete. However, this only applies for concrete used in the
passive environmental class, but the potential beneﬁts of using RCA remain large seeing that concrete in
42
==PAGE:59==
the passive environmental class constitutes approximately 60% of all concrete casted in Denmark [14].
As the theoretical calculations are based on lower bound methods the excess capacity of the beams is in
alignment with plasticity theory, which gives rise to debate whether the effectiveness factors commonly
used for structural concrete need to be adapted when verifying structures casted with recycled concrete. As
the recycled concrete exhibits a more plastic material behaviour it is sensible to increase the effectiveness
factors in order to increase the utilization of the recycled concrete, which is corroborated by the results of
the beam experiments. Upon disregarding the effectiveness factor in bending and increasing the expression
of the shear effectiveness factor from ⌫v = 0.7 −fc/200 for traditional concrete to ⌫v = 0.8 −fc/200 for
the concrete casted with RCA the theoretical load carrying capacities of the beams are closer to the actual
load carrying capacities, and the deviations between theory and experiments are slightly decreased. Adding
the increased effectiveness factor to the recycled concrete mixes and the usual effectiveness factor to the
reference concrete the plastic compressive strengths of the concrete mixes are apparent from Figure 7.1,
where it is observed that the recycled concrete F-RCA50 obtains larger capacity than the reference concrete
F-NA40. Thus, it is shown that recycled concrete can potentially be utilized better than traditional concrete.
Figure 7.1: Effective compressive strengths of the concrete mixes
Additionally, it is observed that the results of the experiments indicate that the calculation methods are con-
servative, seeing that all beams have a capacity that is between 10-20% higher than theoretical calculations
suggest. Overall, this is a good tendency seeing that it provides a margin in the safety of constructions,
however, it is debatable whether the margin of security is in fact too large when considering material con-
sumption. Given new requirements that aim to encourage the green transition in the building industry is it
highly relevant to take sustainability into account upon designing structures; especially concrete structures
as these account for the largest share of the environmental footprint in the building industry.
43
==PAGE:60==
Furthermore, as the tradition and use of concrete elements in Denmark are signiﬁcant, it is relevant to
consider the possibilities of using RCA in a wider perspective than on site casting, which has been the
perspective of the current report. The total production of concrete in Denmark is distributed into three
main categories being infrastructure, small scale buildings, and large scale buildings respectively, of which
infrastructure constitutes 37% and the remaining 63% is allocated into 16% for small scale buildings and
47% for large scale buildings. Annually, 29% of the concrete production for buildings in Denmark [18]
constitutes concrete elements, which is apparent from Figure 7.2. As concrete elements are being produced
in an orderly fashion using RCA as a partial replacement of NA ought to be fairly easily implemented in the
element industry provided that a security of supply is present. Additionally, one could argue that it does not
make a signiﬁcant difference whether transportation costs and emissions to the production plant are used
on the delivery of NA in comparison to RCA, to the extent that the transportation distances are similar.
Figure 7.2: Concrete production in Denmark, 2018 [18]
Currently, in the Danish building industry a lot of the construction demolition waste, CDW, produced dur-
ing demolition and renovation of structures is reused, and more than 90% of the concrete waste is crushed
and used as road ﬁll for infrastructure purposes [7]. The LCA study carried out to evaluate the potential of
decreasing the environmental footprint of structural concrete illustrates a decrease of 2% when considering
the GWP of F-NA40 in comparison with F-RCA50. As this decrease is not signiﬁcant it gives rise to con-
sider when it is sensible to use RCA as a replacement for NA in structural concrete compared to using RCA
as road ﬁll. The ﬁrst option results in a recycling of the concrete, as the RCA has a function corresponding
to NA in a new concrete, which facilitates a circular use of the materials. On the contrary, crushed concrete
used as road ﬁll is downcycled seeing that it is no longer in a circular material ﬂow when used as road ﬁll
and thereby loses value. However, the downcycling is still a signiﬁcantly better choice than depositing the
CDW at landﬁlls, where it will cause pollution.
The above considerations results in certain requirements for the purpose of using RCA as new aggregates
or road ﬁll respectively. CDW that has high traceability, where the strength and material properties can be
44
==PAGE:61==
properly documented, is ideal for structural purposes, whereas CDW that is less traceable, slightly contam-
inated, or has low strength can be used as road ﬁll due to the requirements and restrictions of the crushed
concrete for road ﬁll being less severe than for RCA. Both purposes of concrete CDW results in avoided
extraction of raw materials, and in order to utilize the CDW to the best extent possible it is necessary to
evaluate the possibilities related to transportation, economy, and environmental impact in context of what
is sensible for each speciﬁc case.
From a sustainability point of view it is important take factors such as logistics and security of supply
into consideration when determining the purpose of CDW, seeing that the environmental and economic
advantages of using RCA are largely dependant on transportation distances and costs. This underlines that
the use of concrete CDW as RCA is only sensible when the donor concrete can be locally sourced, due to
the environmental beneﬁts of RCA becoming absent when transport emissions increase. Similarly, large
transportation distances contradict using RCA in an economic perspective. Therefore, an advantageous
use of CDW as RCA is found when a construction site is coinciding with a demolition site as seen in the
demonstration case on Prags Boulevard in Amager. Here, the sorting and crushing of concrete was carried
out on site using a mobile recycling plant, after which new concrete was casted on site, thus practically
eliminating transportation emissions and costs.
Thus, all factors discussed above are to be taken into consideration upon designing structures with recycled
concrete, and that it is not necessarily sufﬁcient to simply design structures based on the material properties
and structural capacity of concrete.
45
==PAGE:62==
8
|
Conclusion
The current project seeks to evaluate the possibilities of replacing natural aggregates, NA, with recycled
concrete aggregates, RCA, with regard to the material properties of concrete. The characterization of ag-
gregates and cylinder testing conﬁrmed that RCA as a material is in compliance with the requirements
found in the current standards and thereby a suitable alternative for NA. Furthermore, it is conﬁrmed that
it is possible to obtain desirable compressive strengths when replacing NA with RCA, where the most ap-
plicable replacement ratio was found for concrete mix F-RCA50, where 100% of the coarse fraction and
50% of the ﬁne fraction is replaced with RCA. The ﬁndings indicate that the allowed replacement ratios
in the current standard can be increased with regard to the coarse fraction, whereas more caution is to be
taken upon replacing large ratios of the ﬁne fraction due to difﬁculties assessing parameters such as water
absorption and the inﬂuence of ﬁne particles.
The experimental work regarding the casting and testing of beams has led to a ﬁnding that the structural
behaviour of the beams is similar regardless of test conﬁguration and whether the beams are casted with
F-NA40 or F-RCA50. In all cases it is observed that the failure of the beams is caused by failure of the
reinforcement, which occurs after the initial cracking of the concrete has taken place in coherence with
the theory studied in the present project. In conclusion the yield condition derived for beams casted with
RCA exposed to combined impacts is conservative and thereby useful in the veriﬁcation of beams. The
mentioned ﬁndings all imply that recycled concrete is a reliable alternative to traditional concrete, seeing
that a material with predictable performance is necessary for employment in the industry.
Furthermore, the current project aims to assess the potential of decreasing the environmental footprint of
concrete by replacing NA with RCA. Overall, the results of the experimental work carried out indicate
that replacing NA with RCA in concrete is a feasible and sensible solution to considerations regarding the
handling of construction and demolition waste, CDW. Additionally, it is concluded that the use of RCA has
a minor impact on the global warming potential, GWP, of concrete, seeing that the GWP is reduced by 2%.
However, as the concept of sustainability is wider than only assessing the carbon footprint of concrete, a
signiﬁcant factor to consider is that an increased use of RCA will decrease resource scarcity, which will be
eventually an inevitable issue. In order to design sustainable buildings for future generations it is therefore
of grave importance to widen the perspective on how RCA can be utilized with regard to purpose, security
of supply, economy, and transportation amongst other aspects.
46
==PAGE:63==
9
|
Further Work
The aim of this project was to investigate the yield condition of beams casted with ﬁne recycled concrete
aggregates, F-RCA, and coarse recycled concrete aggregates, C-RCA, for beams exposed to bending, shear,
and torsion. Below, some of the subjects found relevant for further investigations are mentioned in relation
to the current thesis and its delimitations.
Seeing that it is very likely that the water absorption of the ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA, is
overestimated it is interesting to examine whether this can be more accurately determined using a different
method than provided in the current project. Similarly, as the time frame of the project did not allow for
several iterations to be carried out with regard to the design of the different concrete mixes, it is highly
relevant to investigate whether adjusting the mix designs during casting may provide a better recycled
concrete. Furthermore, it is of interest to investigate why concrete mix design F-RCA80 was found to have
a lower compressive strength than F-RCA100, seeing that the replacement ratio was larger for F-RCA100.
If the use of RCA is to be increased, there is a need of more in-depth knowledge on the causes of strength
reduction of recycled concrete.
As the test facilities provided for the beams at DTU were not sufﬁcient to fully investigate the yield con-
dition it is desirable to carry out further beam experiments, of which it would be compelling to vary the
reinforcement layout of the beams as well as the test set-up to induce shear failure or even torsional fail-
ure. Additionally, a further detailed experimental program would be beneﬁcial upon potentially revising the
effectiveness factors for concrete casted with RCA.
In relation to the Life Cycle Assessment, LCA, a more elaborate assessment containing all aspects of
an LCA is of importance for further work to obtain comprehensive knowledge about the environmental
impacts. A full LCA study could show the environmental impacts related to non renewable resources,
seeing that a consequential LCA will take the avoided extraction of raw materials in to consideration by
crediting these materials to other product systems.
Further work with the delimitations established in the current thesis such as structural behaviour during
serviceability, crack propagation, creep and shrinkage are relevant to consider. Research on the possibilities
of using ﬂy ash, microsilica and plasticizer in concrete mixes with RCA may also prove beneﬁcial for
47
==PAGE:64==
the future development of recycled concrete. Finally, further work can be carried out with regard to high
strength concrete and the remaining environmental classes in order to determine the applicability of recycled
concrete.
48
==PAGE:65==
10
|
Bibliography
[1] A. Nielsen et al. Bygningsmaterialer: Metallære. Polyteknisk Forlag, 1998.
[2] Aalborg Portland. https://www.aalborgportland.dk/produkter/pakket_cement/.
Visited: 2022-05-16.
[3] Aalborg Portland. Cement og Beton - Håndbogen om cement, beton og mørtel, 23. udgave. Aalborg
Portland A/S, 23rd edition edition, 2020.
[4] B. Feddersen. Jernbetonbjælkers Bæreevne - rene og kombinerede påvirkninger, ABKr 251. Afdeling
for Bærende Konstruktioner, 1990.
[5] BBC.
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20211215-the-buildings-made-
from-rubbish. Visited: 2022-05-17.
[6] Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992-1-1. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2nd edition
edition, 2012.
[7] C. D. Pedersen, S. Dyck-Madsen, C. Jarby. Anvendelse af beton i byggeriet. Concito & Rådet for
Grøn Omstilling, 2021.
[8] C. Munch-Petersen,. Betonhåndbogen, 3 Delmaterialer. Dansk Betonforening, 2013.
[9] C. Zheng, C. Lou, et al. Mechanical properties of recycled concrete with demolished waste concrete
aggregate and clay brick aggregate. College of Civil Engineering and Architecture, 2018.
[10] Dansk
Beton.
https://www.danskindustri.dk/medlemsforeninger/
foreningssites/dansk-beton/sog-publikationer/arkiv/baredygtig-
beton-initiativ2/rapport-om-sydhavn-genbrugscenters-genanvendelse-
af-beton-2020/. Visited: 2022-02-02.
[11] DS/EN 1992-1-1. Eurocode 2: Betonkonstruktioner - Del 1-1: Generelle regler samt regler for bygn-
ingskonstruktioner, København, 2008. Dansk Standard.
[12] DS/EN 206. Beton - Speciﬁkation, egenskaber, produktion og overensstemmelse - Regler for ancen-
delse af EN 206 i Danmark, København, 2020. Dansk Standard.
[13] G. N. Munch-Petersen,. Betonhåndbogen, 11 Armering. Dansk Betonforening, 2020.
[14] G. Stenstrop, L. Kristiansen, L. G. Ernst. Bedre råstoffer til beton. Region Midtjylland, 2018.
49
==PAGE:66==
[15] H. S. Pietersen, A. L. A. Fraay. Performance of Concrete With Recycled Aggregates. Delft Technical
University, 2015.
[16] Hjalmar Granholm. Allmän Teori för Beräkning av Armerad Betong. Gumperts Förlag, 1959.
[17] Jianzhuang Xiao. Recycled Aggregate Concrete Structures. Springer, 2018.
[18] L. N. Thrane, T. J. Andersen, D. Mathiesen. Roadmao mod 2030 - Halvering af C02-udledningen fra
betonbyggeri. Dansk Beton, 2nd edition edition, 2019.
[19] Lendager. https://lendager.com/arkitektur/pelican-self-storage/. Accessed:
2022-11-05.
[20] Lennart Elfgren. Reinforced Concrete Beams Loaded in Combined Torsion, Bending, and Shear No.
860. Chalmers University of Technology, 1972.
[21] M. Brander. Greenhouse Gases, CO2, CO2e, and Carbon: What Do All These Terms Mean? Eco-
metrica, 2012.
[22] M. C. Limbachiya, T. Leelawat, R. K. Dhir. Use of recycled concrete aggregate in high-strength
concrete. University of Dundee, 2000.
[23] M. Exteberria, A. R. Marí, E. Vázquez. Recycled aggregate concrete as structural material. RILEM,
2006.
[24] M. Exteberria, A. R. Marí, E. Vázquez, M.Barra. Recycled aggregate concrete as structural material.
Elsevier Ltd., 2007.
[25] M. Malesev, V. Radonjanin, S. Marinkovic. Recycled Concrete as Aggregate for Structural Concrete
Production. University of Belgrade, 2010.
[26] M. P. Nielsen.
Beton 1, Del 2 - Tværsnitsundersøgelse i brugs- og brudstadiet.
Danmarks In-
geniørakademi, 1974.
[27] M. P. Nielsen, L. C. Hoang. Limit Analysis and Concrete Plasticity. CRC Press, 3rd edition edition,
2011.
[28] Rambøll.
https://www.pwc.dk/da/arrangementer/2021/ejendomswebinar%20-
%20nikolaj%20haaning.pdf. Visited: 2022-05-17.
[29] T. Henriksen, L. Juel-Hansen, D. Mathiesen. Udredning af teknologiske muligheder for at genbruge
og genanvende beton - Miljøprojekt nr. 1667. Miljøstyrelsen, 2015.
[30] W. M. Onsongo. The Diagonal Compression Field Theory for Reinforced Concrete Beams Subjected
to Combined Torsion, Flexure, and Axial Load. University of Toronto, 1978.
[31] Zongjin Li. Advanced Concrete Technology. John Wiley & sons, Inc, 2011.
50
==PAGE:67==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:68==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A - Reinforcement Degree
Figure A.1: Veriﬁcation of reinforcement degree of theoretical beam
A1
==PAGE:70==
Appendix B - Theoretical Load Carry-
ing Capacity
B1
==PAGE:71==
Determination of Ultimate Load 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
20,0 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
594,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
550,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
77,8 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
22,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
55,3 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
38,9 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,002 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
398,4 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
10,6 kNm
B2
==PAGE:72==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
174,4 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
10,6 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,002 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,014 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,1 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,0 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
90,4 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,4 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,5 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
8,4 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
9,0 kNm
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
23,9 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
9,6 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
23,9 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,5 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
47,8 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
B3
==PAGE:73==
Appendix C - Load Carrying Capacity
Calculated with Yield Strength
C1
==PAGE:74==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-1
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,5 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,6 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,8 kNm
C2
==PAGE:75==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,8 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,018 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,3 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
27,2 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,9 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
27,2 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
54,4 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C3
==PAGE:76==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-2
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,5 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,6 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,8 kNm
C4
==PAGE:77==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,8 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,018 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,3 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
27,2 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,9 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
27,2 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
54,4 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C5
==PAGE:78==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-3 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,9 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,2 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,8 kNm
C6
==PAGE:79==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,9 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,019 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,4 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
27,2 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,9 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
27,2 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
54,5 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C7
==PAGE:80==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-4 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
33,0 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
27,4 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,9 kNm
C8
==PAGE:81==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
179,1 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,9 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,021 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
97,0 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
27,5 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,0 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
27,5 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
54,9 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C9
==PAGE:82==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-R
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
31,6 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
28,6 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,9 kNm
C10
==PAGE:83==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
178,6 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,9 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,020 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,8 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
27,4 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,9 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
27,4 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
54,7 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C11
==PAGE:84==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM2-B-1
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,9 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,2 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,8 kNm
C12
==PAGE:85==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,9 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,019 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,4 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
19,0 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
600,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,4 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
19,0 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
37,9 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C13
==PAGE:86==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM2-B-2
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,8 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,8 kNm
C14
==PAGE:87==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,7 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,018 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,3 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
18,9 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
600,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,4 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
18,9 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
37,9 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C15
==PAGE:88==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM2-B-R 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
34,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
26,3 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,0 kNm
C16
==PAGE:89==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
179,5 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,0 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,022 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
97,3 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
19,2 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
600,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,5 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
19,2 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
38,4 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C17
==PAGE:90==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-1 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
31,7 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
28,5 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,9 kNm
C18
==PAGE:91==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
178,6 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,9 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,020 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,8 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3791 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
12,0 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
12,8 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
C19
==PAGE:92==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
26,8 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
26,8 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,54 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
53,5 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C20
==PAGE:93==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-2
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
34,9 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
25,9 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,005 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,0 kNm
C21
==PAGE:94==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
179,6 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,0 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,005 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,022 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
97,4 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3679 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
12,8 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
13,7 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
C22
==PAGE:95==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
24,9 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
440,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,0 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
24,9 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,50 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
49,9 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C23
==PAGE:96==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-3
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
31,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
28,9 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
11,9 kNm
C24
==PAGE:97==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
178,5 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
11,9 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,020 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
96,7 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3805 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
11,9 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
12,7 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
C25
==PAGE:98==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
26,7 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
26,7 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,53 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
53,4 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C26
==PAGE:99==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-R
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
39,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Yield strength of reinforcement 
fy
fu/1.08
=
575,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
90,3 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
32,5 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fy
=
57,8 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
23,0 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,006 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
575,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,1 kNm
C27
==PAGE:100==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
180,8 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,1 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,006 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,025 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,3 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
12,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
98,0 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3525 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
13,9 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
14,8 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
C28
==PAGE:101==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
27,3 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
10,9 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
27,3 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,55 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
54,5 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
C29
==PAGE:102==
Appendix D - Load Carrying Capacity
Calculated with Failure Strength
D1
==PAGE:103==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-1 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,5 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
96,8 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
34,4 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
32,8 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
608,4 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,7 kNm
D2
==PAGE:104==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
176,9 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,7 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,017 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
103,5 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
29,1 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
29,1 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
58,3 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D3
==PAGE:105==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-2
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,5 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
96,8 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
34,4 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
32,8 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
608,4 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,7 kNm
D4
==PAGE:106==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
176,9 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,7 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,017 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
103,5 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
29,1 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
29,1 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
58,3 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D5
==PAGE:107==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-3
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,9 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,4 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,0 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
32,6 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
618,6 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,7 kNm
D6
==PAGE:108==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,0 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,7 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,017 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
103,6 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
29,2 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
29,2 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
58,4 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D7
==PAGE:109==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-4
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
33,0 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
29,6 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,8 kNm
D8
==PAGE:110==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
178,2 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,019 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
104,3 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
29,5 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,8 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
29,5 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
59,0 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D9
==PAGE:111==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM1-B-R
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
31,6 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,9 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,8 kNm
D10
==PAGE:112==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,7 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,018 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
104,0 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
29,4 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
29,4 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
58,7 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D11
==PAGE:113==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM2-B-1
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,9 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,4 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,0 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
32,6 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
618,6 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,7 kNm
D12
==PAGE:114==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,0 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,7 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,017 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
103,6 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
20,3 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
600,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
12,2 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
20,3 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
40,7 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D13
==PAGE:115==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM2-B-2
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
29,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
96,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
34,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
33,0 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
603,3 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,6 kNm
D14
==PAGE:116==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
176,8 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,6 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,017 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,6 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
103,5 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
20,3 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
600,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
12,2 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
20,3 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
40,5 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D15
==PAGE:117==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VM2-B-R
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
34,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
28,4 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,9 kNm
D16
==PAGE:118==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
178,6 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,9 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,020 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
104,5 kN
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
20,6 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
600,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
12,4 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
20,6 kN
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
41,2 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D17
==PAGE:119==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-1
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
31,7 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
30,8 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,8 kNm
D18
==PAGE:120==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,7 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,018 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
104,0 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3791 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
12,0 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
12,8 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
D19
==PAGE:121==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
28,6 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,5 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
28,6 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,57 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
57,3 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D20
==PAGE:122==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-2 
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
34,9 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
28,0 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,004 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,9 kNm
D21
==PAGE:123==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
178,8 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,9 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,004 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,020 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
104,7 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3679 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
12,8 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
13,7 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
D22
==PAGE:124==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
26,7 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
440,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,8 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
26,7 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,53 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
53,5 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D23
==PAGE:125==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-3
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
31,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
31,2 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,003 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
12,8 kNm
D24
==PAGE:126==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
177,5 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
12,8 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,003 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,018 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
103,9 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3805 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
11,9 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
12,7 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
D25
==PAGE:127==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
28,6 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,4 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
28,6 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,57 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
57,2 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D26
==PAGE:128==
Determination of Ultimate Load, VMT-B-R
Material Parameters 
Compressive strength of concrete 
fc
=
39,3 MPa
Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
fu
=
621,0 MPa
Modulus of elasticity concrete
Ec
=
30,0 GPa
Modulus of elasticity reinforcement
Es
=
210,0 GPa
Ultimate strain of concrete 
εcu3
=
0,0035 -
Correction factor 
λ
=
0,8 -
Geometrical parameters 
Length of beam
L
=
2000 mm
Height of beam
h
=
250 mm
Width of beam 
b
=
125 mm
Area of beam
Ac
h∙b
=
31250 mm2
Diameter of compressive reinforcement
øsc
=
6 mm
Diameter of tensile reinforcement
øst
=
8 mm
Diameter of stirrups
øss
=
6 mm
Distance between stirrups 
s
=
150 mm
Area of compressive reinforcement 
Asc
2∙π/4∙Øsc
2
=
56,5 mm2
Area of tensile reinforcement 
Ast
2∙π/4∙Øst
2
=
100,5 mm2
Area of stirrups
Ass
2∙π/4∙Øss
2
=
56,5 mm2
Concrete cover longitudinal reinforcement 
csl
=
60,0 mm
Concrete cover stirrups
css
=
35,0 mm
Distance from top to tensile reinforcement 
d
h-csl
=
190,0 mm
Determination of moment capacity using two equations with two unknowns 
Compressive force concrete 
Fc
b∙x∙fc∙λ
=
97,5 kN
Compressive force longidutinal reinforcemen Fsc
Asc∙σsc
=
35,1 kN
Tensile force longidutinal reinforcement 
Fst
Ast∙fu
=
62,4 kN
Horizontal projection equation 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
Moment about tensile reinforcement 
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) = MR
Height of compression zone 
x
solved from equilibrium equations
=
24,8 mm
Strain in compressive reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(x-csl)/x
=
-0,005 -
Stress in compressive reinforcement 
σsc
solved from equilibrium equations
=
621,0 MPa
Moment capacity 
MR
-Fsc∙(d-csl)+Fc∙(d-λx/2) 
=
13,0 kNm
D27
==PAGE:129==
Internal lever arm 
z
h-csl-λx/2
=
180,1 mm
Verification of horizontal equilibrium 
Fc-Fsc-Fst = 0
=
0,0 kN
Verification of moment equilibrium 
 -Fc∙λx/2+Fsc∙csl+Fst∙d = MR
=
13,0 kNm
Verification of strain distribution
Strain in the bottom of the compression zone εbc
εcu3∙(x-x)/x
=
0,000 -
Strain in compression reinforcement 
εsc
εcu3∙(h-x-d)/x
=
0,005 -
Strain in tensile reinforcement 
εst
εcu3∙(h-x-csl)/x
=
0,023 -
Determination of shear capacity using the diagonal compression field method 
Shear effectiveness factor 
νv
0.7-fc/200
=
0,5 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
cot(θ)
1≤ cot(θ) ≤ 2,5
=
2,5 -
θ
=
0,4 rad
Allowable shear stress 
τ
(Ass∙fy/s∙b)∙cot(θ)
=
4,7 MPa
Verification of concrete capacity 
σc
τ/(cos(θ)∙sin(θ))
=
13,6 MPa
σc ≤ νv∙fc
OK
Shear capacity 
VR
z∙b∙τ
=
105,4 kN
Determination of torsional capacity 
Torsional effectiveness factor 
νt
0.7∙(0.7-fc/200)
=
0,3525 -
Inclination of concrete compression 
θ
=
0,4 rad
Circumference of cross section
u
2∙(h+b)
=
750 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 1
tef1
Ac/u
=
41,7 mm
Effective thickness, calculation procedure 2
tef2
2∙(css+øss+øss/2)
=
88,0 mm
Maximum effective thickness 
tefmax
max(tef1,tef2)
=
88,0 mm
Chosen effective thickness* 
tef
2∙(b/2-css) - 1mm
=
54,0 mm
Area confined by perimeter 
Ak
(b-2∙css)∙(h-2∙css)
=
9900,0 mm2
Allowable shear stress 
τ
σc∙cos(θ)∙sin(θ)≤ νt∙fc
=
13,9 MPa
Torsional capacity 
TR
τ∙2∙Ak∙tef
=
14,8 kNm
*Due to the maximum effective thickness being larger than what the geometry of the cross section permits an 
effective thickness is chosen. 
D28
==PAGE:130==
Determination of ultimate load upon combined torsion, bending, and shear 
Ultimate point load 
Pult
Ptot/2
=
29,2 kN
Distance from support to load 
a
=
400,0 mm
Bending moment 
M
Pult∙a
=
11,7 kNm
Shear force 
V
Pult
=
29,2 kN
Excentricity of load 
e
=
20,0 mm
Torsional moment 
T
Pult∙e
=
0,58 kNm
Ultimate load in load cell
Ptot
Solved from yield condition
=
58,5 kN
Yield condition 
M/MR+(V/VR+T/TR)2 ≤ 1
=
1,00
D29
==PAGE:131==
Appendix E - Yield Conditions for Beams
Below, Figures E.1, E.2, E.3, E.4, E.5, E.6, E.7, E.8, E.9, E.10, E.11, and E.12 show the yield condition
determined for each beam individually in coherence with the actual compressive strength of each beam as
well as the yield strength and failure strength of the reinforcement. The calculations that form the basis
of determining the yield condition for each beam using both the yield strength and the failure strength
respectively are apparent from Appendix B.
Figure E.1: Yield condition for VM1-B-1
E1
==PAGE:132==
Figure E.2: Yield condition for VM1-B-2
Figure E.3: Yield condition for VM1-B-3
E2
==PAGE:133==
Figure E.4: Yield condition for VM1-B-4
Figure E.5: Yield condition for VM1-B-R
E3
==PAGE:134==
Figure E.6: Yield condition for VM2-B-1
Figure E.7: Yield condition for VM2-B-2
E4
==PAGE:135==
Figure E.8: Yield condition for VM2-B-R
Figure E.9: Yield condition for VMT-B-1
E5
==PAGE:136==
Figure E.10: Yield condition for VMT-B-2
Figure E.11: Yield condition for VMT-B-3
E6
==PAGE:137==
Figure E.12: Yield condition for VMT-B-R
E7
==PAGE:138==
Annex A
This page is left blank intentionally. Annex A follows below.
==PAGE:139==
Annex A
Calculation of Mean Value and Standard Deviation
Cecilie Kristensen, s155942 & Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:140==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:141==
Contents
1
Mean Value and Standard Deviation
1
1.1
Mean Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Standard Deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
i
==PAGE:142==
List of Symbols
n
Number of observations
SD
Standard deviation
V ar
Variance
x
Value of each observation
µ
Mean value
ii
==PAGE:143==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:144==
1
|
Mean Value and Standard Deviation
As each laboratory test is conducted three times under the same conditions, the mean value and standard
deviation are calculated to avoid showing excessive amounts of data in the main report. The mean value
is an average of the observations, while the standard deviation is the amount of dispersion of the values
observed. Thus, a low standard deviation suggests that the observed values tend towards the mean value,
whereas a higher standard deviation suggests that values are spread.
1.1
Mean Value
The mean value is determined by
µ = 1
n ·
n
X
i=1
xi
(1.1)
where
µ
is the mean value
n
is the number of observations
xi
is the value of each observation
1.2
Standard Deviation
The standard deviation is determined as the square root of the variance, which is the difference between
each observed value and the mean value. Thus, the variance is determined by
V ar = 1
n ·
n
X
i=1
(xi −µ)2
(1.2)
where
V ar
is the variance
n
is the number of observations
xi
is the value of each observation
µ
is the mean value of the observations
1
==PAGE:145==
And ﬁnally, the standard deviation is determined by
SD =
p
V ar
(1.3)
where
SD
is the standard deviation
V ar
is the variance
2
==PAGE:146==
Annex B
This page is left blank intentionally. Annex B follows below.
==PAGE:147==
Annex B
Characterization of Crushed Concrete Aggregates and Cylinder Testing
Cecilie Kristensen, s155942 & Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:148==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:149==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Particle Size Distribution
3
2.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Density and Water Absorption
7
3.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Water Content
12
4.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Cement Content
15
5.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
i
==PAGE:150==
6
Concrete Mix
18
6.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.3
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.5
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
Workability
22
7.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7.3
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.5
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
8
Air Content
25
8.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8.3
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8.5
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
9
Compressive Strength
27
9.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
9.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
9.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
9.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
10 Conclusion
37
11 Bibliography
39
Appendix B.A - Particle Size Distribution
B.A 1
Appendix B.B - Density and Water Absorption
B.B 1
Appendix B.C - Water Content
B.C 1
Appendix B.D - Cement Content
B.D 1
ii
==PAGE:151==
Appendix B.E - Concrete Mix
B.E 1
Appendix B.F - Workability
B.F 1
Appendix B.G - Compressive Strength
B.G 1
iii
==PAGE:152==
List of Symbols
Ac
Cross-sectional area
C
Cement content
F
Load
fc
Compressive strength
Lo
Original gauge length
M
Mass
WA24
Water absorption
w
Water content
∆L
Change in length
"
Strain
✓
Angle
⇢SSD
Density of the saturated surface dry particles
⇢w
Density of water
'
Friction angle
iv
==PAGE:153==
List of Abbreviations
SSD
Saturated Surface Dry
w/c
Water to cement ratio
NA
Natural Aggregates
RCA
Recycled Concrete Aggregates
C-RCA
Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-RCA
Fine Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-NA50
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 50/50
F-NA40
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 60/40
F-RCA50
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 50% NA 0-4mm, 50% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA80
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 20% NA 0-4mm, 80% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA100
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 100% F-RCA 0-4mm
v
==PAGE:154==
List of Figures
2.1
Sieves for Determination of Particle Size Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Particle Size Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Determination of Density and Water Absorption for F-RCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Determination of Density and Water Absorption for C-RCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.1
Overview of Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
7.1
Slump Test Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.2
Initial Slumps for the Concrete Mixes Consisting of NA for Mixes F-NA50 and F-NA40
.
23
8.1
Determination of Air Content with Pressure Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9.1
Casting and Curing of Concrete Cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
9.2
Compression Test Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
9.3
Satisfactory failure of cylinder specimen according to [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
9.4
Failure Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9.5
Visual Inspection of Angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9.6
Calibration Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
9.7
Calibration of Measuring Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
9.8
Stress-Strain Relation Based on Calibrated Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
9.9
Stress-Strain Relation Based on Sorted Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
9.10 Geometrical Irregularities along sides of Cylinder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.11 Geometrical Irregularities on top of Cylinder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
B.F.1 Initial Slumps for the Concrete Mixes Consisting of NA for Mixes F-NA50 and F-NA40 .
B.F 1
B.F.2 Slumps for the Concrete Mixes Consisting of RCA for Mix F-RCA50
. . . . . . . . . .
B.F 1
B.F.3 Slumps for the Concrete Mixes Consisting of RCA for Mix F-RCA80
. . . . . . . . . .
B.F 2
B.F.4 Slumps for the Concrete Mixes Consisting of RCA for Mix D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.F 2
B.G.1 Overview of Mix Design F-NA50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 2
B.G.2 Overview of Mix Design F-NA40 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 3
B.G.3 Overview of Mix Design F-RCA50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 4
B.G.4 Overview of Mix Design F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 5
B.G.5 Overview of Mix Design F-RCA100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 6
B.G.6 Stress-Strain Relations Based on Calibrated Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 7
vi
==PAGE:155==
B.G.7 Stress-Strain Relations Based on Calibrated Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 8
vii
==PAGE:156==
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
Test Portions for Determination of Particle Size Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Sieving Results for Test 1 of the C-RCA, 4-22mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Validation Check of Particle Size Distribution results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Water Absorption and Density results for Test 1 of both F-RCA, 0-4mm and C-RCA, 4-22mm
9
3.2
Density for F-RCA, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Water Absorption Results for F-RCA, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Mean Density for the Fine and Coarse RCA fractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Mean Water Absorption for the Fine and Coarse RCA Fractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.1
Overview of Required and Actual Masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Water Content of Test 1 F-RCA, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Water Content of Test 1 F-RCA, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Mean Water Content of the Aggregate Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.1
Cement Content Results for F-RCA, 0-8mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
Cement Content Results for Test 1 of the F-RCA, 0-8mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Mean Cement Content for the Fine Fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.1
Distribution of Coarse and Fine Aggregates in the Concrete Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.2
Reference Concrete Mixes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.3
Recycled Concrete Aggregate Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7.1
Slump of the different Concrete Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8.1
Air Content of the different Concrete Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
9.1
Mean Friction Angle and Standard deviation of the different Concrete Mixes . . . . . . . .
31
9.2
Mean Compressive Strength and Standard deviation of Each Concrete Mix . . . . . . . . .
34
B.A.1 Sieving Results for Seasand, 0-4mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.A 1
B.A.2 Sieving Results for Seagravel, 4-8mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.A 2
B.A.3 Sieving Results for Seagravel, 8-16mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.A 2
B.A.4 Sieving Results for F-RCA, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.A 3
viii
==PAGE:157==
B.A.5 Sieving Results for C-RCA, 4-22mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.A 4
B.B.1 Water Absorption and Density results for F-RCA, 0-4mm and C-RCA, 4-22mm . . . . .
B.B 1
B.B.2 Water Absorption and Density results for F-RCA, 0-4mm and C-RCA, 4-22mm . . . . .
B.B 1
B.B.3 Density for F-RCA, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.B 2
B.B.4 Water Absorption Results for F-RCA, 0-4mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.B 2
B.B.5 Density results for C-RCA, 4-22mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.B 3
B.B.6 Water Absorption for C-RCA, 4-22mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.B 3
B.C.1 Water Content for Seasand, 0-4mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.C 1
B.C.2 Water Content for Seagravel, 4-8mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.C 1
B.C.3 Water Content for Seagravel, 8-16mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.C 1
B.C.4 Water Content for F-RCA, 0-4mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.C 2
B.C.5 Water Content for C-RCA, 4-22mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.C 2
B.D.1 Cement Content Results for F-RCA, 0-8mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.D 1
B.G.1 Concrete mix and Cylinder Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.G 1
ix
==PAGE:158==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:159==
1
|
Introduction
This annex is compiled to determine the physical properties of the recycled concrete aggregates, RCA,
which are used to replace natural aggregates, NA, in the project Combined Impacts for Beams casted with
Fine and Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates. This is beneﬁcial when creating different concrete mix de-
signs, of which one will be chosen to cast the beams that are the basis of the project. In order to characterize
the recycled concrete aggregates, RCA, and develop different concrete mixes, a number of laboratory tests
are carried out. The current annex will describe the methods used to conduct each test as speciﬁed in the
respective European Standards as well as calculations performed in regard to determining the properties of
the aggregates. Table 1.1 summarizes which tests are carried out and their corresponding European Stan-
dards. For each test carried out the purpose, experimental procedure, results, data processing, and potential
sources of error are described, and ﬁnally a conclusion summarizes the overall ﬁndings.
Table 1.1: Overview of experiments
Laboratory test
European Standard
Particle size distribution
DS/EN 933-1
Water absorption and density
DS/EN 1097-6
Water content
DS/EN 1097-5
Cement content
-
Workability
DS/EN 12350-2
Air Content
DS/EN 12350-7
Compressive strength
DS/EN 12390-1:4
The recycled concrete aggregates used in the current annex originate from a demolished HOFOR-chimney
at Amager and are donated by Norrecco A/S. A detailed report [1] on the demolition of the chimney de-
scribes how the donor concrete is assessed to be suitable for recycling according to DS/EN 12620 [9]. The
donor concrete is found to have a compressive strength of 50-55MPa.
Usually, natural aggregates used in concrete mixes have diameters between 0-32mm and are divided into
two main fractions, namely ﬁne and coarse aggregates, where the coarse aggregates are further subdivided
into three fractions dependent on the diameter of the grain. In the current report the recycled concrete
aggregates are only divided into the main fractions. The fraction of ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates, F-
RCA, which corresponds to grain diameters between 0-4mm, and the fraction of coarse recycled concrete
1
==PAGE:160==
aggregates, C-RCA, that corresponds to gravel diameters between 4-22mm with no further subdivision.
The natural aggregates are divided into standardized fractions of seasand 0-4mm, and seagravel 4-8mm and
8-16mm respectively.
2
==PAGE:161==
2
|
Particle Size Distribution
The particle size distribution of an aggregate is a geometrical property that deﬁnes how the grain sizes of
a speciﬁc aggregate varies. The aim of this test is to determine the grain sizes of the recycled concrete
aggregates and compare the distribution with the particle size distribution found for natural aggregates.
2.1
Experimental Procedure
The particle size distributions for the ﬁne and coarse fractions of the recycled concrete aggregates as well
as the particle size distributions for the seasand and seagravel fractions are determined according to DS/EN
933-1 [10]. The experimental procedure consists of collecting a number of sieves with decreasing mesh
sizes on top of each other, which will divide the test portion of each aggregate into particle size classiﬁca-
tions according to the sieves used in the laboratory test. For the ﬁne fraction of RCA and the seasand the
relevant sieves have mesh sizes of 0.125mm, 0.25mm, 0.5mm, 1mm, 2mm, 4mm, and 8mm. Whereas for
the coarse fraction of RCA and the seagravel fractions, the relevant sieves have the mesh sizes of 2mm,
4mm, 8mm, 16mm, and 32mm. The chosen mesh sizes include the entire variation of the diameter of the
speciﬁc aggregate, and an additional sieve that is one size larger for the ﬁne fractions and one size smaller
for the coarse fractions, as it is relevant to ensure that the aggregate diameters are actually within the given
span. The sieves for the ﬁne and the coarse fractions respectively are shown in Figure 2.1.
(a) Sieves for the ﬁne fractions
(b) Sieves for the coarse fractions
Figure 2.1: Sieves for determination of particle size distribution
3
==PAGE:162==
As preparation for the test, portions of the aggregates are dried in the oven at 105 °C for 24 hours. Addi-
tionally, the mass of each test portion is determined according to DS/EN 933-1 [10], which is dependent
on the largest diameter of the considered aggregate. The minimum masses for the ﬁne fractions are 0.2kg
and the minimum masses for the coarse fractions vary between 0.6-10.0kg. The minimum masses for each
aggregate type according to DS/EN 933-1 along with the actual masses used in the test are summarized in
Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Test portions for determination of particle size distribution
Fraction
Minimum Mass [kg]
Actual Mass [kg]
Seasand, 0-4mm
0.2
0.6
Seagravel, 4-8mm
0.6
1.0
Seagravel, 8-16mm
2.6
3.0
F-RCA, 0-4mm
0.2
0.6
C-RCA, 4-22mm
10.0
10.0
Upon placing a test portion in the sieve column, the sieves are attached to a mechanical vibrator and vibrated
for three minutes. After the sieving each sieve with retained material is weighed. For each aggregate type
the sieving test is carried out three times, to ensure the representativeness of the results.
2.2
Results
The sieving results found for Test 1 of the C-RCA are shown in Table 2.2, the remaining sieving results are
found in Appendix A. The table shows the different sieve sizes, the mass of sieves and samples, and the
retained material, which determine the passing fraction that is given in kilograms and in percent.
Table 2.2: Sieving results for Test 1 of the C-RCA, 4-22mm
4
==PAGE:163==
2.3
Data Processing
The results are validated by ensuring that the difference between the actual mass and the sieved mass is less
than 1%. Table 2.3 summarizes the differences in mass found for each test.
Table 2.3: Validation check of particle size distribution results
Fraction
Test 1 [%]
Test 2 [%]
Test 3 [%]
Seasand, 0-4mm
0.97
0.93
0.76
Seagravel, 4-8mm
0.58
0.49
0.00
Seagravel, 8-16mm
0.17
0.13
0.33
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
3.45
0.00
0.00
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
0.45
0.15
2.30
From Table 2.3 it is apparent that Test 1 for the F-RCA fraction and Test 3 for the C-RCA fraction exceed
the limit of 1%. Thus, these tests are not qualiﬁed for further data processing and are therefore removed.
The ﬁne and coarse fractions for the NA and the RCA respectively are combined to get a complete particle
size distribution for each aggregate. The mean particle size distributions for both the NA and the RCA are
illustrated in Figure 2.2 alongside the upper and lower limits of the recommended particle size distribution,
which are determined according to the general grading requirements given in DS/EN 12620 [9]. However,
the requirements are given for the ﬁne and coarse fraction solely. This is accommodated by using the given
values for each fraction and interpolating for the intermediate values, which has led to the upper and lower
limits marked with the black dashed lines in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Particle size distribution for natural and recycled concrete aggregates along with the upper and lower limits
5
==PAGE:164==
From Figure 2.2 it is apparent that the distribution of the recycled concrete aggregates lies below the dis-
tribution of the natural aggregates, and corresponds fairly well with the general grading requirements. Ad-
ditionally, it can be observed for both the natural aggregates and the recycled concrete aggregates that the
majority of the particle sizes are distributed between 4-16mm. This is visible from the inclined slope which
is large in the speciﬁc area, meaning that a higher percentage of material is retained.
2.4
Errors
For the determination of the particle size distribution errors related to weighing of the material and the
sieves are to be expected. Such errors can be caused by using an inaccurate scale, and in order to decrease
the risk of inaccuracies due to weighing the same scale has been used for weighing all of the sieves for each
aggregate. Furthermore, throughout the sieving, some aggregates are stuck in the mesh of the sieves, which
will cause very slight weight differences of the sieves seeing that these are not re-weighed before the next
sieving.
2.5
Discussion
The sieving test shows that the particle size distribution of the RCA is closer to the required values com-
pared to the NA, which is not expected as the RCA are alternatives to the NA. It is difﬁcult to determine
what causes the NA to deviate from the required values seeing that DTU’s supplier has not provided any
information on the natural aggregates.
2.6
Partial Conclusion
The sieving tests emphasise that recycled concrete aggregates have particle size distributions that are appli-
cable for use in concrete mixes.
6
==PAGE:165==
3
|
Density and Water Absorption
The density and the water absorption of the aggregates are essential factors that inﬂuence the concrete mixes
considerably. The density used in concrete mix designs is the density of the aggregates in the saturated
surface dry state, SSD-state, since the SSD-state corresponds to the state of the aggregates in the fresh
concrete mixture. When the aggregates are in SSD-state the pores are water ﬁlled but the surface is dry, and
therefore no water will be absorbed or added to the concrete mix from the aggregates. Thus, the density in
SSD-state is used as a reference when adjusting the mix design with regard to the state of the aggregates
at the day of the casting. The aim of the current laboratory test is to determine the density and the water
absorption of the recycled concrete aggregates. The results are used to adjust the concrete mixes to prevent
that the aggregates will absorb free water and thereby affect the water to cement ratio of the mix design.
3.1
Experimental Procedure
The test is carried out for both the ﬁne and the coarse recycled aggregates in accordance with DS/EN 1097-6
[4] using the pyknometer method. As preparation for the determination of density and water absorption both
the ﬁne and coarse aggregates are dried in an oven at 105 °C for 24 hours until reaching a constant mass.
Three test portions of approximately 300g of the ﬁne fraction are investigated using 500ml pyknometers,
and three test portions of 800g of the coarse fraction are investigated using 1000ml pyknometers. According
to the standard the test portions of the coarse aggregates ought to be minimum 3.2kg, which is found by
interpolation of the values in Table 2, DS/EN 1097-6 [4]. However, using the test facilities at DTU it is not
possible to handle these large test portions due to the size of the pyknometers available.
The pyknometer method consists of immersing a test portion of the aggregate into demineralised water
ﬁlling the pyknometer approximately 75%, after which the pyknometer is placed in a desiccator, where a
vacuum is induced for roughly 24 hours. Upon removing the pyknometer from the desiccator, it is overﬁlled
with demineralised and air free water, and the cover is placed on top with no air trapped in the vessel after
which the pyknometer is dried and weighed. The further procedure of the test is dependent on whether ﬁne
or coarse aggregates are examined.
7
==PAGE:166==
For the ﬁne fraction the next step is to empty the pyknometer and collect the test portion in a beaker, and dry
the content to SSD-state using a pan, after which the test portion is weighed. The SSD-state is determined
in compliance with Annex F in DS/EN 1097-6 [4], where the ﬁne aggregates are placed in a cone and
compacted lightly 25 times before removing the cone and observing an almost complete collapse with a
visible peak and angular slopes, which is apparent from Figure 3.1c.
(a) F-RCA in pyknometers
(b) F-RCA placed in cone
(c) F-RCA in achieved SSD-state
Figure 3.1: Determination of density and water absorption for F-RCA
For the coarse fraction the SSD-mass of the test portions are determined by drying the aggregates with
kitchen towels until the surface is seemingly dry, after which the test portion is weighed. The pyknometers
and the coarse fractions in wet and SSD-state are shown in Figure 3.2.
(a) C-RCA in pyknometers
(b) C-RCA wet
(c) C-RCA in achieved SSD-state
Figure 3.2: Determination of density and water absorption for C-RCA
8
==PAGE:167==
When all measurements are conducted the density and the water absorption of the aggregates are deter-
mined. The saturated surface dry particle density is determined by
⇢SSD = ⇢w ·
M1
M1 −(M2 −M3)
(3.1)
where
⇢SSD
is the density of the saturated surface dry particles
⇢w
is the density of water at the test temperature
M1
is the mass of the aggregate in saturated surface dry state
M2
is the mass of the pyknometer containing the saturated surface dry test portion and water
M3
is the mass of the pyknometer ﬁlled with water only
Likewise, the water absorption is determined by
WA24 = 100 · (M1 −M4)
M4
(3.2)
where
WA24
is the water absorption
M4
is the mass of the oven-dried test portion
3.2
Results
The measurements needed for the determination of density and water absorption for both the ﬁne and coarse
RCA fractions are shown in Table 3.1 for Test 1. The remaining results are shown in Appendix B, Table
B.B.1 and B.B.2.
Table 3.1: Water absorption and density results for Test 1 of both the F-RCA, 0-4mm and C-RCA, 4-22mm
9
==PAGE:168==
3.3
Data Processing
The densities and the water absorption values are determined for each fraction, and the results are found in
Appendix B Tables B.B.3, B.B.4, B.B.5, and B.B.6. The density and the water absorption found for F-RCA
in Test 1 are shown in Table 3.2 and 3.3 respectively.
Table 3.2: Density for F-RCA, 0-4mm
Table 3.3: Water absorption results for F-RCA, 0-4mm
Based on the found results the mean densities and water absorption are determined, these are given in Table
3.4 and 3.5 along with the standard deviation. The standard deviation is an indication of how scattered the
observation is compared to the mean value, an elaborate explanation is found in Annex A.
Table 3.4: Mean density for the ﬁne and coarse RCA fractions
Fraction
Mean Density [kg/m3]
Standard Deviation [-]
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
2330
14.5
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
2540
24.4
Table 3.5: Mean water absorption for the ﬁne and coarse RCA fractions
Fraction
Mean Water Absorption [%]
Standard Deviation [-]
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
24
6.7
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
3
1.2
3.4
Errors
The rather large variation between the test portion according to the standard and the actual mass used for
the C-RCA fraction could be an error that inﬂuences the results. The SSD-state is determined by means
10
==PAGE:169==
of visual evaluation for both the ﬁne and the coarse fractions, which makes it difﬁcult to ensure that the
observed state is the actual saturated surface dry state. When determining the SSD-state for the F-RCA
fraction, the shape of the cone is compared to what sand should look like in SSD-state, which could give
incorrect results due to difference between the shape of the F-RCA particles and sand. During the test it
is observed that ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates have a different way of packing compared to the ﬁne
natural aggregates. This could inﬂuence the found densities and water absorption values. Another error is
the possibility of using an imprecise scale. The uncertainty is sought minimized by using the same scale
throughout the test.
3.5
Discussion
The density and the water absorption for the coarse fraction, C-RCA, are given by Norrecco [1] and the
values are compared to the values found by the laboratory tests. The density is given as 2480kg/m3 and the
given water absorption percentage is 3.6%. The found mean values are 2540kg/m3 and 3% respectively,
and the variations are considered as a minor difference that could arise from the errors in the performance
of the laboratory tests. When considering the standard deviations found for the densities, the values are
14.5 and 24.4 for the F-RCA and C-RCA respectively. These are considered rather high, but are at the
same time expected due to the methods being solely based on the visual evaluation when determining the
SSD-state. The same tendency is seen for the water absorption where the standard deviation is 6.7 and 1.2
for the F-RCA and C-RCA respectively.
3.6
Partial Conclusion
The values found for the F-RCA are used in the concrete mix designs, and for the C-RCA the density and
water absorption values given by Norrecco are used. For NA the standardised values of density and water
absorption are used as this is common practice in the industry.
11
==PAGE:170==
4
|
Water Content
The water content of the aggregates inﬂuences the amount of water needed in the concrete mixes, therefore
the aim of this test is to determine the water content in the different aggregates. The water content is
determined for both the recycled concrete aggregates and the natural aggregates, which is used to adjust the
concrete mix designs. To get valid results three test portions from each fraction are investigated. The tests
are executed on the day of the casting to get the most accurate results.
4.1
Experimental Procedure
The mass of the test portions are determined according to DS/EN 1097-5 [3]. The minimum mass for the
ﬁne fractions is 0.2kg which is used for both the ﬁne natural aggregates and the ﬁne recycled aggregates.
The mass of coarse aggregates is dependent on the largest diameter of the aggregate considered, which
varies for the different coarse fractions. The required and the actual masses for each fraction are shown in
Table 4.1, where smaller test portions are used for the coarse aggregates due to capacity limitations.
Table 4.1: Overview of required and actual masses
Fraction
Required Mass [kg]
Actual Mass [kg]
Seasand, 0-4mm
0.2
0.2
Seagravel, 4-8mm
1.6
0.5
Seagravel, 8-16mm
3.2
1.0
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
0.2
0.5
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
4.4
1.0
Each test portion is weighed in the received state and then dried in a microwave oven for three minutes.
The test portion is then cooled to ambient air temperature and weighed again. Next, the test portion is dried
in the microwave oven for additional three minutes, cooled and weighed again. This is repeated until the
deviation between the masses is less than 0.1% which ensures constant mass. The water content of the
aggregates is determined by
w = M1 −M3
M3
· 100
(4.1)
12
==PAGE:171==
where
w
is the water content of the test portion
M1
is the mass of the test portion
M3
is the constant mass of dried test portion
4.2
Results
The results consisting of the different masses for Test 1, for the F-RCA are shown in 4.2. The remaining
results are shown in Appendix C in Tables B.C.1, B.C.2, B.C.3, B.C.4, and B.C.5.
Table 4.2: Water content of test 1 F-RCA, 0-4mm
4.3
Data Processing
The data processing and the resulting water content for Test 1 for the F-RCA are shown in Table 4.3, where
the remaining tests are shown along with the results in Appendix C in Tables B.C.1, B.C.2, B.C.3, B.C.4,
and B.C.5. From Table 4.3 it is seen that the deviation between the weighed data is less than 0.1% which
indicates that constant mass is achieved.
Table 4.3: Water content of test 1 F-RCA, 0-4mm
The mean values and the standard deviations of all aggregate types are shown in Table 4.4.
13
==PAGE:172==
Table 4.4: Mean water content of the aggregates types
Fraction
Mean Water Content [%]
Standard Deviation [-]
Seasand, 0-4mm
0.2
0.2
Seagravel, 4-8mm
0.1
0.1
Seagravel, 8-16mm
0.8
0.5
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
0.8
0.2
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
0.4
0.4
4.4
Errors
With regard to the water content a possible error is related to the uncertainties of the scale used. Another
parameter that may potentially inﬂuence the results is the use of smaller test portions than the masses
prescribed in the relevant standard DS/EN 1097-5 [3], as using the prescribed masses was not possible due
to the equipment available at DTU. Another error could be the use of a microwave oven instead of the
ventilated oven as prescribed in the standard, however this is considered to have a minor inﬂuence due to
the deviations between the masses being less than 0.1%.
4.5
Discussion
When comparing the mean values of the ﬁne fractions it is seen that the water content of the F-RCA is
higher than the value found for the seasand. This could be related to the high water absorption found for the
F-RCA in Section 3.3 Table 3.5, whereas the water absorption for seasand is substantially lower generally
around 4% [11]. Furthermore, the mean water content of seagravel fraction 8-16mm is higher than expected,
which can be due to the smaller test portion used. Also, the standard deviation for this fraction is higher
than for the remaining fractions, which is an indication of larger differences between the observation and
the mean value.
4.6
Partial Conclusion
The water content of each aggregate type is used to adjust the overall water content of the concrete mix
designs in order to secure a constant water to cement ratio. In conclusion it is observed that the water
content is larger for the RCA than the NA in the ﬁne fraction, whereas it is smaller for the RCA than the
NA in the coarse fraction of 8-16mm.
14
==PAGE:173==
5
|
Cement Content
In contrast to natural aggregates leftover cement will be attached to the crushed concrete aggregates, and
it is not possible to determine whether this will be active or not in the new concrete mix. However, it is
relevant to determine the amount of leftover cement as this may potentially contribute to the strength of the
new concrete.
5.1
Experimental Procedure
The cement content is determined for the F-RCA fraction, and the test is carried out according to a procedure
given by ZeroWaste Gruppen, since no standard is found on this speciﬁc laboratory test. The experimental
procedure can be found in Appendix D. A portion of the F-RCA fraction is crushed into powder using a
vibratory disc mill for 10 seconds. Three test portions of approximately 50g along with ﬁlters and trays
are weighed on a two decimal scale. Each test portion is placed in a container with 200ml demineralised
water of 48°C. The test container is placed in a fume hood, where 30ml of nitric acid is added to each test
portion. After a while 10ml nitric acid is reapplied to ensure that all of the cement is dissolved. Next, each
test portion is poured through a ﬁlter and thereby divided into wet powder and liquid, after which the ﬁlter
containing the wet powder and the tray are weighed. The ﬁlter and the powder portions are dried at 105°C
for 24 hours and weighed yet again. The cement content is determined by
C = M0 −M3
M0
· 100
(5.1)
where
C
is the cement content of the test portion
M0
is the mass of the test portion
M3
is the mass of dried test portion
5.2
Results
The results found from Test 1 are shown in Table 5.1, whereas the remaining test results are shown in
Appendix D Table B.D.1.
15
==PAGE:174==
Table 5.1: Cement content results for F-RCA, 0-4mm
5.3
Data Processing
The processed data is shown in Table 5.2 where the results found for Test 1 are presented. The resulting
mean value of the cement content for the F-RCA fraction and the standard deviation are shown in Table 5.3,
whereas the remaining test results are shown in Appendix D Table B.D.1.
Table 5.2: Cement content results for Test 1 of the F-RCA, 0-4mm
Table 5.3: Mean cement content for the ﬁne fraction
Fraction
Cement Content [%]
Standard Deviation [-]
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
30
0.5
5.4
Errors
As for the remaining laboratory tests uncertainties related to determining the cement content can be caused
during weighing of the material.
5.5
Discussion
The leftover cement can affect the water to cement ratio by absorbing water and thereby leave the concrete
more dry than anticipated, and therefore the rather high cement content of 30% can potentially affect the
mix designs. It is not possible to determine the amount of leftover cement that will react in the new concrete
mix, and ideally this could be taken into account.
16
==PAGE:175==
5.6
Partial Conclusion
The cement content is determined to obtain a better understanding of what recycled concrete aggregates are
comprised of, and which factors may inﬂuence a concrete mix. However, the cement content is not taken
into consideration in the concrete mixes, as this is considered as out of the scope of this project.
17
==PAGE:176==
6
|
Concrete Mix
When creating a mix design it is necessary to take factors such as which environment the concrete will be
exposed to and what strength requirement into consideration, as these factors greatly affect the properties
of the concrete mix. Upon developing a mix design the two main tasks are composing the cement paste
and composing the distribution of aggregates. For common concrete the cement paste will determine the
strength as this depends on the water to cement ratio. In order to ensure that the concrete gets the desired
compression strength and take uncertainties of concrete production into account, the mix design is devel-
oped for concrete that has an additional strength of 5-7MPa more than what is actually desired. Finally, the
distribution between ﬁne and coarse aggregates is chosen. In the current project it is prioritized to avoid
adding additives to the concrete such as ﬂy ash, microsilica, and plasticizer in order to focus only on the
inﬂuence of the aggregates. However, it is to be expected that the rather large amount of dust from the
crushing of the concrete behaves somewhat similar to ﬂy ash or microsilica as this affects the density of the
cement paste, which is not taken into account upon designing the concrete mixes.
6.1
Experimental Procedure
In the current project ﬁve different concrete mixes with varying contents of natural aggregates and recycled
concrete aggregates are investigated. The characterization of the aggregates form the basis of creating
mix designs in compliance with a desired compression strength of 20MPa in the passive environmental
class. The w/c-ratio of 0.71 is kept constant due to the strength requirement of 27MPa in the design mix.
Additionally, Table 6.1 and Figure 6.1 describe the distribution of both ﬁne and coarse aggregates as well as
the distribution of natural and recycled concrete aggregates in the concrete mixes named F-NA50, F-NA40,
F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 respectively.
Table 6.1: Distribution of coarse and ﬁne aggregates in the concrete mixes
Mix
Distribution of Aggregates
F-NA50
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 50/50
F-NA40
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 60/40
F-RCA50
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 50% NA 0-4mm, 50% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA80
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 20% NA 0-4mm, 80% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA100
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 100% F-RCA 0-4mm
18
==PAGE:177==
To accommodate a reasonable workability of the concrete the two reference mixes F-NA50 and F-NA40
have been used to determine the optimal distribution between ﬁne and coarse aggregates. Concrete mix
F-NA50 is designed in compliance with the distribution method given in Table 4 in [11], in which the
percentage mass of the ﬁne fraction is determined by linear interpolation to be 50%. The distribution leads
to a very dry concrete with a low slump that is considered not applicable for practical use. As a result of
this it is chosen to increase the percentage mass of the coarse fraction to 60% while decreasing the mass
of the ﬁne fraction to 40% in mix F-NA40, which provides signiﬁcantly better workability of the concrete,
and therefore this aggregate distribution is chosen for the remaining mix designs. This is graphically shown
in Figure 6.1 where the percentages are distributed from the total mass of the concrete batch. Thus, the
naming of each mix design is based on the replacement ratio of the ﬁne fraction of aggregates seeing that
the entire coarse fraction is replaced in the mix designs using recycled concrete aggregates as an alternative
to natural aggregates.
Figure 6.1: Overview of mix designs
The concrete is produced in a mixer where the aggregates are initially poured from largest to smallest
particle size, after which the material is mixed in a sequence of mixing the dry material three minutes, then
adding the water and mixing three minutes, pausing three minutes, and ﬁnally remixing the materials for one
minute. The mixing is carried out with this sequence for all ﬁve concrete batches to ensure a homogeneous
concrete mass and a uniform mixing procedure.
19
==PAGE:178==
6.2
Results
From the characterization of the recycled aggregates ﬁve different concrete mixes are developed aiming
for a compressive strength of minimum 20MPa. The concrete mixes have a constant water to cement ratio
of 0.71, and the variation between them is the distribution of natural and recycled aggregates as shown in
Figure 6.1. For concrete mix F-NA50 and F-NA40 35L of concrete is made to ensure a sufﬁcient amount
of concrete for six cylinders and an air content test. The ﬁnal mix designs for the reference concrete mixes
are shown in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Reference concrete mixes
Mix
Cement [kg]
Water [L]
Sand [kg]
Gravel, 4-8mm [kg]
Gravel, 8-16mm [kg]
F-NA50
8.33
6.54
32.1
16.8
17.0
F-NA40
8.33
6.46
26.1
19.8
20.1
For the mixes F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 only 30L are made to avoid unnecessary surplus,
and the mixes with recycled concrete aggregates are shown in Table 6.3. When comparing the values for
the reference concrete mixes, F-NA50 and F-NA40, with the mixes with recycled concrete aggregates, F-
RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100, it is to be kept in mind, that the amounts differ between 35L and 30L
respectively keeping a constant water to cement ratio of 0.71.
Table 6.3: Recycled concrete aggregate mixes
Mix
Cement [kg]
Water [L]
Sand [kg]
F-RCA [kg]
C-RCA [kg]
F-RCA50
7.14
6.74
11.2
7.97
32.1
F-RCA80
7.14
7.25
4.47
12.8
32.1
F-RCA100
7.14
7.61
-
16.0
32.1
From the Tables 6.2 and 6.3 it is apparent that the water content varies which is due to corrections made
when taking the current water content and absorption of each aggregate into account, which does not affect
the water to cement ratio. The comprehensive mix designs corresponding to 1 m3 for each mix are found in
Appendix E.
6.3
Errors
For the design of the different concrete mixes no test batches are made, and therefore the actual air content
of each concrete mix is not taken into account in the water to cement ratio. Additionally, challenges are
represented upon weighing of the material as it is difﬁcult to ensure the exact amounts and adding the
20
==PAGE:179==
material in the concrete mixer with no residual material left in the buckets. Furthermore, as the amounts
used for the mixing are not very large a source of error may occur as it is a challenge to make certain that
the aggregate used is fully representative for the particle size distribution of each aggregate.
6.4
Discussion
The sources of error mentioned above may potentially inﬂuence the strength of the concrete as not con-
sidering the actual air content will most likely cause a slight decrease of the compression strength of the
concrete mixes due to the actual air content being somewhat higher than 1%.
6.5
Partial Conclusion
Following the procedure described above the concrete mix designs for both the reference batches and the
batches using recycled concrete aggregates ought to provide a mean compressive strength of at least 20MPa.
From the main conclusion in Section 10 it is apparent whether the desired compressive strength is obtained.
21
==PAGE:180==
7
|
Workability
The workability of the concrete is relevant when considering the casting process, as the texture of the fresh
concrete determines how applicable the concrete is in practice. The workability of the concrete mixes
are tested by measuring the slump. The purpose of the slump test is to determine the consistency and
workability of the fresh concrete and investigate if the slump changes over time for the mixes with recycled
concrete aggregates.
7.1
Experimental Procedure
The slump tests are performed according to DS/EN 12350-2 [5], and are carried out immediately after the
mixing process for the different concrete mixes. The test is carried out once for the reference concrete
mixes, F-NA50 and F-NA40, while for the mixes consisting of recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA50, F-
RCA80, and F-RCA100, the slump test is carried out three times. The ﬁrst test is performed initially as for
the reference mixes, after which the test is carried out again after 15 minutes and 30 minutes respectively.
This is done to investigate how the slump changes over time for mixes with recycled concrete aggregates.
Note, that the concrete is not remixed in between the slump tests. The apparatuses used for the tests are a
metal cone, a table with clamps, a compacting rod and a ruler. In Figure 7.1 the test procedure is shown.
Figure 7.1: Slump test procedure
As preparation the metal cone is clamped to the table after which the fresh concrete is poured into the
metal cone. The cone is ﬁlled approximately one third of the cone height and then compacted by uniformly
distributing 25 strokes across the concrete with the compacting rod. The compacting rod is lifted a bit from
22
==PAGE:181==
the table to ensure not hitting the bottom when compacting the concrete, as this will cause an additional
unwanted vibration. The next one-third is poured and compacted by 25 strokes, the rod is held a bit over
the ﬁrst layer and thereby only compacting the second layer. Finally, the third layer is ﬁlled and compacted,
and the cone is reﬁlled if necessary. Afterwards the surface is levelled, and the metal cone is pulled straight
upwards in one move. The reversed metal cone is used to place the steel rod and then measure the distance
between the top of the cone and the concrete. The slump is measured from the centre of the concrete cone
to the bottom of the steel rod, where the slump is reported rounding up to the next 10mm.
7.2
Results
The slump is found as the inital slump for the two reference concrete mixes F-NA50 and F-NA40. For
the mixes consisting of recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100, the slump is
measured three times. The measured slumps for each concrete mix are shown in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1: Slump of the different concrete mixes
Mix
Slump, initial [mm]
Slump, 15 min [mm]
Slump, 30 min [mm]
F-NA50
30
-
-
F-NA40
70
-
-
F-RCA50
80
80
50
F-RCA80
150
90
90
F-RCA100
100
80
60
Figure 7.2 shows the slumps for the concrete mixes consisting of natural aggregates, F-NA50 and F-NA40,
where it is seen that mix F-NA50 has a more solid and compact form compared to mix F-NA40. For the
remaining slumps of the different concrete mixes see Appendix F, Figures B.F.1, B.F.2, B.F.3, and B.F.4.
(a) Initial slump mix F-NA50
(b) Initial slump mix F-NA40
Figure 7.2: Initial slumps for the concrete mixes Consisting of NA for mixes F-NA50 and F-NA40
23
==PAGE:182==
7.3
Errors
An error that could affect the results is the determination of the three layers which are visually evaluated
and thereby hard to execute identically each time. This could inﬂuence the compaction and thereby the
measurements. Another error that could occur is under- or over-compacting which occurs due to the position
of the compacting rod, which is visually evaluated and could therefore lead to layers being vibrated twice.
Additionally, a source of error could appear when removing the metal cone, as this shall be done in one
move and without any twisting or turning of the metal cone. This is hard to ensure since the concrete can
be sticky and thereby hard to get to let go of the metal cone, and seeing that residue of old dry concrete
inside the cone from earlier slump tests creates some friction upon lifting the cone. The errors are sought
minimized by letting the same person execute the same procedures for each test.
7.4
Discussion
Traditional concrete is delivered with slumps between 60mm and 200mm [2]. The slump of 30mm found
for concrete mix F-NA50, which is the mix with an equal distribution between the ﬁne and the coarse
aggregate fractions, as depicted in Figure 6.1, is rather low compared to the range for traditional concrete.
This observation lead to the creation of reference mix F-NA40, where the relation between the ﬁne and
the coarse fraction are 40% to 60%, which is maintained for the RCA mixes F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and
F-RCA100.
The following mixes; F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 are thus within the traditional slump
range when considering the initial slumps and the slumps after 15 minutes. However, concrete mix F-
RCA40 develops a slump after 30 minutes which is lower than 60mm, and this may cause workability
issues seeing that concretes with small slumps are harder to work with and will need more vibrating. When
comparing the initial slumps of the mixes consisting of recycled concrete aggregates, concrete mix F-
RCA80 is deviating substantially. Concrete mix F-RCA80 has the highest slump and is not following the
tendency found for mix F-RCA40 and F-RCA100, where the slump seems to increase with the increase of
replaced natural aggregates. This could be an indication of some sort of error in the mix.
7.5
Partial Conclusion
Overall, the results show that the mixes F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 are applicable for
casting according to the traditional slump ranges.
24
==PAGE:183==
8
|
Air Content
The air content inﬂuences the water to cement ratio and is therefore relevant to take into consideration when
working with concrete mixes. The aim of the test is to determine the air content of the different concrete
mixes and thereby evaluate whether the air content is overestimated in the mix designs.
8.1
Experimental Procedure
The test is carried out according to DS/EN 12350-7 [6], and executed for each concrete mix by pouring the
freshly made concrete into a pressure meter. The pressure meter is ﬁlled one third at the time and vibrated
in between the layers with a vibrating platform until no air bubbles are visible. Afterwards, the lid is placed
and water is poured into one side of the pressure meter until it comes out on the other side, which is done to
have as little entrapped air in the pressure meter as possible. Next, air is pumped into the the pressure meter
until the arrow is below zero, which is then adjusted to zero. Finally, pressure is applied by pressing the
green button, and when the arrow stops moving the current air content is determined. The pressure meter is
shown in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Determination of air content with pressure meter
8.2
Results
The measured air content for each concrete mix is shown in Table 8.1.
25
==PAGE:184==
Table 8.1: Air content of the different concrete mixes
Mix
Air Content [%]
F-NA50
1.3
F-NA40
1.6
F-RCA50
1.5
F-RCA80
1.1
F-RCA100
1.8
8.3
Errors
For the determination of the current air content in the different concrete mixes over-vibration is an example
of an error that may affect the results as over-vibration can cause a loss of entrapped air. Additionally, the
pressure meter needs to be recalibrated every once in a while as it is a sensitive tool. Thus, some small
deviations are to be expected if the apparatus is not properly calibrated.
8.4
Discussion
All of the measured values of the air content are found to be larger than the values used in the concrete mix
designs. Usually, the natural air content is somewhere between 1-2% [11], and the air content in all mix
designs is set to 1%. The concrete mixes F-NA50 and F-RCA80 are closest to the used air content value of
1% with measurements of 1.3% and 1.1% respectively. The air content for the mixes F-NA40, F-RCA50,
and F-RCA100 are 1.6%, 1.5%, and 1.8% respectively. Therefore, the larger air contents for the mixes F-
NA40, F-RCA50, and F-RCA100 will inﬂuence the w/c ratio and consequently affect the mix designs and
the strength of the concrete batches. Ideally, a test batch for each of the concrete mixes could be produced
in order to take the air content into account in the mix designs and thus result in potentially more accurate
mixes.
8.5
Partial Conclusion
In this project it is chosen not to spend time on adjusting the mix designs due to the values of the air content
all being within the usual range. Nevertheless, the potential inﬂuence of the different air contents is kept in
mind.
26
==PAGE:185==
9
|
Compressive Strength
The compressive strength is the most commonly used mechanical property of concrete, and factors that
affect the compressive strength are the water to cement ratio, the cement type, and the air content of the
concrete mix amongst others. Furthermore, the strength of the concrete is directly dependent on the age
of the concrete as strength develops over time. The strength is deﬁned as the uniaxial compressive impact
that crushes the concrete. The aim of the test is to determine and compare the compressive strengths of the
different concrete mixes F-NA50, F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100. The tests will provide
data to depict the stress-strain relationship for each of the cylinders in the different mixes, and the peak
value of the stress-strain relationship corresponds to the compressive strength of the concrete. Additionally,
the friction angles of the different mixes are evaluated after crushing of the concrete cylinders.
9.1
Experimental Procedure
Six cylinders are casted for each mix design F-NA50, F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 with
the following dimensions, a height of 200mm and a diameter of 100mm. The casting procedure is executed
in compliance with DS/EN 12390-2 [7], where the cylinders are casted by ﬁlling the mould one half,
followed by vibration and then ﬁlled with the remaining half and vibrated again. To achieve full compaction
a mechanical vibration platform is used as shown in Figure 9.1a. The cylinders are vibrated until no air
bubbles appear on the surface, and the objective of the vibration is to achieve the necessary compaction
without over-vibrating the concrete, as this can lead to a loss of entrapped air or separation.
(a) Cylinders on vibration platform
(b) Cylinders placed in water
Figure 9.1: Casting and curing of concrete cylinders
27
==PAGE:186==
Next, the concrete surface is levelled with the lid and thereafter clamped. The clamps are tightened and the
moulds are stored horizontally for 24 hours. The moulds are then removed and the cylinders are cured in
water at a constant temperature of 20°C in order to keep the concrete hydrated. In Figure 9.1 the casting
and curing of the cylinders are shown.
The cylinders are kept in water until the compression test is executed according to DS/EN 12390-3 [8]. The
compression tests are carried out after 28 days of curing for cylinder mix F-NA50, F-RCA50, F-RCA80,
and F-RCA100, whereas cylinder mix F-NA40 is tested after 29 days. The compression tests are carried
out using an Instron-8508 machine with a capacity of 5000kN, where force is applied to the specimens by
means of a hydraulic actuator. An extensometer is attached to the cylinders in order to measure the vertical
displacements during the test. The extensometer is connected to a data-logger that measures the load, the
change in length due to compression, and the electrical supply. Each cylinder surface is brieﬂy wiped off
before testing the cylinder with the attached extensometer is placed in the test machine, after which the test
is started and data-logging begins. Next, the upper platen is slowly positioned on top of the cylinder, and the
test machine is then started. The load is applied with a loading rate of 0.6 ± 0.2MPa/s, which corresponds
to a load of 4.71 kN/s. The load is applied until failure.
Figure 9.2: Compression test setup
To ensure a satisfactory procedure of the tests, the failure types are assessed and compared to failure types
given in DS/EN 12390-3 [8]. Figure 9.3 shows the satisfactory failure types of cylinder specimens.
28
==PAGE:187==
Figure 9.3: Satisfactory failure of cylinder specimen according to [8]
The friction angle is determined by
' = (45° −✓) · 2
(9.1)
where
'
is the friction angle
✓
is the angle between vertical and the failure shape
The compressive strength is given by the following formula
fc = F
Ac
(9.2)
where
fc
is the compressive strength in MPa
F
is the maximum load at failure in N
Ac
is the cross-sectional area of the test specimen in mm2
The strain is determined by the expression below
" = ∆L
Lo
(9.3)
where
"
is the strain
∆L
is the change in length in mm
Lo
is the original gauge length of extensometer in mm
9.2
Results
The dimensions of the cylinders are measured and the surfaces are visually inspected and documented.
In Appendix G Table B.G.1 and Figures B.G.1, B.G.2, B.G.3, B.G.4, and B.G.5 the speciﬁc dimensions
29
==PAGE:188==
for each cylinder and the belonging photo documentation can be found. When failure has occurred the
loose parts are removed and the failure mode is documented, the failure mode forms the basis of evaluating
whether the failure type is satisfactory according to Figure 9.3 and the determination of the friction angle.
(a) Failure mode F-NA40-1
(b) Failure mode F-RCA50-2
Figure 9.4: Failure mode of cylinders made from mix F-NA40 and F-RCA50 respectively
Above, Figure 9.4 shows the failure types of cylinders of mix F-NA40 and F-RCA50, where loose parts
of the concrete are removed to obtain a better illustration of the failure. In general all the failure modes
of the compressed cylinders are categorized as satisfying, which indicates that the compression tests are
carried out successfully. The angle between the yield line and the vertical line is visually inspected for each
specimen, two angles are determined one for each side of the cone. The angles are determined by drawing
a vertical line through the cylinder and drawing lines along the most distinctive cracks, as shown in Figure
9.5 for test specimens F-NA40-1 and F-RCA50-2.
(a) Friction angles F-NA40-1
(b) Friction angles F-RCA50-2
Figure 9.5: Visual inspection of angles for determination of friction angle
30
==PAGE:189==
9.3
Data Processing
The evaluation of the friction angles led to the mean values and the standard deviations shown in Table 9.1,
the remaining data is shown in Appendix G Table B.G.1.
Table 9.1: Mean friction angle and standard deviation of the different concrete mixes
Mix
Friction Angle [°]
Standard deviation [-]
F-NA50
36.25
2.77
F-NA40
37.00
3.54
F-RCA50
37.50
6.10
F-RCA80
35.00
6.82
F-RCA100
38.75
5.97
In the data processing of the stress-strain relation, the results of each compression test are stored by a data-
logger which receives signals from both the testing machine and the extensometer. In order to interpret the
results it is necessary to do a calibration of the equipment, which forms the basis of processing the data into
the desired units. The calibration is carried out manually by placing the extensometer on a steel rod and
continuously compressing the rod while noting the migration distance, Mdistance [mm], using a precision
surface gauge as well as noting the electrical supply, Esupply [V], and the signal from the extensometer,
Esignal [mV]. The calibration set-up is apparent in Figure 9.6.
Figure 9.6: Calibration set-up
The migration distances, electrical supplies, and the electrical signals are obtained for six data points with
0.5mm between them, after which a linear relation between displacement and the electric signal is estab-
lished resulting in the trend line shown in Figure 9.7.
31
==PAGE:190==
Figure 9.7: Calibration of measuring equipment
Knowing an expression for the trend line allows for the displacement to be calculated from the data stored
with the data-logger, and thus the strain can be determined according to Equation 9.3. Similarly, the force
is calculated from the signals received by the data logger from the test machine as this supplies 400kN/V.
Thus, it is also possible to calculate the stress according to Equation 9.2, and the stress-strain relation can
then be depicted. For each of the cylinders tested the compressive strength is determined, and the mean
compressive strength of each concrete mix is shown in Table 9.2. The stress-strain relation is established
based on the raw calibrated data, and in Figure 9.8 the relation is shown for the reference concrete mix,
F-NA40, whereas the remaining stress-strain relations are shown in Appendix G, Figure B.G.6.
Figure 9.8: Stress-strain relation based on calibrated raw data
32
==PAGE:191==
The stress-strain relation is increasing linearly in the beginning of the compression test until a more parabolic
shape is obtained at the peak, after which the data is scattered randomly. Due to the data-logging being
started before lowering the upper platen of the test machine and being stopped after crushing of the con-
crete, the data obtained in the beginning and end of each compression test is rather uneven, especially after
failure has occurred. In order to obtain a more accurate stress-strain relation the raw calibrated data is
sorted for both the data measurements in the beginning and the end of the data set, seeing that the scattered
measurements are removed and a new origin is added in order for all of the stress-strain relations to start
in (0,0). Based on the sorted data the upgraded stress-strain relations are plotted, and Figure 9.9 shows the
the plots for concrete mix F-NA40 and F-RCA50, whereas the remaining stress-strain relations are shown
in Appendix G, Figure B.G.7.
For concrete mix F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 a mean stress-strain relation based on mix design F-
NA40 is plotted in order to emphasize the difference between traditional concrete and concrete casted with
recycled concrete aggregates. The mean stress-strain relation based on concrete mix F-NA40 is depicted
by choosing 45 x-coordinates corresponding to the strain, after which the y-coordinates of each mix design
belonging to the chosen x-coordinates are determined using linear interpolation between the two data points
closest to each x-value. Next, the mean stress is calculated for the chosen x-coordinates, and in Figure 9.9b
the mean curve is marked with the black dotted line named F-RCA50.
(a) Stress-strain relation based sorted data for mix F-NA40
(b) Stress-strain relation based on sorted data for mix F-RCA50
Figure 9.9: Stress-strain relation based on sorted data
The peak of the stress-strain relation shows the maximum stress and thereby the compressive strength. The
compressive strengths for each cylinder test are shown in Appendix G Table B.G.1 whereas the mean values
for the concrete mixes along with the standard deviation are shown in table 9.2.
33
==PAGE:192==
Table 9.2: Mean compressive strength and standard deviation of each concrete mix
Mix
Mean value [MPa]
Standard deviation [-]
F-NA50
26.56
0.81
F-NA40
25.90
0.39
F-RCA50
24.02
0.58
F-RCA80
17.54
0.52
F-RCA100
20.98
0.46
9.4
Errors
The results of the compressive tests are to a great extent determined by the mix design of each concrete
batch. However, there are certain potential sources of error related to the casting of the cylinders, namely
if the cylinders are not properly vibrated or the surfaces are not properly levelled. Moreover, as clamps are
used to tighten the lid on the cylinder molds, the cylinders are placed horizontally until they are removed
from the molds, which has created slightly unlevelled surfaces along the cylinder sides facing upwards.
These geometrical irregularities are likely to inﬂuence the results of the compressive tests.
Besides from the geometry of the cylinders the distribution of aggregates in each cylinder may also have a
potential impact on the results, as a satisfactory compaction of the aggregates is important upon ensuring the
mechanical properties of the concrete. The compaction is gained by vibrating the concrete while visually
assessing whether large air bubbles are ascending, and when no bubbles are visible the vibration is stopped.
Too little vibration will cause poor compaction, whereas too much vibration increases the risk of separation
between the cement paste and the aggregates and the risk of losing entrapped air. Thus, the compaction
has the potential to affect the results, and as the vibration assessment is visual it poses challenges to ensure
consistency.
9.5
Discussion
Geometrical irregularities are found on all cylinders to a certain extent, however in general the desired
dimensions are achieved within a range of ± 2mm. The surfaces of each cylinder inﬂuence the results
directly since the cross sectional area of the specimens is used to determine the compressive strength. A
number of cylinders are found to have some rough surfaces which could inﬂuence the results, these are
shown below in Figures 9.10 and 9.11 next to a specimen with an optimal surface.
34
==PAGE:193==
(a) Uneven surface F-NA40-4
(b) Even surface F-RCA50-1
Figure 9.10: Geometrical irregularities along sides of cylinder
(a) Uneven surface F-RCA50-4
(b) F-RCA100-3 with stud
(c) Even surface F-NA50-1
Figure 9.11: Geometrical Irregularities on top of cylinder
The friction angles show good correlation between the theoretical value of 37° and the determined values
for each mix design. For mix design F-NA50 and F-NA40 which consist of traditional concrete it is to be
expected that the friction angles are aligned with theory, and the concrete mixes F-RCA50 and F-RCA100
consisting of different amounts of recycled concrete aggregates show the same tendency with mean values
of 37.50° and 38.75° respectively. Cylinders of concrete mix F-RCA80 have the largest deviation when
compared to the theoretical value with a mean value of 35.00°, as well as the largest standard deviation.
The standard deviations are lowest for concrete mix F-NA50 and F-NA40 which indicates that these values
are rather close to the mean value. Additionally, the standard deviations are a bit higher for concrete mix
F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 which show a larger difference between the recorded values.
The stress-strain relations found for the concrete mixes consisting of traditional concrete F-NA50 and F-
NA40 ought to have a concrete strain of 2.0h at the maximum stress, which is generally achieved. For the
concrete mixes using recycled concrete aggregates some variations from theory are detected regarding the
cylinders F-RCA40-1, F-RCA40-2 and F-RCA40-3, where the strain at maximum stress is found between 2-
2.5h, and cylinder F-RCA50-4 is disregarded due to large deviations compared to the remaining cylinders.
35
==PAGE:194==
The same tendency is observed for the strains found for mix design F-RCA80 and F-RCA100.
The mean compressive strength for all concrete mixes, except for mix F-RCA80, are larger than the antici-
pated value of 20MPa. Concrete mix F-RCA80 reached the lowest compressive strength with a mean value
of 17.54MPa which is assumed to be caused by an unknown error during the casting procedure. The as-
sumption is supported by concrete mix F-RCA80 being the mix with the largest slump, which could indicate
that too much water was used in the batch. The assumption of mixture F-RCA80 being erroneous is further
supported by the mean values found for mix F-RCA50 and F-RCA100, where a tendency of decreasing
strength with increasing use of recycled concrete aggregates is detected.
9.6
Partial Conclusion
Based on the failure shapes the compressive tests are considered satisfying by showing the expected behav-
ior, which also applies to the found friction angles, compressive strength and stress-strain relations for the
different concrete mixes.
36
==PAGE:195==
10
|
Conclusion
The characterization of ﬁne and coarse recycled concrete aggregates formed the basis of creating mix de-
signs for the concrete batches F-NA50, F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 aiming for a com-
pressive strength of 20MPa. Determining the physical properties of the RCA used to replace the NA is
paramount in order to evaluate the potential of replacing larger amounts of the natural aggregates than what
is allowed according to the Danish regulations today. From the characterization it can be concluded that
majority of the physical properties of the RCA are in coherence with the physical properties of natural ag-
gregates, which is underlined by the particle size distribution and the density of the recycled aggregates in
particular. However, it is also concluded that the water absorption of the F-RCA is very high, and that the
test method may overestimate the actual water absorption as it is actually intended for sand and not RCA.
The mix designs are developed to achieve a compressive strength of 20MPa after 28 days of hardening, and
this is accomplished for the mixes F-NA50, F-NA40, F-RCA50, and F-RCA100, whereas mix F-RCA80
does not comply with the desired strength. In this regard a further investigation of mix design F-RCA80
is necessary to determine whether the failure to comply with the compressive strength requirements is
caused by human error or something entirely different. When disregarding mix design F-RCA80, it can be
concluded that it is possible to fully replace the natural aggregates and still achieve the desired compressive
strength. However it should be kept in mind, that the found values are mean values and not the 5% fractile
which is usually used when characterizing concrete. Nonetheless, it is also concluded that the compressive
strength decreases upon an increased content of recycled concrete aggregates. Furthermore, the different
concrete mix designs created using both RCA and NA all meet the traditional slump ranges used when
casting fresh concrete in Denmark, and the air content between the different mixes differ to a smaller
extent. In conclusion further compressive strength could potentially have been gained had the speciﬁc air
content of each concrete mix been taken into account. However, in this case the effect of the air content
on the water to cement ratio is small due to the minor deviation from the air content used, and therefore it
is considered reasonable to not prioritize creating test batches for the mix designs in order to include the
actual air content.
Finally, it is observed that the compressive tests are successfully carried out seeing that the failure shapes
were all expected, and the friction angles were within a sensible range. Additionally, the stress-strain rela-
tions for the different concrete mixes are to a great extent in compliance with theory. Thus, it is concluded
37
==PAGE:196==
that achieving a desired strength of concrete while replacing natural aggregates in new concrete is possible
on the condition that the physical properties of the recycled concrete aggregates are taken into account.
38
==PAGE:197==
11
|
Bibliography
[1] Dansk
Beton.
https://www.danskindustri.dk/medlemsforeninger/
foreningssites/dansk-beton/sog-publikationer/arkiv/baredygtig-
beton-initiativ2/rapport-om-sydhavn-genbrugscenters-genanvendelse-
af-beton-2020/, 2020. Visited: 2022-02-02.
[2] Dansk
Beton,
Fabriksbetonforeningen.
https://www.danskindustri.dk/
medlemsforeninger/foreningssites/dansk-beton/fabriksbetonforeningen/
produkter/satmalsbeton/. Visited: 2022-03-03.
[3] DS/EN 1097-5. Metoder til prøvning af tilslags mekaniske og fysiske egenskaber - Del 6: Bestemmelse
af vandindhold ved tørring i ventileret ovn, København, 2013. Dansk Standard.
[4] DS/EN 1097-6. Metoder til prøvning af tilslags mekaniske og fysiske egenskaber - Del 6: Bestemmelse
af korndensitet og vandabsorption, København, 2013. Dansk Standard.
[5] DS/EN 12350-2. Prøvning af frisk beton - Del 2: Sætmål, København, 2019. Dansk Standard.
[6] DS/EN 12350-7. Prøvning af frisk beton - Del 7: Luftindhold - Trykmetoder, København, 2019. Dansk
Standard.
[7] DS/EN 12390-2.
Prøvning af hærdnet beton - Del 2: Tilvirkning og lagring af prøvelegemer til
styrkeprøvning, København, 2019. Dansk Standard.
[8] DS/EN 12390-3. Prøvning af hærdnet beton - Del 3: Prøvelegemers trykstyrke, København, 2021.
Dansk Standard.
[9] DS/EN 12620. Tilslag til beton, København, 2008. Dansk Standard.
[10] DS/EN 993-1.
Metoder til prøvning af tilslags geometriske egenskaber - Del 1: Bestemmelse af
kornstørrelsesfordeling - Sigteanalyse, København, 2013. Dansk Standard.
[11] G. N. Munch-Petersen, C. V. Nielsen et al. Betonhåndbogen. Dansk Betonforening, 2020.
39
==PAGE:198==
Appendix B.A - Particle Size Distribution
Table B.A.1: Sieving results for seasand, 0-4mm
B.A 1
==PAGE:199==
Table B.A.2: Sieving results for seagravel, 4-8mm
Table B.A.3: Sieving results for seagravel, 8-16mm
B.A 2
==PAGE:200==
Table B.A.4: Sieving results for F-RCA, 0-4mm
B.A 3
==PAGE:201==
Table B.A.5: Sieving results for C-RCA, 4-22mm
B.A 4
==PAGE:202==
Appendix B.B - Density and Water Absorption
Table B.B.1: Water absorption and density results for F-RCA, 0-4mm and C-RCA, 4-22mm
Table B.B.2: Water absorption and density results for F-RCA, 0-4mm and C-RCA, 4-22mm
B.B 1
==PAGE:203==
Table B.B.3: Density for F-RCA, 0-4mm
Table B.B.4: Water absorption results for F-RCA, 0-4mm
B.B 2
==PAGE:204==
Table B.B.5: Density results for C-RCA, 4-22mm
Table B.B.6: Water absorption results for C-RCA, 4-22mm
B.B 3
==PAGE:205==
Appendix B.C - Water Content
Table B.C.1: Water content for seasand, 0-4mm
Table B.C.2: Water content for seagravel, 4-8mm
Table B.C.3: Water content for seagravel, 8-16mm
B.C 1
==PAGE:206==
Table B.C.4: Water content for F-RCA, 0-4mm
Table B.C.5: Water content for C-RCA, 4-22mm
Test 1 for the C-RCA is seen to deviate substantially from the remaining test results, and therefore this is
disregarded during further data processing.
B.C 2
==PAGE:207==
Appendix B.D - Cement Content
Table B.D.1: Cement content results for F-RCA, 0-4mm
B.D 1
==PAGE:208==
Cementindhold i beton 
A 
Princip 
Betonprøven knuses og cementpastaen opløses i salpetersyre. Alle chlorider vil 
Herefter være opløst. Uopløselige dele filtreres fra, og mængden af chlorid i 
væskefasen bestemmes ved titrering med sølvnitrat. 
Metoden bestemmer ikke på hvilken form chloriden findes i betonprøven. Den 
siger ikke, om chloriden findes som natriumchlorid (almindelig salt), 
calciumchlorid eller andre chlorider. 
B 
Specielt apparatur 
Titrator 716 DMS Titrino 
C 
Kemikalie sikkerhed 
Salpetersyre - Brandnærende; Ætsende; Brandfarlig ved kontakt med 
brandbare stoffer. Alvorlig ætsningfare. Undgå indånding af dampe. Brug 
syrehandsker, plastikforklæder, sikkerhedsbriller og stinkskab ved afmåling. 
Læs kemikaliebrugsanvisningen før arbejdet begynder. 
D 
Reagenser 
Salpetersyre 1% HNO3: 
17 mL koncentreret HNO3 overføres med måleglas til en 1000,00 mL målekolbe 
som er ½ fyldt med destilleret vand. Der blandes godt og tilsættes vand til 
mærket. Efter blanding overføres opløsningen til en plastikflaske og mærkes. 
E 
Analysens udførelse 
50 g tørret knust prøve afvejes på teknisk vægt til et 1000L bægerglas. Der 
tilsættes ca. 200 mL varmt destilleret vand og det blandes.  
Derefter tilsættes der langsomt 3 x 10 mL konc. HNO3 til opslemningen som 
derefter blandes godt og stilles til afkøling til stuetemperatur (skal foregå i 
stinkskab). 
Sektionen for Materialer og Holdbarhed, F2020
B.D 2
==PAGE:209==
Der tilsættes ca. 10mL konc. HNO3 for at kontrollerer at alt materiale er opløst 
(luftudvikling). Fortsæt med at tilsætte HNO3 indtil der ikke er mere luftudvikling. 
Filtrer opløsningen gennem alm filter ned i et bægerglas. Skyl filtreret en gang 
med 1% HNO3 og derefter med destilleret vand 
Overfør opløsningen til en 500 ml målekolbe og fyld op til mærket med destilleret 
vand.  
Udtage 20 ml til måling af K+Na på ICP 
Chlorid titrer med resten af prøven – se vejledning for chlorid titrering 
F 
Affaldshåndtering 
Ekstrakerne hældes i affaldsdunk mærket X 4.41 (tungmetaller). 
Filterpapiret bortkastes i skraldespanden i stinkskabet. 
Sektionen for Materialer og Holdbarhed, F2020
B.D 3
==PAGE:210==
Appendix B.E - Concrete Mix
B.E 1
==PAGE:211==
Design Mix F-NA50: Water to cement ratio for a strength requirement of 20MPa
Desired compression strength
Fc
=
20 MPa
Strength incl. 5%-fractile and add-on
Fc,5%
Fc + 0.05∙Fc + 6MPa
=
27 MPa
K
For RAPID cement
=
30
α
For RAPID cement
=
0,5
Natural air content
a0
Assumption
=
1 %
Actual air content 
a
=
1 %
Water to cement ratio
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K (1-0.045 (a-a0)))+α)
=
0,71
Control
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K)+α)
=
0,71
Cement content 
Water content 
WC
=
170 l/m
3
Cement content 
CC
WC / w/c
=
238 kg/m
3
Densities 
Sea sand 0-4mm
ρs
=
2610 kg/m
3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
ρp
Betonhåndbogen
=
2560 kg/m
3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
ρæ
Betonhåndbogen
=
2600 kg/m
3
C-RCA 
ρC-RCA
For C-RCA from [1]
=
2480 kg/m
3
F-RCA 
ρF-RCA
For F-RCA from Annex B
=
2330 kg/m
3
RAPID cement, Aalborg Portland
ρrc
=
3080 kg/m
3
Amounts 
Cement
Mc
=
77 l/m
3
Water 
Mw
Assumption
=
170 l/m
3
Air
Ma
Assumption
=
10 l/m
3
Total cement paste
Mkit
Mc+Mw+Ma
=
257 l/m
3
Remaining mass for aggregates
Mrem
1000-Mkit
=
743 l/m
3
Mean density, aggregates
ρmean
=
2713 kg/m
3
Total amount of aggregates
Magg
Mrem/1000 ∙ ρmean
=
2015 kg
Aggregate percentage
1-Mkit
=
0,74 %
Sand percentage 
sa
Table 4 Betonhåndbogen
=
49,2 %
Gravel percentage
st
100-sa
=
50,8 %
Distribution sea sand 
Chosen distribution
=
49,2 %
Distribution sea gravel 4-8mm
Chosen distribution
=
25,38 %
Distribution sea gravel 8-16mm
Chosen distribution
=
25,38 %
Distribution C-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution F-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Sea sand 
Mss
=
366 l/m
3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Msg48
=
189 l/m
3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Msg816
=
189 l/m
3
C-RCA 
MCRCA
=
0 l/m
3
F-RCA
MFRCA
=
0 l/m
3
Control of total amount of aggregates
1000 l/m
3
B.E 2
==PAGE:212==
Correction of amounts due to moisture content and absorption of aggregates
Moisture from Annex B determined on the day of the casting:  
Cement 
Wc
-
=
-
l/m
3
Water 
Ww
-
=
-
l/m
3
Sea sand 
Wss
0,20%
=
0,73 l/m
3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Wsg48
0,10%
=
0,19 l/m
3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Wsg816
0,80%
=
1,51 l/m
3
F-RCA 
WCRCA
0,00%
=
0,00 l/m
3
C-RCA 
WFRCA
0,00%
=
0,00 l/m
3
Absorption values determined using Betonhåndbogen, Annex B, and the report given in [1]:
Cement 
Ac
-
=
-
l/m
3
Water 
Aw
-
=
-
l/m
3
Sea sand 
Ass
4,10%
=
14,99 l/m
3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Asg48
0,80%
=
1,51 l/m
3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Asg816
1,50%
=
2,83 l/m
3
F-RCA 
ACRCA
24,00%
=
0,00 l/m
3
C-RCA 
AFRCA
3,60%
=
0,00 l/m
3
Corrected amounts
Cement 
CMc
=
77 l/m
3
Water 
CMw
WC - WA
=
187 l/m
3
Sea sand 
CMss
Mss + Wss - Ass
=
351,46 l/m
3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
CMsg48
Msg48 + Wsg48 - Asg48
=
187,18 l/m
3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
CMsg816
Msg816 + Wsg816 - Asg816
=
187,18 l/m
3
F-RCA 
CMCRCA
MCRCA + WCRCA - ACRCA
=
0,00 l/m
3
C-RCA 
CMFRCA
MFRCA + WFRCA - AFRCA
=
0,00 l/m
3
Free water from aggregates 
WA
∑CM-M
=
-16,90 l/m
3
B.E 3
==PAGE:213==
FINAL MIX DESIGN F-NA50, fck=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
187 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
274 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
726 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1969 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
351 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
187 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
187 l/m3
C-RCA 
0 l/m3
F-RCA 
0 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
FINAL MIX DESIGN F-NA40, fck=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
185 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
272 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
728 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1975 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
286 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
221 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
221 l/m3
C-RCA 
0 l/m3
F-RCA 
0 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
FINAL MIX DESIGN F-RCA50, fck=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
225 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
312 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
688 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1807 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
143 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
431 l/m3
F-RCA 
114 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
The remaining concrete mixes F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 are designed in compliance with mix design F-
NA50 as shown above. However, they differ with regard to the distribution of aggregates and thus the correction of masses. 
The final mix designs are shown below. 
B.E 4
==PAGE:214==
FINAL MIX DESIGN F-RCA80, fck=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
242 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
329 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
671 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1761 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
57 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
431 l/m3
F-RCA 
183 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
FINAL MIX DESIGN F-RCA100, fck=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
253 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
340 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
660 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1731 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
431 l/m3
F-RCA 
228 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
B.E 5
==PAGE:215==
Appendix B.F - Workability
(a) Initial slump mix F-NA50,
30mm
(b) Initial slump mix F-NA40,
70mm
Figure B.F.1: Initial slumps for the concrete mixes F-NA50 and F-NA40
(a) Initial slump, 80mm
(b) Slump after 15 minutes, 80mm
(c) Slump after 30 minutes, 50mm
Figure B.F.2: Initial slump and slumps after 15 and 30 minutes for concrete mix F-RCA50
B.F 1
==PAGE:216==
(a) Initial slump, 150mm
(b) Slump after 15 minutes, 90mm
(c) Slump after 30 minutes, 90mm
Figure B.F.3: Initial slump and slumps after 15 and 30 minutes for concrete mix F-RCA80
(a) Initial slump, 100mm
(b) Slump after 15 minutes, 80mm
(c) Slump after 30 minutes, 60mm
Figure B.F.4: Initial slump and slumps after 15 and 30 minutes for concrete mix F-RCA100
B.F 2
==PAGE:217==
Appendix B.G - Compressive Strength
Table B.G.1: Concrete mix and cylinder properties
Id
Slump
d
h
A
F
fc
✓1
✓2
'
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm2]
[kN]
[MPa]
[°]
[°]
[°]
F-NA50-1
30
99.7
199.0
7812
205.9
26.4
27
29
34
F-NA50-2
100.0
200.0
7849
199.1
25.4
29
22
39
F-NA50-3
100.1
200.0
7871
212.3
27.0
29
28
33
F-NA50-4
99.8
199.0
7829
215.7
27.6
26
25
39
F-NA40-1
70
100.3
199.0
7898
209.6
26.5
27
24
39
F-NA40-2
100.2
199.0
7879
202.7
25.7
24
35
31
F-NA40-3
99.9
199.5
7845
202.7
25.8
22
30
38
F-NA40-4
99.9
199.5
7835
199.8
25.5
22
28
40
F-RCA50-1
80
100.1
199.0
7874
194.5
24.7
21
24
45
F-RCA50-2
99.7
199.5
7804
183.4
23.5
21
30
39
F-RCA50-3
100.0
199.0
7852
192.1
24.5
32
30
28
F-RCA50-4
100.0
199.5
7851
183.7
23.4
24
28
38
F-RCA80-1
150
100.0
199.0
7860
143.2
18.2
36
30
24
F-RCA80-2
99.9
198.5
7830
131.8
16.8
20
31
39
F-RCA80-3
100.2
199.5
7892
136.6
17.3
28
27
35
F-RCA80-4
99.8
199.0
7829
139.5
17.8
27
21
42
F-RCA100-1
100
100.1
199.0
7867
167.5
21.3
20
21
49
F-RCA100-2
99.8
199.5
7821
160.7
20.6
25
29
36
F-RCA100-3
99.9
198.0
7832
168.9
21.6
27
29
34
F-RCA100-4
100.1
199.5
7863
161.3
20.5
25
29
36
B.G 1
==PAGE:218==
F-NA50-1
F-NA50-2
F-NA50-3
F-NA50-4
Figure B.G.1: Overview of cylinders made from mix design F-NA50
B.G 2
==PAGE:219==
F-NA40-1
F-NA40-2
F-NA40-3
F-NA40-4
Figure B.G.2: Overview of cylinders made from mix design F-NA40
B.G 3
==PAGE:220==
F-RCA50-1
F-RCA50-2
F-RCA50-3
F-RCA50-4
Figure B.G.3: Overview of cylinders made from mix design F-RCA50
B.G 4
==PAGE:221==
F-RCA80-1
F-RCA80-2
F-RCA80-3
F-RCA80-4
Figure B.G.4: Overview of cylinders made from mix design F-RCA80
B.G 5
==PAGE:222==
F-RCA100-1
F-RCA100-2
F-RCA100-3
F-RCA100-4
Figure B.G.5: Overview of cylinders made from mix design F-RCA100
B.G 6
==PAGE:223==
(a) Stress-strain relation for mix F-NA50
(b) Stress-strain relation for mix F-NA40
(c) Stress-strain relation for mix F-RCA50
(d) Stress-strain relation for mix F-RCA80
(e) Stress-strain relation for mix F-RCA100
Figure B.G.6: Stress-strain relations based on calibrated raw data
B.G 7
==PAGE:224==
(a) Stress-strain relation for mix F-NA50
(b) Stress-strain relation for mix F-NA40
(c) Stress-strain relation for mix F-RCA50
(d) Stress-strain relation for mix F-RCA80
(e) Stress-strain relation for mix F-RCA100
Figure B.G.7: Stress-strain relations based on calibrated data
B.G 8
==PAGE:225==
Annex C
This page is left blank intentionally. Annex C follows below.
==PAGE:226==
Annex C
Yield Strength of Reinforcement and Beam Testing
Cecilie Kristensen, s155942 & Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:227==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:228==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Yield Strength of Reinforcement
2
2.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Casting of Beams
6
3.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Testing of Beams
12
4.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Conclusion
26
6
Bibliography
27
Appendix C.A - Testing of Beams
C.A 1
Appendix C.B - Trend Lines
C.B 1
i
==PAGE:229==
List of Symbols
a
Shear span
Arebar
Cross sectional area of test specimen
b
Width of beam
c
Concrete cover
cs
Concrete cover of stirrups
fc
Compressive strength
fu
Ultimate strength of reinforcement
Fu
Ultimate force of reinforcement
fy
Yield strength of reinforcement
h
Height of beam
L
Length of beam
Lss
Length of test specimen
m
Mass of test specimen
s
Distance between stirrups
Ø
Diameter of reinforcement
⇢
Density of structural steel
ii
==PAGE:230==
List of Abbreviations
NA
Natural Aggregates
RCA
Recycled Concrete Aggregates
C-RCA
Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-RCA
Fine Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-NA40
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 60/40
F-RCA50
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 50% NA 0-4mm, 50% F-RCA 0-4mm
iii
==PAGE:231==
List of Figures
2.1
Tensile Test Set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.1
Overview of Beam Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Preparation for Casting of Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Overview of Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Errors Related to the Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.1
Test Set-up using Instron-6025 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Test Set-up for VM1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Test Set-up for VM2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Test Set-up for VMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Fabrication Drawing for Torsional Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.6
Device Fabricated to enable Torsional Loading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.7
Placement of Deformation Measurement Devices for VM1 and VM2 . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.8
Placement of Deformation Measurement Devices for VMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.9
VM1-B-1, VM1-B-2, and VM1-B-R After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.10 VM2-B-1, VM2-B-2, VM2-B-3, and VM2-B-R After Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.11 VMT-B-1, VMT-B-2, VMT-B-3, and VMT-B-R After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.12 VM1-B-4 After Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.13 Trend Line for Calibration of Measuring Device H1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.14 Recording of Displacements for VM1-B-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.15 Force-Displacement Curve for VM1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.16 Force-Displacement Curve for VM2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.17 Force-Displacement Curve for VMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.18 Force-Displacement Curve for VM1-B-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.19 Errors Related to Test Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
C.A.1
VM1-B-1 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 1
C.A.2
VM1-B-2 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 2
C.A.3
VM1-B-3 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 3
C.A.4
VM1-B-R After Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 4
C.A.5
VM2-B-1 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 5
C.A.6
VM2-B-2 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 6
iv
==PAGE:232==
C.A.7
VM2-B-R After Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 7
C.A.8
VMT-B-1 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 8
C.A.9
VMT-B-2 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 9
C.A.10 VMT-B-3 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 10
C.A.11 VMT-B-R After Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 11
C.A.12 VM1-B-4 After Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 12
C.B.1
Trend Lines for Calibration of Measuring Devices H1-H3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.B 1
C.B.2
Trend Lines for Calibration of Measuring Devices V1-V3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.B 2
C.B.3
Recording of Displacements for VMT-B-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.B 3
v
==PAGE:233==
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
Specimen Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Specimen Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Mean Yield Strength of Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Mean Ultimate Strength of Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1
Slump and Air Content for each Beam casted with RCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Slump and Air Content for each Beam casted with NA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Mean and Standard Deviation of Slump Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Mean of Air Content and Standard Deviation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.1
Beams used for Testing of Conﬁguration VM1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Beams used for Testing of Conﬁguration VM2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Beams used for Testing of Conﬁguration VMT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Results of Test Conﬁguration VM1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Results of Test Conﬁguration VM2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Results of Test Conﬁguration VMT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
C.A.1
VM1-B-1 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 1
C.A.2
VM1-B-2 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 2
C.A.3
VM1-B-3 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 3
C.A.4
VM1-B-R Test Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 4
C.A.5
VM2-B-1 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 5
C.A.6
VM2-B-2 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 6
C.A.7
VM2-B-R Test Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 7
C.A.8
VMT-B-1 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 8
C.A.9
VMT-B-2 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 9
C.A.10 VMT-B-3 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 10
C.A.11 VMT-B-R Test Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 11
C.A.12 VM1-B-4 Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.A 12
vi
==PAGE:234==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:235==
1
|
Introduction
This annex is compiled to determine and compare the failure load of beams casted with recycled concrete
aggregates, RCA, and natural aggregates, NA, in reference to the project Combined Impacts for Beams
Casted with Fine and Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates. The beams are casted with two different con-
crete mixes that have a distribution of 18% water, 8% cement, and 74% aggregates, where the distribution of
aggregates in both mixes are 60% of the coarse fraction and 40% of the ﬁne fraction. For the beams casted
with RCA the coarse recycled concrete aggregates, C-RCA, constitute 100% of the coarse fraction, whereas
50% of the ﬁne fraction is replaced with ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA. This concrete mix is
referred to as F-RCA50, where the naming solely focuses on the replacement ratio of the ﬁne fraction due
to the entire coarse fraction being replaced with C-RCA. In order to determine the capacity of beams casted
with RCA, three different test set-ups are investigated to determine the behaviour of beams exposed to
combined impacts. The performance of these beams is compared to the performance of beams casted with
only natural aggregates, NA, which is referred to as F-NA40, where the naming focuses on the distribution
between coarse and ﬁne aggregates seeing that all aggregates in this mix are natural. The concrete mixes
have a desired compression strength of 20MPa and are considered exposed to the passive environmental
class. All beams tested are reinforced with the same amount and distribution of reinforcement.
The current annex will describe the methods used to cast the beams, where the workability and the air
content of each batch is investigated. Furthermore, the strength of the reinforcement and the ultimate load
of the beams for each test set-up is determined. Table 1.1 summarizes which tests are carried out according
to their speciﬁc European Standards. For each test carried out the purpose, experimental procedure, results,
data processing, and potential sources of error are described, and ﬁnally a conclusion will summarize the
overall ﬁndings.
Table 1.1: Overview of experiments
Laboratory test
International Standard
Metallic Materials - Tensile Testing
DS/ISO 6892-1
Workability
DS/EN 12350-2
Air Content
DS/EN 12350-7
Compressive strength
DS/EN 12390-1:4
1
==PAGE:236==
2
|
Yield Strength of Reinforcement
Upon designing structural elements composed of reinforced concrete the advantages of the compressive
strength of the concrete and the tensile strength of the reinforcement are utilized. Reinforcement bars and
stirrups used to reinforce the beams in the current project have been provided by Lemvigh Müller and are
all ribbed steels of a quality corresponding to 550B, and in accordance with DS/EN 10080 [2]. B refers to
the ductility class, where B is recommended for structures veriﬁed using plasticity theory, and 550 refers
to a yield strength of 550MPa. Thus, the steels provided are known to have a yield strength of minimum
550MPa, and the purpose of the tensile test is to determine the actual yield strength of the rebars used, in
order to take this into account during veriﬁcation of the beams. The yield strength is determined from the
tensile test knowing that adequate ductility of the steel is deﬁned by the ratio of tensile strength to the yield
strength given in DS/EN 1992-1-1 [6].
2.1
Experimental Procedure
The longitudinal rebars used to reinforce the beams with regard to tensile and compression forces are of
diameters 8mm and 6mm respectively. For the tensile reinforcement the ultimate strength is determined
by performing ﬁve tensile tests using an Instron-8502 servo hydraulic test machine in compliance with the
set-up shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Tensile test set-up
2
==PAGE:237==
Before being able to test the ﬁve tensile rebars they are cut into specimens with a length of 300mm using
an angle grinder. Subsequently, they are named SS1-SS5, measured, and weighed, and the speciﬁc cross
sectional area of each specimen is determined. Usually, the clamps belonging to the servo hydraulic test
machine cannot grip test specimens with diameters smaller than 10mm. However, this is dealt with by
positioning soft metallic sheets with a thickness of 2.5mm between the clamps and each test specimen.
Unfortunately, this is a limitation for the compressive reinforcement as it is not possible to create a proper
grip for the clamps with the metallic sheets available at the testing facility at DTU. Thus, the ultimate
strength is determined only for the compressive reinforcement, where the tensile test provides the force
used to rupture each test specimen.
The cross sectional area is determined by
Arebar =
m
⇢· Lss
(2.1)
where
Arebar is the cross sectional area of the test specimen
m
is the mass of the test specimen
⇢
is the density of structural steel
Lss
is the length of the test specimen
The ultimate strength is determined by
fu =
Fu
Arebar
(2.2)
where
fu
is the ultimate strength
Fu
is the ultimate force
Arebar is the cross sectional area of the test specimen
From the ultimate strength the yield strength is determined by the ratio of tensile strength to the yield
strength given by
fy = fu
1.08
(2.3)
where
fy
is the yield strength
fu
is the ultimate strength
3
==PAGE:238==
2.2
Results
For each of the specimens tested Table 2.1 summarizes the mass, density, length, and ultimate force. These
results are used in the data processing to determine the yield and the ultimate strength of the specimens.
Table 2.1: Specimen properties
Id
SS1
SS2
SS3
SS4
SS5
Mass [g]
119
122
122
122
123
⇢[g/cm3]
7.85
7.85
7.85
7.85
7.85
L [mm]
292
300
300
300
302
Fu [kN]
32.2
31.9
32.4
32.1
32.3
2.3
Data Processing
The processed data for each of the tensile tests is shown in Table 2.2, and the resulting mean value of the
yield and ultimate strength of the reinforcement are apparent from Table 2.3 and Table 2.4 respectively.
Table 2.2: Specimen calculations
Id
SS1
SS2
SS3
SS4
SS5
Arebar [mm2]
51.8
51.8
51.8
51.9
51.7
fu [MPa]
621
616
626
618
625
fy [MPa]
575
570
579
573
579
Table 2.3: Mean yield strength of reinforcement
Id
Mean Yield Strength [MPa]
Standard Deviation [-]
Tensile reinforcement Ø8
575
3.68
Table 2.4: Mean ultimate strength of reinforcement
Id
Mean Ultimate Strength [MPa]
Standard Deviation [-]
Tensile reinforcement Ø8
621
3.98
4
==PAGE:239==
2.4
Errors
Small uncertainties of the results can be related to the weighing and measurement of the test specimens.
These are considered relatively small and with a minor inﬂuence on the results.
2.5
Discussion
Upon calculation of the structural capacity of the beams in the current project it is assumed that the com-
pressive reinforcement has a yield strength corresponding to the yield strength of the tensile reinforcement,
which is not possible to corroborate due to the circumstances of the test machinery available at DTU. Fur-
thermore, the same yield strength is assumed applicable for the stirrups as these are of the same diameter
as the compressive reinforcement. These assumptions are considered reasonable seeing that the same man-
ufacturer provided all reinforcement.
Moreover, it is advantageous to determine the yield strength from the actual test rather than the relation
between the yield and tensile strength. However, as this is not possible due to the test set-up it is relevant
to mention that the ratio between the yield and tensile strength is not necessarily 1.08 as this is a minimum
requirement to obtain sufﬁcient ductility for steel grade B.
2.6
Partial Conclusion
As manufacturers have to supply reinforcement with a minimum yield strength it is expected that the actual
yield strength is higher than stated in the order description which makes the results credible. However,
not being able to take the actual yield strength of the compressive reinforcement and stirrups into account
during calculations may cause deviations between the test results.
5
==PAGE:240==
3
|
Casting of Beams
To evaluate the behaviour of beams casted with concrete mix F-RCA50, nine beams are casted. Addition-
ally, four beams are casted using concrete mix F-NA40 and used as a reference, when evaluating the beams
casted with RCA. For each beam an appertaining cylinder is casted in order to determine the compressive
strength of the concrete at the day of the testing. During casting of the beams the slump and the air content
of the fresh concrete batches are determined, and these values are evaluated and compared to the values
found in Annex B.
The geometry of each beam is given by a width of 125mm, a height of 250mm, and a length of 2m.
Each beam is reinforced with tensile and compressive longitudinal rebars with diameters of 8mm and 6mm
respectively. Furthermore, shear reinforcement is applied with a diameter of 6mm and a distance of 150mm
between the stirrups. Figure 3.1 shows an overview of the beam dimensions along with the cross sections.
Figure 3.1: Overview of beam geometry
The stirrups provided for the beams have a circular shape, which forces the longitudional rebars to be placed
further into the cross section than what is common practice, as shown in 3.1. The concrete cover of the
longitudional rebars is therefore 60mm, whereas the distances from the concrete surface to the stirrups are
35mm along both sides, top, and bottom of each beam. These concrete covers are larger than the required
minimum distances given in DS/EN 1992-1-1 [6] and are thereby in compliance with the current standard.
6
==PAGE:241==
3.1
Experimental Procedure
Prior to the casting, a reinforcement cage for each beam is made by tying the longitudinal rebars to the
stirrups. The reinforcement cage is placed in the formwork with reinforcement spacers of 35mm to ensure
the concrete cover of the stirrups. Figure 3.2 shows the reinforcement cage along with the cage placed in
the formwork.
(a) Stirrups tied to longitudinal rebars, spacing 150mm
(b) Reinforcement in formwork
Figure 3.2: Preparation for casting of beams
The reference beams are casted with concrete mix design F-NA40, consisting of an aggregate distribution
where 40% belongs to the ﬁne fraction and 60% to the coarse fraction. The beams casted with RCA are
made from concrete mix F-RCA50 consisting of an equal distribution between ﬁne fractions of RCA and
NA and 100% RCA for the coarse fraction. An overview of the two mix designs is shown in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Overview of mix designs
7
==PAGE:242==
For each beam a concrete batch of 85 litres is mixed and used to cast the beam, the appertaining cylinder
and for testing the slump and the air content of each batch. The concrete mixes are made using the Eirich
mixing system at the structural lab at DTU, which consists of a number of silos containing aggregates and a
concrete mixer. This system automatically doses the neccessary aggregates, which are subsequently mixed
in the mixer with a rotation of 7m/s. Next, the fresh concrete is poured into the formwork after which the
beam is compacted with a rod vibrator, and additional concrete is added if needed. Lastly, two suspension
points are placed in the fresh concrete for transportation of the casted beams. After each beam is casted a
slump test is executed according to DS/EN 12350-2 [3], to which a detailed description is found in Annex
B. Next, the air content of the batch is determined according to DS/EN 12350-7 [4]. Finally the appertaining
cylinder with a height of 200mm and a diameter of 100mm is casted according to the procedure in DS/EN
12390-1:2 [5]. Then each beam is stored in the structural lab underneath a plastic cover for 24 hours, after
which the beams and the appertaining cylinders are removed from the formwork and stored in curing water
until the day of the test. This procedure is repeated for each of the beams casted.
3.2
Results
For each batch the slump and the air content are determined, and below Table 3.1 and 3.2 shows the recorded
slumps and the air content for each batch.
Table 3.1: Slump and air content for each beam casted with RCA
Test
BB1
BB2
BB5
BB3
BB5
BB6
BB7
BB8
BB9
Slump [mm]
80
100
70
90
70
50
80
90
90
Air content [%]
0.9
0.8
1.1
1.2
0.9
0.95
1.2
0.9
1.3
Table 3.2: Slump and air content for each beam casted with NA
Test
RB1
RB2
RB3
RB4
Slump [mm]
60
80
80
100
Air content [%]
1.5
1.1
1.6
1.3
3.3
Data Processing
Table 3.3 and 3.4 show the mean values and the standard deviations for the slump test and the air content
respectively.
8
==PAGE:243==
Table 3.3: Mean and standard deviation of slump test
Mix Design
Mean Slump [mm]
Standard Deviation [-]
F-RCA50
80
15.0
F-NA40
80
16.3
Table 3.4: Mean of air content and standard deviation
Mix Design
Mean Air Content [%]
Standard Deviation [-]
F-RCA50
1.0
0.18
F-NA40
1.4
0.22
3.4
Errors
The casting of beams follows the same procedure for both the tying of reinforcement and the casting of
each beam and cylinder. The same equipment is used and the same person has been assigned to the same
processes and tasks upon every casting. This is done to ensure that the beams are casted as similarly as
possible and under uniform conditions. Although this is kept in mind errors throughout the execution are
unavoidable.
Errors related to the reinforcement tying are apparent due to the longitudinal rebars being skew, which leads
to skew cages and thereby to varying distances between reinforcement and formwork. Figure 4.19a shows
a beam where a straight reinforcement cage is placed in the formwork, whereas Figure 4.19b shows one of
the more skew cages.
(a) Straight reinforcement cage
(b) Skew reinforcement cage
(c) Imprecise position of rebars
Figure 3.4: Errors related to the reinforcement
9
==PAGE:244==
Another error related to the reinforcement is the imprecise placement of the longitudinal rebars caused by
the circular shape of the stirrups seeing that it is somewhat difﬁcult to place the longitudinal reinforcement
at the exact same position each time. This error results in an uneven distance between the rebars and the
formwork, which is shown in Figure 3.4c.
Errors related to the concrete mixes are considered insigniﬁcant due to the use of the Eirich mixing system.
The system is weighing and dosing the aggregates automatically, according to the desired mix design. How-
ever, errors related to uneven compaction of the concrete are unavoidable. The fresh concrete is vibrated
until no air bobbles are apparent on the surface, which is hard to do uniformly for every beam as this is
a visual evaluation. Too little vibration may lead to a concrete with a large amount of air bobbles which
weakens the beam. Contrarily, concrete that is vibrated too much may separate.
3.5
Discussion
When considering the slumps found for the beams casted with mix design F-RCA50 and the beams casted
with mix design F-NA40, it is apparent that the slumps in general are within the desired range of 60-200mm
[1] which is applicable for concrete in practical use. However one batch, BB6, is found to have a slump
below this range of 50mm, which may be due to the time of the test. Both beam types have similar slump
measures which is underlined by the fact that the mean slump is 80mm in both cases.
The found slumps are evaluated in correlation to the slumps found in Annex B, Table 7.1, which were 70mm
for mix design F-NA40 and 80mm for mix design F-RCA50. Thus, the mean slumps found for the beams
of F-RCA50 are equal to the value found in Annex B, Table 7.1. For the beams casted with F-NA40 the
mean slump is found to be slightly higher than the slump of 70mm found in Annex B, Table 7.1. However,
it should be kept in mind that only one slump test was executed for F-NA40 and F-RCA50 respectively in
Annex B, Table 7.1. Another factor that could affect the comparison is the use of different mixing machines
with different rotation velocities.
From the air content measurements it is apparent that the air content in the beams made from mix design
F-RCA50 are lower than the values found for the F-NA40 beams. The mean air content for the F-RCA50
beams is 1.0% where the F-NA40 beams has a mean of 1.4%, which is within the traditional range of 1-2%
[7]. Both values are lower than the values found in Annex B, Table 8.1 where the values were 1.5% and
1.6% for F-RCA50 and F-NA40 respectively. As for the slump the comparison is used as an indication of
how consistent the concrete can be made. The comparison shows that it is hard to make the exact same
concrete mix several times. However the change of machinery should be kept in mind.
10
==PAGE:245==
3.6
Partial Conclusion
The beams are casted as uniformly as possible to ensure consistent conditions for the experiments. Errors
related to the reinforcement are noted in order to track potential errors if necessary. The concrete mixes
are overall found to be applicable for casting based on the found slumps and air contents. The comparison
between the slump test and the air content values and the results found in Annex B Table 7.1 and 8.1 show
that the mixes have very similar properties, despite the different mixing procedures.
11
==PAGE:246==
4
|
Testing of Beams
The beams are tested in three different test set-ups, two where the beams are tested in bending and shear
with different shear spans, and one where the beams are exposed to combined bending, shear, and torsion.
Each test results in a force-displacement curve that provides the failure load of the test specimen, and for
each of the test set-ups one F-NA40 reference beam is tested alongside three F-RCA50 beams casted with
RCA.
4.1
Experimental Procedure
As preparation for the beam experiments the beams and the appertaining cylinders are removed from the
curing tub and lightly cleansed with water in order to remove residual ﬁlth and sludge. While waiting for the
beams to dry the compressive strength of each cylinder is determined in accordance with DS/EN 12390-2
[5]. One side of each beam is painted white in order to ensure good visibility of the cracks that will occur
during the tests. Once each beam is dry it is carefully placed in the test machine.
The testing of each beam is carried out using an Instron-6025 electro mechanical test machine, which is
functioning as a frame that applies force by means of a linear actuator, after which the force is distributed
into two point loads due to a yoke being attached to the frame and the load cell as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Test set-up using Instron-6025
12
==PAGE:247==
A data-logger is connected to the test machine and receives input from the load cell and six deformation
measurement devices mounted to the beam. For all beams the test duration is aimed towards being approxi-
mately 25 minutes, and upon loading of each beam cracking patterns are visually inspected and emphasized
with makers. Upon reaching the ultimate load of each beam the test machine is stopped and the results are
recorded.
Throughout the beam experiments three different test conﬁgurations are used in an attempt to investigate
the behaviour of the beams at several positions of the yield condition; two of them only exposing the beams
to bending and shear and the ﬁnal one exposing the beams to bending, shear, and torsion simultaneously.
The following Figure 4.2 shows the ﬁrst test conﬁguration, VM1, in which the shear span is 400mm. Due
to limitations of the geometry of the yoke that distributes the load from the load cell into two point loads
affecting the beam this is the smallest shear span used in the testing of the beams.
Figure 4.2: Test set-up for VM1
The beams tested in this conﬁguration are apparent from Table 4.1 below, where the reference identiﬁcation
speciﬁes which beams are tested, and the notation name speciﬁes which naming convention is used during
data treatment for each beam.
Table 4.1: Beams used for testing of conﬁguration VM1
Test Conﬁguration
Reference Id
Notation
VM1
BB1
VM1-B-1
BB2
VM1-B-2
BB3
VM1-B-3
RB2
VM1-B-R
Below, Figure 4.3 demonstrates the second test conﬁguration, VM2, where the shear span is increased to
600mm thus resulting in a greater bending moment.
13
==PAGE:248==
Figure 4.3: Test set-up for VM2
The beams tested in this conﬁguration are apparent from Table 4.2 below.
Table 4.2: Beams used for testing of conﬁguration VM2
Test Conﬁguration
Reference Id
Notation
VM2
BB4
VM2-B-1
BB5
VM2-B-2
BB6
VM2-B-3
RB4
VM2-B-R
Finally, Figure 4.4 demonstrates the third test conﬁguration, VMT, where the shear span is corresponding
to the one used in VM1 of 400mm. However, in this test conﬁguration the load is applied eccentrically,
which results in a torsional moment affecting the beam.
Figure 4.4: Test set-up for VMT
The beams tested in this conﬁguration are apparent from Table 4.3 below.
Table 4.3: Beams used for testing of conﬁguration VMT
Test Conﬁguration
Reference Id
Notation
VMT
BB7
VMT-B-1
BB8
VMT-B-2
BB9
VMT-B-3
RB5
VMT-B-R
14
==PAGE:249==
Seeing that the load cell cannot be exposed to torsion two devices have been customised to enable the
eccentricity of the point loads. These devices are fabricated from the drawings shown in Figure 4.5, and
they are attached directly to the concrete beams with an interlayer of 1cm masonite.
Figure 4.5: Fabrication drawing for torsional device, measurements given in mm
In this load conﬁguration the concrete beams are placed eccentrically in the test machine with the torsional
devices on top, after which the yoke is placed on the torsional devices with the centre line of the yoke
and load cell being directly above the ball bearing, thus 20mm away from the centre line of the concrete
beam. Below, Figure 4.6 shows the torsional devices. Note, that the welds from the fabrication drawing are
replaced by bolts.
(a) Torsional device with ball bearing (b) Plate for transfer of load from yoke
Figure 4.6: Device fabricated to enable torsional loading
15
==PAGE:250==
For each of the test conﬁgurations six deformation measurement devices are placed on the beams as shown
in Figures 4.7 and 4.8. These are connected to the data-logger and will provide the deformations occurring
at the supports and by the load during testing.
Figure 4.7: Placement of deformation measurement devices for VM1 and VM2
Figure 4.8: Placement of deformation measurement devices for VMT
4.2
Results
The diameters of the appertaining cylinders and the ultimate loads found from the compression tests are
documented and used to determine the compressive strength of the concrete on the day of the experiment.
The compressive strengths of the cylinders are considered equal to the concrete strength of each beam. The
compressive strengths along with other essential parameters can be found in Appendix A, where the data is
listed for each beam speciﬁcally.
The cross sectional dimensions of the beams are measured and the surfaces are visually inspected. During
testing the cracks are highlighted and documented as these form the basis of evaluating what kind of failure
has ruptured each of the beams. Below, Figures 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, and 4.12 show the beams after testing. Note,
that VM1-B-4 is documented separately due to circumstances during testing, which will be elaborated in
Section 4.3.
16
==PAGE:251==
Figure 4.9: VM1-B-1, VM1-B-2, VM1-B-3, and VM1-B-R after testing
Figure 4.10: VM2-B-1, VM2-B-2, VM2-B-3, and VM2-B-R after testing
17
==PAGE:252==
Figure 4.11: VMT-B-1, VMT-B-2, VMT-B-3, and VMT-B-R after testing
Figure 4.12: VM1-B-4 after testing
4.3
Data Processing
In order to interpret the data received by the data-logger from each of the tests carried out a calibration of
each of the six deformation measurement devices has been performed, and this done in a manner corre-
sponding to the calibration described in Annex B. In this case the migration distances and electrical signals
are acquired for data points with approximately 5mm between them, and from this linear relations are re-
sulting in the trend lines shown in Figure 4.13 for device H1, where the remaining trend lines are shown in
Appendix B, Figures C.B.1 and C.B.2.
18
==PAGE:253==
Figure 4.13: Trend line for calibration of measuring device H1
Knowing an expression for the trend line of each measurement device allows for the displacement to be
calculated from the data stored with the data-logger. In a similar manner the force from the load cell
is determined from the received signals of the test machine seeing that this supplies 100kN/V. In order
to obtain a force-displacement curve that provides a reasonable base of comparison between the beams
tested within each load conﬁguration, the displacement used in the curves is the vertical deformation at
the load in the side of the beam where failure occurs. This choice is justiﬁed upon evaluating the different
displacements obtained for the reference beam, VM1-B-R, tested in conﬁguration VM1 which is apparent
in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Recording of displacements for VM1-B-R
19
==PAGE:254==
From the ﬁgure above it is clearly visible that both the vertical and horizontal deformations at the support
are signiﬁcantly smaller than the vertical deformations by the loads, which is to be expected. Furthermore,
it is apparent from the ﬁgure that the failure of the beam occurs at the left side of the beam corresponding
to the force-displacement curve named VM1-B-R-V1, seeing that this deformation develops notably more
upon reaching the failure load. Therefore, the displacement obtained at the side of the failure is used to
depict the force-displacement curves throughout the processing of data that follows below. A similar plot
is made for test conﬁguration VMT to ensure that no unexpected displacements are occurring and that the
same tendency appears. The plot is shown in Appendix B, Figure C.B.3.
During testing of conﬁguration VM1 it is observed that the beams fail in bending despite some shear cracks
being visible. Furthermore, a failure load between 60kN and 70kN is recorded for all beams tested in this
conﬁguration, which is apparent from Figure 4.15, where it is also found that the reference beam, VM1-B-R,
has the largest capacity. Additionally, all beams have a similar behaviour and are in fairly good compliance
throughout the experiments for VM1, despite a slightly lower stiffness being observed for beam VM1-B-2
than for the remaining beams.
Figure 4.15: Force-displacement curve for VM1
Before deciding on a shear span of 600mm for test conﬁguration VM2 an option of investigating the beams
with a shorter shear span of 300mm was tested on one beam, which is the reason that only two beams with
F-RCA50 are tested in VM2. The force-displacement curves for the two beams casted with F-RCA50 and
the reference beam casted with F-NA40 are illustrated in Figure 4.16.
20
==PAGE:255==
Figure 4.16: Force-displacement curve for VM2
The shorter shear span of 300mm was tested on one beam which did not fail within the capacity of the
test machine, seeing that the decrease in bending moment resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in the force
needed to induce failure of the beam. Thus, seeing that the test facilities at DTU could not accommodate
such loading, a shear span of 600mm was decided upon for test conﬁguration VM2. From Figure 4.16
it is apparent that the failure load is between 40kN and 50kN, which is signiﬁcantly lower than observed
for conﬁguration VM1. This is caused by the increase in bending moment, and again it is observed that
the reference beam, VM2-B-R, has a slightly larger capacity compared to the beams casted with RCA.
Furthermore, the deviation between the behavior of the beams is very small for test conﬁguration VM2.
Next, for the test conﬁguration VMT the failure loads observed are approximately between 60kN and 70kN
as for the case of VM1, which is expected due to the shear span yet again being 400mm. However, in this
case it is noted that deformations develop signiﬁcantly faster than for conﬁguration VM1, which entails that
the torsional stiffness is somewhat smaller than the bending stiffness of the beams. Again, the behavior of
the beams is quite aligned, despite larger deviations being observed for test conﬁguration VMT than for the
remaining conﬁgurations VM1 and VM2.
21
==PAGE:256==
Figure 4.17: Force-displacement curve for VMT
Finally, Figure 4.18 shows the force-displacement curve for the beam, that did not fail within the capacity
of the test machine in test conﬁguration VM2. This beam is evaluated separately due to its load history
being different than for the remaining beam tests. Upon the capacity failure of the test machine the beam
was unloaded, which caused crack propagation to stop and some cracks to contract. Afterwards, the beam
was brought to failure using test conﬁguration VM1, where it reached a failure load in correspondence with
the ones recorded for the remaining beams of VM1 as apparent in Figure 4.18, where it is referred to as
VM1-B-4. Thus, it seems that the initial loading did not affect the capacity of the beam.
Figure 4.18: Force-displacement curve for VM1-B-4
22
==PAGE:257==
Below, the Tables 4.4, 4.5, and 4.6 summarize the failure loads obtained for each conﬁguration. Addition-
ally, the tables are updated in coherence with changes made from the original plan due to the circumstances
regarding test conﬁguration VM2, and therefore the beam VM1-B-4 with the peculiar load history is appar-
ent in the table corresponding to conﬁguration VM1. Finally, the mean values and standard deviations are
determined for the beams casted with F-RCA50 in each of the test conﬁgurations.
Table 4.4: Results of test conﬁguration VM1
Test Conﬁguration
Reference ID
Notation
Failure Load
Mean Value
Standard Deviation
VM1
BB1
VM1-B-1
65.8kN
67.6kN
2.2
BB2
VM1-B-2
65.0kN
BB3
VM1-B-3
67.9kN
BB4
VM1-B-4
69.3kN
RB2
VM1-B-R
70.1kN
-
-
Table 4.5: Results of test conﬁguration VM2
Test Conﬁguration
Reference ID
Notation
Failure Load
Mean Value
Standard Deviation
VM2
BB5
VM2-B-1
45.4kN
45.7kN
0.5
BB6
VM2-B-2
46.1kN
RB4
VM2-B-R
46.7kN
-
-
Table 4.6: Results of test conﬁguration VMT
Test Conﬁguration
Reference ID
Notation
Failure Load
Mean Value
Standard Deviation
VMT
BB7
VMT-B-1
68.8kN
66.8kN
3.6
BB8
VMT-B-2
62.7kN
BB9
VMT-B-3
69.0kN
RB5
VMT-B-R
71.0kN
-
-
4.4
Errors
An error that could affect the results is related to the surface of the beam and the steel yoke that applies the
force to the upper surface of the beam. Since the beam surface is not totally plane the yoke and the attached
steel rollers will apply the load unevenly due to the irregular concrete surface. This will in some cases mean
that the load is mainly applied to some speciﬁc parts of the beam instead of evenly throughout the cross
section. In Figure 4.19a it is illustrated how the load ought to be distributed, whereas the issue related to the
23
==PAGE:258==
uneven surface of the concrete beam is depicted in Figure 4.19b. Similarly, it can be a challenge to place
the yoke exactly in the centre line of the beam, which may introduce eccentricities that can cause small
torsional moments unintentionally. This is apparent from the Figures 4.19c and 4.19d.
(a) Even distribution
(b) Uneven distribution
(c) Centered load
(d) Eccentric load
Figure 4.19: Errors related to test set-up
Another source of error that may inﬂuence the results of the experiments is caused by the placement of the
supports, as it is difﬁcult to place the beams without moving the supports slightly. However, this movement
is considered very small.
The position of the suspension points introduce challenges as these are sometimes coinciding with the
yoke once the deﬂection of the concrete beams increase. A solution to this was bending the suspension
points by pounding them with a large hammer before placing the beams in the test machine. However, this
might introduce some micro cracks and thereby weaken the cross section, which is not taken into account.
Unfortunately, no other options were possible without the transportation and lifting of the beams being
problematic and unsafe. Another source of error related to the suspension points is found in some of the
beam tests where the increasing deformations causes the yoke to push down on the suspension points, thus
introducing an additional point load. Although this is observed the source of error is considered of minor
inﬂuence due to it occurring very close to failure. Hence, this minor point load does not really contribute to
the failure, as cracks are already heavily propagated at this point.
24
==PAGE:259==
4.5
Discussion
From the beam experiments it is apparent that the behavior of the beams are in better coherence upon
increasing the bending moment, which is indicated by the small deviations registered for VM2, where
bending is clearly dominant. Thus, it seems that an increase in shear stresses causes larger deviations in the
structural behavior of the test specimens, as both shear and torsion contribute to the shear stresses.
In all test conﬁgurations it is apparent that bending dictates the failure of the beams as ﬂexural cracks
transpire initially, and the development of shear cracks is marginal in most cases. Nonetheless, it is observed
that the ﬂexural cracks and the shear cracks coincide. The sparse appearance of shear cracks indicates that
the shear reinforcement stirrups are placed too closely, which is difﬁcult to avoid as it is preferable that the
reinforcement cage has a certain stiffness.
Furthermore, small deformations are registered by the supports of the beams, and theoretically these ought
to be zero in the case of VM1 and VM2. However, this is very problematic to ensure with the given test set-
up. Finally, the amount of days in curing are varying for the beams casted with F-RCA50 and the reference
beams casted with F-NA40. As the beams casted with F-NA40 have shorter curing periods the deviation
recorded between the failure loads may be underestimated.
4.6
Partial Conclusion
The standard deviations recorded between the beams casted with F-RCA50 are relatively small for all test
conﬁgurations, and additionally the difference between the mean values of the F-RCA50 beams is very
small in comparison with the results obtained for the reference F-NA40 beams being below 5kN for all test
conﬁgurations.
25
==PAGE:260==
5
|
Conclusion
As a result of the experimental work all failure loads are found to be within intervals of less than 10kN for
each load conﬁguration, which is considered a reasonable deviation upon recognizing uncertainties related
to factors such as vibration, skewness of reinforcement and the position of the test set-up. Furthermore, for
all test conﬁgurations it is observed that the reference beams casted with F-NA40 all have slightly larger
structural capacity than the beams casted with F-RCA50.
Another conclusion of the experimental work is that the coherence between the behaviour of the beams
casted with F-NA40 and F-RCA50 respectively is very good, and in this regard the deviations are considered
minimal. This observation is apparent for all test conﬁgurations, and thus the cracking tendencies are similar
to those known for regular concrete, which underlines that concrete casted with recycled aggregates is a
reliable and useful alternative to regular concrete.
26
==PAGE:261==
6
|
Bibliography
[1] Dansk Beton, Fabriksbetonforeningen.
https://www.danskbeton.dk/fabriksbeton/
produkter/standardvarer/traditionel-saetmaalsbeton/. Visited: 2022-02-02.
[2] DS/EN 10080. Armeringsstål til beton - Svejselige armeringsstål - Generelt, København, 2006. Dansk
Standard.
[3] DS/EN 12350-2. Prøvning af frisk beton - Del 2: Sætmål, København, 2019. Dansk Standard.
[4] DS/EN 12350-7. Prøvning af frisk beton - Del 7: Luftindhold - Trykmetoder, København, 2019. Dansk
Standard.
[5] DS/EN 12390-2.
Prøvning af hærdnet beton - Del 2: Tilvirkning og lagring af prøvelegemer til
styrkeprøvning, København, 2019. Dansk Standard.
[6] DS/EN 1991-1-1. Eurocode 2: Betonkonstruktioner - Del 1-1: Generelle regler samt regler for bygn-
ingskonstruktioner, København, 2008. Dansk Standard.
[7] G. N. Munch-Petersen, C. V. Nielsen et al. Betonhåndbogen. Dansk Betonforening, 2020.
27
==PAGE:262==
Appendix C.A - Testing of Beams
The current appendix consists of speciﬁc beam parameters and ﬁgures of the speciﬁc beam after the test
alongside pictures of the failure or the reinforcement rupture. For beams where the failure of the longitudinal
tensile reinforcement were visible the fracture is highlighted by a circle.
Table C.A.1: VM1-B-1 test data
VM1-B-1
Number of days in curing
52
Beam dimensions h x b
251 x 127mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
29.5MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
23min
Ultimate load
65.8kN
Max displacement
23.8mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
No
Figure C.A.1: VM1-B-1 after failure occurred along with close-ups of the critical crack
C.A 1
==PAGE:263==
Table C.A.2: VM1-B-2 test data
VM1-B-2
Number of days in curing
52
Beam dimensions h x b
253 x 127mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
29.5MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
21min
Failure load
65.0kN
Max displacement
29.9mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.2: VM1-B-2 after testing along with close-ups of the critical crack and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 2
==PAGE:264==
Table C.A.3: VM1-B-3 test data
VM1-B-3
Number of days in curing
52
Beam dimensions h x b
249 x 127mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
29.9MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
23min
Failure load
67.9kN
Max displacement
28.5mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
No
Figure C.A.3: VM1-B-3 after testing along with a close-up of the crack propagation and the critical crack
C.A 3
==PAGE:265==
Table C.A.4: VM1-B-R test data
VM1-B-R
Number of days in curing
44
Beam dimensions h x b
251 x 126mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
31.6MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
24min
Failure load
70.1kN
Max displacement
34.2mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.4: VM1-B-R after testing along with a close-up of the critical crack and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 4
==PAGE:266==
Table C.A.5: VM2-B-1 test data
VM2-B-1
Number of days in curing
51
Beam dimensions h x b
250 x 127mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
29.9MPa
Shear span
600mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
15min
Failure load
45.4kN
Max displacement
31.5mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.5: VM2-B-1 after testing along with a close-up of the critical crack and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 5
==PAGE:267==
Table C.A.6: VM2-B-2 test data
VM2-B-2
Number of days in curing
51
Beam dimensions h x b
257 x 125mm
Compressive strength of cylinder,fc
29.3MPa
Shear span
600mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
16min
Failure load
46.1kN
Max displacement
27.2mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.6: VM2-B-2 after testing along with a close-up of the crack propagation and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 6
==PAGE:268==
Table C.A.7: VM2-B-R test data
VM2-B-R
Number of days in curing
45
Beam dimensions h x b
250 x 125mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
34.3MPa
Shear span
600mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
16min
Failure load
46.7kN
Max displacement
24.4mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.7: VM2-B-R after testing along with a close-up of the critical crack and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 7
==PAGE:269==
Table C.A.8: VMT-B-1 test data
VMT-B-1
Number of days in curing
64
Beam dimensions h x b
257 x 126mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
31.7MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.04kN/s
Test duration
29min
Failure load
68.8kN
Max displacement
30.9mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
No
Figure C.A.8: VMT-B-1 after testing along with a close-up of the critical crack and the reinforcement
C.A 8
==PAGE:270==
Table C.A.9: VMT-B-2 test data
VMT-B-2
Number of days in curing
64
Beam dimensions h x b
248 x 127mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
34.9MPa
Shear span
440mm
Test speed
0.04kN/s
Test duration
26min
Failure load
62.7kN
Max displacement
29.1mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
No
Figure C.A.9: VMT-B-2 after testing along with close-ups of the critical crack
C.A 9
==PAGE:271==
Table C.A.10: VMT-B-3 test data
VMT-B-3
Number of days in curing
64
Beam dimensions h x b
249 x 125mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
31.3MPa
Shear span
400 mm
Test speed
0.04kN/s
Test duration
27min
Failure load
69.0kN
Max displacement
33.6mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.10: VMT-B-3 after testing along with a close-up of the critical crack and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 10
==PAGE:272==
Table C.A.11: VMT-B-R test data
VMT-B-R
Number of days in curing
61
Beam dimensions h x b
252 x 125mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
39.3MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.04kN/s
Test duration
29min
Failure load
71.0kN
Max displacement
29.8mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
No
Figure C.A.11: VMT-B-R after testing along with a close-up of the crack propagation and the critical crack
C.A 11
==PAGE:273==
Table C.A.12: VM1-B-4 test data
VM1-B-4
Number of days in curing
52
Beam dimensions h x b
253 x 127mm
Compressive strength of cylinder, fc
33.0MPa
Shear span
400mm
Test speed
0.05kN/s
Test duration
23min
Failure load
69.3kN
Max displacement
20.9mm
Failure of tensile reinforcement
Yes
Figure C.A.12: VM1-B-4 after testing along with a close-up of the critical crack and the failure of the reinforcement
C.A 12
==PAGE:274==
Appendix C.B - Trend Lines
(a) Trend line for device H1
(b) Trend line for device H2
(c) Trend line for device H3
Figure C.B.1: Trend lines for calibration of measuring devices
C.B 1
==PAGE:275==
(a) Trend line for device V1
(b) Trend line for device V2
(c) Trend line for device V3
Figure C.B.2: Trend lines for calibration of measuring devices V1-V3
C.B 2
==PAGE:276==
Figure C.B.3: Recording of displacements for VMT-B-R
C.B 3
==PAGE:277==
Annex D
This page is left blank intentionally. Annex D follows below.
==PAGE:278==
Annex D
Life Cycle Assessment of Concrete Cylinders Casted with RCA
Cecilie Kristensen, s155942 & Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:279==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:280==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Goal and Scope
4
2.1
Goal Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Scope Deﬁnition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Modelling of Product System
6
4
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
9
5
Life Cycle Interpretation
13
6
Bibliography
15
Appendix D.A - EPD
D.A 1
i
==PAGE:281==
List of Abbreviations
ADPe
Abiotic Depletion Potential, elements
ADPf
Abiotic Depletion Potential, fossil resources
AP
Acidiﬁcation Potential
DGNB
Deutsche Gessellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen
EDP
Environmental Product Declaration
EP
Eutrophication Potential
GWP
Global Warming Potential
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
LCI
Life Cycle Interpretation
ODP
Ozone Depletion Potential
POCP
Photochemical Ozone Creation Potentials
NA
Natural Aggregates
RCA
Recycled Concrete Aggregates
C-RCA
Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-RCA
Fine Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-NA40
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 60/40
F-RCA50
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 50% NA 0-4mm, 50% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA80
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 20% NA 0-4mm, 80% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA100
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 100% F-RCA 0-4mm
ii
==PAGE:282==
List of Figures
1.1
Overview of Life Cycle Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Overview of Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
System Boundary for the Comparative LCA Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Life Cycle Phases According to the European Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Impact Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
Comparison of F-NA40 with Generic Concrete
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Global Warming Potential and Abiotic Depletion Potential for Fossil Resources . . . . . .
10
4.3
Acidiﬁcation Potential and Eutrophication Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Ozone Depletion Potential and Photochemical Ozone Creation Potentials
. . . . . . . . .
11
4.5
Abiotic Depletion Potential for Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
iii
==PAGE:283==
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of LCA Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1
Quantities of 1m3 Concrete for NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Quantities of 1m3 Concrete for RCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.1
Interpretation of Results per Impact Category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
D.A.1
Environmental Product Declaration, Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.A 1
D.A.2
Environmental Product Declaration, Natural Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.A 1
D.A.3
Environmental Product Declaration, Recycled Concrete Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . .
D.A 1
iv
==PAGE:284==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:285==
1
|
Introduction
The current annex is created to investigate the relative environmental footprint of different concrete mixes
containing varying ratios of recycled concrete aggregates, RCA, as part of the project Combined Impacts
for Beams casted with Fine and Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates.
In general sustainable development is most commonly deﬁned using three main parameters, namely social
sustainability, economic sustainability, and environmental sustainability. With regard to the built environ-
ment social sustainability is hard to quantify as this refers to the relation between users and their surround-
ings such as the amount of daylight, security, and acoustics that affect the user’s well-being in a building.
Next, economic sustainability focuses on the balance between the costs of a building and the quality of said
building in which the entire lifetime of the building is evaluated. Finally, environmental sustainability refers
to the environmental footprint of a building in a local, regional, and global perspective [1].
Evaluation of the environmental sustainability of a material or a building is most often carried out in accor-
dance with current standards such as DS/EN ISO 14040, DS/EN ISO 14044, and DS/EN 15978. However,
these do not take social and economical sustainability into account. Besides from the standards the use of
certiﬁcation schemes such as Deutsche Gessellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen, DGNB, and Svanemærket
is steadily growing in building industry, and these seek to incorporate all three branches of sustainability.
Also, the use of these certiﬁcations increases the uniformity on how to handle the assessment of the envi-
ronmental, social, and economical sustainability of materials and buildings, which secures comparability
and transparency of products across the industry.
Upon carrying out a life cycle assessment, LCA, the amount of data available on speciﬁc materials often
poses challenges as it is still a relatively new task in the building industry. In order to increase the environ-
mental assessment of materials a growing number of suppliers and companies are publishing environmental
product declarations, EPDs, which deﬁne the environmental properties of a speciﬁc product according to
DS/EN 15804.
Generally, an LCA consists of ﬁve stages that describe the entire life cycle of a given system, and these are
further subdivided into processes related to the speciﬁc stages in accordance with DS/EN 15978 as shown
in Figure 1.1. In order to assess the sustainability of a product system it is important to take its entire life
1
==PAGE:286==
cycle into account, as each life cycle stage may have different contributions to the overall sustainability of
the product system.
Figure 1.1: Overview of life cycle stages [2]
In the current annex the main principles of the phases of an LCA are used to investigate whether there is a
potential of reducing the environmental impact of concrete by replacing natural aggregates, NA, with RCA.
Thus, the focus of the LCA is directed towards environmental sustainability, and it seeks to evaluate whether
it is environmentally sound to use recycled concrete in the building industry. Below, Figure 1.2 illustrates
which replacement ratios of aggregates are investigated, where the total amount of aggregates constitute
74% of each concrete mix, and the distribution between ﬁne and coarse aggregates is 40% ﬁne aggregates
and 60% coarse aggregates. Similarly, the percentage distributions given below each concrete mix referred
to as F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 respectively, illuminate the ratios between NA and
RCA in each mix design.
Figure 1.2: Overview of mix designs
2
==PAGE:287==
The basis of the LCA study is carried out according to the standards given in Table 1.1. However, these
are quite comprehensive, and therefore only the sections relevant for the current project are taken into
consideration. Thus, this LCA study cannot be considered a full LCA as the scope is delimited.
Table 1.1: Overview of LCA Guidelines
Laboratory test
European Standard
Life cycle assessment, principles and framework
DS/EN ISO 14040
Life cycle assessment, requirements and guidelines
DS/EN ISO 14044
Sustainability of construction works
DS/EN 15978
Furthermore, as the scope of the LCA study limited, the results are to be considered guiding and not as
documentation, seeing that uncertainties arise due to a shortcoming of data available and assumptions made
in the completion of the LCA study.
The present report is structured in such a manner that the goal and scope of the LCA are stated and elabo-
rated, after which the modelling procedure of the product system considered is described in detail. Finally, a
life cycle impact assessment, LCIA, will state the overall ﬁndings of the LCA with regard to different impact
categories, and a life cycle interpretation, LCI, will conclude on the potential of reducing the environmental
footprint of concrete by replacing NA with RCA.
3
==PAGE:288==
2
|
Goal and Scope
2.1
Goal Deﬁnition
The intention of the current LCA is to investigate the environmental footprint of a traditional concrete mix
casted with NA, F-NA40, in comparison to three concrete mixes casted with RCA, F-RCA50, F-RCA80,
and F-RCA100 respectively. The LCA study is executed to investigate whether limiting the use of NA
will decrease the environmental footprint of structural concrete. For the current LCA the target audience
consists of engineers, architects, and entrepreneurs of the building industry as it aims to examine whether
casting concrete with RCA will increase the relative sustainability of structural concrete.
The current LCA is carried out as a comparative analysis and can therefore not conclude on the overall
sustainability of the investigated concrete mixes. However, it seeks to highlight whether a potential of
improvements with regard to environmental performance is present upon casting concrete with RCA, by
investigating the environmental footprint of concrete casted with different replacement ratios. Furthermore,
it seeks to examine how the use of RCA in new concrete affects the different impact categories that all
contribute to the overall environmental footprint of the concrete.
During the LCA study a number of assumptions are made to simplify the scope of the LCA, which is a
consequence of the short time frame available. Amongst others, these assumptions include considering data
from environmental product declarations, EPDs, regarding the cement and aggregates to be sufﬁcient in the
creation of the LCA.
2.2
Scope Deﬁnition
The current analysis is comparative, and therefore the function of the concrete is deﬁned to ensure that the
comparison is carried out on the same basis for each concrete mix. The function of structural concrete is to
provide a certain load carrying capacity when used in construction throughout the building industry. Thus,
the functional unit of the current LCA study is
1 m3 of concrete shall provide a compressive strength of at least 20MPa for a time frame of 50 years
4
==PAGE:289==
The entire product system for structural concrete is illustrated in Figure 2.1, where all the processes that
contribute to the environmental footprint are included. The dashed green lines indicate the transition be-
tween the different life cycle stages.
Figure 2.1: System boundary for the comparative LCA study
The product phase includes extraction of raw materials, transport, and production of structural materials.
Similarly, the building process uses the materials from the product phase and includes the transport and
assembly of these, whereas the use phase takes operation, maintenance, repairs, renovation, and energy
and water consumption into consideration. Finally, the end of life stage considers the demolition, trans-
port, incineration and disposal of the different components, whereas the life cycle stage outside the system
boundary is included to assess the potential for reuse and recycling of the products from the end of life
stage. As the building processes, the use phases, the end of life phases, and the potentials for recycling and
reuse outside the system boundaries are identical for the different concrete mixes considered, it is not rele-
vant to include these in the comparative LCA study. The system boundary is therefore limited to include the
processes that contribute to the product phase of the concrete mix, and the system boundary is marked with
a read line in Figure 2.1. This limitation is considered applicable since the differences between traditional
concrete and concrete casted with RCA are found in the product phase and due to the end of life scenarios
being presumed equivalent for both the traditional and the recycled concrete. However, it is well-known that
an environmental footprint is associated with the concrete throughout all life cycle stages. The reference
ﬂows are based on 1m3 of concrete in coherence with the functional unit.
5
==PAGE:290==
3
|
Modelling of Product System
The modelling of the LCA is carried out in LCAbyg version 5.2.1.0, which is a software tool developed by
BUILD - Department of The Build Environment, Aalborg University. The software is primarily applicable
for LCAs of buildings, which are based on DS/EN 15978 [5]. In LCAbyg the environmental impacts are
calculated throughout the entire lifetime of the building to be assessed as shown in Figure 1.1. However, in
the current project only the product phases A1-A3 referred to as cradle to gate are considered as highlighted
in Figure 3.1 below.
Figure 3.1: Life cycle phases according to the European standard
The product phase A1 consists of the gathering and extraction of raw materials, whereas phase A2 is the
transportation of raw materials to the production plant, and A3 is the production and manufacturing of the
product that will be used in the building process stage. During all processes of the product phase energy
is consumed, and excess waste needs to be eliminated. The phases A1-A3 are modelled for the cement,
natural aggregates, and recycled concrete aggregates by using EPDs that provide the environmental impacts
of the production of the raw materials.
The EPD for Rapid Cement is used to model the contributions from the cement, which corresponds to the
speciﬁc cement used in the project, and the environmental impacts of the EPD are found in Appendix A,
Table D.A.1. Similarly, the data used for the modelling of the NA are given in Appendix A, Table D.A.2,
which corresponds to marine aggregates manufactured by NCC Industry, Division of Stone Materials. The
EPD provides the environmental impacts for concrete sand with diameters of 0-4mm and for pebble with
sizes of 8-16mm which are both applicable for use in concrete mixes. Finally, the recycled concrete ag-
gregates are modelled by using an EPD corresponding to crushed aggregates applicable as road ﬁll, since
no EPD was found on the speciﬁc aggregates. The EPD for crushed aggregates as road ﬁll is assumed to
be a reasonable ﬁt for the modelling seeing that no data were possible to obtain from Norrecco A/S, who
provided the recycled concrete aggregates used in the current project. Furthermore, it is common practice to
6
==PAGE:291==
state only the most widely used application of the product on EPDs in general, and therefore it is not essen-
tial that the EPD only mentions the crushed concrete aggregates in relation to road ﬁll. The environmental
impacts of the EPD are found in Appendix A, Table D.A.3.
In the modelling of the concrete mixes the use of water is neglected due to the amounts of water being
constant in all mix designs, and seeing that LCAbyg is based on a library of building materials where no
data is present for the modelling of water. In contrast to this the cement content is taken into consideration
as this is known to have the largest share of the environmental footprint of concrete, despite of the cement
amounts also being constant. Seeing that only the product phases are included in the modelling of the
aggregates, this is also the case for the modelling of each concrete batch, where the cement and aggregates
correspond to the raw materials needed for production of concrete. Due to data given in the EPDs it is not
possible to distinguish between the phases A1-A3.
After the incorporation of the EPDs into LCAbyg the further modelling of the concrete mixes F-NA40,
F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100, respectively, is composed using the each of the mix recipes corre-
sponding to 1m3 as apparent in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. These quantities are in coherence with the concrete
mixes designed in Annex B.
Table 3.1: Quantities of 1m3 concrete for the concrete mix casted with NA
Mix
Cement [kg/m3]
Sand [kg/m3]
Gravel, 4-8mm [kg/m3]
Gravel, 8-16mm [kg/m3]
F-NA40
238
745
566
575
Table 3.2: Quantities of 1m3 concrete for the concrete mixes casted with RCA
Mix
Cement [kg/m3]
Sand [kg/m3]
F-RCA [kg/m3]
C-RCA [kg/m3]
F-RCA50
238
373
266
1070
F-RCA80
238
149
425
1070
F-RCA100
238
-
532
1070
The analysis carried out in LCAbyg results in impact assessments distributed into seven different impact
categories that are apparent from Figure 3.2, where the unit for each category is presented along with a brief
description of the corresponding environmental issue. These impact categories form the basis of interpreting
the results of the LCA study, and the parameters measured are Global Warming Potential, GWP, Ozone
Depletion Potential, ODP, Photochemical Ozone Creation Potentials, POCP, Acidiﬁcation Potential, AP,
Eutrophication Potential, EP, Abiotic Depletion Potential elements, ADPe, and Abiotic Depletion Potential
fossil resources, ADPf.
7
==PAGE:292==
Figure 3.2: Impact categories with corresponding unit and environmental issue [2]
8
==PAGE:293==
4
|
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
Based on the modelling of the product system for the production of each concrete mix LCAbyg provides
the environmental impact of each mix distributed into the seven different impact categories. In an attempt to
corroborate the data obtained from the different EPDs for each aggregate type and the cement and to justify
the choices made in the modelling of the product system a comparison is made between F-NA40 and a
generic concrete with a compressive strength of 20MPa from the product library of LCAbyg. Below, Figure
4.1 shows the normalized results for each environmental impact category in a percentage-wise distribution
for the generic concrete mix and F-NA40 respectively.
Figure 4.1: Comparison of F-NA40 with generic concrete
In six out of seven impact categories the difference is less than 6%, and the greatest difference is found
for GWP where a deviation of 10% is observed. The deviations are assumed to be caused by the basis of
comparison not being fully identical, seeing that the generic concrete includes both transport and energy
used for the concrete production, whereas F-NA40 only considers the transport and energy consumption
during material extraction. For the generic concrete the distribution between the ﬁne and coarse aggregates
is unknown, which may also explain part of the deviations. Additionally, the energy sources are not known
for either of the concrete mixes, which may inﬂuence the comparison. Overall, the differences are con-
sidered minor which substantiates that the environmental footprint given in each EPD with regard to the
natural aggregates is reliable. Thus, the comparison indicates that the data from the EPDs used for the LCA
are representative.
9
==PAGE:294==
Usually, a sensitivity analysis is carried out to evaluate the robustness of the results obtained in an LCA
study, where a normalized sensitivity coefﬁcient is calculated after changing different parameters such as
quantities of materials or transportation distances. Provided that the sensitivity coefﬁcient is less than a
certain value deemed appropriate upon investigating a speciﬁc product system, the modelled system is
assumed not to be sensitive towards the parameter tested. Contrarily, if the sensitivity coefﬁcient is larger
than the appropriate value chosen, it is to be taken into account during the interpretation of the results of
the LCA. However, as the current study is based on information given in EPD’s the different processes that
go into the extraction of raw materials and crushing of concrete after demolition are not editable. Hence,
it is not possible nor relevant to carry out a sensitivity analysis of the modelled system, since the system
considered is limited to quite a narrow scope.
The results of the LCA study of the environmental footprint of the concrete mixes F-NA40, F-RCA50, F-
RCA80, and F-RCA100 respectively, which are based on EPD’s for the different aggregate types, are shown
below for all impact categories described in Section 3, and Figure 4.2. The results of the comparison of
the different concrete mixes for the two main contributors to the environmental footprint, namely GWP and
ADPf, are both decreased upon decreasing the amount of NA and replacing this with RCA. Note, that the
results are given for 1m3, and that the y-axis does not start at zero, which is intentional in order to emphasize
the differences between the concrete mixes. Had the y-axis started at zero the decreasing tendency of the
bars would not be visible.
Figure 4.2: Global warming potential and abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources for 1m3
10
==PAGE:295==
Next, a similar tendency is observed for the third and fourth largest contributors to the environmental foot-
print, namely AP and EP, which is apparent from Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Acidiﬁcation potential and eutrophication potential for 1m3
Contrarily, for the remaining three impact categories, ODP, POCP, and ADPe, which constitute approxi-
mately 5% of the total environmental footprint of the F-NA40 concrete mix, a decreasing amount of NA
and an increasing amount of RCA leads to enlarged values of the different impact categories, which is
apparent from Figures 4.4 and 4.5.
Figure 4.4: Ozone depletion potential and photochemical ozone creation potentials 1m3
11
==PAGE:296==
Figure 4.5: Abiotic depletion potential for elements for 1m3
The causes and effects of the results obtained above will be further investigated and elaborated in the life
cycle interpretation, LCI.
12
==PAGE:297==
5
|
Life Cycle Interpretation
From the impact assessment it is observed that four out of seven impact categories are higher for the concrete
mixture made of F-NA40 compared to the RCA mixtures. These impact categories are GWP, ADPf, AP,
and EP, which are also corresponding to the impact categories that have the largest contributions to the
overall environmental footprint of concrete. Based on these impact categories the potential of improving
the environmental footprint is large as emissions decrease upon an increase in the use of RCA. For ADPf
the difference between the F-NA40 mix and the mixes with RCA is not as large, however, the tendency is
still clear.
Adversely, it is observed that the remaining three impact categories ODP, POCP, and ADPe are increasing
for the RCA mixtures. Thus, these impact categories indicate that an increase in the use of RCA will
affect the environmental footprint negatively. Below, Table 5.1 highlights which of the concrete mixes F-
NA40 and F-RCA50 result in the highest and lowest emissions marked with red and green respectively.
Furthermore, it highlights the impact categories where the difference between the concrete mixes exhibits
a markedly different behaviour, and in the current project this is deﬁned as a factor 2 of difference, which
is current for the categories POCP and ADPe.
Table 5.1: Interpretation of results per impact category
Regarding the impact categories of POCP and ADPe these results are peculiar and unexpected, especially
seeing that ADPe concerns raw materials and minerals, and the use of recycled concrete aggregates ought
to decrease this impact category rather than increase it. The impact category POCP concerns photochemical
pollution which can be caused by factory emissions, and in this regard the increase is reasonable seeing that
the demolished concrete needs to be processed before reuse is possible. However, as the LCA study carried
out is comparative the beneﬁts of avoiding extraction of raw material will not be visible from the results.
In order to incorporate the effect of not extracting new raw material a consequentional LCA is necessary
13
==PAGE:298==
to conduct, seeing that such a type of LCA takes all systems and consequences into consideration in the
modelling of a speciﬁc scenario. Thus, the avoided amount of raw material would in that case have to be
credited in order to potentially be part of another product system and thereby affect the impact category of
ADPe positively.
Overall, the results of the LCA study are considered reliable due to the low complexity of the modelled
system, which decreases the risk of error upon modelling and due to the amounts of each component being
accurately determined and not estimated. However, as the only EPD used that is product-speciﬁc is the
one for Rapid Cement, uncertainties are introduced upon not having sufﬁcient data present for either of
the aggregate types. Therefore, the EPDs used for both NA and RCA are assumed to be applicable to the
product system, but this is not actually veriﬁable besides from the comparison carried out for NA with
regard to the concrete found in the generic library of LCAbyg.
Due to the circumstances regarding the LCA study it is not possible to obtain the actual environmental
footprint of the concrete mixes, as the results only provide an indication of how the concrete mixes behave
in relation to each other. This is due to the assumptions made upon determining the goal and scope of the
LCA, where the processes and life cycle stages that are identical for all concrete mixes are disregarded.
In conclusion the overall environmental footprint can be reduced upon replacing NA with RCA. However,
it is a limitation of the results that it has not been possible to corroborate the EPD used for speciﬁc RCA
used, as this could potentially provide a more accurate view of the environmental footprint.
14
==PAGE:299==
6
|
Bibliography
[1] Brundtland
rapporten,
1987.
https://bu.dk/introduktion/baeredygtig-udviklings-historie/1987-
brundtland-rapporten/. Visited: 2022-05-19.
[2] A. S. Worm, H. Poulin, F. C. Østergaard et al. Branchevejledning i LCA ved renovering. Teknologisk
Institut, 2016.
[3] Aalborg Portland A/S. Environmental Product Declaration, Rapid Cement, Id: S-P-01967. EPD Norge,
2017.
[4] Argent Materials Incorporated. Environmental Product Declaration, Recycled aggregate products, Id:
S-P-03101. EPD International AB, 2021.
[5] DS/EN 15978. Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg - Vurdering af bygningers miljømæssige
kvalitet - Beregningsmetode, København, 2012. Dansk Standard.
[6] NCC Industry Nordic AB. Environmental Product Declaration for aggregates from Copenhagen, ter-
minal for marine aggregates-Avedøre, Id: S-P-02081. EPD International AB, 2020.
15
==PAGE:300==
Appendix D.A - EPD
The EPD used for Rapid Cement is shown in Table D.A.1 [3].
Table D.A.1: Environmental product declaration, cement
The EPD used for both fractions of the natural aggregates are shown in Table D.A.2 [6].
Table D.A.2: Environmental product declaration, natural aggregates
The EPD used for the recycled concrete aggregates are shown in Table D.A.3 [4].
Table D.A.3: Environmental product declaration, recycled concrete aggregates
D.A 1
==PAGE:301==
Annex E
This page is left blank intentionally. Annex E follows below.
==PAGE:302==
Annex E
Further investigation of concrete mixes F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 due to low
compressive strengths
Jelena Kuburovic, s164731
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:303==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:304==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Segregation Check
3
3
Fluorescence Impregnated Thin Section
5
3.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Results and Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Remix of F-RCA80
8
5
Summary
10
6
Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure
11
6.1
Experimental Procedure, Results, and Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6.2
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.4
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
Comparison of Compressive Strengths
17
7.1
Compressive Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7.2
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
Conclusion
22
9
Bibliography
23
Appendix E.A - Water Content, Remix of F-RCA80
E.A 1
Appendix E.B - Concrete Mix F-RCA80, Remix
E.B 1
Appendix E.C - Water Content, Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure
E.C 1
Appendix E.D - Concrete Mix F-RCA80 and F-RCA100, modiﬁed mixing procedure
E.D 1
Appendix E.E - Sieving Results
E.E 1
i
==PAGE:305==
Appendix E.F - Compressive Strength
E.F 1
Appendix E.G - Estimation of Compressive Strength
E.G 1
ii
==PAGE:306==
List of Symbols
βcc(t)
Coefﬁcient depending on the age of the concrete
fcm
Mean compressive strength at 28 days
fcm(t)
Mean compressive strength at an age of t days
s
Coefﬁcient depending on the cement type
t
Age of concrete in days
iii
==PAGE:307==
List of Abbreviations
FITS
Fluorescence Impregnated Thin Section
NA
Natural Aggregates
RCA
Recycled Concrete Aggregates
C-RCA
Coarse Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-RCA
Fine Recycled Concrete Aggregates
F-NA40
100% NA 4-16mm, 100% NA 0-4mm, aggregate ratio 60/40
F-RCA50
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 50% NA 0-4mm, 50% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA80
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 20% NA 0-4mm, 80% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA100
100% C-RCA 4-22mm, 100% F-RCA 0-4mm
F-RCA80-O
Original F-RCA80 mix from Annex B
F-RCA80-0%
Mix F-RCA80 with 0% adjustment for the water absorption of F-RCA
F-RCA80-12%
Mix F-RCA80 with 12% adjustment for the water absorption of F-RCA
F-RCA80-24%
Mix F-RCA80 with 24% adjustment for the water absorption of F-RCA
F-RCA100-O
Original F-RCA100 mix from Annex B
F-RCA100-0%
Mix F-RCA100 with 0% adjustment for the water absorption of F-RCA
F-RCA100-12%
Mix F-RCA100 with 12% adjustment for the water absorption of F-RCA
F-RCA100-24%
Mix F-RCA100 with 24% adjustment for the water absorption of F-RCA
iv
==PAGE:308==
List of Figures
1.1
Overview of Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview of Compressive Strengths for The Concrete Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Concrete Mix F-RCA80 During The Casting Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Section Through Cylinder F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1
FITS of Cylinder Casted With F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Cut-out of FITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Cut-out of FITS With Large Air Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Cut-out of FITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.1
Current and Original F-RCA80 Concrete Mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6.1
Particle Size Distribution for the Modiﬁed F-RCA80 Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.2
Particle Size Distribution for The Modiﬁed F-RCA100 Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.3
Slump for Concrete Mix F-RCA80-12% Before and After Adding Water . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.4
Slumps for The Modiﬁed F-RCA80 Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.5
Slumps for The Modiﬁed F-RCA100 Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7.1
Original Compressive Strengths and Estimated 28 day Strength for F-RCA80 . . . . . . .
19
7.2
Relation Between Slump and Compressive Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7.3
Original Compressive Strengths and Estimated 28 day Strength for F-RCA100 . . . . . . .
21
v
==PAGE:309==
List of Tables
4.1
Mean Water Content of the Aggregates Used for Remixing of F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Quantities for Mix Design F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.1
Mean Water Content of the Aggregates Used for The Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure . . . . .
12
6.2
Concrete Mix Designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6.3
Slump of Concrete Mix F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7.1
Mean 7 day Compressive Strength of Concrete Mix F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 . . . . . . .
17
7.2
Estimated 28 day Compressive Strength of Concrete Mix F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 . . . .
19
E.A.1 Water Content for C-RCA, Used in Remix of F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.A 1
E.A.2 Water Content for F-RCA, Used in Remix of F-RCA80 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.A 1
E.C.1 Water Content for C-RCA, Used in The Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . .
E.C 1
E.C.2 Water Content for F-RCA, Used in The Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . .
E.C 1
E.E.1 Sieving Results for F-RCA80-0%, F-RCA80-12%, and F-RCA80-24% . . . . . . . . . .
E.E 1
E.E.2 Sieving Results for F-RCA100-0%, F-RCA100-12%, and F-RCA100-24% . . . . . . . .
E.E 2
E.F.1
Compressive Strengths for The Modiﬁed F-RCA80 Mixes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.F 1
E.F.2
Compressive Strengths for The Modiﬁed F-RCA100 Mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.F 1
E.G.1 Estimated Compressive Strengths for F-RCA80-0%, F-RCA80-12%, and F-RCA80-24%
E.G 1
E.G.2 Estimated Compressive Strengths for F-RCA100-0%, F-RCA100-12%, and F-RCA100-
24% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.G 1
vi
==PAGE:310==
This page is left blank intentionally
==PAGE:311==
1
|
Introduction
The current annex is created to further investigate the concrete mixes containing varying ratios of recycled
concrete aggregates, RCA, as part of the project Combined Impacts for Beams casted with Fine and Coarse
Recycled Concrete Aggregates.
Five different concrete mixes were made and investigated in Annex B, and in the following only four mixes
are presented due to the ﬁfth, F-NA50, being made as a preliminary test to determine the most suitable ratio
between ﬁne and coarse aggregates. The four different concrete mixes consist of one traditional concrete
mix with an aggregate distribution constituted by 40% of the ﬁne fraction and 60% of the coarse fraction.
This aggregate ratio is kept constant for the remaining mixes but with a 100% replacement of the coarse
fraction of natural aggregates, NA, with coarse recycled concrete aggregates, C-RCA. The ﬁne fraction of
NA is partially replaced with ﬁne recycled concrete aggregates, F-RCA, with replacement ratios of 50%,
80%, and 100%, for concrete mix F-RCA50, F-RCA80, and F-RCA100 respectively. The different concrete
mixtures and their speciﬁc shares of components are illustrated in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Overview of mix designs
The compressive strengths of the different concrete mixes are apparent from Figure 1.2, where the strengths
are mean values based on four cylinders being exposed to uniaxial compression testing. From the bar plot
it is observed that the highest strength is found for the traditional concrete, F-NA40, whereas a tendency
1
==PAGE:312==
of decreasing strengths with increasing replacements ratios are apparent for the concrete mixes casted with
RCA.
Figure 1.2: Overview of compressive strengths for the concrete mixes after 28 days of hardening
Additionally, it is observed that concrete mix F-RCA80 has a signiﬁcantly lower compressive strength
compared to the remaining two concrete mixes casted with RCA. The observation is rather unexpected
seeing that concrete mix F-RCA100 contains a larger amount of RCA and has a higher strength than F-
RCA80 with a lower amount of RCA. These observations are the basis of the following annex as the
reasoning for the results are examined and sought determined.
In the following the potential causes of the low compressive strength of F-RCA80 are evaluated, and reasons
such as errors during the casting process, errors related to the concrete proportioning or errors caused by
potential over-vibration of the cylinders are investigated. Another reason could be related to the water
absorption of the F-RCA which is considered uncertain since the method used for the determination is
based on sand and not F-RCA.
Additionally, F-RCA100 is investigated further due to the unexpected high compressive strength in compar-
ison to F-RCA80. The general observation found for concrete casted with RCA is that a higher replacement
ratio lead to lower strengths, which is not the case when considering F-RCA80 and F-RCA100. Whether
the compressive strength of F-RCA100 is a coincidence is investigated by casting new cylinders with a
modiﬁed casting procedure.
2
==PAGE:313==
2
|
Segregation Check
During the casting process of concrete mix F-RCA80 in Annex B an observation raised concerns related to
the homogeneity of the mixture. The mixture appeared to be divided in the coarse fraction and the cement
paste as apparent from Figure 2.1a. Furthermore, during vibration, a rather odd behavior is observed in
comparison to the remaining mixes. Figure 2.1b shows how the cement paste splashes during vibration,
which makes it hard to determine whether the concrete is vibrated sufﬁciently.
(a) Concrete mix F-RCA80
(b) Concrete mix F-RCA80 while vibrating
Figure 2.1: Concrete mix F-RCA80 during the casting process
Based on the observations made an investigation of the homogeneity is conducted where the occurrence
of segregation is checked. This evaluation is done by a visual examination of a longitudinal cut through a
cylinder. The aim is to check whether the cylinder has been over-vibrated, which may cause the aggregates
to segregate.
(a) Section through cylinder
(b) Close-up of section
Figure 2.2: Section through cylinder F-RCA80
3
==PAGE:314==
Segregation is characterized by separation of the aggregate fractions, where large sized aggregates sink to
the bottom and cement paste is occuring in the upper part of the cylinder [4]. Figure 2.2b shows the sliced
cylinder along with a close-up of the aggregates. The cylinder section in Figure 2.2b shows no indication of
segregation as the aggregates are well-mixed which shows a rather homogeneous concrete mix. However,
when taking a closer look at the cylinder it is apparent that smaller voids of air are visible. Based on
this observation a more elaborate investigation is initiated where a ﬂuorescence impregnated thin section is
analyzed.
4
==PAGE:315==
3
|
Fluorescence Impregnated Thin Section
In order to obtain detailed knowledge about concrete mix F-RCA80 a ﬂuorescence impregnated thin section,
FITS, is made to investigate the micro-structural composition of the concrete mix. The aim of this analysis
is to investigate the homogeneity and air content of the mixture.
3.1
Experimental Procedure
One cylinder of concrete mix F-RCA80 is cut in half in the longitudinal direction as preparation for the
analysis, after which the cylinder is delivered to SEIR-materialeanalyse A/S who has provided the FITS.
The FITS is a 30mmx45mm section with a thickness of 20µm, and the FITS is apparent in Figure 3.1. The
analysis of the FITS is carried at DTU by allowing different types of light to penetrate the thin section and
thereby visually observe the characteristics through a microscope.
Figure 3.1: FITS of cylinder casted with F-RCA80
3.2
Results and Data Processing
During the examination different parts of the FITS are investigated and a number of observations are made.
The micro-structure of a selected area of the FITS is shown in Figure 3.2.
5
==PAGE:316==
(a) Enlarged area of FITS
(b) Enlarged area of FITS with highlights
Figure 3.2: Cut-out of FITS
Figure 3.4a shows an enlarged part of the FITS, where the aggregates, the cement paste and the air is
apparent. The cement paste is the light brown substance, whereas the yellow parts illustrate air. In Figure
3.4b the different aggregates are highlighted, where the blue solid lines show the RCA grains as these are
characterised by the dark brown cement paste. The grains highlighted with blue consist of a variety of
particles of different sizes which originate from the former concrete. Another type of grain is highlighted
with an orange dotted line, and these aggregates appear as single grains.
When comparing the air content of the cement paste, the light brown substance, with the old cement paste
around the RCA, the dark brown mass, it is apparent that the old cement paste contains small to no amount
of air in contrast to the light brown cement paste. The air content is further examined by taking a closer look
at a different part of the FITS. Figure 3.3 shows two different parts of the FITS where large amounts of air
is observed, seeing that the yellow colour indicates the presence of air. Note that the view set-up is different
compared to the view used for Figure 3.2 which is due to different microscopes being used throughout the
analysis.
(a) Area of FITS with large air content
(b) Another area of FITS with large air content
Figure 3.3: Cut-out of FITS with large air content
6
==PAGE:317==
From Figure 3.3 above it is clear that the concrete mix contains large amounts of air, which indicates that
the concrete mix was not vibrated sufﬁciently. The large air content increases the porosity of the concrete
due to the air ﬁlled voids. A high porosity results in a low compressive strength of the concrete, which
is in correlation with the observed behaviour of concrete mix F-RCA80. The large air content affects the
connection between the aggregates and the cement paste, which is weakened when air is found around the
aggregate grains. Figure 3.4 shows a cut-out of the FITS along with a close-up of the cut-out showing air
that is present in the perimeter of the grain which causes the grains to slip under when subjected to load.
(a) Overview of FITS with large air content
(b) Close-up of grain slip
Figure 3.4: Cut-out of FITS with grain slip
3.3
Errors
In the examination of the FITS only a small area is investigated which is assumed to be representative for
the entire concrete mix. However, this might not be the case.
3.4
Discussion
A wider investigation of the FITS would have been ideal to carry out along with several FITS’s made
on several cylinders of the same mixture, which could have minimised the uncertainties related to the
representativeness.
3.5
Partial Conclusion
The analysis of the FITS shows that the concrete mixture contains a large amount of air, which is probably
the reason behind the low compressive strength. It remains unknown why this tendency was only observed
for mix F-RCA80.
7
==PAGE:318==
4
|
Remix of F-RCA80
A remix of concrete mix F-RCA80 is executed to determine whether the low compressive strength is related
to an error in the mixing process or if the low strength is a general characteristic for the mix. The concrete
mix is remixed with the identical concrete mix design, however the mix design is corrected corresponding
to the water content of the aggregates at the day of the casting.
The water content is determined according to DS/EN 1097-5 [2], and a more detailed description of the
determination is apparent from the experimental procedure in Annex B, Section 4.1. The water content
is determined for both the C-RCA and the F-RCA due to the aggregates being stored outside and thereby
possibly containing larger amounts of water compared to the values found in Annex B. For the seasand the
value found in Annex B, Table 4.4 is used seeing that the same material with identical storage conditions
is used. The determination of water content is executed three times for each fraction with a mass of 1kg
for the coarse fraction and 0.5kg for the ﬁne fraction, the results is found in Appendix E.A Table E.A.1 and
E.A.2, whereas the mean water content and the standard deviation is apparent from Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Mean water content of the aggregates used for remixing of F-RCA80
Fraction
Mean Water Content [%]
Standard Deviation [-]
Seasand, 0-4mm
0.2
0.2
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
4.5
0.3
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
0.6
2.6
The adjusted concrete mix design resulted in the quantities apparent from Table 4.2 which corresponds to a
batch of 30L. The full concrete mix design is found in Appendix E.B - Concrete Mix F-RCA80, Remix.
Table 4.2: Quantities for mix design F-RCA80
Mix
Cement [kg]
Water [L]
Sand [kg]
F-RCA [kg]
C-RCA [kg]
F-RCA80
7.1
7.3
4.5
13.4
32.2
8
==PAGE:319==
The quantities shown in the Table 4.2 above are poured into the concrete mixer, where the aggregates
are poured from largest to smallest particle size, after which the material is mixed. The mixing sequence
consists of mixing the dry material for three minutes, then adding water and mixing for three minutes,
pausing for three minutes, and ﬁnally remixing the materials for one minute. This lead to a rather wet
concrete mixture, with the same appearance as found for the original F-RCA80 concrete mix in Annex B.
In order to distinguish between the original F-RCA80 mix from Annex B and the mixes made for further
work in the current annex, the original mix is denoted F-RCA80-O in the remainder of the current annex.
The remixed F-RCA80 mixture and F-RCA80-O are shown in Figures 4.1a and 4.1b respectively.
(a) Current F-RCA80 concrete mix
(b) F-RCA80-O concrete mix
Figure 4.1: Current and original F-RCA80 concrete mix
From the concrete mixes shown in Figure 4.1 it is apparent that the mixes are both relatively wet with a clear
division between the large grains and the cement paste. Additionally, it is apparent that the water content in
the reproduced F-RCA80 mix is larger compared to the original mix. Based on this observation it is decided
not to carry on with casting of cylinders seeing that the texture of the mixture is similar to the original mix
and thereby similar results are assumed to be obtained. Furthermore, the observations indicate that the low
compressive strength obtained for F-RCA80-O was not due to an error in the mixing procedure.
9
==PAGE:320==
5
|
Summary
The separation check, the FITS analysis along with the remix of F-RCA80 showed that the mixture was
homogene but with a rather high air content, which resulted in a weak concrete mixture. From the remix
of F-RCA80 it is apparent that the low compressive strength is not related to an error during the mixing
procedure but rather an issue related to the water content of the mixture. The large water content is assumed
caused by the state of the aggregates and an overestimation of the water absorption coefﬁcient. The concrete
mixes are adjusted for the water absorption of the RCA which is relatively large for the F-RCA, with a value
of 24%. Based on the observations it is concluded to further investigate both concrete mixes F-RCA80 and
F-RCA100 since it is not certain whether F-RCA80 has an odd behaviour or if errors in concrete mix
F-RCA100 induced the larger compressive strength.
10
==PAGE:321==
6
|
Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure
In the following a modiﬁed mixing procedure compared to the one used in Annex B is introduced. The aim
is to examine whether an adjustment in the mixing procedure can inﬂuence the properties of the concrete
mixes, and thereby make it possible to obtain the desired compressive strength. In the procedure used in
Annex B the concrete mix designs are adjusted in relation to the water absorption coefﬁcient found for the
aggregates, which might have been overestimated and thereby leading to a high slump and low compressive
strength. This is further investigated by adjusting the mixing procedure where varying amounts of the water
absorption coefﬁcient for the F-RCA is used. The adjusted procedure is used for both concrete mix F-
RCA80 and F-RCA100 in order to determine whether the relation found for the compressive strengths has
been a coincidence. The modiﬁed mixing procedure consists of three batches for each mix design, the ﬁrst
one is conducted without considering the water absorption of F-RCA, in the next batch half of the water
absorption coefﬁcient is considered, which corresponds to 12%. Finally, the adjustment corresponds to the
total water absorption coefﬁcient of 24% for F-RCA corresponding to the value found in Annex B, section
3.3.
In the further investigation the water content is determined, which is used to establish the new concrete mix
designs. Furthermore, a particle size distribution is determined for each batch to document the exact distri-
bution of particles used in the different mixtures. Thereafter, the workability of the batches are examined
and ﬁnally two cylinders of each batch are casted.
6.1
Experimental Procedure, Results, and Data Processing
In order to avoid extensive repetition the results and data processing are combined in the following. Fur-
thermore, the experimental procedures are brieﬂy described with references to Annex B, where detailed
descriptions are found.
Water Content
Prior to the mixing procedure the aggregates are dried in an oven at 105°for 24 hours, after which constant
mass is ensured, the drying is executed in order to obtain uniform properties for the aggregates. At the day
of the casting the water content of the aggregates are determined in accordance with the procedure found in
Annex B, Section 4.1. The tests are executed three times for F-RCA and C-RCA respectively, after which
the water content is determined, ﬁnally the concrete mix designs are adjusted with the new values of water
11
==PAGE:322==
content. The mean values and the standard deviations are apparent from Table 6.1, for the speciﬁc results
see Appendix E.C. Tables E.C.1 and E.C.2.
Table 6.1: Mean water content of the aggregates used for the modiﬁed mixing procedure
Fraction
Mean Water Content [%]
Standard Deviation [-]
Fine Fraction, F-RCA
0.10
0.07
Coarse Fraction, C-RCA
0.06
0.03
Concrete Mix Design
In the following the mix designs with varying modiﬁcations to the water absorption coefﬁcient for the F-
RCA are established. The variation of water absorption is chosen as 0%, 12%, and 24% adjustments in the
mix designs. The three different modiﬁed procedures all apply to both F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 leading to
six mixtures named after the concrete mix followed by the corresponding water absorption coefﬁcient. The
notation and the different quantities of each component for each mix design is shown in Table 6.2. For the
full concrete mix design see Appendix E.D.
Table 6.2: Concrete mix designs
Mix
Cement [kg]
Water [L]
Sand [kg]
F-RCA [kg]
C-RCA [kg]
F-RCA80-0%
1.90
1.50 + 0.75L
1.19
4.43
8.53
F-RCA80-12%
1.67
1.51 + 0.25L
1.04
3.41
7.46
F-RCA80-24%
1.67
1.71
1.04
2.95
7.46
F-RCA100-0%
1.67
1.30 + 0.75L
-
4.85
7.46
F-RCA100-12%
1.67
1.55
-
4.27
7.46
F-RCA100-24%
1.67
1.80
-
3.69
7.46
All concrete mixes are made with a w/c-ratio of 0.71 aiming for a minimum compressive strength of 20MPa.
Variations in the amount of cement for F-RCA80-0% and the remaining mix designs are due to the mixing
of F-RCA8-0% consisting of 8L where the remaining are corresponding to 7L. During the mixing procedure
additional water is added to the mixtures, the amount is marked with blue in Table 6.2, the additional water
added is further elaborated in relation to the workability of the concrete mixtures.
Particle Size Distribution
The aggregate quantities form Table 6.2 are weighed and sieved in the ﬁne fraction with sieves from 0-8mm,
whereas the coarse fraction is sieved through sieve sizes 4-32mm. The experimental procedure is described
in Annex B, Section 2.1. The particle size distribution for each batch is apparent from Figure 6.1 and 6.2
for the water absorption of 0%, 12%, and 24% for F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 respectively. The ﬁgures are
based on the data found in Appendix E.E - Sieving Results, Table E.E.1 and E.E.2.
12
==PAGE:323==
Figure 6.1: Particle size distribution for the modiﬁed F-RCA80 mixes
From the Figure 6.1 it is apparent that the largest amount of aggregates are found between sieve size 4-
16mm where 60% of the aggregates are retained. Furthermore, it is apparent that the three different batches
have coinciding lines which indicates that the used aggregates are uniformly distributed for each batch.
Figure 6.2: Particle size distribution for the modiﬁed F-RCA100 mixes
The particle size distributions apparent from Figure 6.2 show the same tendency with a slightly better
coherence between the different batches. This ensures that the comparison of compressive strengths will be
determined on the same basis.
13
==PAGE:324==
Workability
The sieved aggregates and the cement is poured into the mixing machine from largest to smallest particle
size, the dry material is mixed for two minutes, after which water is added, and there after the mixing in
continued for further two minutes. During the mixing procedure water is added to the mixtures in case
of dry mixtures in order to obtain a desirable texture of the concrete. For concrete mixture F-RCA80-0%
0.75L are added due to a very dry concrete mix. Whether the concrete is desirable in regard to texture is
determined by conducting slump tests to investigate the workability of the different concrete mixes. The
experimental procedure corresponds to the procedure described in Annex B, section 7.1.
For F-RCA80-12% a rather low slump was observed which led to a remix of the concrete batch with an
addition of 0.25L water, the additional water is written with blue in Table 6.2. The ﬁrst slump test with no
additional water is apparent from Figure 6.3a, where Figure 6.3b shows the slump after adding water and
remixing the batch. The concrete cones for all the modiﬁed F-RCA80 mixtures are apparent from Figure
6.4, whereas the slumps are apparent from Table 6.3.
(a) F-RCA80-12%
(b) F-RCA80-12% after water is added
Figure 6.3: Slump for concrete mix F-RCA80-12% before and after adding water
(a) F-RCA80-0%
(b) F-RCA80-12%
(c) F-RCA80-24%
Figure 6.4: Slump for the modiﬁed F-RCA80 mixes
14
==PAGE:325==
The slumps found for F-RCA100 are apparent in Figure 6.5, the corresponding slumps are given in Table
6.3.
(a) F-RCA100-0%
(b) F-RCA100-12%
(c) F-RCA100-24%
Figure 6.5: Slump for the modiﬁed F-RCA100 mixes
Table 6.3: Slump of concrete mix F-RCA80 and F-RCA100
Mix \Water Absorption
0%
12%
24%
F-RCA80 [mm]
70
50
60
F-RCA100 [mm]
60
40
20
For the F-RCA100 mixtures solely F-RCA-0% is modiﬁed by adding water to the mixture as apparent from
Table 6.2. Due to limited time mixture F-RCA-12% and F-RCA-24% were not corrected with additional
water which lead to slumps that are lower that optimal prescribed slumps of 60-120mm [1].
6.2
Errors
Errors related to the different tests and determinations are unavoidable, whereas errors in the experimen-
tal procedure, weighing of components, and inconsistencies are present but considered to have a minor
inﬂuence on the results.
6.3
Discussion
The found slumps were lower than the desired values, which is unfortunate seeing that the concrete with
low slumps are hard to work with in practice. A more repetitive procedure where water is added after
each slump test until desired workability is reached would have been preferable to implement to ensure
the applicability of the concrete. Due to lack of time this was not prioritized, instead the water was added
to some mixtures after the slump test as for F-RCA80-12%, in other cases water was added based on the
observed texture of the concrete.
15
==PAGE:326==
6.4
Partial Conclusion
Concrete applicable in practice ought to have slumps of 60-120mm which is not obtained for all mixtures,
however cylinders are casted with the concrete with this kept in mind.
16
==PAGE:327==
7
|
Comparison of Compressive Strengths
In the following the compressive strenghts of the modiﬁed mixing procedure are determined and compared
to the original compressive strengths found for the cylinders tested in Annex B. Two cylinders with a height
of 200mm and a diameter of 100mm are casted from each concrete mix and tested in a uniaxial compression
test after seven days of hardening in water. The experimental procedure is similar to the procedure found in
Annex B, Section 9.1, however in this case no displacements were measured, due to the focus being solely
on the determination of the compressive strengths.
7.1
Compressive Strength
The cylinders dimensions are measured in order to determine the exact compressive strength of each cylin-
der. The dimensions and the compressive strengths are found in Appendix E.F, Table E.F.1 and Table E.F.2,
whereas Table 7.1 shows the mean values of each concrete mix.
Table 7.1: Mean 7 day compressive strength of the modiﬁed F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 mixes
Mix \Water Absorption
0%
12%
24%
F-RCA80 [MPa]
20.5
22.0
18.2
F-RCA100 [MPa]
16.7
22.9
22.0
Table 7.1 above shows that the compressive strength for F-RCA80 is greatest in the mixture where a water
absorption coefﬁcient of 12% is used, the same tendency is apparent for F-RCA100. The lowest strength
is found where the water absorption coefﬁcient is 24% for F-RCA80, whereas the opposite is observed for
F-RCA100 where the lowest strength is found in the mixture with no water adjustments related to water
absorption is made. This makes it difﬁcult to determine the most sufﬁcient water absorption coefﬁcient,
however a beneﬁcial observation is that the compressive strength is beyond the desired 20MPa in most
cases after seven days of hardening.
7.2
Comparison
In order to compare the compressive strengths found for the modiﬁed concrete mixes with the strengths
found in Annex B, which corresponds to the strength after 28 days, the strength development formula is
17
==PAGE:328==
used to estimate the 28 day strength for the modiﬁed mixtures. The strength development formula which
determines the mean compressive strength at the age t, is given in the current standard DS/EN 1992-1-1 [3]
and determined as
fcm(t) = βcc(t)fcm
(7.1)
where
t
is the age of the concrete in days
fcm(t) is the mean compressive strength at the age of t days
fcm
is the mean compressive strength at 28 days
The coefﬁcient βcc(t), which depends on the age of the concrete, is given by
βcc(t) = exp
0
B
@s
0
B
@1 −
✓28
t
◆1
2
1
C
A
1
C
A
(7.2)
where
βcc(t)
is a coefﬁcient dependent on the age of the concrete
s
is 0.2 which corresponds to the strength class of rapid cement
t
is the age of the concrete in days
The compressive strength at 28 days is estimated by inserting the known seven day strength as fcm(t) in the
expression below
fcm = fcm(t)
βcc(t)
(7.3)
where
t
is the age of the concrete in days
fcm(t) is the mean compressive strength at the age of t days
βcc(t)
is a coefﬁcient dependent on the age of the concrete
The expression above estimates the concrete strength development at 28 days, and the compressive strengths
for each concrete mix are apparent from 7.2, where the appertaining calculations are found in Appendix E.G,
Table E.G.1 and E.G.2.
18
==PAGE:329==
Table 7.2: Estimated 28 day compressive strength of the modiﬁed F-RCA80 and F-RCA100 mixes
Mix
0%
12%
24%
F-RCA80 [MPa]
25.1
26.9
22.2
F-RCA100 [MPa]
20.3
28.0
26.9
In order to illustrate the difference between the estimated strengths and the original compressive strengths,
the strengths are plotted in a bar plot in Figure 7.1 and 7.3 respectively.
Figure 7.1: Original compressive strengths and estimated 28 day strength for F-RCA80
From Figure 7.1 it is apparent that the compressive strength is higher in all the modiﬁed concrete mixes
compared to the originally found strength for the F-RCA80-O mix. An increase of 4.7MPa is found between
the original mix F-RCA80-O and F-RCA80-24% which is comprised of the same concrete mix. The only
difference between the mixtures is found in the water content of the RCA and the mixing machine. This
indicates that the state of the aggregates has a great impact on the compressive strength, and furthermore it
shows that it is possible to reach the desired compressive strength of 20MPa.
However, when seeing the compressive strengths in relation to the slumps, the mixtures that are within the
range corresponding to a applicable concrete are F-RCA80-0% and F-RCA24%. The relation is highlighted
by plotting the slump and the compressive strength of F-RCA80-O and F-RCA80-24% seeing that these
are made on the same basis and thereby most compatible. Figure 7.2 shows the relation between the
compressive strength and the slump. The slump-strength relation for the original F-RCA80 and F-RCA80-
24% is marked with the blue line where the appertaining strength and slumps are (60mm, 22.2MPa) and
19
==PAGE:330==
(150mm, 17.5MPa) for F-RCA-O and F-RCA80-24% respectively. The estimated correlation is plotted as
the grey trend line.
Figure 7.2: Relation between slump and compressive s strength for F-RCA80-O and F-RCA80-24%
The slump-strength relation show that the strength is decreasing as the slump is increasing. If assuming that
the relation is representative for mix F-RCA80 with the water content adjustment of 24% it is apparent that
slumps larger than 100mm will lead to compressive strengths lower than 20MPa. Ideally this relation could
be useful to consider when determining how much water to add to the concrete mix. However, this involves
a larger study and a more comprehensive test series in order to obtain a representative and applicable relation
between slump and strength. Furthermore, this could be expanded to involve the remaining concrete mixes
and thereby form a useful basis for establishing concrete mixtures containing RCA.
The comparison between the original F-RCA100 concrete mix and the estimated compressive strengths for
the modiﬁed concrete mixes are shown in Figure 7.3. For this mixture the original strength is very close to
the strength found for F-RCA100-0% where no correction for water absorption was made, the remaining
mixtures have greater strengths but also lower slumps, which questions the applicability of the concrete
since the mixtures were dry with slumps of 40mm and 20mm for F-RCA100-12% and F-RCA100-24%
respectively.
20
==PAGE:331==
Figure 7.3: Original compressive strengths and estimated 28 day strength for F-RCA100
Overall, the results show that it is possible to reach the desired strength of 20MPa after 28 days for all con-
crete mixes. Furthermore it is observed that the highest compressive strength is found where an adjustment
of water absorption of 12% is made, which applies to both modiﬁed concrete mixes.
21
==PAGE:332==
8
|
Conclusion
The aim of Annex E is to investigate the reasons behind concrete mix F-RCA80 having a signiﬁcantly
lower compressive strength compared to the remaining F-RCA mixes. This is examined by checking for
segregation, performing a remixing procedure, and by investigating the micro-structure of the concrete.
The investigations show that the original concrete was homogeneous with no sign of segregation, and fur-
thermore it is found that the low compressive strength is most likely caused by the large air content in the
mixture. The remixing process underlines the great inﬂuence of the state of the aggregates, seeing that the
concrete turned out to be too wet. This shows that the odd behavior of concrete mix F-RCA80 is due to
a large air content, which was hard to minimize by vibration of the concrete, seeing that the concrete also
contains a large amount of water. This conclusion lead to the investigation of the inﬂuence of adjustments
related to the water absorption coefﬁcient for F-RCA during the establishment of the concrete mixes.
The aim of the modiﬁed mixing procedure is to examine the compressive strengths when varying water
absorption coefﬁcients are considered. Higher strengths are found for the modiﬁed F-RCA80 mixes com-
pared to the original mix, which shows that the low compressive strength of F-RCA80-O is not a general
property but rather related to the water content of the mixes. Furthermore, it is concluded that the origi-
nally determined strength of F-RCA100-O is relatively accurate and not a coincidence seeing that similar
strengths are found when adjusting the water absorption coefﬁcient of the F-RCA. Overall, the modiﬁed
procedure showed that the desirable strength of 20MPa can be obtained regardless of the adjustments of
water absorption. However, this must be set in relation to the slumps, which were rather low in some cases,
especially for the modiﬁed F-RCA100 mixes.
Based on the estimated compressive strengths it is concluded that the greatest compressive strength is found
for the mixes with a water absorption of 12%. This indicates that a beneﬁcial concrete mix design could
be found when an adjustment of water absorption is found between 0% and the determined coefﬁcient,
which is 24% in this study. This underlines the necessity of establishing standards and methods for the
determination of water absorption that are suitable for F-RCA.
Finally, it is concluded that the need for increasing the amount of cement when working with RCA is
disconﬁrmed seeing that the desirable compressive strengths of 20MPa are found for all concrete mixes,
without adding cement.
22
==PAGE:333==
9
|
Bibliography
[1] Dansk
Beton,
Fabriksbetonforeningen.
https://www.danskindustri.dk/
medlemsforeninger/foreningssites/dansk-beton/fabriksbetonforeningen/
produkter/satmalsbeton/. Visited: 2022-03-03.
[2] DS/EN 1097-5. Metoder til prøvning af tilslags mekaniske og fysiske egenskaber - Del 6: Bestemmelse
af vandindhold ved tørring i ventileret ovn, København, 2013. Dansk Standard.
[3] DS/EN 1992-1-1. Eurocode 2: Betonkonstruktioner - Del 1-1: Generelle regler samt regler for bygn-
ingskonstruktioner, København, 2008. Dansk Standard.
[4] Zongjin Li. Advanced Concrete Technology. John Wiley & sons, Inc, 2011.
23
==PAGE:334==
Appendix E.A - Water Content, Remix of F-RCA80
Table E.A.1: Water content for C-RCA, used in remix of F-RCA80
Table E.A.2: Water content for F-RCA, used in remix of F-RCA80
E.A 1
==PAGE:335==
Appendix E.B - Concrete Mix F-RCA80, Remix
E.B 1
==PAGE:336==
Design Mix F-RCA80-Remix: Water to cement ratio for a strength requirement of 20MPa
Desired compression strength
Fc
=
20 MPa
Strength incl. 5%-fractile and add-on
Fc,5%
Fc + 0.05∙Fc + 6MPa
=
27 MPa
K
For RAPID cement
=
30
α
For RAPID cement
=
0.5
Natural air content
a0
Assumption
=
1 %
Actual air content 
a
=
1 %
Water to cement ratio
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K (1-0.045 (a-a0)))+α)
=
0.71
Control
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K)+α)
=
0.71
Cement content 
Water content 
WC
=
170 l/m3
Cement content 
CC
WC / w/c
=
238 kg/m3
Densities 
Sea sand 0-4mm
ρs
=
2610 kg/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
ρp
Betonhåndbogen
=
2560 kg/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
ρæ
Betonhåndbogen
=
2600 kg/m3
C-RCA 
ρC-RCA
For C-RCA from [1]
=
2480 kg/m3
F-RCA 
ρF-RCA
For F-RCA from Annex B
=
2330 kg/m3
RAPID cement, Aalborg Portland
ρrc
=
3080 kg/m3
Amounts 
Cement
Mc
=
77 l/m3
Water 
Mw
Assumption
=
170 l/m3
Air
Ma
Assumption
=
10 l/m3
Total cement paste
Mkit
Mc+Mw+Ma
=
257 l/m3
Remaining mass for aggregates
Mrem
1000-Mkit
=
743 l/m3
Mean density, aggregates
ρmean
=
2713 kg/m3
Total amount of aggregates
Magg
Mrem/1000 ∙ ρmean
=
2015 kg
Aggregate percentage
1-Mkit
=
0.74 %
Sand percentage 
sa
Table 4 Betonhåndbogen
=
49.2 %
Gravel percentage
st
100-sa
=
50.8 %
Distribution sea sand 
Chosen distribution
=
8.0 %
Distribution sea gravel 4-8mm
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution sea gravel 8-16mm
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution C-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
60.0 %
Distribution F-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
32.0 %
Sea sand 
Mss
=
59 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Msg48
=
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Msg816
=
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
MCRCA
=
446 l/m3
F-RCA
MFRCA
=
238 l/m3
Control of total amount of aggregates
1000 l/m3
E.B 2
==PAGE:337==
Correction of amounts due to moisture content and absorption of aggregates
Moisture from Annex B determined on the day of the casting:  
Cement 
Wc
-
=
-
l/m3
Water 
Ww
-
=
-
l/m3
Sea sand 
Wss
0.20%
=
0.12 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Wsg48
0.10%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Wsg816
0.80%
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
WFRCA
4.50%
=
10.70 l/m3
C-RCA 
WCRCA
0.60%
=
2.67 l/m3
Absorption values determined using Betonhåndbogen, Annex B, and the report given in [1]:
Cement 
Ac
-
=
-
l/m3
Water 
Aw
-
=
-
l/m3
Sea sand 
Ass
4.10%
=
2.44 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Asg48
0.80%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Asg816
1.50%
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
AFRCA
24.00%
=
57.04 l/m3
C-RCA 
ACRCA
3.60%
=
16.04 l/m3
Corrected amounts
Cement 
CMc
=
77 l/m3
Water 
CMw
WC - WA
=
232 l/m3
Sea sand 
CMss
Mss + Wss - Ass
=
57.10 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
CMsg48
Msg48 + Wsg48 - Asg48
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
CMsg816
Msg816 + Wsg816 - Asg816
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
CMFRCA
MFRCA + WFRCA - AFRCA
=
191.33 l/m3
C-RCA 
CMCRCA
MCRCA + WCRCA - ACRCA
=
432.27 l/m3
Free water from aggregates 
WA
∑CM-M
=
-62.03 l/m3
E.B 3
==PAGE:338==
Appendix E.C - Water Content, Modiﬁed Mix-
ing Procedure
Table E.C.1: Water content for C-RCA, used in the modiﬁed mixing procedure
Table E.C.2: Water content for F-RCA, used in the modiﬁed mixing procedure
E.C 1
==PAGE:339==
Appendix E.D - Concrete Mix F-RCA80 and F-
RCA100, Modiﬁed Mixing Procedure
E.D 1
==PAGE:340==
Design Mix F-RCA80-0%: Water to cement ratio for a strength requirement of 20MPa
Desired compression strength
Fc
=
20 MPa
Strength incl. 5%-fractile and add-on
Fc,5%
Fc + 0.05∙Fc + 6MPa
=
27 MPa
K
For RAPID cement
=
30
α
For RAPID cement
=
0.5
Natural air content
a0
Assumption
=
1 %
Actual air content 
a
=
1 %
Water to cement ratio
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K (1-0.045 (a-a0)))+α)
=
0.71
Control
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K)+α)
=
0.71
Cement content 
Water content 
WC
=
170 l/m3
Cement content 
CC
WC / w/c
=
238 kg/m3
Densities 
Sea sand 0-4mm
ρs
=
2610 kg/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
ρp
Betonhåndbogen
=
2560 kg/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
ρæ
Betonhåndbogen
=
2600 kg/m3
C-RCA 
ρC-RCA
For C-RCA from [1]
=
2480 kg/m3
F-RCA 
ρF-RCA
For F-RCA from Annex B
=
2330 kg/m3
RAPID cement, Aalborg Portland
ρrc
=
3080 kg/m3
Amounts 
Cement
Mc
=
77 l/m3
Water 
Mw
Assumption
=
170 l/m3
Air
Ma
Assumption
=
10 l/m3
Total cement paste
Mkit
Mc+Mw+Ma
=
257 l/m3
Remaining mass for aggregates
Mrem
1000-Mkit
=
743 l/m3
Mean density, aggregates
ρmean
=
2713 kg/m3
Total amount of aggregates
Magg
Mrem/1000 ∙ ρmean
=
2015 kg
Aggregate percentage
1-Mkit
=
0.74 %
Sand percentage 
sa
Table 4 Betonhåndbogen
=
49.2 %
Gravel percentage
st
100-sa
=
50.8 %
Distribution sea sand 
Chosen distribution
=
8.0 %
Distribution sea gravel 4-8mm
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution sea gravel 8-16mm
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution C-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
60.0 %
Distribution F-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
32.0 %
Sea sand 
Mss
=
59 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Msg48
=
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Msg816
=
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
MCRCA
=
446 l/m3
F-RCA
MFRCA
=
238 l/m3
Control of total amount of aggregates
1000 l/m3
E.D 2
==PAGE:341==
Correction of amounts due to moisture content and absorption of aggregates
Moisture from Annex B determined on the day of the casting:  
Cement 
Wc
-
=
-
l/m3
Water 
Ww
-
=
-
l/m3
Sea sand 
Wss
0.20%
=
0.12 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Wsg48
0.10%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Wsg816
0.80%
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
WFRCA
0.10%
=
0.24 l/m3
C-RCA 
WCRCA
0.06%
=
0.27 l/m3
Absorption values determined using Betonhåndbogen, Annex B, and the report given in [1]:
Cement 
Ac
-
=
-
l/m3
Water 
Aw
-
=
-
l/m3
Sea sand 
Ass
4.10%
=
2.44 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Asg48
0.80%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Asg816
1.50%
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
AFRCA
0.00%
=
0.00 l/m3
C-RCA 
ACRCA
3.60%
=
16.04 l/m3
Corrected amounts
Cement 
CMc
=
77 l/m3
Water 
CMw
WC - WA
=
188 l/m3
Sea sand 
CMss
Mss + Wss - Ass
=
57.10 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
CMsg48
Msg48 + Wsg48 - Asg48
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
CMsg816
Msg816 + Wsg816 - Asg816
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
CMFRCA
MFRCA + WFRCA - AFRCA
=
237.91 l/m3
C-RCA 
CMCRCA
MCRCA + WCRCA - ACRCA
=
429.86 l/m3
Free water from aggregates 
WA
∑CM-M
=
-17.86 l/m3
E.D 3
==PAGE:342==
MIX DESIGN F-RCA80-12%, fc=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
216 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
304 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
696 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1889 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
57 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
209 l/m3
F-RCA 
430 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
MIX DESIGN F-RCA80-24%, fc=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
245 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
332 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
668 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1811 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
57 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
181 l/m3
F-RCA 
430 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
The following concrete mixes F-RCA80-12% and F-RCA80-24% are designed in compliance with mix 
design F-RCA80-0% as shown above. However, they differ with regard to the water absorption coefficient.
E.D 4
==PAGE:343==
Design Mix F-RCA100-0%: Water to cement ratio for a strength requirement of 20MPa
Desired compression strength
Fc
=
20 MPa
Strength incl. 5%-fractile and add-on
Fc,5%
Fc + 0.05∙Fc + 6MPa
=
27 MPa
K
For RAPID cement
=
30
α
For RAPID cement
=
0.5
Natural air content
a0
Assumption
=
1 %
Actual air content 
a
=
1 %
Water to cement ratio
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K (1-0.045 (a-a0)))+α)
=
0.71
Control
w/c
1/((Fc,5%/K)+α)
=
0.71
Cement content 
Water content 
WC
=
170 l/m3
Cement content 
CC
WC / w/c
=
238 kg/m3
Densities 
Sea sand 0-4mm
ρs
=
2610 kg/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
ρp
Betonhåndbogen
=
2560 kg/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
ρæ
Betonhåndbogen
=
2600 kg/m3
C-RCA 
ρC-RCA
For C-RCA from [1]
=
2480 kg/m3
F-RCA 
ρF-RCA
For F-RCA from Annex B
=
2330 kg/m3
RAPID cement, Aalborg Portland
ρrc
=
3080 kg/m3
Amounts 
Cement
Mc
=
77 l/m3
Water 
Mw
Assumption
=
170 l/m3
Air
Ma
Assumption
=
10 l/m3
Total cement paste
Mkit
Mc+Mw+Ma
=
257 l/m3
Remaining mass for aggregates
Mrem
1000-Mkit
=
743 l/m3
Mean density, aggregates
ρmean
=
2713 kg/m3
Total amount of aggregates
Magg
Mrem/1000 ∙ ρmean
=
2015 kg
Aggregate percentage
1-Mkit
=
0.74 %
Sand percentage 
sa
Table 4 Betonhåndbogen
=
49.2 %
Gravel percentage
st
100-sa
=
50.8 %
Distribution sea sand 
Chosen distribution
=
0.0 %
Distribution sea gravel 4-8mm
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution sea gravel 8-16mm
Chosen distribution
=
0 %
Distribution C-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
60.0 %
Distribution F-RCA 
Chosen distribution
=
40.0 %
Sea sand 
Mss
=
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Msg48
=
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Msg816
=
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
MCRCA
=
446 l/m3
F-RCA
MFRCA
=
297 l/m3
Control of total amount of aggregates
1000 l/m3
E.D 5
==PAGE:344==
Correction of amounts due to moisture content and absorption of aggregates
Moisture from Annex B determined on the day of the casting:  
Cement 
Wc
-
=
-
l/m3
Water 
Ww
-
=
-
l/m3
Sea sand 
Wss
0.20%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Wsg48
0.10%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Wsg816
0.80%
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
WFRCA
0.10%
=
0.30 l/m3
C-RCA 
WCRCA
0.06%
=
0.27 l/m3
Absorption values determined using Betonhåndbogen, Annex B, and the report given in [1]:
Cement 
Ac
-
=
-
l/m3
Water 
Aw
-
=
-
l/m3
Sea sand 
Ass
4.10%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
Asg48
0.80%
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
Asg816
1.50%
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
AFRCA
0.00%
=
0.00 l/m3
C-RCA 
ACRCA
3.60%
=
16.04 l/m3
Corrected amounts
Cement 
CMc
=
77 l/m3
Water 
CMw
WC - WA
=
185 l/m3
Sea sand 
CMss
Mss + Wss - Ass
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
CMsg48
Msg48 + Wsg48 - Asg48
=
0.00 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
CMsg816
Msg816 + Wsg816 - Asg816
=
0.00 l/m3
F-RCA 
CMFRCA
MFRCA + WFRCA - AFRCA
=
297.39 l/m3
C-RCA 
CMCRCA
MCRCA + WCRCA - ACRCA
=
429.86 l/m3
Free water from aggregates 
WA
∑CM-M
=
-15.48 l/m3
E.D 6
==PAGE:345==
MIX DESIGN F-RCA100-12%, fc=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
221 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
308 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
692 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1876 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
262 l/m3
F-RCA 
430 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
MIX DESIGN F-RCA100-24%, fc=20 MPa, w/c=0.71
Cement content 
77 l/m3
Air content 
10 l/m3
Corrected water content 
257 l/m3
Corrected cement paste content  
344 l/m3
Corrected remaining mass for aggregates
656 l/m3
Corrected mass of aggregates 
1779 kg
Amount of aggregates: 
Sea sand 
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 4-8mm
0 l/m3
Sea gravel 8-16mm
0 l/m3
C-RCA 
226 l/m3
F-RCA 
430 l/m3
Control
1000 l/m3
The following concrete mixes F-RCA100-12% and F-RCA100-24% are designed in compliance with mix design F-
RCA100-0% as shown above. However, they differ with regard to the water absorption coefficient.
E.D 7
==PAGE:346==
Appendix E.E - Sieving Results
Table E.E.1: Sieving results for F-RCA80-0%, F-RCA80-12%, and F-RCA80-24%
E.E 1
==PAGE:347==
Table E.E.2: Sieving results for F-RCA100-0%, F-RCA100-12%, and F-RCA100-24%
E.E 2
==PAGE:348==
Appendix E.F - Compressive Strength
Table E.F.1: Compressive strength for the modiﬁed F-RCA80 mixes after 7 days of hardening
Table E.F.2: Compressive strength for the modiﬁed F-RCA100 mixes after 7 days of hardening
E.F 1
==PAGE:349==
Appendix E.G - Estimation of Compressive Strength
Table E.G.1: Estimated compressive strength for F-RCA80-0%, F-RCA80-12%, and F-RCA80-24%
Table E.G.2: Estimated Compressive strengths for F-RCA100-0%, F-RCA100-12%, and F-RCA100-24%
E.G 1
