==PAGE:1==
Transformers for Physics Predictions
Learning stable nonlinear operators for partial differen-
tial equations
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Transformers for Physics Predictions
Learning stable nonlinear operators for partial differential equations
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Sebastian T. Kotewitz &
Nicolai M. T. Lassen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Andrea Roberto Insinga, 2019
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Anker Engelunds
Vej, Building 301, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Continuum Modelling
and Testing, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Sebastian T. Kotewitz - s174270
Signature
Date
Nicolai M. T. Lassen - s175407
Signature
Date
ii
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis, we examine the capability of the attention mechanism [43] in both spatial
and temporal approximations in the context of mapping non-linear dynamics in discretized
spaces. The attention mechanism is examined in the temporal domain using an autore-
gressive generator across time steps. For the spatial domain, the attention mechanism
is applied point-wise to project the discrete inputs into a learned vector space, which is
then analyzed as a signal. For the practical implementation, we combine the attention
mechanism with other ideas in the area of physics based deep learning.
Specifically, the domain of micromagnetics is considered due to its high complexity caused
by the fully connected interactions between magnetic grains. This makes the computa-
tional complexity and memory requirements scale exponentially with problem size when
using numerical solvers. As demonstrated in Ref. [43], the attention mechanism is capable
of capturing long-range interactions in the domain of natural language processing, which
could potentially capture the dynamics of a fully connected system. This also makes it
highly interesting to compare the attention mechanism to previous convolution based so-
lutions, which are limited to more local connections. The proposed models are trained
and tested against a numerical solver, and the goal is to achieve marginal speedup at a
minimal cost to accuracy.
It is shown, that the proposed models are able to approximate the magnetic state sequences
of standard problems in micromagnetism with information of the first few magnetic states,
even down to the single initial state. For a discretized 64×16×1 grid of 500nm×125nm×
3nm, predicting a 400 time step sequence of 1.6ns took the model utilizing attention for
the temporal domain 6.973 seconds. For accuracy against the numerical solver, the area
between the spatially averaged magnetization curves for the x, y and z components lie
between 0.03 and 0.10. The model utilizing attention for the spatial domain performed
the same task in only 3.082 seconds, and with areas between the spatially averaged
magnetization curves ranging from 0.02 to 0.13.
Transformers for Physics Predictions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Rasmus Bjørk, Professor, Head of Section DTU Energy
It is with great pleasure that we express our deep appreciation to Prof. Rasmus Bjørk
for providing us with the opportunity to work on this project and for advising us on the
physics aspects of it. Additionally, we wish to thank Rasmus for creating the MagTense
framework, which enabled the synthesis of test and training data.
Stefan Pollok, PhD Student, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
We want to thank PhD Student Stefan Pollok for advising us on deep learning and pointing
out relevant research in the micromagnetic community. In addition, we would like to thank
Stefan for porting MagTense to Python.
Andrea Roberto Insinga Tenure Track Assistant Professor, Department of Energy
Conversion and Storage
We would like to thank Andrea Roberto Insinga for allowing us to use his beautiful art
on the cover of the thesis.
iv
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Table 1: Notation and their meaning
Notation
Meaning
H
Hilbert spaces defined in a domain Ω, f ∈H : Ω→R
F
Frequency space defined in a domain Ω, f ∈F : Ω→R
E
Encoding process
D
Decoding process
qi, ki, vi
Individual query, key, and value vectors
Q, K, V
Query, key, and value matrices
∥x∥
Vector norm
∥A∥E
Flattened array of pointwise norms in euclidean space
Jx
Vector of x dimensions containing only ones
G
Petrov–Galerkin projection
xt, x(t)
The observed data at point t in time
Xt
The observed data projection at point t in time
Kn
The koopman operator for a domain Rn →Rn
L
The objective loss term for a given model
Transformers for Physics Predictions
v
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
CNN: Convolutional Neural Network
DL: Deep learning
DS: Dynamic System
FDM: Finite Difference Method
FEM: Finite Element Method
FNO: Fourier Neural Operator
FVM: Finite Volume Method
GPT: Generative Pre-trained Transformer
GPU: Graphics Processing Unit
GT: Galerkin Transformer
LLG: Landau–Lifshitz–Gilbert
MSE: Mean Squared Error
NLP: Natural Language Processing
NN: Neural Network
NO: Neural Operator
NOL: Neural Operator Learning
PBDL: Physics-based Deep Learning
PDE: Partial Differential Equation
PINN: Physics Informed Neural Network
vi
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Data-driven solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The Micromagnetic Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
MagTense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Multi-Layer Perceptrons and Dense Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Residual networks and skip connections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Auto-Encoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Koopman Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Neural Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.9
Galerkin Transformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Approach
15
3.1
Koopman based Auto-encoder & Auto-regressive transformer
. . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Galerkin Transformer & Fourier neural regressor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Experiments
25
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Koopman-Driven Auto-Encoder & Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Galerkin Transformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
29
5.1
Koopman-Driven Auto-Encoder & Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Galerkin Transformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Discussion
49
6.1
Koopman-Driven Auto-encoder & Transformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Galerkin Transformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusion
53
8
Outlook
55
8.1
Learning dynamics in Fourier space instead of Hilbert space . . . . . . . . .
55
8.2
Enabling variable temporal length input in the Galerkin transformer . . . .
55
A Appendix
61
A.1 Comparing koopman dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Transformers for Physics Predictions
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
From the light hitting your retina to the cells that makes up your body, from the earth
orbiting the sun to the galaxy that it is a part of, partial differential equations (PDEs)
emerge as the governing principle. For centuries, the study of PDEs have been the driving
force for approximating these complex phenomena of interest.
Advances in computer
science have allowed numerical methods for approximation to be applied to solutions for
PDEs in order to attain faster and more reliable results. A vast majority of applications
employ conventional numerical solvers, such as finite element (FEM), finite difference
(FDM) and finite volume (FVM) methods [35], where the solution space is discretized
and the problem is solved in finite dimensions. A complex spatiotemporal PDE, however,
requires a high-resolution discretization of both time and space, which is computationally
expensive.
The resolution of these solvers therefore depends on the trade-off between
accuracy and eﬀiciency.
Meanwhile, methods based on data-driven models attempting to infer patterns from finite
sequences of input-output pairs is gaining ground as a widespread applicable technique.
These models have the capability of directly learning the trajectory of a given equation [9].
Learned models are in most cases faster than numerical solvers at inference time, but they
require large sets of training data and computationally expensive optimization. Generally,
these models are based on deep layered neural networks (NNs), also referred to as deep
learning (DL).
With the emergence of the transformer architecture [43], leaps of progress have been made
in sequence modeling, pushing state-of-the-art results in natural language processing and
computer vision domains [10, 6, 11, 12]. This architecture is characterized by its atten-
tion mechanism, which is capable of capturing long-range interactions between arbitrary
locations and inputs. The attention mechanism can be used in modeling PDEs by ap-
plying it to either the spatial or temporal relations. In either domain, the presence of a
self-attention mechanism may result in the model being capable of mapping relationships
regardless of distance, and without any distance related decay.
A recently investigated area of interest is that of micromagnetism [25, 23, 26] driven by
the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbel (LLG) equation for modeling the time-dependant change of a
magnetic system on the mesoscale, i.e. the scale of nanometer to micrometer. The micro-
magnetic domain is characterized by the fully connected interactions between magnetic
grains [4]. In order to solve this domain numerically, it becomes increasingly diﬀicult given
the polynomial scaling of interactions between grains with respect to the dimensionality
and resolution of the discretization. Currently, numerical solvers like that of MagTense
[4] have an exponential growth in computational complexity and memory requirements
with the size of the problem (on GPU). Thus, this domain is particularly interesting for
exploration of the long range capabilities of the attention mechanism in relation to more
local methods like that of convolutions. Also, models would be able to bypass the memory
and complexity scaling issues of the domain.
For modern applications in practice, e.g., magnetic storage devices [41], it is of interest to
describe magnetic effects inside material on the mesoscale. Using a continuum approach,
the micromagnetic formalism (Ref. [7]) allows for this. Within this formalism, a material
is modeled with local magnetization vectors m, resolving magnetic structures, e.g., domain
walls.
Transformers for Physics Predictions
1
==PAGE:12==
In this thesis, we present an investigation for approximating the LLG equation of the
micromagnetic domain. Specifically, this study examines whether the transformer archi-
tecture, along with physics-based DL, can be used to learn the dynamics of this domain.
The computational complexity and memory requirements of the models should scale lin-
early with the problem size, rather than exponentially. The data for this study will be
generated by the open source micromagnetic solver MagTense [5]. The models presented
here will be subject to validation against the benchmark for the µMAG problem 4 (Ref.
[34, 33]), along with an evaluation of the computational cost and size.
1.1
Data-driven solutions
Data-driven solutions involve constructing a parameterized model and fitting it to a set
of training data. Ideally, this will result in a model that solves general problems in the
domain of the training set. A model’s fit to a domain is typically validated by exposing it
to previously unseen data during and after training.
For purposes of approximating physics systems, a number of data-driven techniques have
been developed in recent years.
Concepts such as Physics Informed Neural Networks
(PINN) [37], Physics-based Deep Learning (PBDL) [42], Neural Operator Learning (NOL)
[29] etc. paves the way for DL approaches in this domain. In contrast to numerical solvers,
these methods seek to approximate the next state of a sequence from learned mappings,
given a set of observed states S
f(S) = Sn+1,
1 ≤|S| ≤n,
(1.1)
where Sx denotes the xth element of the set S.
Methods like that of PINN, seek to
approximate only the final state, given an initial condition:
f(x0) = xt
(1.2)
Deep-learning models can have hundreds of millions of parameters (Ref. [11]), and so the
optimization technique used needs to be able to handle this large amount of parameters.
For Deep-learning models, a commonly used optimization technique is gradient descent
with a loss function. For deep-learning models, a combination of dynamic programming
and backwards-propagation is used to find the gradient of all parameters with respect to
the current batch of training samples and the current set of parameters. This is achieved
through a layer by layer approach rather than attempting to calculate the gradient for each
individual parameter. Gradient descent limits the found solution to a local minimum, and
does not guarantee a set of parameters resulting in the global minimum with regards to the
error function. The error function is chosen to fit the task of the network, as the network
will attempt to minimize the result of the error function. An example error function is the
mean squared error (MSE), which measures the mean squared distance between values
in the target output and the model output.
This error function is mainly used when
attempting to reconstruct or predict continuous values.
The training data is assumed to be ground truth data, and the fit model will therefore
inherit any faults and biases present in the training set. Because of this, the data needs to
come from a trusted source of truth. These sources include proven numerical simulations
or a set of real world observations.
Deep-Learning models are made to be fast. These models consist of a set number of matrix
multiplications, which can be run in parallel on a GPU with high eﬀiciency. Additionally,
any number of samples can be batch-inferred, making full use of the parallelization abilities
of the GPU.
2
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:13==
As this approach results in a model fit on a training data set, only close approximations
of the actual result can be reached.
1.2
The Micromagnetic Problem
In this thesis, data-driven solutions to the micromagnetic problem are examined. Micro-
magnetism is a suitable domain for exploring the performance of DL models in the area
of PDEs, considering the fully connected property of the system.
For numerical solvers, this property results in exponential computational cost and memory
consumption following the discretization resolution of the problem, which quickly leads
to unfeasible simulation times or memory issues (Fig. 1.1). Thus, it would be ideal to
explore techniques that are capable of solving the larger scale problems without running
into these issues.
Figure 1.1: MagTense computation time as a function of resolution on different hardware
(From Ref. [4])
In order to numerically model the time-dependent behavior of a micromagnetic system, the
Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation is used. The LLG equation allows for a detailed
understanding of how the magnetization evolves over time.
The original equation was introduced by Landau & Lifshitz in 1935 [27].
dM
dt = −γ(M × Heff) −λM × (M × Heff),
(1.3)
where M denotes the magnetization, and Heff denotes the effective field, which is a combi-
nation of the external field, the demagnetizing field, the exchange interaction as a quantum
mechanical effect, and the crystal anisotropy. γ denotes the electron gyromagnetic ratio
and λ is a phenomenological damping parameter. λ is often replaced with the following:
λ = α γ
Ms
,
(1.4)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
3
==PAGE:14==
for which α is a dimensionless dampening factor and Ms is the saturation magnetization.
This yields the following Landau-Lifshitz equation:
dM
dt = −γ(M × Heff) −α γ
Ms
M × (M × Heff)
(1.5)
The equation was modified by Gilbert in 1955 to better model large dampening factors
found in real magnets [17]. This was achieved by replacing the dampening term of the
Landau-Lifshitz equation to include a dependency of the time derivative of the magneti-
zation:
dM
dt = −γ(M × Heff −ηM × dM
dt ),
(1.6)
where η is the dampening parameter. The Gilbert modification can be transformed back
into the Landau-Lifshitz format with a clever choice of parameterization [1]:
dM
dt = −γ
′M × Heff −λM × (M × Heff),
(1.7)
where γ
′ is given as
γ
′ =
γ
1 + γ2η2M2s
(1.8)
and
λ =
γ2η
1 + γ2η2M2s
(1.9)
1.2.1
The standard problems
In order to facilitate comparisons of proposed computational techniques within micro-
magnetism, the µMAG group has developed five standard problems (Ref. [34]). Each
problem aims to address a different aspect of micromagnetic calculations. This project
will attempt to solve standard problem 4, which focuses on the time-dependent dynamic
aspects of micromagnetic computations (Ref. [33]). The problem 4 specifications has a
film of dimensions 500nm × 125nm × 3nm (Fig. 1.2).
Figure 1.2: Problem 4 specifications proposed by µMAG group (From Ref. [33])
The film is set to an initial magnetization state of equilibrium called the s-state (see Fig.
1.3).
This is achieved by applying an external field in the direction [1, 1, 1] and then
gradually reducing its strength to 0.
The film has the following material properties:
• A = 1.3 ∗10−11 J
m
• Ms = 8.0 ∗105 A
m
4
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:15==
• K = 0.0
Figure 1.3: Initial equilibrium s-state
A field of specified direction and magnitude are then applied in order to reverse the mag-
netization of the film. The time evolution of the magnetization is observed as the state
moves towards a new equilibrium. Problem 4 consists of two problems, each with a dif-
ferent field (Tab. 1.1).
Table 1.1: µMAG problem 4 external fields
µ0Hx
µ0Hy
µ0Hz
Field 1
-24.6 mT
4.3 mT
0.0 mT
Field 2
-35.5 mT
-6.3 mT
0.0 mT
In order to compare the results of a proposed computational method, two outputs are of
particular interest. The first output is a graph of the (x,y,z) components of the spatially
averaged magnetization of the film as a function of time from t = 0 to the new equilibrium
state. The second output is a 2D map of the magnetizations at the time value when the
x-component of the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses 0. This 2D map can be
compared to an image with channels Red, Green, and Blue, but instead the 2D map has
the channels x, y, and z.
1.3
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2 includes the background knowledge required for understanding our methods for
the proposed models.
Chapter 3 gives an overview of the proposed models and training methods. The models
will be discussed in depth, and the motivation behind the changes to our models compared
to previous literature will be laid out. The hyper-parameters used to tune the models will
be explained.
Chapter 4 explains how the experiments for each model was carried out. This chapter
goes into detail about the training parameters, and it briefly touches upon the goals of
the resulting models.
Chapter 5 lists the results of the experiments. One can expect to find the loss curves
from training, and the resulting spatially averaged magnetization curves along with the
2D-map snapshots of the magnetizations explained in Sec. 1.2. The results can be used
to compare the examined models with models from other origins.
Chapter 6 discusses the results listed in the previous chapter in an attempt to determine
which models performed well, and why some models would have worse performance.
Chapter 7 wraps up the discussion to determine the best model for further development
Transformers for Physics Predictions
5
==PAGE:16==
and research.
Chapter 8 has ideas on what paths could be expanded upon, and why the listed ideas
seem promising.
6
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:17==
2
Background
This chapter presents the theoretical background for the methods used to analyze the
micromagnetic domain data.
2.1
MagTense
MagTense [5] is a simulation framework taking the simulation approach to solving problems
in the magnostatic as well as the micromagnetic domain. For magnetostatic simulations,
MagTense allows different geometrical shapes of magnetic material to be placed within a
simulation space. These magnets are referred to as magnetic tiles, and each magnetic tile
holds information about the offset, shape type, rotation, & magnetization properties.
For micromagnetic simulations, MagTense uses a discretized grid to calculate granular
changes inside a simulated magnet.
There are some extra parameters to be used for
micromagnetism, including the anisotropy constant, the damping constant α, and the
precession constant γ.
Micromagnetism is simulated using the Landau-Lifshitz equation described in Eq. 1.7.
Magnetization is a normalized vector, as it only conveys direction. This means, that each
magnetization vector in the state will have a length of 1.
2.2
Multi-Layer Perceptrons and Dense Layers
Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP) is a type of feedforward artificial neural network. The
MLP consists of at least three layers, one input, one output, and one hidden layer in
between. Each layer, except for the input layer, uses a non-linear activation function. The
MLP layers are dense, meaning each node in a given layer connects to every node in the
next layer. The connections between two given layers are managed with a weight matrix
and a bias vector. The value of a given node k in a given layer i where i = 0 is the input
layer, and the size of the previous layer D, is given by:
h(i)
k (x, w, b) = xk
i = 0
h(i)
k (x, w, b) = fi


D
∑
j=0
w(i)
kj xj + bk


i ̸= 0
(2.1)
Where x is the input from the previous layer, w is the weight matrix of layer i, and b is
the bias vector. The input data needs to have the same size as the input layer. Learning
happens via gradient descent.
This method uses an objective function to determine,
numerically, how well the task has been handled on a given input. This function is used on
one or more samples of training data at a time, in order to determine the gradient of each
weight and bias in the model. The gradient values for each weight is dependant on the
output and the weights in the layer ahead, leading to these calculations being performed
through backpropagation.
The gradient values are then used to update the values of the weights and biases in the
model. The method varies depending on the optimization method chosen.
2.3
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks, or CNNs, are a type of regularized version Multi-Layer
Perceptrons [20]. Convolutional layers themselves use a system of shared weights and are
Transformers for Physics Predictions
7
==PAGE:18==
therefore space invariant. The input is processed by a layer through a convolution kernel
which is moved across the sample, using the shared weights for each application. For the
most part, however, the output of one or more convolutional layers are eventually fed to a
fully connected layer, which forces the input to be of certain dimensions to accommodate
the fixed input dimensions of the fully connected layer.
Convolutions take an input with a certain amount of channels, as an example the red,
green, and blue channels of an image, and translates these channels into another set of
channels, called feature-maps. The dimensions of the output is determined by the kernel
size, stride, and padding of the input. The learned features of the feature-maps are not
supplied, they are instead learned by the model during training. The spatial size of the
output can be described as a follows:
O = W −K + 2P
S
+ 1
(2.2)
Where O is the output spatial size, W is the input spatial size, K is the kernel size, S is
the stride, and P is the padding.
2.4
Residual networks and skip connections
With deeper models, skip connections may become necessary. Skip connections are set
up to propagate data from one layer to another, deeper layer. The connection skips one
or more layers in this process. The weighted gates that determine what to pass through
this skip connection is learned alongside the rest of the parameters. A simple example of
a linear skip connection skipping two layers can be found in Fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Residual block with a two layer skip connection
2.5
Auto-Encoders
The auto-encoder structure, first introduced in Ref. [39], is a model structure capable of
condensing information via eﬀicient coding. The model typically consists of an encoder
and decoder part, where the encoder is tasked with encoding the input into representation
of reduced dimensions. To validate and later make use of these encoded representations,
the decoder attempts to recover the original data through the encoded representations.
The encoded representations, or latent space representations, ideally contain as much
important information from the data as possible, so that recovering the data from these
representations be approximated as closely as possible.
For auto-encoders trained on data in the form of images, the encoding and decoding
layers typically makes use of convolutional layers (from CNN), as these perform well while
being much simpler in structure than using fully connected methods such as multilayer
perceptrons (MLP). This also makes it easier to avoid overfitting the models.
Auto-encoders are typically trained to minimize the reconstruction error, often the mean
squared error:
L(x, θ) = ||x −Dθ(Eθ(x))||2
(2.3)
Where x is the input data, and θ are the parameters of the model. E and D are the process
of encoding and decoding, respectively.
8
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:19==
2.6
Transformer
Originally created for Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, the transformer architec-
ture [43] has had a large impact on deep learning as a whole. The transformer is based on
an encoder-decoder architecture to solve sequence to sequence tasks like language trans-
lation. The encoder takes the input sequence consisting of a number of elements, while
the decoder generates the output sequence of elements to match a target sequence, taking
information from the encoder layers along the way. Additionally, some skip connections
are used. An overview of the encoder-decoder transformer can be found in Figure.
Figure 2.2: Transformer encoder/decoder architecture [43]
The self-attention uses scaled dot product based on a query-key-value concept to, for each
element in the input, calculate the influence of all elements in the sequence relative to
each other, and then produce an output based on the calculated self-attention weight and
a learned parameter for each input. This is done by learning weight matrices Wq, Wk,
and Wv, which all transform the inputs of the attention layer to a query, key, and value
vector, respectively.
qi = xiWq
ki = xiWk
vi = xiWv
Transformers for Physics Predictions
9
==PAGE:20==
These three vectors are calculated for each element of the sequence and packed into the
matrices Q, K, and V . The self-attention output (dots) is calculated as follows:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
√
d
)
V
(2.4)
The query vectors are matrix multiplied with the transposed key vectors, this results in
a square matrix of dimensions seq_len × seq_len, which holds information about how
each element should attend to every other element (including itself), the self-attention is
then scaled with a factor of
1
√
d to prevent the softmax function from producing small
gradients, with d being the internal hidden size of the elements in the attention layer, and
afterwards the softmax function is applied row-wise to convert the self-attention values
to probabilities. For a visual example of the self-attention output, see Tab. 2.1. The
self-attention probabilities are then matrix multiplied by the value vectors, which gives
the output for each element in the sequence, each of dimension d.
Table 2.1: Self-attention example
How
Are
You
How
0.1
0.7
0.2
Are
0.05
0.05
0.9
You
0.05
0.85
0.1
Self-attention is length-invariant, and for the attention of each element in the sequence,
the entire sequence is taken into account. This is different from models like the LSTM [19],
which iterates through each element one at a time, and updates a hidden internal state for
each step. The transformer model has a potential limitless context window. Also, unlike
the LSTM, the positions of the elements in the sequence has no effect on the transformer
output, as there is no sequential order of operations through the sequence. To have the
positions of the elements have an effect, a positional embedding is added to each element
based on their position in the sequence. The positional encodings can be learned or fixed.
The self-attention itself is computed in parallel across multiple self-attention heads to
reduce computational cost. This is done by splitting the internal hidden representation of
the input equally amongst a number of self-attention heads. Each head is responsible for
calculating the self-attention across different, equally sized chunks of the key, query, and
value vectors.
The self-attention mechanism allows for highly parallel training, allowing the model to
train on the entire input and output sequence in one forward pass. However, it is important
for the decoder not to be influenced by the future elements of the target sequence. To
prevent the decoder from attending to future elements of the target sequence, the decoder
uses masking in the self-attention. Before the softmax is applied to the self-attention, the
self-attention is partially masked. The masking is done by setting the self-attention values
of future elements to −∞, which will become 0 when the softmax is applied. A masked
example of Tab. 2.1 can be found in Tab. 2.2.
Table 2.2: Self-attention example, with partial mask
How
Are
You
How
1.0
0.0
0.0
Are
0.5
0.5
0.0
You
0.05
0.85
0.1
10
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:21==
During inference, the output elements are generated the same way as during training, but
due to the output target sequence being unknown, the output elements are only generated
one at a time, and for each step the already generated sequence is taken into account.
2.7
Koopman Embeddings
The Koopman operator was proposed in Ref. [22, 40] for continuous-time (CT) nonlinear
systems. The Koopman operator describes the composition operator in physics systems,
where it is the left-adjoint of the transfer operator of Perron-Frobenius [2]. The idea of
the operator is to project states from Euclidean space into an infinite dimensional Hilbert
space, where the previously non-linear relations between the evolutionary steps of the
system becomes linear. For discrete time (DT), one step forward in the system is done by
applying the Koopman operator in the projected Hilbert space:
Xt+1 = K∞× Xt
(2.5)
Koopman embeddings (KE) as a data-driven technique has emerged over the past decade
following the contributions of Refs. [14, 13, 16, 32]. It proposes a method of approximating
the behaviour of the Koopman operator through a learned finite-dimensional mapping.
Additionally, there is a learned function for projecting Euclidean space into the learned
Hilbert space, as well as a learned function for reprojecting the Hilbert space into Euclidean
space. These networks are usually trained on all mentioned objectives at the same time,
and the objectives are not necessarily weighed equally.
The Koopman embedding technique seeks to achieve a smooth vector space with a linear
relation of the underlying dynamics. It follows from this smooth vector space that when
an error occurs in Hilbert space, the trajectory in Euclidean space experiences an error
bounded by its size. Given an infinite space, the mapping can potentially contain infinite
information, including the information needed to solve the PDE in a linear manner. As
shown in Refs. [13, 16], this embedded information allows autoregressive models to map
these transitions as a learned operator, thus enabling discrete time marching of a system
from a projection of the initial state/condition.
2.8
Neural Operators
A 1995 publication (Ref. [9]) introduces the concept of neural networks as learned op-
erators for the mappings between infinite-dimensional function spaces directly from any
parametric dependence on the solution. Thus making this Neural Operator (NO) tech-
nique spatial invariant in theory. The work presents the universal approximation theorem,
which states that neural networks can approximate any continuous function with any ac-
curacy when the hidden layers are unconstrained.
In recent years, this idea has been deployed as a feasible strategy for learning PDEs with
works such as DeepONet [31]. In the work, a novel regression architecture is build on the
ideas of Ref. [9]. This network uses an iterative approach for approximation time steps
directly on the input data. For the DeepONet architecture a branch-and-trunk structure
is employed. The branch net is applied to the input functions and trunk net to querying
regions in the output [31] (see Fig. 2.3).
Transformers for Physics Predictions
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.3: Novel branch-and-trunk architecture (From Ref. [31])
Following this work a great deal of research has been carried out in the domain of Neural
NOs [24, 29, 36, 38, 3]. Especially the use of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) as a
replacement for the convolutions kernel has shown great promise. Since differentiation is
equivalent to multiplication in Fourier space, the Fourier transform is frequently used in
spectral methods for solving differential equations [29]. This technique has been imple-
mented in the Fourier Neural Network (FNO) [29] as a spectral convolution layer. Here
FFT is used to represent input in frequency space, where a linear transform is applied to
these input frequencies. This transform is then reduced to the most significant frequencies
by filtering out the highest Fourier modes, leaving a fixed amount of modes. The filtered
modes are multiplied with a learned operator R; since the number of modes is fixed, the
operator R can have fixed dimensions. After this filter is applied the remaining frequencies
are reprojected to Euclidean space through the inverse FFT. A layered architecture can
be constructed as with CNNs; the single block and layered architecture is shown in Fig.
2.4.
Figure 2.4: Layered architecture of the Fourier Nerual Network (FNO) (from Ref. [29])
The mapping of NOs in theory converges towards the described infinite functional space,
but in practice they are finite-dimensional approximations of time-dependent functions,
which are sampled on some discretization grids [28]. As a result, these methods still rely
on the same discretizations for the input and output.
12
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:23==
2.9
Galerkin Transformer
Proposed in Choose a Transformer: Fourier or Galerkin [8], the Galerkin Transformer
(GT) aims to use the self-attention mechanism from [43] for data-driven operator learning
related to PDEs.
The GT takes the discrete points as input, and stores all temporal
information point-wise for the discretization.
The self-attention of the GT has been modified to accommodate this change. The formula
for the self-attention in the GT is:
AttentionG(Q, K, V ) = Q(LayerNorm(K)T LayerNorm(V ))
n
(2.6)
Where n is the sequence length (amount of points sampled). A visualization of the Galerkin
attention can be found in Fig. 2.5.
Figure 2.5: A dissection of Galerkin-type attention’s output [8]
This changes the complexity of the matrix multiplications from O(n2d) to O(nd2), making
the complexity linear rather than quadratic with relation to the sequence length n. The
self-attention of the GT also works column-wise instead of row-wise, the reason being,
that the rows represent the learned embeddings of each token for every position, while the
columns can be interpreted as basis functions for the sampled grid points of the positional
encodings.
Relating this to finite element methods and the Petrov-Galerkin projections, the column-
space of Q is the trial space, K is the test space, the Galerkin self-attention is a set of
learnable Petrov-Galerkin projections for each basis covered in V .
As Shuhao Cao writes on his webpage: ”For the best approximator (Petrov-Galerkin
projection) in the value space, there exists at least one key to match an incoming query
to deliver this best approximator.” 1. Note, that for the Galerkin self-attention layer, the
value space is Q, the key space is V , and the query space is K.
These GT self-attention layers are used as encoders for the input to go from physical space
to Petrov-Galerkin projections, and are then followed by problem specific decoder layers
in order to return to physical space.
1https://scaomath.github.io/blog/galerkin-transformer/#proof-a-saddle-point-problem-in-hilbert-spaces
Transformers for Physics Predictions
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:25==
3
Approach
Outlined in Chap. 1 the micro-magnetic problem is a fully-connected dynamic system
which evolve over time following Eq. 1.6. For the model, this means that every point in
each state influences every point in the next states, and thus, the model has to consider all
previous information at all times. Simply fully connecting an entire time step in a sample,
which has dimensions 64×16×1, to infer the next step would lead to a highly specialized,
computationally expensive model which would be very prone to overfitting.
This chapter outlines the methods and motivations behind the proposed models. The pro-
posed models are split into two categories, each using self attention for different domains.
The models seek to improve on the work done by Kovacs et al. [25] in a few ways. The
models should improve on feature inclusion such as, but not limited to, the external field
and material parameters. The models should also be able to take a larger amount of mag-
netization states into account when predicting the next, which should improve accuracy
of inference further into the future.
In the previous work, the external field was used only when stepping forward in latent
space, and only a single point of information for the x- and y-component is used, mean-
ing external fields varying in space are impossible to map. Also, the context window for
predicting the next magnetic state was set to 4, and the method for predicting the next
latent state involved a linear layer with the previous 4 latent states, and the x/y compo-
nents of the external field, as input. For the proposed models, the external field and other
parameters will be embedded as their own separate channels, and the step predictor will
instead operate only on the latent space representations. Having the parameters inserted
into channels will allow for spatially variant parameters. The temporal resolution of their
data is 0.01ns over 1ns, but for the proposed models the temporal resolution is set to
0.004ns over 1.6ns to show potential improvements over longer predictions.
3.1
Koopman based Auto-encoder & Auto-regressive
transformer
Closely following the proposed setup of Ref. [16], the Koopman based setup will consist
of two separate models. This model will be the model utilizing attention in the temporal
domain. An auto-encoder model will be trained in encoding the time steps of samples,
along with parameters such as the external field, to latent space and decode a sample from
latent space back to physical domain space, without the parameters. An auto-regressive
transformer will then be trained on the latent representations coming from the now frozen
auto-encoder, in order for it to be able to infer future time steps for other micro-magnetic
sequences. The auto-regressive transformer allows inference using input sequences of any
length, including inference using only the initial state. This is different from the work
in Ref. [25], as the model in the paper requires 3 additional states in addition to the
initial state. Additionally, the self attention mechanism used on the temporal domain
should provide better extrapolation as inference continues far into the future away from
the initial state.
The auto-encoder has the following set of hyper parameters:
• Backbone Dim 1
• Backbone Dim 2
Transformers for Physics Predictions
15
==PAGE:26==
• Backbone Dim 3
• FF size
• Embedding size
• Koopman bandwidth
The flow of the encoding process can be found in Tab. 3.2, the decoding process can be
found in Tab. 3.3. The field information is propagated along two new channels in the
physical space, one channel for the x-component, the other for the y-component. The
backbone_dim hyper parameters affect the channel sizes of the different convolution lay-
ers. The residual blocks follow the structure of a standard residual block as described in
Ref. [18]. Fc_dim affects the size of the fully connected layer connecting the final layer
to the output of the convolution layers. Finally, embed_dim determines the number of
dimensions in latent space.
The Koopman bandwidth serves to reduce the complexity of the learned Koopman oper-
ator. The Koopman operator has the shape Embeddingsize × Embeddingsize in order
to work as a linear operator on the latent space representations. Not all of these weights
are needed [16], so the Koopman bandwidth determines the width of used weights in the
Koopman operator down the diagonal.
Table 3.1: Example parameters for Tab. 3.2 and Tab. 3.3
Backbone dim 1
48
Backbone dim 2
96
Backbone dim 3
192
FF size
256
Embedding size
128
Table 3.2: Encoding process with parameters from Tab. 3.1
Task
Output dimensions
Input
3 × 64 × 16
&
2
Fill two channels with field info
5 × 64 × 16
Conv2d, Batchnorm2d, ReLU
48 × 64 × 16
Residual block, stride 2
48 × 32 × 8
Residual block, stride 2
96 × 16 × 4
Residual block, stride 2
192 × 8 × 2
Reshape
3072
Linear, LeakyReLU
256
Linear, LayerNorm
128
16
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:27==
Table 3.3: Decoding process with parameters from Tab. 3.1
Task
Output dimensions
Input
128
Linear, LeakyReLU
256
Linear, LeakyReLU
3072
Reshape
192 × 8 × 2
ConvTranspose2d, BatchNorm2d, LeakyReLU
96 × 16 × 4
ConvTranspose2d, BatchNorm2d, LeakyReLU
48 × 32 × 8
ConvTranspose2d
3 × 64 × 16
Training the auto-encoder is done in blocks of training data. Rather than attempting
to force dynamics across entire samples at a time, smaller blocks are sampled from the
training data. The blocks are sampled at a given, fixed, size, and the stride between the
beginning of each block is also fixed. The block size and stride are the same for an entire
training session across every sample, splitting each sample into a set amount of blocks. The
amount of blocks is given in Eq. 3.1. Ideally, seq_len−block_size
stride
should be a whole number,
as otherwise the last parts of the sequences will go unused. Also, stride ≤block_size
should be true, as otherwise there will be unused parts between the blocks. The block
segmentation is shown in Fig. 3.1, this also demonstrates how some of the sequences may
go unused if a bad combination of parameters is used.
num_blocks = floor
(seq_len −block_size
stride
)
+ 1, block_size ≤seq_len
(3.1)
Figure 3.1: Block segmentation of a sample sequence with length 8. Block size is 3, stride
is 2
The auto-regressive transformer is from x-transformers [44] using the continuous-value
auto-regressive transformer found in Ref. [15]. This is a decoder-only transformer like
that of the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) proposed in Ref. [6]. The structure
follows the standard transformer structure, and this is reflected in the hyper-parameters.
The hyperparameters are:
• Max Seq Length
• Dim In
• Dim Out
• Decoder Dim
Transformers for Physics Predictions
17
==PAGE:28==
• Depth
• Heads
As the transformer is set to predict a sequence of latent states, based on a sequence of
latent states, the in and out dimensions will be the same, and they will be equal to the
size of the latent space.
For regularization purposes, dropout was introduced to both the attention mechanism as
well as the feed forward layers. This introduces the following parameters:
• FF Dropout
• Attn Dropout
The decoder is causal, meaning the model only takes context of previous states into ac-
count; it never takes future states into account. The structure of the transformer can be
found in Fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Structure of the Continuous-Value, Auto-Regressive, decoder only, causal
transformer
3.1.1
Training the model without dynamics
For the first preliminary experiment, the auto-encoder was trained without any constraints
on dynamics. This means, that the model would only be concerned about encoding the
physical domain into latent space, and decoding the latent space back into the physical
18
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:29==
domain.
The auto-regressive transformer will still have valid data to work with, but
without any dynamics to learn, inferring time steps should lead to poor results.
The
auto-encoder was trained using the following objective:
L(x, θ) = λ1Lrecon(x, θ) + λ2Lnorm(x, θ)
(3.2)
L(x, θ)recon = MSE(Dθ(Eθ(x)), x)
(3.3)
L(x, θ)norm = MSE(||Dθ(Eθ(x))||E, J64∗16)
(3.4)
Where MSE(y, ˆy) = 1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2, ||A||E is an unfolded vector of all individual vector
norms in magnetization state A, Ji denotes a vector of dimension i filled with ones, and θ
represents the current parameters of the model. x is the input magnetization state in the
physical domain.
λ1 is used to weigh a simple reconstruction error term. This is calculated as the error
between the magnetization states of the block, and the direct result of embedding and
then recovering the same state of the block. λ2 is used to weigh the importance of the
model outputting unit vectors.
Normally, the auto-encoder we are using is trained using blocks of training data. This is
not relevant to the model without dynamics, as this model is not relying on any state to
state dynamics. It is for this reason that the notation of blocks have been omitted in the
objective function. A graphical overview of the auto-encoder training can be seen in Fig.
3.3.
Figure 3.3: Main training flow of the auto-encoder with no dynamics on one block
Afterwards, the training set was encoded using the trained, frozen auto-encoder. These
latent representations were then used to train the auto-regressive transformer.
The objective of the transformer was:
L(x, θ) = MSE(Pθ(x[0 : t −1]), x[1 : t])
(3.5)
Where MSE(y, ˆy) = 1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2, Pθ has the auto-regressive transformer predict the
set of embedded states shiftet forward one time step, and θ are the parameters of the
transformer.
A graphical overview of the transformer training can be found in Fig. 3.2.
Transformers for Physics Predictions
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: Training the auto-regressive transformer on one block
3.1.2
Training the model with dynamics
For the second experiment, the auto-encoder was trained have Koopman dynamics in latent
space. The Koopman dynamics were enforced by having a learned Koopman operator,
which was trained through the objective alongside reconstruction.
Training the auto-
encoder with dynamics makes use of the training block structure described in Sec. 3.1,
and the block indices are included in the objective function as index 1 through b. The
objective function used was:
L(x, θ)
=
λ2Lreconstruction(x, θ, 1) + λ4Lnormalization(x, θ, 1)
+
b
∑
i=2
(
λ1Ldynamics(x, θ, i) + λ2Lreconstruction(x, θ, i)
+
λ3Ldynamics_decay(x, θ) + λ4Lnormalization(x, θ, i)
)
(3.6)
Ldynamics(x, θ, i) = MSE(Dθ(Ki−1Eθ(x1)), Dθ(Eθ(xi)))
(3.7)
Lreconstruction(x, θ, i) = MSE(Dθ(Eθ(xi)), xi)
(3.8)
Ldynamics_decay(x, θ) = pow(K, 2)
(3.9)
Lnormalization(x, θ, i) = MSE(||(Dθ(Eθ(xi)))||E, J64∗16)
(3.10)
Where MSE(y, ˆy) = 1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2 and θ are the current parameters of the model. Ki
denotes multiplying by the square matrix K i times. pow(A, i) denotes raising every value
in matrix A to the power of i. ||A||E is an unfolded vector of all individual vector norms
in magnetization state A. Ji denotes a vector of length i filled with ones.
The loss function makes use of continuous blocks of size b from the simulated data. The
block size determines how far into the future the Koopman dynamics should be evaluated.
λ1 is used to assign a weight to the error of the Koopman dynamics. This part of the loss
function compares the magnetization states of a block with the reconstructions achieved
from applying the Koopman operator on the first magnetization state the appropriate
amount of times. λ2 is used to weigh a simple reconstruction error term. This is calcu-
lated as the error between the magnetization states of the block, and the direct result of
embedding and then recovering the same state of the block. λ3 is used to set the weight of
the Koopman decay term. This term decays the Koopman operator’s parameters, which
should force the model to learn more meaningful dynamics [16]. λ4 is used to weigh the
importance of the model outputting unit vectors.
20
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:31==
An overview of the training flow can be seen in Fig. 3.5. The transformer was trained in
the same manner as depicted in Sec. 3.1.1.
Figure 3.5: Main training flow of the auto-encoder with dynamics on one block
3.1.3
Jointly trained auto-encoder and transformer
For the third experiment, a proposed jointly trained auto-encoder and transformer was
explored. This involved training the auto-encoder with no enforced dynamics, but then
also training the auto-regressive transformer alongside at the same time. The rationaliza-
tion is, that the model will optimize the dynamics in latent space to fit the needs of the
auto-regressive transformer. The objective was:
L(x, θ) = λ1Lreconstruction(x, θ) + λ2Ldynamics(x, θ)
(3.11)
Lreconstruction(x, θ) = 1
b
b
∑
i=1
MSE(Dθ(Eθ(x[i, 0 : t])), x[i, 0 : t])
(3.12)
Ldynamics(x, θ) = 1
b
b
∑
i=1
MSE(Pθ(Eθ(x[i, 0 : t −1])), Eθ(x[i, 1 : t]))
(3.13)
Where MSE(y, ˆy) = 1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2, Pθ has the auto-regressive transformer predict the
next set of embedded states, shifted forward one time unit, and θ represents the current
parameters of the model. The input x is of dimensions b × t × c × w × h, where b and t
are the batch size and maximum sequence length.
λ1 is used to weigh a simple reconstruction error term. This is calculated as the error
between the magnetization states of the block, and the direct result of embedding and
then recovering the same state of the block. λ2 is used to assign a weight to the error of
the Koopman dynamics. This part of the loss function compares the predicted embedded
states with the actual embedded states (shifted one step forward).
Transformers for Physics Predictions
21
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Galerkin Transformer & Fourier neural regressor
In contrast to the Koopman embedding technique (Sec. 3.1) and the model from Kovac
et al. [25], the Galerkin Transformer and the Fourier Neural Regressor are both space
invariant as described in the Sec. 2.8 and 2.9. This approach seeks to explore attention
for the spatial domain of a PDE. The GT and FNR both utilize point wise, fully con-
nected operations across channels to predict the next magnetization states. The entire
discretized physical space is fed into the transformer at once, meaning that the learned
spatial dynamics can span the entire physical space, rather than being limited to just a
fixed kernel size as with convolutions.
3.2.1
Iterative Euclidean time marching
Unlike the latent space time marching shown in Sec. 3.1, this approach follows the pro-
posed iterative regression of [8] in which states are projected into latent space and then
recovered for the next step. This iterative way of regression can be seen in Fig. 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Iterative regression technique
As this technique moves between latent space and the uncontrollable real space of the
domain, inference-related errors should increase as the context of the initial states becomes
increasingly distant. When compared to the temporal method of Sec. 3.1, where inference
should look stable over the whole time sequence, this approach using spatial attention
should map the sequence far more accurately before errors accumulate.
As the Galerkin transformer queries for arbitrary location on a discrete grid rather than
time steps, the dimensionality of the input data can be theoretically infinite as in con-
trast to the finite input of Ref. [25]. The temporal context window, however, is finite,
which means that the sequence length of the input must be consistent. Taking this into
consideration the block sampling method from Sec. 3.1 needs to follow that
block_size = context_size + steps,
where the context_size is the consistent length input and the steps is the amount of future
steps for prediction.
To capture the spatial dimension of the problem, absolute positions in the form of a
generated grid points are passed through the Galerkin attention shown in Fig. 3.7.
22
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.7: Discrete absolute positioning grid
The architecture follows the originally proposed setup [8] with slight augmentations seen
in Fig. 3.8. In contrast to the original problem, this micromagnetic domain consists of
x, y and z components enriched with x and y component of a field and grid. For a given
batch, the enriched input are arranged according to the time dimension, which provides
the dimensionality of
{X, F, S} ∈R(Tin·C+d+d)×W×H →R(Tout·C)×W×H,
for the input and the output of the model. Where X is the input magnetization, F is the
field, and S is the spatial coordinates. Tin and Tout are the amount of time steps for the
input and output, C is the amount of channels, d is the amount of spatial dimensions (in
our case 2), W is the width of the input, and H is the height of the input.
Figure 3.8: The input is projected with spacial coordinates for x and y and field informa-
tion. Following a Galerkin attention and spectral convolution as the time regressor
The hyperprameters for the model follows that of Ref. [8], where the most sigificant is are
as follows:
• Attention hidden dimension: N hidden
• Number of attention layers: Encoder layers
Transformers for Physics Predictions
23
==PAGE:34==
• Attention heads: N Head
• Hidden dimension in the frequency domain: Freq dimension
• Number of remaining Fourier modes after filtering: Fourier modes
• Number of spectral convolutions: Num regressor layers
In this approach, the objective is to minimize the distance between prediction and obser-
vation. This follows from Ref. [8] as the standard L2 norm 1
N ΣN
t ||Pθ(xt) −xt||2
E, where
xt is the current step and Pθ denotes the models prediction of the next step in Euclidean
space with the parameters θ. The vanilla Adam optimizer1 from PyTorch was utilized to
optimize the parameters of this model.
1https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.Adam.html
24
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:35==
4
Experiments
To determine the performance of the different proposed models, experiments were set up
to compare the resulting trained models with the benchmark of the µMAG’s problem
4. The experiments all aim to show the x, y, & z components of the spatially averaged
magnetizations as a function of time, as well as a snapshot of the magnetization at the
time when the spatially averaged x-component first crosses zero. This is in line with the
standard benchmark results proposed by µMAG for their problem 4 [25].
4.1
Data
The training samples were simulated using MagTense [5].
Each sample is a 400 time
step sequence, starting with the standard s-state, which can be seen in Fig. 4.1. Each
time step is 4ps, or 0.004ns, this makes each sample span 1.6ns. The samples cover an
area of 500nm × 125nm × 3nm, as is expected of the µMAG standard problem 4. The
discretization resolution is 64 × 16 × 1, meaning each discretized point is an approximated
average of 7.8125nm×7.8125nm×3nm. The same discretization was used when simulating
the sequences in MagTense.
Following Ref. [25], the data was limited to samples with an applied field in the angles
spanning from 158 degrees to 202 degrees, measured counter clockwise from the positive
direction on the x-axis. This results in samples with external fields always pointing against
the initial s-state on the x-axis. The strength of the applied external fields were limited
to be between 22mT/µ0 and 44mT/µ0.
Figure 4.1: 64 × 16 grid representation of the s-state
4.2
Koopman-Driven Auto-Encoder & Transformer
4.2.1
No dynamics
As an introductory test, the auto-encoder was trained without dynamics on the training
set. The hyper parameters of the auto-encoder model can be found in Tab. 4.2. The
auto-encoder had 2.230.413 trainable parameters For this test, both parts of the objective
function (Eq. 3.2) were weighted equally with λ1 = λ2 = 1.
The auto-encoder model was trained for 300 epochs of 98 steps each, with a learning rate
of 0.001, and the optimizer used was the AdamW optimizer [30] 1 and ExponentialLR
2 learning rate scheduler with γ = 0.995. Training took 1 hour and 57 minutes. The
optimizer parameters are outlined in Tab. 4.1. The block size, as well as the stride, was
1https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.AdamW.html
2https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ExponentialLR.html
Transformers for Physics Predictions
25
==PAGE:36==
set to 4. The training and validation loss curves can be found in Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.1.
After training the auto-encoder, the weights of the auto-encoder were frozen, and the
transformer was trained. The hyper-parameters of the transformer can be found in Tab.
4.3. The transformer had 37.949.056 trainable parameters. For dropout, both attention
and feed forward dropout was used. Both dropouts were set to 0.08. The transformer was
trained for 500 epochs of 16 steps each with a learning rate of 0.001 using the Adam [21]
3 optimizer with default parameters. Training took 2 hours and 4 minutes.
Table 4.1: Optimizer parameters, no auto-encoder dynamics
learning rate
0.001
eps
1e −8
momentum
0.9
β0
0.9
β1
0.999
weight decay
1e −8
Table 4.2: Auto-encoder hyper-parameters, no dynamics
Embedding size
128
FF size
192
Conv dim 1
48
Conv dim 2
96
Conv dim 3
192
Koopman bandwith
7
Table 4.3: Transformer hyper-parameters, no dynamics
Max Seq Length
24
Dim In
128
Dim Out
128
Decoder Dim
512
Depth
12
Heads
8
4.2.2
Training the auto-encoder with Koopman dynamics
Following the auto-encoder model trained with no dynamics, an auto-encoder with Koop-
man dynamics was explored. The auto-encoder hyper-parameters can be found in Tab.
4.4. The auto-encoder had a total of 2.136.763 trainable parameters. The auto-encoder
model was trained for 300 epochs of 98 steps with a learning rate of 0.001 using the same
optimizer and scheduler as the auto-encoder training in Sec. 4.2.1. The block size, as well
as the stride, was set to 4. Training took 2 hours and 41 minutes. For the weights of the
objective function, they were set as follows:
• λ1 = λ2 = 10
• λ3 = 0.01
• λ4 = 2
3https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.Adam.html
26
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.4: Auto-encoder parameters trained with Koopman dynamics
Embedding size
128
FF size
192
Conv dim 1
48
Conv dim 2
96
Conv dim 3
192
Koopman bandwith
7
The transformer was trained using the frozen auto-encoder. The transformer parameters
can be found in Tab. 4.5. The transformer had a total of 37.949.056 trainable parameters.
The transformer was trained for 500 epochs of 32 steps with a learning rate of 0.001 using
the Adam optimizer with default parameters. The block size was equal to the context
window size, and the stride was set to 8. The training took 7 hours and 26 minutes.
The dropout rate for this transformer was 0.08 for both the feed forward dropout and the
attention dropout.
Table 4.5: Transformer parameters using auto-encoder with Koopman dynamics
Max Seq Length
24
Dim In
128
Dim Out
128
Decoder Dim
512
Depth
12
Heads
8
4.2.3
Jointly trained Auto-Encoder and Transformer
This combined transformer and auto-encoder model was trained for 175 epochs of 93 steps
on 500 samples. Training time was 3 hours and 29 minutes. The hyper-parameters of the
auto-encoder can be found in Tab. 4.6, and the hyper-parameters for the transformer can
be found in Tab. 4.7. The jointly trained model had 41.193.667 trainable parameters.
The transformer used a dropout of 0.08 for both the attention and ff dropouts.
For the objective function, λ1 was set to 1, and λ2 was set to 100.
Table 4.6: Auto-encoder model parameters used in the jointly trained model
Embedding size
128
FF size
192
Conv dim 1
64
Conv dim 2
128
Conv dim 3
256
Transformers for Physics Predictions
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.7: Transformer parameters used in the jointly trained model
Max Seq Length
24
Dim In
128
Dim Out
128
Decoder Dim
512
Depth
12
Heads
8
4.3
Galerkin Transformer
4.3.1
Iterative Euclidean time marching
The experiment for the iterative regression in psychical space was trained for 100 epochs,
each with a step size of 76. Time for training was 3 hours and 19 minutes. The hyperpra-
menters for the model can be found in Tab 4.8. The model had total of 634.739 trainable
parameters. Here, the learning rate is attached to the OneCycleLR scheduler 4 from the
pytorch library with the pramenters found in Tab. 4.9. For training, the block size was
set at 20, with a context window of 10 and a step size of 10.
Table 4.8: Galerkin transformer parameters
N hidden
128
Encoder layers
4
N Heads
4
Freq dimension
20
Fourier modes
8
Num regressor layers
4
Table 4.9: OneCycleLR scheduler parameters
Learning rage
0.003
div_factor
0.0004
final_div_factor
0.0004
4https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.lr_scheduler.OneCycleLR.html
28
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:39==
5
Results
This chapter presents the results from training and validation of each experimental setup.
Graphs that display loss over training epochs have a log y component so that variation
can be easily identified. For readability, all plots depicting the magnetization state where
Mx crosses zero, the amount of vectors shown has been reduced by a factor of two, and
the background has been colored according to the magnetization angle in the x/y plane.
For problem 4, time marching in plots are presented as the ground truth data, with the
model prediction overlaid. Each color red, green, blue corresponds to the component x, y,
and z respectively.
5.1
Koopman-Driven Auto-Encoder & Transformer
5.1.1
No dynamics
The training and validation loss curves of the auto-encoder model with no dynamics can
be found in Fig. 5.1 and Fig. 5.2 respectively. Only the reconstruction and normalization
losses are included in the validation loss.
The auto-encoder model’s performance on the two µMAG problem 4 problems can be
found in Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4. This is the performance of the auto-encoder encoding and
then decoding all states.
Figure 5.1: Auto-encoder training loss
Transformers for Physics Predictions
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.2: Auto-encoder validation loss
Figure 5.3: Auto-encoder performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (reconstruction only)
30
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.4: Auto-encoder performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (reconstruction only)
For the transformer, the training and validation loss curves can be found in Fig. 5.5 & Fig.
5.6. The transformer’s performance on the two µMAG problem 4 problems are split into
two results for each problem. The first result is the x-, y-, & z-components of the spatially
averaged magnetization as a function of time is plotted from t = 0 to the equilibrium state.
The other result is an image of the magnetization state at the time when the x-component
of the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero.
For problem 4.1, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.7, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of the
spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.8.
For problem 4.2, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.9, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of the
spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.10.
Figure 5.5: Transformer training loss
Transformers for Physics Predictions
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.6: Transformer validation loss
Figure 5.7: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization curve)
32
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:43==
(a) Transformer
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.8: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization state where
Mx first crosses 0)
Figure 5.9: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization curve)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
33
==PAGE:44==
(a) Transformer
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.10: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization state where
Mx first crosses 0)
5.1.2
Koopman dynamics
The training and validation loss curves of the Auto-encoder model with enforced koopman
dynamics can be found in Fig. 5.11 and Fig. 5.12 respectively. Only the reconstruction
and normalization losses are included in the validation loss.
The auto-encoder model’s performance on the two µMAG problem 4 problems can be
found in Fig. 5.13 and Fig. 5.14. This is the performance of the auto-encoder encoding
and then decoding all states.
The performance of the koopman dynamics can be found in Fig. 5.15. This is the result
of embedding the initial s-state, and then applying the koopman operator continuously to
generate a sequence of latent states. These states are then all reconstructed in order to
return the latent states to physical space.
34
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.11: Auto-encoder training loss with koopman dynamics
Figure 5.12: Auto-encoder validation loss with koopman dynamics (reconstruction loss
only)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.13: Auto-encoder on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (reconstruction only)
Figure 5.14: Auto-encoder on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (reconstruction only)
36
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.15: Auto-encoder with koopman dynamics predicting from the initial state using
only the learned koopman operator
For the transformer, the training and validation loss curves can be found in Fig. 5.16 &
Fig. 5.17. Following the methods found in Sec. 4.2.1 for the validation of the µMAG
problem 4.
For problem 4.1, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.18, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of
the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.19.
For problem 4.2, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.20, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of
the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.21.
For the spatially averaged magnetization curves, the area between curves can be found in
Tab. 5.1. A detailed overview of the running time of a full inference task at batch size 1
can be found in Tab. 5.2.
The transformer inference times of different batch sizes can be seen in Tab. 5.3.
Figure 5.16: Transformer training loss
Transformers for Physics Predictions
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.17: Transformer validation loss
Figure 5.18: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization curve)
38
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:49==
(a) Transformer
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.19: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization state where
Mx first crosses 0)
Figure 5.20: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization curve)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
39
==PAGE:50==
(a) Transformer
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.21: Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization state where
Mx first crosses 0)
Table 5.1: Area between spatially averaged magnetization curves
Mx
My
Mz
Problem 4.1
0.03
0.1
0.04
Problem 4.2
0.06
0.1
0.03
Table 5.2: Inference time using only the initial state
Task
Time (s)
Embed initial state
0.001
Generate embedded sequence
6.971
Recover sequence
0.001
Total
6.973
MagTense
10.719
40
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:51==
Table 5.3: Sequence generation times at different batch sizes (using only the initial states)
Batch size
Generate 399 magnetic states for every batch (s)
4
7.418
8
7.368
16
7.600
32
10.437
64
17.484
128
28.294
256
46.461
512
84.394
5.1.3
Jointly trained Auto-Encoder and Transformer
For the combined training, the training and validation loss graphs can be found in Fig.
5.22 and Fig. 5.23.
The trained auto-encoder’s performance can be found in Fig. 5.24 & Fig. 5.25; this is
only the performance of encoding and decoding the magnetization states.
For problem 4.1, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.26, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of
the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.27.
For problem 4.2, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.28, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of
the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.29.
A graph showing the MSE between the latent representation of x and x −1 can be found
in Fig. 5.30.
Figure 5.22: Training loss when training both auto-encoder and transformer at the same
time
Transformers for Physics Predictions
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.23: Validation loss when training both auto-encoder and transformer at the same
time
Figure 5.24: Jointly trained model performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Embedding/Re-
construction only)
42
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.25: Jointly trained model performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Embedding/Re-
construction only)
Figure 5.26: Jointly trained model performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization
curve given only the initial s-state and external field)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
43
==PAGE:54==
(a) Jointly trained model
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.27: Jointly trained model performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization
state where Mx first crosses 0, given only the initial s-state and external field)
Figure 5.28: Jointly trained model performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization
curve given only the initial s-state and external field)
44
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:55==
(a) Jointly trained model
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.29: Jointly trained model performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization
state where Mx first crosses 0, given only the initial s-state and external field)
Figure 5.30: Jointly trained model MSE between current and previous predicted embedded
state (problem 4.1)
5.2
Galerkin Transformer
5.2.1
Iterative Euclidean time marching
Training and validation loss curves can be found in Fig. 5.31. Following the methods
found in Sec. 4.2.1 for the validation of the µMAG problem 4.
For problem 4.1, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
Transformers for Physics Predictions
45
==PAGE:56==
in Fig. 5.32, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of
the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.33.
For problem 4.2, the spatially averaged magnetization as a function of time can be found
in Fig. 5.34, and the image of the magnetization at the time when the x-component of
the spatially averaged magnetization first crosses zero can be found in Fig. 5.35.
For the spatially averaged magnetization curves, the area between curves can be found in
Tab. 5.4. A detailed overview of the running time of a full inference task at batch size 1
can be found in Tab. 5.5.
The transformer inference times of different batch sizes can be seen in Tab. 5.6.
Figure 5.31: Caption
Figure 5.32: Galerkin Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization
curve)
46
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:57==
(a) Galerkin Transformer
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.33: Galerkin performance on µMAG’s problem 4.1 (Magnetization state where
Mx first crosses 0, given the context of 10 initial samples and external field).
Figure 5.34: Galerkin Transformer performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization
curve)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
47
==PAGE:58==
(a) Galerkin Transformer
(b) MagTense
Figure 5.35: Galerkin performance on µMAG’s problem 4.2 (Magnetization state where
Mx first crosses 0, given the context of 10 initial samples and external field).
Table 5.4: Area between spatially averaged magnetization curves
Mx
My
Mz
Problem 4.1
0.02
0.10
0.02
Problem 4.2
0.05
0.13
0.03
Table 5.5: Inference time with a context of 10 states
Task
Time (s)
Generate sequence
3.0823
MagTense
10.719
Table 5.6: Sequence generation times at different batch sizes with a context of 10 states
Batch size
Generate 390 magnetic states for every batch (s)
4
3.580
8
4.001
16
3.974
32
3.892
64
5.140
128
9.875
256
19.445
512
50.781
48
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
In this chapter, the results of each experiment is looked at in detail, and possible expla-
nations are put forward. Additionally, some ideas for improvements are presented for the
more promising experiments.
6.1
Koopman-Driven Auto-encoder & Transformer
Out of the different Koopman-driven experiments, the only one showing promising results
is the model involving the independently trained auto-encoder with Koopman dynamics.
This is seen on the magnetization curves compared to the results of MagTense, where the
model trained with Koopman dynamics performs better. The magnetization states where
Mx first crosses zero look more like the ones from MagTense from the model with the
Koopman Dynamics as well, although the model trained without Dynamics had a decent
approximation of problem 4.1, only placed at an incorrect time. The experiments have
shown why the dynamics in latent space are important, as the performance of the model
degrades otherwise, despite the validation error of the transformer being significantly lower
without dynamics.
6.1.1
No dynamics
For the experiment without dynamics, the model performance on µMAG’s problem 4 was
not satisfactory.
This, coupled with the otherwise excellent performance of the auto-
encoder alone, indicates, that it is not possible to solve this problem without enforcing
some dynamics in the auto-encoder model. The transformer which has to operate on the
embedded representations simply does not have any dynamics between embedded states
to infer, as the embedded versions have no forced correlation between them.
This also explains how, despite the low validation loss of this transformer (0.0006), the
results in this experiment are worse than in the one presented below with enforced Koop-
man dynamics. This indicates, that despite the transformer performing really well on the
inference of future embedded states, the small error that it has changes the outcome when
recovering the inferred embedded representations drastically. It can be argued, that this
demonstrates the existence of a chaotic latent space that is neither smooth nor aligned
with any trajectory of dynamics.
6.1.2
Koopman dynamics
It seems that, while the Koopman operator is bound by the third factor of the loss func-
tion, it is only limited by an upper bound. The trained auto-encoder ends up having the
learned values in the Koopman operator approach zero, making each application of the
operator reduce the embedded representation vector close to zero instantly.
Since the
model attempts to solve a minimization problem, the resulting model seems to ”assign”
the zero vector in embedded state to the average magnetization state of the data set,
thus making the reconstruction of these Koopman-inferred embedded states as correct as
possible, while still being far from the right states. This was worrying, as the transformer
seemingly did not have any real dynamics to go by.
The validation loss for this transformer was much higher than the previous experiment.
For this transformer, the validation loss ended at 0.012, which is much higher than the
transformer from Sec. 4.2.1 which ended at 0.0006. This shows that despite this new
transformer not performing as well, the error that it makes in latent space is mitigated by
the learned dynamics. In other words, the dynamics enforced in the auto-encoder model of
this section can see different, larger deviations in the embedded space without completely
Transformers for Physics Predictions
49
==PAGE:60==
changing the output of the reconstructed state.
The inference times shown in Tab. 5.2 show a significant bottle neck in the sequence gen-
eration using the transformer. It should be noted, that the generation of sequences can
be done in batches, making use of the excellent parallel capabilities enabled by the GPU.
The table shows the benefits of parallelization using the auto-encoder model, as the initial
state consists of one state, while the recovery task consists of recovering all subsequent 399
magnetization states, but both tasks end up taking nearly the same amount of time. A
demonstration of parallelizing the transformer generation task is seen in Tab. 5.3, where
the transformer is tasked to batch generate the subsequent 399 sequences given b initial
states. It is observed, that the inference time is initially unaffected by the increased batch
size, until the batch size doubles beyond 16. Even with these bigger batches, the time it
takes to generate the subsequent states does not seem to double along with it.
While the model shows error in the predictions, the error does not seem to grow signifi-
cantly with time. This can be attributed to the attention mechanism being used in the
temporal domain.
6.1.3
Jointly trained Auto-Encoder and Transformer
The resulting auto-encoder produced alright results when simply embedding and recover-
ing the sequences, this can be seen in Fig. 5.24 and Fig. 5.25. The model’s performance
was bad when it came to inferring the sequence given the initial s-state. The behaviour
of the model appears to be the same as when only the Koopman dynamics were used.
The model learns to assign a single vector in embedded space to minimize the loss of the
objective function, and the sequence inference instead collapses into this vector and stays
there. This behaviour can be observed in the two magnetization graphs in Fig. 5.26 and
Fig. 5.28. The magnetization states when Mx first crosses 0 are also going to be wrong as
a result, as the first state where Mx has crossed 0 will be in this collapsed vector embed-
ded state. The two plots are included in Fig. 5.27 and Fig. 5.29. Interestingly, since the
transformer is applying a non linear operation, the embedded vector that the system ends
up collapsing into is an arbitrary one, not necessarily the zero vector as with the linear
Koopman operator.
The dynamics behaviour was further analyzed by looking at the predicted sequence of
embedded states. The initial embedded state was a result of embedding the initial s-state,
but the following embedded states are all a result of the auto-regressive transformer pre-
dicting the next embedded state. The MSE between the current and previous embedded
state from 2 to 400 was observed for µMAG’s problem 4.1. The plot can be found in Fig.
5.30, the plot for µMAG’s problem 4.2 is similar. Three different colors are used: the red
point marks the MSE between the embedded s-state and the first prediction, the green
points mark the MSE between the current and previous embedded state while the initial
s-state is still within the context window of the transformer, and the blue marks are all
MSE between the current and the previous embedded states after the initial embedded
s-state has left the context window. There are clear differences between these three cat-
egories, further supporting the notion of a dynamics collapse as it happened when just
using the learned Koopman operator.
6.2
Galerkin Transformer
6.2.1
Iterative Euclidean time marching
As a result of using Galerkin transformer and FNO regression using an iterative approach
between Euclidean and latent space, the results obtained follow the expectations of the
proposed experiment. This can be seen in the two magnetization graphs Fig. 5.32 and Fig.
5.34, showing a tight fit initially but a gradual drop off as the problem progresses. The
drop off in performance can be attributed to the fact that the attention mechanism was
50
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:61==
not used in the temporal domain, but rather only in the physical domain. The excellent
initial performance can be attributed to the attention mechanism in the spatial domain
capturing more of the spatial dynamics than a CNN approach would have (like the one
used in the Koopman based model).
In the assumption that the attention projection to Petrov Galerkin space converges to a
smooth vector space, as is more clearly visible for the results of the Koopmman technique
Ref. 5.1.2, it would then be beneficial to propagate forward in the latent space. Thus,
there would hopefully be a reduction in the accumulation of errors from moving between
latent- and Euclidean space repeatedly, which this method imposes.
Eliminating the
accumulated error should improve the overall performance, but the performance is still
expected to degrade over time, as the attention mechanism is not used in the temporal
domain.
Despite the fact that this error accumulates, the model does not have a significant differ-
ence in the area between spatially averaged magnetizations than Koopman, as shown in
Tab. 5.4 with an overall better lower bound for both problems. Furthermore the magneti-
sation state when Mx first crosses 0 reflect that of the numerical solver [4], seen in Fig.
5.33 and 5.34 more closely than Fig. 5.19 and 5.21, which could indicate a tighter fit for
the spatial domain. As compared to Koopman driven technique with its 40.179.469 train-
able parameters, this model has been trained with 634.739 parameters and still achieves
high fit of the domain. This is reflected in the inference time of 3.0 seconds in Ref. 5.5,
for generating 390 timesteps in comparison to 6.9 times in Ref. 5.2.
Transformers for Physics Predictions
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
In the field of PDEs, the attention mechanism shows great promise as a novel universal
method for capturing long range dependencies of either temporal trajectories or spatial
projections. We have shown the potential of the attention mechanism in the domain of
micromagnetism by comparing the predicted sequences to existing numerical solvers.
For a discretized 64 × 16 × 1 grid of 500nm × 125nm × 3nm, predicting a 400 time step
sequence of 1.6ns took the model utilizing temporal attention 6.973 seconds, with areas
between the spatially averaged magnetization curves over time from MagTense and the
model in the x, y and z dimensions ranging from 0.03 to 0.1.
The model utilizing
spatial attention performed the same task in only 3.0 seconds, and with areas between
the spatially averaged magnetization curves ranging from 0.02 to 0.13.
It has been shown that, contrary to numerical solvers which scale exponentially with the
size of this problem, the inference time of the models proposed in this thesis scale as a
function of select hyperparameters affecting either parameter amount or module count.
Due to this, the models are potentially advantageous with respect to memory and time
constraints of larger scale problems when compared to numerical solutions.
At the time of writing this thesis, models for predicting physics based dynamics are still
in its infancy, but it is an area being widely researched by the combined physics- and
computer science community. In this thesis, the models proposed tend to be beneficial
only at large scales, either in terms of the amount of problems in need of solving, or in
terms of the size of the problems themselves. While technology advances and new models
are developed, deep learning models may be able to replace or augment numerical solutions
in the near future, even for small-scale problems.
Transformers for Physics Predictions
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:65==
8
Outlook
It is important to note how the work presented in this thesis can be improved.
This
chapter presents two suggestions which serve to bring the advantages of one model into
the other. If both models are successfully combined, the self attention mechanism could
be used for both the temporal and spatial domain at the same time.
8.1
Learning dynamics in Fourier space instead of Hilbert
space
The current attempt at learning Koopman dynamics in Hilbert space showed unsatisfac-
tory results. It was shown, that the learned Koopman operator collapses into something
close to a null matrix, making every application of the operator result in latent represen-
tations resembling null vectors.
While the transformer was able to infer the latent representations in Hilbert space despite
the collapsing dynamics, it would be of interest to have actual support from the dynamics
imposed on the auto-encoder.
It would be interesting to have the auto-encoder make use of Fourier space rather than
Hilbert space; it could even use the spectral convolutions as the backbone for the auto-
encoder. The structure would follow that of the FNO, but instead of having multiple
layers each applying their R operator in their respective Fourier spaces, the R operator
would be used to predict only the very next time step, with the possibility of using the
operator multiple times in sequence as a way of stepping forward in time.
The auto-regressive transformer would be trained in the same manner as the previous
Koopman experiments, with only the auto-encoder architecture being changed.
8.2
Enabling variable temporal length input in the
Galerkin transformer
The current Galerkin transformer is only capable of fixed dimensional inputs and outputs.
The input and output can differ in dimension sizes, but the dimension sizes limit the
amount of time steps the model can take as input, and how many time steps can be
produced as output. In order to support a temporal context window larger than one,
n > 1, the initial input sequence will also have to match the determined temporal size. In
the case of micromagnetics, it would necessitate simulating the first n steps.
It would be interesting to implement a form of masking in the input, allowing the model to
ignore unused parts of the temporal dimension during inference, should the input contain
fewer time steps than the models maximum support.
This will leverage the temporal
self attention abilities found in the Koopman based model, and combine it with the self
attention in the spatial domain of the Galerkin Transformer. The diﬀiculty lies in the
fixed nature of the model, as the model expects a certain amount of channels in the
input, which is determined by the temporal size. Successful implementation would allow
the model to generate the entire sequence given just the initial state, without having to
simulate anything in the beginning.
Furthermore, due to the promising results of attention as a Neural Operator represented
by the Galerkin transform, we have created a package containing these components as
modules for future research 1.
1Neural Operator package: https://github.com/NicolaiLassen/no-pytorch
Transformers for Physics Predictions
55
==PAGE:66==
56
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] Amikam Aharoni. Introduction to the theory of ferromagnetism. Clarendon Press,
1996. ISBN 978-0-19-851791-7.
[2] AmirMahdi Ahmadinejad, Arun Jambulapati, Amin Saberi, and Aaron Sidford.
Perron-frobenius theory in nearly linear time:
Positive eigenvectors, m-matrices,
graph kernels, and other applications.
CoRR, abs/1810.02348, 2018.
URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1810.02348.
[3] Kaushik Bhattacharya, Bamdad Hosseini, Nikola B. Kovachki, and Andrew M. Stuart.
Model reduction and neural networks for parametric pdes, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2005.03180.
[4] R. Bjørk, E.B. Poulsen, K.K. Nielsen, and A.R. Insinga. MagTense: A micromagnetic
framework using the analytical demagnetization tensor. Journal of Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials, 535:168057, oct 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.jmmm.2021.168057. URL
https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jmmm.2021.168057.
[5] R. Bjørk, E.B. Poulsen, K.K. Nielsen, and A.R. Insinga. Magtense: A micromagnetic
framework using the analytical demagnetization tensor. Journal of Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials, 535:168057, Oct 2021. ISSN 0304-8853. doi: 10.1016/j.jmmm.
2021.168057. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2021.168057.
[6] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Pra-
fulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell,
Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon
Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher
Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR, abs/2005.14165, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
[7] William Fuller Brown Jr. Micromagnetics, domains, and resonance. Journal of Applied
Physics, 30(4):S62–S69, 1959.
[8] Shuhao Cao. Choose a transformer: Fourier or galerkin, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2105.14995.
[9] Tianping Chen and Hong Chen. Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by
neural networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical
systems. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 6(4):911–917, 1995. doi: 10.1109/
72.392253.
[10] Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea
Gane, Tamás Sarlós, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser,
David Belanger, Lucy J. Colwell, and Adrian Weller.
Rethinking attention with
performers. CoRR, abs/2009.14794, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.14794.
[11] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2018. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
Transformers for Physics Predictions
57
==PAGE:68==
[12] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua
Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold,
Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale.
CoRR, abs/2010.11929, 2020.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
[13] Hamidreza Eivazi, Luca Guastoni, Philipp Schlatter, Hossein Azizpour, and Ricardo
Vinuesa. Recurrent neural networks and koopman-based frameworks for temporal
predictions in a low-order model of turbulence, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2005.02762.
[14] Fletcher Fan, Bowen Yi, David C. Rye, Guodong Shi, and Ian R. Manchester.
Learning stable koopman embeddings.
CoRR, abs/2110.06509, 2021.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2110.06509.
[15] Yingruo Fan, Zhaojiang Lin, Jun Saito, Wenping Wang, and Taku Komura. Face-
former:
Speech-driven 3d facial animation with transformers, 2021.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2112.05329.
[16] Nicholas Geneva and Nicholas Zabaras. Transformers for modeling physical systems.
Neural Networks, 146:272–289, Feb 2022. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.
2021.11.022. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2021.11.022.
[17] T. L. Gilbert and J. M. Kelly. Anomalous rotational damping in ferromagnetic sheets.
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, pages 253–263, 1955.
[18] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[19] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural compu-
tation, 9:1735–80, 12 1997. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[20] Nikhil Ketkar and Jojo Moolayil. Convolutional Neural Networks, pages 197–242.
Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2021. ISBN 978-1-4842-5364-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-5364-
9_6. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-5364-9_6.
[21] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,
2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[22] B O Koopman. Hamiltonian systems and transformation in hilbert space. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A, 17(5):315–318, May 1931.
[23] Alexander Kornell, Lukas Exl, Leoni Breth, Johann Fischbacher, Alexander Kovacs,
Harald Oezelt, Markus Gusenbauer, Masao Yano, Noritsugu Sakuma, Akihito Ki-
noshita, Tetsuya Shoji, Akira Kato, Norbert J. Mauser, and Thomas Schrefl. De-
scription of collective magnetization processes with machine learning models, 2022.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.03708.
[24] Nikola B. Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhat-
tacharya, Andrew M. Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar.
Neural operator: Learn-
ing maps between function spaces.
CoRR, abs/2108.08481, 2021.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2108.08481.
[25] Alexander Kovacs, Johann Fischbacher, Harald Oezelt, Markus Gusenbauer, Lukas
Exl, Florian Bruckner, Dieter Suess, and Thomas Schrefl. Learning magnetization
dynamics. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 491:165548, 2019. ISSN
58
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:69==
0304-8853.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2019.165548.
URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304885319307978.
[26] Alexander Kovacs, Lukas Exl, Alexander Kornell, Johann Fischbacher, Markus Hov-
orka, Markus Gusenbauer, Leoni Breth, Harald Oezelt, Masao Yano, Noritsugu
Sakuma, Akihito Kinoshita, Tetsuya Shoji, Akira Kato, and Thomas Schrefl. Ex-
ploring the hysteresis properties of nanocrystalline permanent magnets using deep
learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.16676.
[27] L.D. Landau and E.M Lifshitz. Theory of the dispersion of magnetic permeability in
ferromagnetic bodies. Physikalische Zeitschrift der Sowjetunion 8, Part 2, page 153,
1935.
[28] Zijie Li, Kazem Meidani, and Amir Barati Farimani. Transformer for partial differ-
ential equations’ operator learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13671.
[29] Zongyi Li, Nikola B. Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik
Bhattacharya, Andrew M. Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural oper-
ator for parametric partial differential equations. CoRR, abs/2010.08895, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.08895.
[30] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Fixing weight decay regularization in adam. CoRR,
abs/1711.05101, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.
[31] Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, and George Em Karniadakis. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear
operators for identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation
theorem of operators. CoRR, abs/1910.03193, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
03193.
[32] Bethany Lusch, J. Kutz, and Steven Brunton.
Deep learning for universal linear
embeddings of nonlinear dynamics. Nature Communications, 9, 11 2018. doi: 10.
1038/s41467-018-07210-0.
[33] Bob McMichael, Roger Koch, Thomas Schrefl, Jason Eicke, and Bob McMichael.
µMAG standard problem #4, 2000. URL https://www.ctcms.nist.gov/~rdm/mumag.
org.html.
[34] Bob McMichael, Roger Koch, Thomas Schrefl, Jason Eicke, and Bob McMichael.
µmag standard problems, 2022.
URL https://www.ctcms.nist.gov/~rdm/toc.html#
standards.
[35] Joaquim Peiro and Spencer Sherwin. Finite Difference, Finite Element and Finite
Volume Methods for Partial Differential Equations, pages 2415–2446. Springer, Dor-
drecht, 01 2005. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-3286-8_127.
[36] Md Ashiqur Rahman, Manuel A. Florez, Anima Anandkumar, Zachary E. Ross,
and Kamyar Azizzadenesheli. Generative adversarial neural operators, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.03017.
[37] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999118307125.
[38] Nicholas Roberts, Mikhail Khodak, Tri Dao, Liam Li, Christopher Ré, and Ameet
Transformers for Physics Predictions
59
==PAGE:70==
Talwalkar. Rethinking neural operations for diverse tasks. CoRR, abs/2103.15798,
2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.15798.
[39] D.E. RUMELHART, G.E. HINTON, and R.J. WILLIAMS. Learning internal repre-
sentations by error propagation.
In Allan Collins and Edward E. Smith, editors,
Readings in Cognitive Science, pages 399–421. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
ISBN
978-1-4832-1446-7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4832-1446-7.50035-2. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781483214467500352.
[40] Gregory Snyder and Zhuoyuan Song. Koopman operator theory for nonlinear dynamic
modeling using dynamic mode decomposition, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
08442.
[41] Saied Tehrani, Jon M Slaughter, Mark Deherrera, Brad N Engel, Nicholas D Rizzo,
John Salter, Mark Durlam, Renu W Dave, Jason Janesky, Brian Butcher, et al.
Magnetoresistive random access memory using magnetic tunnel junctions. Proceedings
of the IEEE, 91(5):703–714, 2003.
[42] Nils Thuerey, Philipp Holl, Maximilian Mueller, Patrick Schnell, Felix Trost, and
Kiwon Um.
Physics-based deep learning, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.
05237.
[43] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017.
[44] Phil Wang. x-transformers. https://github.com/lucidrains/x-transformers, 2022.
60
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix
A.1
Comparing koopman dynamics
When plotting the koopman dynamics, we tried two different approaches. One approach
was to simply embed the initial state and then apply the koopman operator over and over
to get the sequence of latent states, then use the auto-encoder to reconstruct the entire
sequence.
The other approach involved reconstructing and the embedding after every
koopman operation.
The experiments involved plotting the spatially averaged magnetization, plotting the sum
of each latent representation (adding all values in each vector), and plotting the values of
the final latent representation.
The results of the experiments where the recovery of the latent states were performed in
the end can be found in Fig. A.1, A.2 & A.3, whereas the results of the experiment with
recovery and embedding between every koopman operation can be found in Fig. A.4, A.5
& A.6.
Figure A.1: Magnetization curve of koopman dynamics (Staying in latent space)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.2: Sum of latent vectors (Staying in latent space)
Figure A.3: Last latent vector values (Staying in latent space)
62
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.4: Magnetization curve of koopman dynamics (Recover every koopman step)
Figure A.5: Sum of latent vectors (Recover every koopman step)
Transformers for Physics Predictions
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.6: Last latent vector values (Recover every koopman step)
64
Transformers for Physics Predictions
==PAGE:75==
Transformers for Physics Predictions
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej, Building 301
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
