==PAGE:1==
Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Autonomous Drone Control
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This master thesis entitled ”Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control”
has been prepared for six months at Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, as a part of ”Inspectrone” project. It has been submitted in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Natalia Agnieszka Karpowicz - s202400
Signature
Date
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Nowadays, the probability of getting injured during ship ballast tank inspection is high
because of possibility of gas leakage or incidents with falling parts. The thesis is part of
the “Inspectrone” project that aims to reduce the risk of the maintenance crew by using
autonomous drones to perform inspections of ship ballast tanks.
The project will focus on implementation of an algorithm to optimize the drone’s trajec-
tory to autonomously guide the drone through the holes in ship ballast tank and at the
same time avoid the collision with potential obstacles like walls or other elements of ship
construction.
The optimization of the unmanned aerial vehicle’s (UAV) trajectory planning has recently
become a case of many research problems. To generate time optimal path is often a very
complex task that requires advanced calculations of the UAV’s dynamics, often with the
limited knowledge about the environment. This can be solved by using intelligent control
systems i.e. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL).
In the project, the use of different DRL approaches to improve the autonomous drone
control to fly through tank holes will be examined. The goal is to plan the trajectory that
minimizes the time needed to complete this task, taking as an input to the algorithm,
information about environment from the drone’s sensors.
iv
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Reinforcement Learning
3
2.1
Actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Reward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7
Q-learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Deep Q-Network
9
3.1
Deep Q-learning implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
DQN improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
System Overview
15
4.1
System components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
System structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Simulation
19
5.1
Simulation importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Simulation architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
Multiple drones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.4
Clock speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Algorithm implementation
23
6.1
Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Action space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.4
Reward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.5
Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.6
Reset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.7
DQN model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7
Testing
27
7.1
Simulation and environment tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8
Results
31
8.1
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
8.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
9
Conclusion
35
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
v
==PAGE:6==
Bibliography
37
A Model parameters
39
vi
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In the last decade, a significant grow in the number of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)
applications was observed. Drones are now used in various different fields, starting from
monitoring and photography; and ending at inspection and delivery. It is expected that
drone’s market size will increase from 7.7 billion USD in 2022 to 17.5 billion USB in 2028
[1].
With the increasing number of applications, come new technological challenges in the
field of autonomous navigation, control or intelligent decision making. Those tasks re-
quire advanced algorithms that would handle its complexity. Recent development of Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AI) opened new possibilities for the use of drones in the areas where
autonomous solutions are highly required and UAV must operate without human help.
One of the areas where high autonomous level is demanded is inspection of confined
spaces. Sending human to perform an inspection in such areas can often cause significant
health damage to the worker or come with high cost of conducting the task. However,
using a drone in that case might be challenging. In many cases it is not possible to use
GPS, so instead, to learn to navigate in the area, drone uses cameras and advanced
Computer Vision algorithms.
Figure 1.1: Image showing ship ballast tank environment in the simulation.
An example of the confined space where drones can be used to reduce the probability
of getting injured during inspection is ship ballast tank. Nowadays, inspection of ship
ballast tank comes with the high risk of injury because of possibility of gas leakage or
incidents with falling parts. This Master Thesis is part of the “Inspectrone” project that
aims to reduce the risk of the maintenance crew by using autonomous drones to perform
inspections of ship ballast tanks.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.2: Inside of ship ballast tank. The aim of the project is to teach the drone to fly
through the hole shown on the image.
In the project, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithm was introduced as a way for
teaching the UAV fly autonomously through ship ballast tank hole. The goal is to optimize
the drone’s trajectory through ballast tank hole basing on the depth image from the camera
and at the same time avoiding the collision with the potential obstacles like walls or other
elements of ship construction.
2
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:9==
2
Reinforcement Learning
Modern drone application often require to make complex calculations in order to perform
its task. This can be for example: optimization of the trajectory or energy usage, decision
making based on the image and sensors data, collision avoidance etc. Those task need
to take into consideration many different factors and make advanced calculation in order
to accomplish their goal. One way to solve the problem of complexity of the algorithm is
to use Reinforcement Learning (RL).
The idea behind Rl is to introduce the reward function Rt that rewards the agent for doing
its task correctly. The agent takes actions At in the environment and calculates the reward
at each state St. Base on the sum of the rewards in the episode, it corrects its policy
(strategy of movements). Finally, after many trials, it learns how to perform a task. This
approach allows to learn patterns that are usually hard to perceive by human or their
complexity is difficult to explain by mathematical equations.
Figure 2.1: Graph showing the idea behind Reinforcement Learning. Agent takes an
action At which results in landing in new state St+1 and receiving reward Rt+1.
This reflects human’s way of learning. Humans also try an action and learn from its out-
come. An example can be how to learn to ride a bike. The goal here is to ride as long
distance without falling as possible. If the actions results in falling or unstable ride, they
are corrected. If they results in driving longer distance then people know that the progress
in learning has been made and keep trying this strategy.
The main components of the RL algorithm are: policy, action, observation, state, reward
and value functions and optionally model of the environment.
2.1
Actions
The actions are steps taken in the environment that lead to the change of agent’s state.
That can be for example a movement of the robot in certain direction, jumping of the player
in the video game or pressing a button in the web browser. Actions can be discrete or
continuous.The agent chooses an action a from a set of all possible actions A . It means
that a ∈A .
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
3
==PAGE:10==
2.2
State
A description of the agent’s environment is called the state s where s ∈S and S is a
set of possible states. The information about the environment can take different forms. It
can be an image from the computer game, the position and rotation of the mechanism, or
values takes from the device sensors.
During the training, the most important part takes a state of the environment that is per-
ceived by the agent itself. It is called observation and it is not always equivalent to the
state as agents perception can be limited.
Thus, in Reinforcement Learning, environment can be classified according to its observ-
ability by the agent. If the agent knows all of the information of the environment, we are
talking about fully observable system. An example of such a system can be an algorithm
for Atari game where agent gets a current screen image from the game as an observation.
The agent is aware of everything that is happening in the game.
However, let’s take as example a robot that gets information only from its sensors. Its
knowledge about environment is limited during the training. If the agent has limited infor-
mation of the environment, the model is called partially observable.
2.3
Reward
To measure the performance of the action at the certain state, RL algorithm uses reward
function. Reward R reflects how good the outcome of action was. Thus, it is important
to appropriately design the reward function to properly evaluate the performance of the
action.
Let’s define the average reward in the Nth step of the episode:
RN = R1 + R2 + R3 + ... + RN−1
N −1
(2.1)
It can be proved that RN+1 = RN + 1
N (RN −RN):
RN+1 = E(R(a)) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
Ri =
= 1
N (RN +
N−1
∑
i=1
Ri) =
= 1
N (RN + (N −1)
1
N −1
N−1
∑
i=1
Ri) =
= 1
N (RN + (N −1)RN) =
= 1
N (RN + NRN −RN) =
= RN + 1
N (RN −RN)
(2.2)
This formula is important for the update part of the algorithm and the concept will be further
explain while introducing Q-learning algorithm. However, now let’s focus on the formula.
It can be noticed that equation can be written in the following way:
R ←R + α(R −R)
(2.3)
4
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:11==
The goal here is to update the estimate R by using the old estimate R and target R. Thus,
it can be written that:
NewEstimate ←OldEstimate + α(Target −OldEstimate)
(2.4)
where (Target −OldEstimate) is the estimate error that is reduced by step size α. This
notation is especially important from the point of view of the memory usage and compu-
tation speed as it is more efficient to use eq. 2.3 to update the averages of the reward.
2.4
Policy
During the training, agent learns the strategy of choosing actions i.e. policy. Policy π is a
function that maps agent’s state St into action At. The algorithm aims to maximize sum of
future rewards so the goal of the policy is to choose an action that is the most beneficial
for the agent. Policy is a crucial element of RL algorithm as it determines the agent’s
behaviour.
2.4.1
Offline and online policy update
There are many different approaches of how to design policy function. One of the way
of categorizing policy is the division for online and offline updates of the agent’s strategy.
The offline RL algorithms learn by using previously logged data. The agent first takes pre-
viously specified number of iterations in the environment, collects information regarding
state, action, reward and saves the data. However, the online learning updates the model
directly after collecting the observation.
2.4.2
Exploration vs. exploitation
An important aspect of RL is the compromise between exploration and exploitation. As
previously mentioned, the goal of RL is to maximize sum of the future rewards. The agent
should exploit the best action to accomplish that goal but at the same time, it should
explore other possible action as it might happen that one of them will result in higher
reward than the expected one.
2.4.3
ϵ-greedy algorithms
One of the approaches to ensure exploration is to introduce a parameter ϵ that specifies
the probability of choosing random action instead of the one that maximizes expected
value function. This algorithm is called ϵ-greedy bandit algorithm. By using this technique,
agent visits the states that it would most likely avoid while following its policy and thus, it
explores more.
Figure 2.2: Graph showing how ϵ value decreases over the time step N while using decay
ϵ-greedy algorithm.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
5
==PAGE:12==
However, it is much more profitable to the agent to explore at the beginning of the training
and exploit in the end. In that case, agent visits lots of possible states and then focus on
finding the most optimal actions. It can be accomplished by gradually decreasing ϵ over
time (see 2.2). In the algorithm, the following parameters should be defined: initial ϵ, end
ϵ and number of steps after the end ϵ is reached. It is called decay ϵ-greedy algorithm.
The algorithm was shown as a pseudocode below.
Algorithm 1 Decay ϵ-greedy algorithm
1: Inputs:
initial exploration rate ϵinit, final exploration rate ϵend, number of
exploration steps nϵ, 0 <= ϵinit <= 1, 0 <= ϵend <= 1, ϵinit > ϵend
2: Initialize:
R(a) ←0, N(a) ←0, for each a ∈A
3: loop forever
4:
r ←max( N(a)−nϵ
N(a)
, 0)
5:
ϵ ←(ϵinit −ϵend) · r + ϵend
6:
a ←



arg max
as∈A (s)
R(as) with probability 1 −ϵ, breaking ties randomly
random action a, with probability ϵ
7:
Take action a and receive reward R
8:
N(a) ←N(a) + 1
9:
R(a) ←R(a) +
1
N(a)[R −R(a)]
RL is broad topic and there are much more approaches for policy implementation than
the mentioned above and it cannot be clearly said which approach is the best for the
optimization of training. This depends on the type of the task the agent tries to learn, its
environment, action and observation space, etc.
2.5
Return
The goal of the agent is to maximize the sum the rewards received at each action during
the episode. The sum of all future rewards at the particular state is called return G. This
is the sum, the agent aims to maximize. Return G at specific time t is given by:
Gt = Rt+1 + Rt+2 + ... + RT =
T
∑
i=1
Rt+i
(2.5)
where: T is a final time step
In many cases, however, final time step T is not a constant. The agent’s tasks time can
differ and sometimes have no end. Then T = ∞and so does the return. To handle this
problem, a discounted factor γ was introduced:
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + ... =
T
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1
(2.6)
where: γ is a discount factor and 0 <= γ <= 1
If γ < 1, the return has a finite value and distant future rewards are worth less than the
rewards close to the current time. Which is often more preferable as then the agents
6
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:13==
considers the event that are about to happen soon more significant than the events that
might happen after long time. It is worth noticing that the discounted return can be also
written in the following way:
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + ... =
= Rt+1 + γ(Rt+2 + γRt+3 + γ2Rt+4 + ...) =
= Rt+1 + γGt+1
(2.7)
This notation is important for introducing the RL algorithms and it will be used to explain
the concept of Q-learning.
2.6
Value
Another important component of RL algorithm is value function. Value is defined as an
expectation of the agent’s return following the policy π. The value function can be based
on agents state - state-value function or state and action - action-value function. Thus,
state-value function Vπ(s) is given by:
Vπ(s) = Eπ[Gt|St = s] = Eπ[
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1|St = s]
(2.8)
It predicts the expected reward based on the agents state but what if taking different
actions from the same state can lead to different expected rewards. To find the optimal
policy the agent should have information about which action is the most profitable. In
action-value function Qπ(s, a), the expected reward is calculated based on a state and an
action. Qπ(s, a) is defined as:
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[Gt|St = s, At = a] = Eπ[
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1|St = s, At = a]
(2.9)
Action-value function Qπ(s, a) is often called Q-function. It can be said that the agent
follows optimal policy π∗by choosing an action a from a state s that results in the highest
value of action-value function Qπ(s, a) i.e. when agent expects the highest reward.
Notice that if agent follows optimal policy π∗, it results in always choosing the most prof-
itable action by the agent and so its state-value and action-value functions will be equal:
V∗(s) = arg max
a
Q∗(s, a)
(2.10)
2.6.1
Temporal-Difference learning
Looking at the notation 2.3, the update of the value function V can be formulated in the
following way:
V (St) ←V (St) + α[Gt −V (St)]
(2.11)
The return G is here the target and it’s compared with the old estimate of the value function
V . It’s difference is called error estimate and it indicates how much value function V should
change to get closer to its true value. This is multiplied by the learning rate α.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
7
==PAGE:14==
However, to get estimate of G, the agent normally should go through all the steps til the
end of the episode. To optimize the time of the computations, we can use equation 2.7:
V (St) ←V (St) + α[Rt+1 + γV (St+1) −V (St)]
(2.12)
The update of V (St) value using the equation above is called Temporal-Difference (TD)
update.
2.7
Q-learning
Algorithm 2 Q-learning (off-policy TD control)
1: Inputs:
step size α, α ∈< 0, 1], exploration rate ϵ, 0 <= ϵ <= 1
2: Initialize:
Q(s, a) ←0 for all s ∈S , a ∈A
3: loop for each episode
4:
Initialize s
5:
do
6:
choose a from s using policy π delivered from Q
7:
take action a and observe R, s′
8:
Q(St, At) ←Q(St, At) + α[Rt+1 + γ maxa Q(St+1, a) −Q(St, At)]
9:
s ←s′
10:
while s is not terminal
Q-learning algorithm was formulated in 1989. It approximates new value of action-value
function by using the concept of TD update:
Q(St, At) ←Q(St, At) + α[Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q(St+1, a) −Q(St, At)]
(2.13)
The Q-learning algorithm first initializes the action-value function Q and agent’s policy π.
Algorithm chooses the action based on the policy that is dependent on the action-value
function Q - optimal policy chooses the action that result in highest action-value function
Q value. After taking a step agent lands in new state s′ and calculates reward R. Basing
on that observation, action-value function Q is updated using the equation 2.13. This is
repeated until the end of all episodes.
The action-state values Q in the Q-learning algorithm are stored as an array that holds
an estimate for each pair action-state. This means that for infinite number of actions or
states the size of the table becomes infinitely large. Thus to use the algorithm, the action
space should be discrete and the state space should be limited.
8
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:15==
3
Deep Q-Network
The problem with the Q-learning is that the agent learns by visiting pairs of states and
actions and to each pair, algorithm assigns the estimated Q-value so the algorithm must
store the information about each possible state and action. What if, the environment con-
sists of huge number of possible states. Then the algorithm becomes memory consuming
and in same cases, it might turn out impossible to store that huge amount of data. In ad-
dition to that, to teach the algorithm to find the optimal policy, agent needs to visit each
pair of state, action many times which results in enormously long time of training.
As an example, let’s consider the game of checkers. The game seems pretty simple.
Each player has 12 pieces that are placed on the board of size 8x8. A pawn can be taken
from the board if the opponent captures it. Imagine that the algorithm takes as a state an
array of size of the board - 8x8 and in each cell of the array, it hold a number indicating
if there is a white, black pawn located in the cell, if the pawn is a man or a king or if the
cell holds no pawn. That results in more than 1020 different possible states with the action
space of 256. In that case, it is impossible to store an array with the information about
each state-action pair.
A solution to this problem is finding a function that approximates the Q-value function
basing on the action, state and the other custom parameters θ. This can be achieved by
using a Deep Neural Network (DNN). DNN used to approximate Q-value function is called
Deep Q-network (DQN) and the algorithm that aims to find optimal policy using DQN is
called Deep Q-learning.
3.1
Deep Q-learning implementation
As mentioned before, in DQN algorithm, some improvements over the Q-learning algo-
rithm were introduced. The main difference is using neural network instead of tabular
method for Q-value estimation but there are also other changes in the algorithm imple-
mentation that needs to be applied to allow the agent to find optimal strategy of actions
using neural network.
3.1.1
Network architecture
Let’s start with how Q-value function is approximated in Deep Q-learning algorithm. In Q-
learning, the Q-value table stores estimated Q-value for each state and action. In Deep
Q-learning, Q-value function is represented by a neural network. It is worth noticing that
the goal of the algorithm is to find optimal policy that is mapping an observation into action.
Q-values are estimates of the future sum of rewards. Thus, agent that follows an optimal
policy π∗(s) will always choose an action a with the highest Q-value Q(s, a).
π∗(s) = arga max Q∗(s, a)
(3.1)
To find an action that is most profitable for the specific state, Q-value for each action
should be approximated. Thus, DQN can be defined as a network with an observation x
as an input and pairs of actions and Q-values as output. To represents an output of the
network as pair of Q-values and actions, the network consists on na outputs where na is
numbers of actions. Each output holds an estimate of Q-value of an action that is assign
to this output.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: Graph showing an example of Deep Q-Network. Input to the network is an
observation. The network approximates the Q-value for each possible action of the agent.
As in Q-learning algorithm, Deep Q-learning only allows to use discrete action and ob-
servation space. Size of the observation space is equivalent to number of inputs to the
network and size of the action space - to the output. However, using the neural network
allows to use unlimited number of possible states which is its biggest advantage over the
Q-learning.
As previously mentioned, output of the neural network is an estimated Q-value Q(s, a).
During training, after each iteration of the training loop, network’s wights are updated
basing on the calculated loss. Loss function specify the difference between output of the
neural network and its true value. One way to calculate the loss function is to use mean
squared error between network output and its expected value y:
L(θ) = Eπ[(y −Q(sj, aj, θ)2]
(3.2)
To calculate target Q-value y, the equation below is used. This way of estimating Q-value
was also used in Q-learning (see equation 2.13).
yj = Rj + γ max
a′
Q(Sj+1, a′)
(3.3)
So in order to compare current Q-value and target Q-value, estimation of the Q-value
Q(Sj+1, a′) in the next state is needed. Thus, in the algorithm, network is used twice.
First to estimate Q-values in the current state and then in the next state. Having the
information about the current reward, Q-values and next Q-values allows us to perform
an update to the network using gradient descent method.
3.1.2
Experience replay
To reduce a correlation between agent’s experiences, the concept of buffer replay was
introduced. At every step, agent collects experience i.e. observation, action, reward,
next observation and information about termination of the task. It is then are stored in
the memory. During the network update, random subset of experiences is taken from the
buffer. Number of experiences taken is equal to the batch size. Basing on the chosen
experiences, network is updated. This approach results in breaking correlation between
consecutive observations.
10
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:17==
It is worth mentioning that the buffer size has huge impact on the algorithm performance.
Replay buffers are usually implemented as first in, first out (FIFO) buffers. When new
experience comes to the buffer, last one stored is forgotten. Thus, using small buffer size
results in storing only last few experiences and so the agent learns only from the recent
observations. It can forget what it learned in the past which might lead to ”catastrophically
forgetting”. Therefore, it is important to design replay buffer with appropriate size.
3.1.3
Algorithm
Deep Q-learning algorithm starts with initializing replay buffer D with the buffer size N.
Deep Q-Network Q takes random weights at the start. Number of training episodes M is
specified as a parameter. Algorithm loops through all of the episodes.
Algorithm 3 Deep Q-learning with experience replay [2]
1: Initialize:
Replay memory D to capacity N,
action-value function Q with random weights
2: for episode = 1, M do
3:
Initialise sequence s1 = x1 and preprocessed sequenced ϕ1 = ϕ(s1)
4:
for t = 1, T do
5:
With probability ϵ select a random action at,
6:
otherwise select at = maxa Q∗(ϕ(st), a; )
7:
Execute action at in emulator and observe reward Rt and observation xt+1
8:
Set st+1 = st, at, xt+1 and preprocess ϕt+1 = ϕ(st+1)
9:
Store transition (ϕt, at, Rt, ϕt+1) in D
10:
Sample random minibatch of transitions (ϕj, aj, Rj, ϕj+1) from D
11:
set yj =
{
rj,
for terminal ϕj+1
rj + γ maxa′ Q(ϕj+1, a′; ),
for non-terminal ϕj+1
12:
Perform a gradient descent step on (yj−Q(ϕj, aj; ))2
13:
end for
14: end for=0
For each episode, first observation x1 is collected and preprocessed. The loop lasts until
the episode terminates, that is the agent took maximum number of steps T that is specified
in the algorithm or an event occurred that triggers the ending of the episode. That can be
for example reaching the goal that agent tries to accomplish.
For each step, agent chooses an action basing on the Greedy policy. Action can be
random or selected according to the Q-value function which is the neural network output
of the model taking preprocessed observation as an input. Action, in that case, is chosen
basing on the equation 3.1.
Agent takes a selected action and observes reward R and next observation xt+1. The
experience of observation, action, reward, next reward and information about termination
of the episode is added to the buffer.
Next, algorithm samples experiences stored in the replay buffer and calculates target Q-
value yj according to equation 3.3. If state of the agent is terminal, target Q-value is equal
to reward of the agent. Then, network is updated using mean squared error loss function
(see equation 3.2). Agent lands in new state and the process is repeated until the end of
an episode.
After going through all of the episode, agent should learn a strategy of movements. How-
ever, the performance of the algorithm depends on the chosen parameters - network
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
11
==PAGE:18==
structure, learning rate, buffer size, etc. In order to learn optimal policy, appropriate algo-
rithm’s parameters should be selected.
3.2
DQN improvements
Some improvements to the DQN algorithm can be applied to reduce the chance of catas-
trophic forgetting occurrence, help stabilization of the learning and decrease the amount
of time needed for learning.
3.2.1
Target model
In DQN algorithm, neural network predicts both future expected Q-values and current
Q-values. This can lead to unstable training where network oscillates during training or
might stop making progress. Due to that problem, the agent might not be able to learn
how to accomplish specified goal.
One solution to the problem is introducing not one DQN but two: first that is used to
choose actions of the agent, it is called ”online model” and it’s updated after every step of
the agent; and second - ”target model”, used to estimate next Q-values. Target model is
updated by copying the weight of an online model. This is done in regular time intervals.
As the target network is updated less often than online model, training gets more stable.
3.2.2
Double DQN
Another improvement to the DQN algorithm is called Double DQN [3]. It was observed
that target Q-network is often prone to estimate too big Q-values. Q-values are estimated
basing on DQN and after that maximum Q-value is taken to update the network. Imagine,
a situation when all actions lead to approximately same return. Then all Q-values should
be same. However, target Q-values are estimates, calculated using DQN. This means
that they will have similar values but there will be an action that is slightly better than
others. This action will be consider as a superior to the others and its Q-value will be
used to update the network. This might lead to wrong estimation of Q-values of the action
as its Q-value will be prioritized by the DQN.
To solve the problem, it was suggested to use online model instead target model while
choosing best actions and then use target model to estimate Q-values for the previously
chosen actions.
yj = Rj+1 + γQtarget(Sj+1, arg max
a′
Qonline(Sj+1, a′))
(3.4)
This solution does not require introducing additional networks or changing the architecture
of the DQN algorithm. It reduces the overoptimism while estimating Q-values and by that
stabilizes the training.
3.2.3
Dueling DQN
In 2016, new approach to the DQN architecture was proposed. It was called Dueling
DQN [4]. The idea here was to instead of estimating Q-values directly as an output to the
network, to first estimate state-value function V and the difference between action-value
function Q and state-value function V - advantage A:
Aπ(s, a) = Qπ(s, a) −V (s)
(3.5)
Thus, the proposed neural network has two heads: first estimated state-value function V
and second the advantage A. The state-value function represents how good is to be in a
12
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:19==
state s and advantage A estimates the importance of each actions. Q-values can be then
calculated by summarizing received state-value V and advantage A. This solution leads
to faster convergence and better policy evaluation in the presence of many similar-valued
actions.
3.2.4
Prioritized experience replay
As the experiences taken from replay buffer during the model training are sampled uni-
formly, the transitions are replayed at the same frequency as they were collected. To learn
more efficiently, the transitions significance should be taken into consideration during their
replay.
This approach for increasing efficiency of the DQN training is called Prioritized experience
replay [5]. It aims to replay important transitions more frequently as it is expected that the
agent can learn more from these specific transitions than from the others. The priority of
transition depends here on absolute TD error.
3.2.5
Other DQN improvements
Some others DQN improvements can be applied to boost performance of the algorithm
such as Noisy Nets, Distributional RL or n-step returns. One of the algorithm that is worth
mentioning here is called Rainbow [6]. The algorithm is a combination of 6 previously
mentioned DQN improvements. The research showed that combining all of these method
can result in significant improvement of the model performance.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
13
==PAGE:20==
14
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:21==
4
System Overview
The goal of the project is to successfully teach a drone how to navigate through a hole
inside a ship ballast tank. To accomplish this goal, the drone is trained using RL algorithm
in the simulator. Thus, the system was divided into 2 parts: simulation design and algo-
rithm implementation. In this chapter, the system components will be described and it will
be explained how the connection between different system parts is established and how
the components are dependable from each other.
4.1
System components
The system consists of two parts: simulation and algorithm. Both of the parts are equally
important and cannot work without the other. The simulation is a reflection of the ship
ballast tank environment and drone dynamics. The 3d structure of the simulation was
designed in Epic Unreal Gaming engine. To simulate drone’s dynamics and physics laws
of the environment, AirSim plugin to Unreal Engine platform was used.
Figure 4.1: Graph showing the components of the system.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
15
==PAGE:22==
The first crucial component of the simulation implementation is the design of the envi-
ronment. This was done using Unreal Engine platform and placing 3d mesh objects with
appropriate parameters into the environment. The second part is parameter selection of
the drone dynamics, start location and its shape. It is significant to choose the param-
eters accordingly to the the given task so the simulation would work correctly. Those
parameters can be modified in AirSim settings.
The RL algorithm can be divided into 3 major parts: environment class implementation,
training and evaluation. The environment class holds a description of the drone’s be-
haviour while taking a step in the simulation, how it perceives the environment and how
its evaluated for its actions. To specify it, the following methods should be defined: step,
reset, observation, action and reward.
After the environment is specified, the RL algorithm can be implemented. The model
of RL algorithm is defined by using Stable Baseline 3 library [7]. The proper algorithm
parameters must be specified in order to achieve the project goal and to optimize the
execution time of the algorithm. It was decided to implement multiprocessing and use
multiple agents to decrease the time needed to train the algorithm.
Figure 4.2: Graph showing the structure of the system.
Evaluation of the trained algorithm is the next important component of the system. It
is conducted by using a separate script. Thus, the first part of system evaluation is its
implementation where the specific evaluation class is defined and used to perform the
tests. Then, the algorithm is evaluated and the received result of the testing is logged.
16
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:23==
4.2
System structure
As previously mentioned, the system consists if 4 parts: simulation, environment, training
and evaluation. To teach the model and then to validate its performance all of the system
elements must be used. The system elements must communicate with each other and
send relevant information when there is a request for that.
The simulation components are Unreal Engine 3d model design and Airsim plug in. Airsim
uses information about created 3d environment of the ship ballast tank. This can for
example give the drone an information about possible collision or allow to get an image
from camera.
The next crucial element is environment class where the information about drone’s be-
havior is stored. This part is strongly connected with the simulation as it uses AirSim
methods to give commands to the drone i.e. moveByVelocityAsync() which sets a par-
ticular linear velocity of the drone, simGetImages() that return an image from a camera
or getMultirotorState() that returns the state of the agent, etc. Two separate environment
classes were used for training and for evaluation as the evaluation part requires testing
on different location of the ballast tank and the additional implementation of the evaluation
logging.
The defined environment is then used to train the model. To define the DQN, Stable
Baseline 3 library was used. Thus, the training part of the systems uses method from
the library to train the model and to handle multiple drones environment together with
multiprocessing of the training. As the result of the training, the DQN model is received.
The model is then used for the evaluation part. The evaluation uses method ”model.evaluate()”
from the Stable Baseline 3 library. The received evaluation logging is stored in .csv file
and then analyzed.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:25==
5
Simulation
To learn how to perform a task, the agent needs to interact with the environment. It can be
a simple mathematical model, simulation or even a place in the real world. During each
iteration of the algorithm, agent takes a step and lands in new place in the environment.
It often requires millions of steps taken by the agent to learn its task. This process might
be often time consuming. Moreover, at the beginning of the training, agent does not know
its policy and as the result its actions are taken randomly. If the agent is a real device e.g.
a robot, it might cause a serious damage to the device’s components. In this chapter, the
importance of simulation in the RL algorithm training will be discussed and the steps of
its implementation in the project will be described.
5.1
Simulation importance
This project aims to teach the drone to fly autonomously through ship ballast tank hole.
The agent is, thus, the drone. Imagine the situation when the RL algorithm is trained
on the agent in real life. The algorithm uses ϵ-greedy policy which means the actions at
the beginning of the training are chosen randomly. There is high probability of collision
with the obstacles in the ship ballast tanks which can result in the damage to the drone
hardware. It can be avoided by using the simulation of the ship ballast tank environment.
It reduces the cost of the potential components replacement.
Another problem in RL is time. The algorithm execution is significantly long. One of
the goals in this project was to optimize the time of the training. Multiple drones were
used to collect data for the network update. Using multiple drone agents in the simulation
is relatively simple comparing to implementing this idea in real life as it would result in
significant increase of the costs caused by the necessity of purchasing more drones and
not mentioning the fact of creating multiple ship ballast tank environments.
Secondly, in simulation exists a possibility of time speeding. The simulation operates
knowing the laws of physics and thus, it is possible to set time as a parameter that can
be increased. This can decrease time needed for training significantly which cannot be
done while training on real device.
To sum up, simulation is an essential tool for RL training of the physical devices. If the
simulation precisely reflect the true environment, algorithm trained in the simulation can
be used on the real device. However, some additional training should be done as the
simulation never fully reflects the environment.
5.2
Simulation architecture
The simulation was created using Epic Unreal Gaming engine. Epic Unreal Gaming en-
gine is a program that is widely used i.e. for designing photorealistic 3d visualizations
and simulations. To simulate drone dynamics, AirSim platform was installed. AirSim is
a plugin to Epic Unreal Gaming engine. It is used to simulate autonomous vehicles i.e
quadrotors and cars.
The environment simulates the ship ballast tank conditions. 3d object of ship ballast tank
was added to the simulation in Unreal Engine. The drone that is assigned to the ballast
tank is placed inside ship ballast tank facing to the hole. It is assumed that the algorithm
starts executing when drone sees the hole.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
19
==PAGE:26==
5.3
Multiple drones
As previously mentioned, to reduce time needed for algorithm execution, multiple ballast
tank environments were created. The goal here is to insert many 3d ballast tank objects
into a simulation and assign one drone to one of the ballast tanks. The ballast tanks
should be placed in such a distance from each other so the agents could not interfere
which means it is not possible for a drone to see or collide with another agent.
First step in introducing multiple drones environment was to create an algorithm to spawn
ship ballast tank objects into environment. In order to accomplish this goal, Blueprint
Visual Scripting system provided by Unreal Engine was used (see 5.1). It allows to create
simulation elements basing on a node-based interface. The block code spawns ballast
tank objects with a specific distance in x and y direction from each other.
Figure 5.1: Block code used to insert multiple ship ballast tank into simulation.
The algorithm takes 5 input parameters: number of columns and rows, distance between
ballast tanks along x and y axis, scale of the ship ballast tanks. Parameters can be easily
modified from Details panel in the Main Editor window (see 5.2).
Figure 5.2: Parameters that can be chosen while spawning ship ballast tank into simula-
tion.
As the result, the grid of ship ballast tank was created. The number of ship ballast tanks
was set to 50 (5 columns and 10 rows). It means that maximum 50 drones can be inserted
into the simulation. However, number of the drones used for training will depend on the
properties of a computer the algorithm is trained on. The distance from the ballast tanks
was set to 12m along x axis and 5m along y axis which prevents the agents from interacting
with each other.
Next step was to create an algorithm for spawning the drones. A script was created
using a build-in method in the Airsim simulation - ”simAddVehicle()”. The method adds a
20
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5.3: Result of inserting multiple ballast tank into the simulation.
chosen vehicle i.e. car or quadrotor in the specified position. ”simAddVehicle()” method
also allows to choose the controller type of the drone. Simple Flight controller was chosen
which is a default controller in Airsim simulation.
The algorithm takes as an input number of drones, distance between the ship ballast tanks
and their number of rows and columns. The drones are originally placed inside the ballast
tank and they are facing the hole. One drone is assign to exactly one ballast tank.
All the steps used to create multiple ship ballast tank allow to train the model using mul-
tiple agents. Multiprocessing was introduced where one environment is handled by one
process and the data from each environment is used to update common DRL model.
5.4
Clock speed
Another improvement to the system was an increase of the clock speed. This can sig-
nificantly reduce the time needed for training. However, while choosing the appropriate
clock speed, it must be remembered that the execution time of the algorithm for one step
of one agent cannot exceed the time of taking the step.
In this project, the clock speed was set to 2 which results in speeding the time twice. It
was tested that it takes approximately 70ms to execute the code needed for taking one
step by the agent. The system properties of the computer used for training can be seen in
the appendix. The steps are takes in equal intervals of time, it was decided to set 200ms
as a time step. With time sped up twice, it gives 100ms to execute the code for one step.
Increasing the clock speed to the value higher than 2 would result in having time step
lower than execution time and thus, the step time would depend on the execution time
that is not always constant. Not constant time step might influence the training of the
agent as the observation is received in not equal intervals of time.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:29==
6
Algorithm implementation
The base RL algorithm used in the project was DQN. To apply DQN algorithm, it is crucial
to appropriately define the algorithm components: actions, observations, reward, etc.
accordingly to the task the agent performs. In this project, the description of the agent’s
behaviour is included in the ”Environment” class. It holds the definition of the agent’s
actions, state, reward, observation and the description of agent’s behaviour when the
environment is initiated and reset.
Those components contain information about the drones behaviour, its state at the par-
ticular moment and information it can receive from its surroundings. In addition to that,
the performance of the agent, as well as the time of the training will also depend on the
chosen parameters of the algorithm i.e. number of total steps, buffer size, learning rate,
etc. Thus, it is highly significant to choose those right components and parameters during
the implementation of the RL algorithm.
6.1
Environment
The Environment class inherits from Gym environment class. Gym [8] is a standard API
that contains ready environments to use for RL algorithms. In this project, the custom
environment was created. As the algorithm inherits from Gym class, the following methods
must be defined: step, reset; where step returns: observation, reward, information about
task completion and additional information, after taking a specific action. This allows to
structure the drones behaviour while taking the step by the agent, when the training starts
and when the episode ends and the environment should be reset.
Figure 6.1: Image showing the drone during algorithm initialization. The environment of
the drone is ship ballast tank and drone is originally located inside it.
In the simulation, single environment is one ballast tank and one agent is assign to this
environment. The agent is here a drone and its task is to reach certain point behind the
hole of the ballast tank. The environment initialization contains definition of the variables
used to perform steps and environment reset i.e. observation properties, action space
initialization etc. The agent is originally located inside the ballast tank, facing the hole.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
23
==PAGE:30==
6.2
Action space
Action space is discrete. The agent can perform 13 different actions:
• increase velocity along x axis by 0.05 or 0.25
• decrease velocity along x axis by 0.05 or 0.25
• increase velocity along z axis by 0.025 or 0.1
• decrease velocity along z axis by 0.025 or 0.1
• turn clockwise by 1 or 5 degree
• turn counterclockwise by 1 or 5 degree
• retain current velocity and rotation
However, it was assumed that velocity in x direction cannot be negative. So, if the agent’s
velocity becomes negative as the result of choosing the action that decreases its velocity
along x axis, its velocity remains 0. This speeds up the training process as to accomplish
the goal, the agent do not need to move in opposite direction to the hole.
Figure 6.2: Graph showing the possible action that can be taken by the agent.
Thus, the drone can move forward, up, down, turn clockwise and counterclockwise. The
action were illustrated on the graphic above (see 6.2).
6.3
Observation
The observation consists of 3 depth images of size 64x64. The 3 images are equivalent
to 3 last images observed by camera after performing a step. Each time the agent takes
an action, it receives a depth image from the camera and adds it to an array that holds
previous images, the last image is deleted.
Figure 6.3: Graph showing the example of observation that consists of 3 image frames
that were observed in the last 3 steps of the training.
24
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:31==
The reason to use many previous images instead of just one is that by looking just on the
one image, the agent cannot clearly see its direction of movement. Using more than one
allows the drone to establish its current velocity and choose the action in regards to that.
6.4
Reward
The main goal of the agent is to fly through the ship ballast hole after detecting it. Apart
from that it should avoid the collisions and reach its goal at the shortest possible time.
It was decided to use reward that is always negative with its highest value in the goal
position. It means that the return will also be negative and as the agent aims to maximize
the reward, it will try to minimize number of steps needed to reach the goal.
The reward formula was defined as follows:
Rj = Rxj + Ryj + Rzj + Rcj
(6.1)
where:
• Rxj - reward for getting closer to goal in x direction at step j
• Ryj - reward for remaining on the same position as goal center on y axis at step j
• Rzj - reward for remaining on the same position as goal center on y axis at step j
• Rcj - penalty for collision at step j
Rxj, Ryj, Rzj, Rcj were given by:
Rxj = xpos
xgoal
−1
(6.2)
Ryj = −2 · y2
pos
(6.3)
Rzj =
{
−5 · (
1
5−zhole (zpos + zhole))2,
if zpos <= zhole
−0.75 · (
1
zfloor+zhole (zpos + zhole))2,
if zpos > zhole
(6.4)
Rcj =
{
−penalty,
if collision occurred
0,
if no collision occurred
(6.5)
where:
• xpos, ypos, zpos position of the drone in world coordinates
• xgoal position of the goal on x axis in world coordinates
• zhole the position of the center of the hole on z axis
• zfloor the position of the floor on z axis
The value of penalty rate was set to be 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3 and its influence
on training performance was tested.
Moreover, the following assumptions were applied:
Rj =





0,
if Rj > 0
Rj,
if −500 < Rj < 0
−500,
if Rj < −500
(6.6)
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
25
==PAGE:32==
As previously mentioned, the reward was designed to be always negative that is why, after
reaching the goal, the agent does not receive any additional reward. In addition to that,
the reward is clipped if its value surpasses -500. This was applied to prevent simulation
errors that will be explain later in the next chapter.
6.5
Step
The step method takes as an input the action number. It consists of 3 parts: ordering the
agent to perform an action, observing the environment and computing the reward. The
method returns received observation, reward, information about episode termination and
additional information about agent’s state (velocity, position and orientation).
Figure 6.4: Graph showing the procedure of taking a step.
The time of one step was set to be equal 300ms. Meaning that the agent makes a decision
about what action to take every 300ms.
6.6
Reset
Reset method is called after the end of each episode. It resets the drone position to its
original state - point (0,0,0) and after that, the drone is moved to a random position. The
position is picked so the following limitations are met:
• −0.35 < x < 0.35
• −0.2 < y < 0.2
• −1.5 < z < −0.1
Moreover, it is possible to choose the training using 5 different holes located at the ground
level of the ship ballast tank. Originally, the agent was trained just on the first hole.
Those two procedures are required to increase generalization of the algorithm and at the
same time reduce the risk of over-fitting occurrence,
6.7
DQN model
The DQN model presented in chapter 3 was applied. The model was implemented with
the use of Stable Baseline 3 (SB3) library. It implements DQN model with target model
modification and decay greedy policy method. As the multiprocessing was applied, it was
possible to use only the release that does not allow to use Double-DQN, Dueling-DQN
and Prioritized Experience Replay. The model parameters that were applied during the
training can be seen in appendix.
26
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:33==
7
Testing
Next step was to test the simulation and algorithm. Simulation was tested both on the
script where random movement were chosen and for the implemented algorithm. Many
simulation issues were encountered that could significantly influence the model training.
Algorithm was tested by conducting a training on one hole without any ladders and on
five different holes including ladders. It was tested how reward function influence the
algorithm performance and the influence of training on one hole without ladders before it
and for many holes with some obstacles before the hole.
7.1
Simulation and environment tests
The implementation of the simulation and environment class was deeply described in
chapters 5 and 6. However, before the algorithm was defined, the simulation and envi-
ronment were tested on simple script that allowed to choose random actions by the agent.
After the test with random action selection, it was tested if simulation works properly for
DQN algorithm. During tests, several issues were encountered during the implementa-
tion.
First problem noticed in the simulation was that AirSim library does not allow to reset
particular drone i.e. to reset controller and move drone to its start position while using
multiple drone agents. At this stage of the project, it was intended to reset drone after
collision occurred. Thus, custom reset method was defined that moved the drone to the
start position when collision happened, simSetVehiclePose() method was used to teleport
the drone to desired position.
However, after further testings, unexpected behaviour of the drone in the simulation was
discovered. After collision, drone was sometimes teleporting to random locations in the
simulation. The explanation of this behaviour was that the controller of the drone was
not being reset after the end of the each episode as the custom method of resetting the
drone was applied. Sudden teleportation after many episodes caused destabilization of
the controller which leaded to unexpected behaviour of the drone. The solution for this
problem was to reset all drones at the same time which means that only fix number of
steps could have been used. It was chosen to use 50 steps per episode.
Reset method was not the only one that was allowed to be used at all of the drones at
once. Method join() that aimed to wait for the agent until it finishes the action could also
have been used only on all of the drones. Thus, instead of using this method, fixed step
time periods were introduced. A step was taken every 300ms. This solution was also
preferable as the drones eventually could have been reset at the same time so the fixed
time steps allowed to finish 50 steps at approximately same time by all of the agents.
Another important part that should be mentioned is that collision is often being detected
only in a moment of the first collision with the obstacle which means after colliding with the
wall, the collision can be detected only once. Unless the drone will land up in state with
no collision and after that collides again. This is significant notice as the agent might not
then be punished for staying longer in collision state regardless of implementing collision
penalty. This simulation feature was noticed during training of the model for which the
episode ended after collision (before it was decided to use fixed number of steps). It was
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
27
==PAGE:34==
observed that episode sometimes does not end after colliding with the wall. Thus, it was
decided to investigate the problem.
It might happened that an observation is not being received i.e. the request for a camera
image has been sent but no response was received. In that case, the training script raises
an error as input to the neural network is equal to None. To avoid this problem, exception
handling was applied where an empty array is received instead of image if the agent gets
no image data.
Another unexpected behaviour was noticed where drone started to move in the direction
that was forbidden in a code for example along y axis direction or backwards. It should be
impossible for the drone to conduct such a movement. Nevertheless, this behaviour was
experienced. To find the reason for such behaviour, the propellers speed was recorded
to check if the drone conducted the movement itself or if there was additional force in
the simulation that pushed the drone in certain direction. The propellers speed did not
show any reason to believe that it was drone that actually chose to move in forbidden
direction and thus, it was not an error in the code but in the simulation. As the reason
for the additional force occurrence was not discovered, the problem was not solved and
it might cause to destabilization in algorithm’s training.
After one of the training, an interesting strategy of agent’s movements was observed. The
drone learned to move straight and keep pushing against the wall. It also kept increasing
the velocity towards wall direction. After a while, the drone moved to the other side of
the wall besides the fact that it was solid wall in the simulation and this action should be
impossible to make. To avoid this situation from happening, the velocity of the agent is set
to 0 after collision and maximum velocity of the drone was defined to be equal to 1m/s.
Figure 7.1: Example of the data collected during the training of a model, showing the
relationship of episode length, episode mean reward, exploration rate, fps, learning rate,
loss; and episode number.
28
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:35==
7.2
Training
The training was conducted for 2 millions of steps. It was tested how model performed
for different reward function implementations. For the purpose of monitoring the training,
the following training information was stored: episode length, episode mean reward, ex-
ploration rate, fps, learning rate and loss. The graphs showing the dependency of these
parameters from episode number were implemented using Stable Baseline 3 method that
allows to store training data and display it as a tensorboard.
As previously mentioned, the algorithm was tested on different reward functions i.e. with
no penalty for collision and with penalty of 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3. It was tested
how different reward functions influence the training.
After selection of one of the reward functions, the algorithm was trained on the holes with
ladders before them to see if the same algorithm can learn to avoid collision with obstacles
before the hole.
7.3
Evaluation
In the project, the goal is to successfully teach the drone to fly through the ship ballast
tank hole. It is also important to avoid collisions with the environment as that can damage
the hardware of the drone and prevents it from accomplishing its task. Another crucial
aspect of the project is to see if the time needed to perform the task can be optimized by
using the algorithm.
Thus, three different factors were examined: accuracy of the model i.e. if the drone suc-
cessfully flew via the hole and completed its task, number of collisions with the obstacles
like walls, ladders etc. and number of steps needed to accomplish the task. As time
needed to take one step is constant, number of steps is proportional to total time needed
to fly via the hole. The information about accuracy, collision and number of steps was
collected for each episode of evaluation.
The evaluation of each model was conducted on 200 steps per agent. As 3 agents were
used during the evaluation of the models, 600 samples for each evaluation were stored
in .csv file. The received information was further analysed.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
29
==PAGE:36==
30
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:37==
8
Results
In this chapter, the received results during the algorithm training and its evaluation will be
discussed. For training analysis purpose, two graphs for each model will be analysed:
the episode mean reward and loss. The received results will examined. The process of
evaluation of the model will be described and number of collisions, accuracy of the model
and time needed for accomplishing the goal for each model will be compared and the
results will be analyzed.
8.1
Training
The result of the training for reward function with penalty of 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25 and 0.3
was shown on a graph below. The graph represents two of the factors collected during
the training: episode mean reward and loss.
It can be noticed that in all of the cases the episode mean reward converged and received
value of approximately -25 at the end of the training. However, on some of the graphs,
a drop in mean reward value during the training can be observed. It could be a result
of smoothing the episode mean reward value, simulation error or DQN training related
problems like catastrophic forgetting.
The loss function also converged for the value of approximately 0.7. A sudden rise of the
loss function was observed on the graphs with penalty of 0.1 and 0.3. The cause for this
can be the same as for the drop in episode mean reward graph i.e. smoothing the graph,
simulation related problems or catastrophic forgetting.
Figure 8.1: Graphs showing episode mean reward and loss per episode for reward func-
tion with penalty for collision of 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3.
No significant difference in training performance between all introduced above models
was noticed. The episode mean reward and loss value graphs converged with similar
value of approximately -25 for mean reward and 0.7 for loss.
8.2
Evaluation
Two box plots were created to show distribution of the following factors: number of colli-
sions and number of steps needed to accomplish the agent’s goal. Moreover, accuracy
of each model was shown on bar chart. The received charts can be seen on figure 8.2.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 8.2: Evaluation of a model performance for 7 different reward functions: with no
penalty for collision and with penalty of 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3 - number of collisions
per episode, accuracy of the model and number of steps needed to fly through the hole.
Looking at ”Collision evaluation” graph, it can be noticed that number of collisions during
the evaluation of the models was significantly high. To accomplish the goal and fly suc-
cessfully via the ship ballast tank hole, the drone should not collide with the environment
at all. However, the average number of collisions per episode was approximately equal
to 10.2.
Any correlation of penalty for collision and number of collisions during the episode was
observed. However, it can be noticed that 2 models performed better than the others when
to look at the collision count i.e. model 6 (penalty of 0.25) and model 1 (no penalty). Those
2 models show the lowest value of standard deviation and median. Two models that stand
out with the highest value of standard deviation and median are: model 2 (penalty of 0.1)
and model 7 (penalty of 0.3).
Number of steps to reach the goal shows similar value for each model with the average
value of 18.6 steps. The lowest median can be observed in model 3 and model 7. How-
ever, the difference is very subtle and it cannot be clearly decided which model performed
better than others.
The last factor to evaluate was accuracy of the model. This factor is especially important
as it shows proportion of successful trials during the evaluation. The best performing
model while comparing the accuracy of evaluation, was model 5 (penalty of 0.2) with
accuracy of 79.67%. Model 4 (penalty of 0.15) performed just slightly worse with accuracy
of 77.83%. Two models with the lowest accuracy were: model 2 (penalty of 0.1) with
accuracy of 56.50% and model 6 (penalty of 0.25) with accuracy of 52.67%. Overall, the
average accuracy was equal to 66.14%.
32
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:39==
The received accuracy of 79.67% is still not satisfactory. However, it shows that the model
learned how to perform a task and is able to achieve its goal - flying via ship ballast tank
holes even while evaluated on a different ship ballast tank hole.
Figure 8.3: Comparison of collision numbers, accuracy and number of steps needed to
fly through the hole for 7 models with different reward functions during training and eval-
uation.
On the graph above, it was compared how the models performed during training vs. eval-
uation. For the collision number evaluation, apart from two models: 2 and 7, that were
standing out from the rest by showing much higher value of the collision count, any pattern
can be seen that can relate the increasing penalty for collision and number of collisions.
For the accuracy comparison, training models characterize with much higher accuracy
than evaluation models with 88.95% accuracy on average and maximum of 94.83% ac-
curacy for model 4. It was expected for the training model to achieve higher accuracy as
the collection of the data for training accuracy evaluation was conducted on the hole the
agent was trained on. For the evaluation part, agent was evaluated on different unknown
holes.
The value of average number of steps needed to accomplish the agent’s task did not differ
significantly for training and evaluation looking at the specific models in most cases. The
only model where difference can be noticed is model 4 where evaluation model takes
much higher value of average number of step than training model.
Looking at both of the graphs created above, it cannot be clearly said which model should
be chosen as a superior to the others. However, the accuracy graph shows that the high-
est accuracy was achieved by model 4 and 5. Model 4 characterizes with very high value
of number of steps during evaluation. Moreover, it can be observed that both for train-
ing and evaluation, this model had higher value of average collision number. This is the
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
33
==PAGE:40==
reason why model 5 was chosen for further analysis and its performance was compared
while training on one hole and all of the holes on the ground level of ship ballast tank.
Figure 8.4: Evaluation of a model performance for 2 different trainings: on hole where
there are no ladders before it and for all the holes at ground level of a ballast tank where
obstacles might occur - number of collisions per episode, accuracy of the model and
number of steps needed to fly through the hole.
It can be noticed that the model trained on holes with more possible collisions, is more
likely to collide with the environment than model trained on one hole. One of the reason
for such behaviour can be that this model needs much more steps to train as the case
is more complicated to learn by the agent. Both of the models were trained on the same
number of steps - 2e6 steps.
There is, however, no significant difference in number of steps needed to reach the goal.
Here, median and standard deviation show almost the same value for both examined
cases.
Looking at the accuracy graph, it can be observed that for the case where drone was
trained on all holes at the ground level of the ballast tank, the accuracy is significantly lower
and takes value of approximately 28.33%. A case where drone has to learn how to avoid
obstacles, not just to fly via the hole is much more complicated case and requires more
training or model improvements to learn a strategy to both not collide with the environment
and end up in final goal position. Thus, to achieve better accuracy results, the algorithm
should be trained on more steps or some algorithm performance improvements methods
should be applied.
34
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:41==
9
Conclusion
The DQN model was trained and further evaluated, taking into consideration number of
collisions, accuracy and number of steps to reach the goal. Looking at the graphs showing
mean reward per episode and loss function, it can be concluded that model was success-
fully implemented as in all of the examined cases mean reward per episode and loss
converge with the increasing number of episodes.
From accuracy graphs, it can be concluded that the agent learned some patterns to per-
form its task as the accuracy of the best performing model reached 79.67%. In that case,
the agent was trained on one hole and evaluated on a set of other holes which means the
model learned to generalize to perform its task on different types of holes.
However, further investigation of model parameters and algorithm methods that can be
used to improve the model performance is needed. The test should be conducted to show
the relation of particular model parameters and its influence on evaluation performance.
Some improvements to DQN algorithm described in chapter 3. can be applied like Double
DQN, Dueling network or Prioritized experience replay and they influence on training and
model evaluation should be investigated. Finally, different RL algorithm can be applied
to see if they outperform the DQN model. Thus, further research is needed to boost
the model performance in order to use it on real device and in the real ship ballast tank
environment.
The tests show that increasing a penalty for collision results in subtle change of perfor-
mance of the agent with slightly better performance of the model with penalty of 0.2. This
model achieved highest accuracy during the training. However, as the difference in ac-
curacy is just slightly better than other models, additional tests should be conducted to
prove that the model is superior to others.
Training of the model on many different ship ballast tank holes with more obstacles colli-
sion possibility is more complex task than training on one hole that on one hole where no
ladders are placed before the wall so the collision can happen only if drone hit the floor,
the wall of ship ballast tank or other obstacle but behind the hole. As the task is more
complex, it requires more training steps to learn the strategy for collision avoidance and
to achieve similar accuracy to the model trained on simplified case of just one hole without
any ladders before it.
The problem of collision avoidance should be deeply investigated and in order to minimize
the collision number per episode. The model improvements should be applied to improve
training and evaluation performance of the model. Further work should include parameter
investigation, implementation of DQN improvements and examination of its importance
for the network performance and comparison with different RL algorithm such as PPO,
A2C, SAC, etc. The model should be trained on many holes with possibility of collision
with the obstacles to learn how to avoid them and at the same time complete its task by
flying via the hole. The examined optimization problem can be extended to minimize other
parameters like battery consumption. Finally, the received model should be tested on the
real device. This approach might require additional training of the received model as the
simulation is never a full reflection of the real environment.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
35
==PAGE:42==
After the appropriate research and model improvement, the algorithm can be used to
autonomously perform flight via ship ballast tank hole and thus, be part of the Inspectrone
project and help in inspection of the ship ballast tank. However, as mentioned above, still
much work should be done to adjust the algorithm to efficiently and accurately perform
the task.
36
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Drone Market Size, Share [2022-2029]. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/drone-
market-size-share-2022-113200889.html. 2022.
[2]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning”. In: CoRR
abs/1312.5602 (2013). arXiv: 1312.5602. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
[3]
Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. “Deep Reinforcement Learning
with Double Q-learning”. In: CoRR abs/1509.06461 (2015). arXiv: 1509.06461. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.06461.
[4]
Ziyu Wang, Nando de Freitas, and Marc Lanctot. “Dueling Network Architectures for
Deep Reinforcement Learning”. In: CoRR abs/1511.06581 (2015). arXiv: 1511.06581.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06581.
[5]
Tom Schaul et al. Prioritized Experience Replay. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1511.
05952. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05952.
[6]
Matteo Hessel et al. “Rainbow: Combining Improvements in Deep Reinforcement
Learning”. In: CoRR abs/1710.02298 (2017). arXiv: 1710.02298. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1710.02298.
[7]
Stable Baseline3 Documentation. https : / / stable - baselines3 . readthedocs . io / en /
master/. 2022.
[8]
Gym Documentation. https://www.gymlibrary.ml/. 2022.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
37
==PAGE:44==
38
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
==PAGE:45==
A
Model parameters
Table A.1: Parameters used for training of the model.
Parameter
learning rate
1e-4
buffer size
5000
total number of steps
10e6
target model update interval
1000 steps
online model update frequency
4 steps
exploration initial epsilon
0.75
exploration final epsilon
0.01
exploration fraction
0.2
learning starts
5000
batch size
32
discount factor
0.99
number of agents
3
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Drone Control
39
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
