==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Wind farm production maximization using 
combined layout and wake steering 
optimization under load constraint
Maria Virginia Sarcos Araujo
DTU Wind Energy-M-0563
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0563 
July 2022
Project period: 
February - July 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Katherine Dykes
Rafael Valotta Rodrigues
Mikkel Friis-Møller
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Maria Virginia Sarcos Araujo
Title:
Wind farm production maximization using 
combined layout and wake steering optimization 
under load constraint
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisors Katherine Dykes, Rafael Valotta Rodrigues
and Mikkel Friis-Møller for their constant support and guidance throughout the project. Thank
you very much for all the help and advice in every step of the process, especially to Mikkel for
the lengthy discussions of the results and assistance with coding. I would also like to thank
Javier for his help throughout the optimization course and with some coding difficulties during
the thesis.
To all the new friends I made during this exciting journey, thank you for being there for
me and supporting me when things got difficult. I am very grateful for all the people I met at
DTU and the amazing friendships I made along the way. I would also like to thank my best
friends back home, Victoria and Michelle, who despite the distance always make the effort to
catch up and help me whenever I need it. To Lucia and Alejandro, thank you for making these
past few months enjoyable and for the constant support, both academically and emotional.
Last but not least, to my family, who are always there for me and give me strength to carry
on, even from a distance. A million thanks to my parents for the sacrifices they have made to
make my dream of pursuing a Master degree possible. I will be forever grateful for your advice
and continuous support throughout all my academic years.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In recent years, research on wake steering has proven beneficial for increasing the power
production of individual turbines as well as the Annual Energy Production (AEP) of a wind
farm.
By having an intentional yaw offset, the wake in the wind farm can be redirected
so that the turbines downstream can capture more energy.
However, misalignment of the
turbines with the wind direction and change of their positions within the wind farm comes
with a considerable impact on the fatigue loading for blade root and tower top loads.
In
addition, layout optimization by itself has been studied extensively and its benefits are more
than established. Nevertheless, a combined scenario where both the layout and the turbines’
yaw angles are optimized while restricting the loads has not been explored. Thus, this thesis
project aims to investigate how a coupled strategy of wake steering and layout optimization
under load constraints influences a wind farm’s AEP and to explore the likely trade-off between
load and power when operating the turbines under yaw misalignment. For this purpose, an
already trained surrogate model of the DTU 10MW reference turbine is used to perform both
the Damage Equivalent Loads (DEL) and the Lifetime Damage Equivalent Loads (LDEL)
calculation via PyWake’s flow model, and TOPFARM is used to carry out the optimizations.
For the layout optimization, the design variables were chosen as the inter-turbine spacing and
grid rotation angle to reduce the complexity of the problem. A simple 9 turbine wind farm case
is used for the study and a comparison is made between two optimization approaches: integrated
and sequential. The analysis shows that an integrated optimization is highly computational
expensive, even when the design variables for layout optimization are reduced to only two.
On the other hand, the sequential approach yielded a higher AEP gain in substantially less
time, which begs to question whether a fully integrated optimization is justifiable. For both
optimization approaches a uniform distribution of the LDEL was obtained and the constraints
were never reached, which means that further restriction on the maximum allowable loading
could be explored.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
List of Figures
iv
List of Tables
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Report Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Wake Steering Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Optimization Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
TOPFARM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Problem description
19
3.1
Integrated Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Sequential Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Limitations and Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Surrogate Model Analysis
25
4.1
Turbine spacing sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Yaw angle sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Optimization with two turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results
34
5.1
Integrated Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Sequential Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Summary of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Sensitivity Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Conclusion
50
7
Future Work
51
References
52
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
Force diagram in yawed wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
XDSM diagram of an optimization workflow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Illustration of coordinate system for turbine loads with added reference for tower
top (TT) loads from HAWC2 manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Flowchart of TOPFARM’s main components.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Flowchart of PyWake’s main components.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6
Flowchart of PyWake’s engineering models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7
Wind resource at the Lillgrund site. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8
Schematic of the Jiménez wake deflection model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
9
Visualization of wind farm layout configuration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
10
Integrated optimization workflow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
11
Sequential optimization workflow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
12
Flow field at 5D of inter-turbine spacing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
13
Power vs wind speed for different spacing, downstream turbin. . . . . . . . . . .
27
14
DEL vs wind speed for different TI levels.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
15
DEL vs spacing for different wind speeds, downstream turbine. . . . . . . . . . .
29
16
Flow field at 20° yaw offset for the upstream turbine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
17
Power on two turbines for U = 8 m/s.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
18
DEL vs yaw angles for the upstream and downstream turbine. . . . . . . . . . .
32
19
Wind farm layout for baseline and optimized cases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
20
Evolution of AEP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
21
Change in power for every wind direction at 8 m/s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
22
Wake maps for flow case 174° and 8 m/s, baseline and optimized.
. . . . . . . .
37
23
Change in load and AEP per turbine for flow case 174° and 8 m/s. . . . . . . . .
37
24
Wake maps for flow case 270° and 8 m/s, baseline and optimized.
. . . . . . . .
38
25
Change in load and AEP per turbine for flow case 270° and 8 m/s. . . . . . . . .
39
26
Wind farm layout and AEP for baseline and optimized cases. . . . . . . . . . . .
40
27
Change in power for every wind direction at 8 m/s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
28
Change in power for every wind direction at 8 m/s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
29
Wake maps for initial and optimized yaw angles at 8 m/s.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
44
30
Visualization of grid rotation angle for either rows or columns. . . . . . . . . . .
47
31
Wake maps for initial and optimized yaw angles at 8 m/s.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
32
Change in load and AEP per turbine for flow case 270° and 8 m/s. . . . . . . . .
49
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
1
Integrated optimization setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Layout optimization setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Wake steering optimization setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Surrogate analysis setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Power results for different spacing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
LDEL usage for 2 turbine case wake steering optimization. . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Constraint utilization ratio, integrated optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8
Results for optimized yaw offsets at 174° and 8 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
9
Results for optimized yaw offsets at 270° and 8 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
10
Constraint utilization ratio, layout optimization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
11
Constraint utilization ratio, yaw optimization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
12
Summary of results for integrated and sequential optimizations . . . . . . . . . .
45
13
Results from integrated optimization with different initial values of θ. . . . . . .
46
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
As the world moves towards a greener future since the introduction of the Paris agreement
in 2016 [1], energy companies in many countries worldwide are heavily investing in renewable
alternatives. Limiting global warming to below 2°C comes with many challenges that require
cross-disciplinary action from countless of institutions. Thus, the wind industry has seen rapid
development and established itself as a powerful market where new technologies are constantly
being introduced. All of this to find better ways to improve both the individual power a turbine
can generate as well as the collective production of a wind farm.
World wind capacity is accelerating fast, and in 2021, there was already a massive 837 GW
of installed capacity and over 94 GW came from newly installed wind power. According to the
2022 GWEX report, both onshore and offshore projects saw a higher demand last year, with
the offshore market almost tripling its installed capacity from 6.1 GW in 2020 to 21.1 GW in
2021 [2]. Moreover, the report states that the market outlook is positive and a prediction of a
6.6% yearly market growth is expected for the next five years.
In Europe alone, offshore wind is expected to grow exponentially, having an installed
capacity between 230 and 450 GW by 2050 [3]. To get the most out of this growing sector
and ensure that wind becomes one of the main sources of green power generation, it is key to
understand as much as possible all the complexities involved in wind farm design. This includes
countless factors such as feasibility studies, cost evaluation, site assessment, environmental
constraints, noise limitations, and more.
Although the installed capacity worldwide keeps increasing year by year, predictions from
leading experts point to an even faster development of renewable energy projects to stay on
track with the 1.5℃goal and to achieve net zero by 2050. Major effort across disciplines is
necessary and it is anticipated that wind power must quadruple its growth to stay on course
the Paris agreement [2]. It is thus imperative that attention is paid to improving the existing
wind farms or develop new ones with more cost-efficient configurations in mind.
Within the most important aspects to ensure that wind farms produce the maximum
power allowable while keeping costs to a minimum is the development of efficient strategies to
best capture the wind resource of potential wind farm sites. Equally significant are advanced
control strategies and wind farm layout optimization; which have gain a lot of attention for
their capability to maximize power output and at the same time, seek to minimize turbine
loading.
Wake steering has become particularly attractive as a mean of active turbine control, where
an angle misalignment between the upstream turbine and the upcoming inflow allows for an
increase in power output and better wind resource for turbines downstream. Similarly, advanced
modelling of wind farms, such as optimization, has been a huge contributor for developing novel
technologies that can maximize the Annual Energy Production (AEP) while reducing energy
costs.
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Motivation
1.1
Motivation
Wind turbines present complex variations in loads when operating under yaw-offset condi-
tions. The increase or reduction of the Design Equivalent Loads (DELs) is highly dependent on
the wind speed regime, turbulence levels and even airfoil aerodynamics. However, a common
consensus from several studies is that variation of blade loads can be reduced at an optimal
yaw misalignment angle. In Kragh and Hansen [4] it was found that a 70% reduction in blade
load variation can be achieved for a deterministic inflow case and steady-state characteristics.
When talking about turbulent inflows, on the other hand, high turbulence levels showed a small
reduction in blade load variation, but for lower turbulence levels, the loads can be reduced by
almost 20%. These statistics show how operating the turbines with intentional yaw misalign-
ment, otherwise known as wake steering, can have a positive impact on the reduction of fatigue
loads for some of the turbine components.
The study by van Dijk et al [5] gives a comprehensive analysis of wind turbine loads when
turbines downstream experience partial wake overlap. A computational framework is designed
to optimize a two turbines array using a Game Theoretic (GT) optimization approach to find
the optimal yaw offsets that maximize the power production while minimizing the loads under
partial wake conditions. Various optimization cases were explored, where it was found that
optimizing for power production only yielded a significant increase in the flapwise and edgewise
bending moments for some wind directions. The multi-objective optimizations for power and
loads demonstrated that loads can be slightly reduced without sacrificing too much power.
A study by Damiani et al [6] uses an analytical approach combined with aero-elastic simula-
tions to compare the fatigue and extreme loads under yaw offset conditions with measurement
data from the GE 1.5MW turbine. In the study, the turbine operates under skewed inflow.
The paper analyzes the main load channels associated with wind turbine components, includ-
ing blade root flapwise and edgewise bending moments and tower top and tower bottom bending
moments.
Moving beyond wake steering, some studies have also looked into the effects of layout
optimization in wind turbine loading.
Most notably, in a study by Stanley et al [7], the
edgewise bending moment (EBM) load variations were investigated for a simple ten-turbine
case and two wind directions. By using a two-step approach in which the results are compared
between unconstrained and constrained conditions for the EBM, it was found that the highest
AEP reported in both cases is pretty much the same.
These results indicate that loading
constraints can be implemented in layout optimization without sacrificing too much AEP.
A prominent study by Riva et al [8] used load surrogate models to perform a gradient-based
wind farm layout optimization. The study sought to maximize the AEP with the addition
of a constraint on the Lifetime Design Equivalent Loads (LDELs) of several wind turbine
components into TOPFARM.
Although research on layout optimization or wake steering alone has been done for quite
some time now, studies regarding integrated layout and turbine control is scarce. However,
some papers on the topic of combined layout and wake steering optimization have yielded
results that reiterate the benefits of utilizing such strategies to improve a wind farm’s AEP.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Project Description
A study by Fleming et al [9] used the princess Amalia wind farm to perform a combined
optimization that included layout and yaw control optimization. The paper investigated the
mean power output for several wind directions and focused on a single wind speed. It was
found that the yaw control optimization yielded a 7% increase in power output compared to the
baseline when turbines are aligned with the mean wind direction. Furthermore, the combined
layout and yaw optimization resulted in a power production increase of 8.5% compared to the
baseline. In addition, a study by Gebraad et al [10] showed an AEP improvement of 5.3% when
doing a coupled layout and wake steering optimization for all wind directions and wind speeds
representative of the princess Amalia wind park measurements. However, these two studies did
not take into account fatigue loading and recommend it to be a subject of future research.
Given the literature presented, the potential in AEP gain from coupling such strategies
is more than evident. The inclusion of fatigue loading in the models is mentioned as a vital
next step to fully determine whether said approach is favorable in terms of power production
and load alleviation. There are many advantages of implementing a coupled layout and wake
steering optimization. For example, allowing developers to design cost-effective wind farms
that can better capture the wind resource while preserving the structural integrity of turbine
components. Because of this, the topic of the present project focuses on considering fatigue
loading in an integrated layout and wake steering optimization and investigating its influence
on a wind farm’s AEP.
1.2
Project Description
The studies presented in the previous section serve as inspiration for the main research
question relevant for this project.
Mainly, the present work seeks to explore the influence
of a combined optimization strategy, where layout and wake steering are coupled under load
constraints, on the AEP of a wind farm. It is expected that taking into account the loading of
several wind turbine components when designing a wind farm plays a huge role in minimizing
some of the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs associated with the project, as the design
life of the turbines could potentially be extended. However, the present project will only focus
on analyzing how the AEP and turbine loading are affected and the possible trade-off between
them.
The work by Friis-Møller [11] serves as a stepping stone for the elaboration of this project,
thus some of the code developed in the study will be reused here.
The load constraint is
modelled by a surrogate model implemented by [11] based on the model produced by Riva et
al [8]. TOPFARM will be used to set up the optimization problem while PyWake allows the
calculation of AEP and loads for a given set of wind speeds and wind direction. All data used
is representative of a reference site and turbine. The layout optimization is reduced to two
design variables: the inter-turbine spacing and grid rotation, as opposed to individual turbine
positions, to reduce the complexity of the problem. The wind farm grid is thus able to shrink
and expand for a chosen turbine spacing and also rotate when given some angle.
The primary research question of the present study is formulated as: How does a coupled
strategy of layout and wake steering optimization influence a wind farm’s AEP when considering
load as constraints?
3
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Report Outline
In addition, a secondary research question is proposed to investigate the possible benefits
or drawbacks of performing a sequential optimization instead of an integrated one. Both ap-
proaches are thoroughly described in the report and results from both methods are presented
and analyzed.
1.3
Report Outline
The current chapter introduces all the consulted literature and previous studies on the
present topic of study. In Chapter 2, the methodology and theoretical background of the fun-
damental concepts used throughout the study are presented. An overall overview of both wake
steering and general optimization theory is explained as well as a broad definition of the TOP-
FARM and PyWake software. In Chapter 3, the problem description and study methodology
are presented, where the optimization approaches and characteristics are described, as well
as the optimization workflow and limitations for both the integrated and sequential optimiza-
tions. Chapter 4 investigates the behavior of the DTU 10MW-RWT surrogate model used in
the study. A detailed analysis is carried out to assess the response of the surrogate for a two
turbine case and different inter-turbine spacing and yaw offset conditions. Lastly, Chapter 5
focuses on the results obtained from both the integrated and sequential optimization. The last
chapters deal with the study’s conclusion as well as a discussion for future work.
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
In this chapter, the theoretical background supporting each tool and model used for the
realization of the project is to be described. Furthermore, the methodology pertaining the
optimization problem will be briefly explained, with emphasis on the cost model, constraints
and site used for the study.
First, the basic theory behind active yaw steering is discussed. Then, an overview of wind
farm optimization is mentioned, where the optimization structure is reviewed, including the
optimization problem and the elements behind it. In addition, the basics behind surrogate-
based optimization will be explained along with a brief description of the turbine surrogate
model used. The software tools TOPFARM and PyWake are later explained where all the
models and variables relevant for the optimization studies are discussed.
Worth mentioning is that DTU’s Sophia HPC cluster [12] was used to run the simulations
needed for this project. The cluster is a powerful tool that runs in the Linux CentOS operating
system with a total of 516 computational nodes. Each node in the cluster represents a x86-64
computer with 32 physical cores. For the realization of this project, one node and core were
used, which allows for 128 GB of RAM memory usage. To execute jobs, Sophia relies on the
SLURM cluster management and job scheduling system that allocates users exclusive or non-
exclusive access to resources for the specified working period. The system is used to start,
execute and monitor work via allocated nodes, and these can be performed either interactively
or via batch jobs.
2.1
Wake Steering Theory
All modern wind turbines operate with a yaw system that rotates the turbine’s nacelle
and aligns it with the incoming wind as it changes direction. From momentum theory, it is
known that a turbine can extract the maximum amount of power possible when the rotor is
perpendicular to the wind. Thus, theoretically, yaw misalignment decreases the power output
capability of wind turbines. The term yaw angle is given to the angle formed between the
incoming wind and the turbine shaft at hub height, and it is represented by θ in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Force diagram of rotor in yawed wind turbine, presented in [13].
5
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Optimization Theory
The effective wind speed now being captured by the rotor becomes U0 cos(θ), which affects
the power output of the turbine in the following way: knowing that the maximum allowable
power that can be extracted is proportional to the free wind speed cubed (U 3
0) for a perfectly
aligned wind turbine, when replacing this term with the axial component, the expression for
power becomes as shown in Equation 1. From this, it can be said that now the power is reduced
by a factor of cos(θ)3. Similarly, the same reasoning is applied to the thrust force that the rotor
experiences. The thrust force in the axial direction is expressed as seen in Equation 2.
P = 1
2 ρ A (U0 cos(θ))3 CP
(1)
TA = 1
2 ρ A (U0 cos(θ))2 CT
(2)
Since the thrust coefficient is an important parameter when using wake models to simulate
the wind speed deficit and wake deflection, it is also important to note how yaw misalignment
reduces the total thrust force captured by the rotor. The study of wind farm wakes requires
considering the thrust force in the direction of the wind instead of the axial component, leading
to Equation 3.
T = TA cos(θ) = 1
2 ρ A U 2
0 cos(θ)3 CT
(3)
Ultimately, the thrust coefficient CT is reduced by a factor of cos(θ)3 as well.
Although the theory suggests that intentional misalignment of the turbine with the up-
coming wind is unfavorable, active wake steering can deflect the wake away from downstream
turbines, increasing the power output on a wind farm level. By having turbines that are less
affected by the upstream wake, the downstream turbines can experience a significant increase
in their inlet velocity. Wake steering can also alter the aerodynamic interaction between the
inner turbines in a wind farm and the intentional redirection of the wake can be favorable in
reducing wake losses.
2.2
Optimization Theory
Simple optimization problems date back almost 3,000 years when mathematicians were
trying to solve geometrical problems. From then on, optimization has proven to be a powerful
tool that aids in finding the best possible solution to a problem given a set of variables and
constraints. According to Martins and Ning, "any problem where a decision needs to be made
can be cast as an optimization problem" [14]. This idea denotes the fact that optimization
problems are present beyond engineering, appearing in other disciplines such as economics,
political science, management, physics, etc. Within engineering, optimization is used to design
engineering systems and the practice has been used for many purposes from wing design in
aerospace engineering to mechanism design in mechanical engineering. The biggest trait that
characterizes optimization problems is its iterative nature, where designers use optimization
algorithms to automate the design process and obtain a feasible solution to a problem.
In order to carry out an optimization, a proper formulation of the problem is required,
which includes fundamental elements such as:
6
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Optimization Theory
• objective function: when performing an optimization, the objective function serves as
a quantitative representation that determines whether a solution is better than another.
Depending on the problem, the objective function can be either minimized or maximized.
• design variables: for the objective function to find the best solution, a series of design
variables, which define the system, are changed and controlled by the optimizer to explore
the design space until the algorithm converges.
• constraints: to limit the design space in terms of the design variables, constraints must
be set up to bind the problem within some bounds or limits. These constraints can be
either equality or inequality constraints.
An optimization problem is typically expressed as a mathematical formulation, which is
also called the optimization problem statement and is written as:
minimize
x
f(x)
by varying
xi ≤xi ≤xi, i = 1, . . . , n.
subject to
g(x) ≤0
h(x) = 0
(4)
The formulation of Equation 4 can be read as: minimize the objective function f(x) by
varying the design variables xi subject to the equality or inequality constraints h(x) or g(x),
respectively.
The design variables can be further constrained to be within specific bounds,
as denoted by xi and xi. Furthermore, a minimization problem can be transformed into a
maximization problem by writing the objective function as:
max[f(x)] = −min[−f(x)]
(5)
Figure 2 illustrates a basic eXtended Design Structure Matrix (XDSM) diagram of an
optimization workflow.
Figure 2: XDSM diagram of an optimization workflow.
7
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Optimization Theory
The design variable x serves as input to the different system components, comprised of the
objective function and the selected optimizer with its corresponding driver algorithm. After the
optimization, the variable x∗represents the optimized state found that satisfies the constraints
and objective function.
2.2.1
Wind Farm Optimization
Wind farm design is inherently complex, from handling many disciplines, accounting for
several stakeholders, having long time scales and a large scope, the system around wind plants
is heavily coupled. Thus, wind farm design requires a systems engineering approach to tackle
the challenges that arise and better evaluate the performance and cost of a given wind plant.
For such types of systems, optimization is highly efficient, as several variables that need to be
considered in the design process can be combined into an optimization problem that finds the
best possible solution for a specific objective function.
Optimization in wind energy dates back to the 1970s when the use of wind power was
being explored as a potential source of large-scale electricity generation. The first scientific
paper recorded on the topic was in 1974 and studied the interaction of wind turbines’ arrays.
Research has come a long way since then, and numerous journal papers, conference proceedings
and technical reports have been published continuously since the mid-2000s. Herbet-Acero et al
[15] present a comprehensive review that walks the reader through the evolution of the design
and optimization of wind farms as well as the models and numerical approaches used to solve
an optimization problem.
Setting up a wind farm involves several technical and economical factors that wind farm
developers must address constantly and intelligently. In addition, the large initial investment
needed to begin a wind farm design project represents the main driver for companies to ensure
that the configuration of wind turbines chosen is as optimal as possible. This need paved the
way for the first studies in wind farm layout optimization, from the pioneering research from
Mosetti et al [16] back in 1992.
Ever since that first study by Mosetti, the attention to wind farm optimization has been
turned to the development of wind farms that can maximize their energy production while
minimizing the cost of energy, which became the most widespread objective function within
the optimization problem formulation. As presented in the nicely summarized paper by Tesauro
et al [17], a couple of sub-models are necessary to establish the objective function: wake models
and cost models.
These two take into account the most important interactions within the
turbines of a wind farm, i.e the decrease in energy of air particles downstream of a turbine due
to the velocity drop behind the rotor and the evaluation of different costs associated with wind
farm design (foundations, electrical grids, maintenance, degradation, etc).
Over the past few years, some researchers and study institutions have contributed to
the growth of wind farm optimization by implementing software solutions that can model
optimization problems with a multi-fidelity approach, using different algorithms within models
that show an increase in complexity. According to Tesauro et al [17], this approach "represents
a trade-off between good quality solutions and a reasonable computational time". Thus the
8
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Optimization Theory
next sections will serve as a basic overview of how these state-of-the-art optimizations and
flow modeling tools work. And how can these be used to develop a plethora of wind farm
optimization problems, including the one regarding the present project.
2.2.2
Surrogate-Based Optimization
Multi-disciplinary systems like those present in aerospace engineering or wind energy are
usually quite computationally expensive, which makes the modeling and optimization of these
quite challenging. Thus, surrogate models are often used to improve the computational time of
advanced models without losing too much accuracy in the process. In essence, a surrogate model
represents a response surface from an approximation to a function or data set. In optimization,
surrogate models allow for much faster computations, where the models are built using data
from high-fidelity models, and its use is denoted as surrogate-based optimization [18].
Given the nature of this project, surrogate-based optimization comes in handy for reduc-
ing the computational time it takes to calculate a turbine’s component load under a certain
load case. Conducting experiments and simulations on wind turbines requires advanced aeroe-
lastic models that can evaluate countless parameters, loads being one of them. HAWC2 is a
widespread software that computes a comprehensible aeroelastic analysis for individual tur-
bines. However, simulation times involving the software fall in the range of hours and even
days, depending on the complexity of the flow case. Therefore, performing an optimization
that involves load analysis would result in an exceedingly high computational time.
The surrogate model used for this project was developed by researchers at DTU and trained
for the DTU 10MW reference turbine. The aeroelastic load simulation takes the turbulent wind
field as input and it can be described by the following variables across the rotor plane:
• Mean wind field. This includes the average wind speed at hub height, the vertical shear
exponent α and the wind veer.
• Turbulence. Here the turbulence intensity, turbulence probability density function and
the turbulence spectrum (by the Mann model) are considered.
• Mean wind inflow. The variables considered here are relative to the wind turbine and
account for the tilt angle (vertical flow) and the yaw angle (horizontal flow).
• Air density.
The purpose of this surrogate model is to calculate the short-term Design Equivalent Loads,
or DEL, of the DTU 10MW wind turbine based on specific wind conditions and aeroelastic
simulations performed by HAWC2. The study by Dimitrov et al [19] showcases the detailed
explanation of this procedure as well as the input parameters previously described.
As per the study, the calculation of the DEL for different turbine components follows
Equation 6.
9
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Optimization Theory
Seq =
X niSm
i
Nref
1/m
(6)
where Nref is the reference number of cycles, in this case, 600, and m is the specific
material’s Wöhler exponent. Typically m = 12 for the blades and m = 4 for the tower. The
cycle amplitudes are obtained via rainflow counting, where Si represents the load range cycles
and ni the number of cycles within a certain range.
Initially, the surrogate model was trained for yaw angle bounds of −10° ≤Ψ ≤10°.
However, the model trained by Mikkel et al [11] will be used as a reference, as it accounts for
load analysis under wake steering conditions. Therefore, the permissible yaw angle bounds the
surrogate model can take are increased to −30° ≤Ψ ≤50°.
In addition, the reference outputs used for the surrogate model consist of a 10-min average
power signal and four 1Hz DELs corresponding to the same 10-min period. These four channels
are:
• Blade root flapwise bending moment (Mx)
• Blade root edgewise bending moment (My)
• Tower-top tilt bending moment (Mx)
• Tower-top yaw bending moment (Mz)
The thrust force is composed of a component normal to the flow as well as a tangential
component, which acts in the blades’ rotational direction. To better characterize these loads, the
flapwise and edgewise bending moments are introduced at the root of the blades. The flapwise
bending moment appears from the normal forces acting on the blade and it is responsible for
deflecting the blades out of the rotor plane either upwind or downwind. On the other hand,
the edgewise bending moment is caused by the tangential force distribution acting on the rotor
plane. It is parallel to the rotor axis and contributes to the torque, which makes it highly
influenced by gravitational loading. The blade bending moments are heavily affected by the
change in yaw angles as the turbine experiences a change in the inflow’s angle of alignment with
its rotor. This is coupled with the asymmetric loading experienced by the blades and results
in an increase in load magnitude for non-aligned turbines.
The tower also experiences loading at both the top and bottom of the structure. These
loads result from the interaction of the structure with the aerodynamic loads transmitted by the
blades as well as the weight of the turbine and tower. Flapwise, edgewise and torsion moments
are transferred to the tower coordinates, where the tower top tilt and tower top yaw stem from
the rotor’s tilt and yaw moments. Output on the tilt and yaw bending moment at the top of
the tower is recorded by the surrogate model. Usually, the measure of these bending moments
is made right where the nacelle and tower are joined together. Thus, it can shed light on the
loading influence when the yaw mechanism is operating continuously when information about
bearing loads is not provided.
10
==PAGE:18==
2.3
TOPFARM
Figure 3: Illustration of coordinate system and turbine loads with added reference for tower
top (TT) loads as presented in the HAWC2 manual [20].
Figure 3 shows the coordinate system employed according to HAWC2. The blade root
flapwise and edgewise bending moments are represented by the XB and YB axis, respectively.
To illustrate the direction of the tower top tilt (XTT) and tower top yaw (ZTT) an addition was
made to the sketch.
2.3
TOPFARM
The optimization problem in this project will be carried out with the Python package
TOPFARM, which was developed at DTU Wind Energy and relies on the multidisciplinary
OpenMDAO optimization platform for solving optimizations in regards to wind farms [21]. The
TOPFARM tool can be used to study offshore and onshore projects by integrating different
models and analyzing several metrics such as AEP, turbine component degradation, Operation
and Management (O&M) costs, etc. For the calculation of the power production, TOPFARM
wraps the PyWake package and computes the power given predefined wake models. The latest
version, TOPFARM 2.2.6, is equipped to solve a variety of problems such as layout optimization,
turbine type optimization, wake steering, optimizations with load as constraints, etc. The most
common wake and cost models are already defined in TOPFARM, however, it also allows for
customization, where users can define their own models for the optimization. Recent literature
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3
TOPFARM
describes some examples of previous works in optimization that use TOPFARM as the modelling
tool [22], [23].
Since TOPFARM follows the OpenMDAO framework, the elements within its architecture
are called components, which interact with each other to find the best possible solution to an op-
timization problem. The central object of the workflow is the TopFarmProblem, which includes
the design variables, objective function, constraint and drivers needed for the optimization, as
seen in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Flowchart of TOPFARM’s main components.
Each element of the TOPFARM software will be explained in further detail with reference
to the optimization problem given by this study.
2.3.1
Design Variables
Similar to OpenMDAO, the design variables in TOPFARM represent the variables to
change during the optimization which influence the objective function. In wind farm layout
optimization, it is common to use the turbines’ positions as design variables [10], [24]. This
approach requires defining two design variables per turbine and ultimately, it can become
infeasible to work with such large number of variables if the wind farm studied is big. Describing
the wind farm as a grid-like layout can simplify the problem by considering only two or three
design variables regardless of the wind farm size [25]. In this project, the integrated optimization
problem takes the following design variables: the yaw offsets, the inter-turbine spacing (S) and
the wind farm rotation angle (θ). However, the yaw angles depend on the number of turbines,
wind speed and wind direction, denoted in Python as Ψilk.
2.3.2
Cost Component
The cost component is responsible for defining and evaluating the objective function. In
this case, the cost component pertains to the yearly energy produced by a wind turbine or wind
farm, which is defined by the site’s wind directions and wind speeds. To calculate the AEP, the
12
==PAGE:20==
2.3
TOPFARM
probability of wind speeds for a given wind sector are needed, which can be represented by a
wind rose. In wind energy, this probability is characterized by the Weibull function, as shown
in Equation 7.
PDF(V ) = k
A
V
A
(k−1)
exp
 
−
V
A
k!
(7)
The probability distribution function takes the scale (A) and shape (k) parameters which
are representative of the Weibull function. These parameters are site-dependent and are defined
within PyWake’s pacakge.
A wind farm’s total AEP corresponds to the sum of the power produced by each turbine
for all wind speed times the frequency of those wind speeds for each wind direction bin.
AEP = 8760
N−1
X
i=1
1
2 (P (Vi+1) + P (Vi)) · f (Vi < Vo < Vi+1)
(8)
As seen in Equation 8, the turbine’s power curve is represented by P(V ) and f(V ) repre-
sents the wind speed probability distribution function. Lastly, the hours in a year (8760) are
taken into account to represent the annual energy production.
2.3.3
Driver
The driver is responsible for performing the numerical optimization in TOPFARM and
the tool supports several driver options through Python’s SciPy scientific package. TOPFARM
is able to solve gradient-based optimizations with the Sequential Least Squares Programming
(SLSQP) driver, which is based on the Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) theory. It
is used to solve non-linear optimization problems where the objective function and constraints
are twice continuously differentiable. In SQP, the problem is divided into several quadratic
programming sub-problems where a solution is found to construct a better approximation.
This process is iterative and creates a sequence of approximations in order to move closer and
converge to the final solution. TOPFARM also supports gradient-free optimization through the
Constrained Optimization by Linear Approximation (COBYLA) algorithm. In this method, the
derivatives of the objective function are not known, and the algorithm works by approximating
the constrained optimization problem as a linear programming problem in an iterative manner.
Gradient-based and gradient-free methods differ primarily in their setup complexity. On
the one hand, gradient-free methods are easier to configure and allow for either local or global
search of the design space, which increases the chances of finding the global minimum. On the
other hand, a gradient-based approach is more challenging to set up but is overall more efficient,
although they have higher chances of getting stuck in local minima [14]. The selection of the
optimization driver is thus heavily influenced by the dimension of the problem. For problems
with a large number of design variables, gradient-free methods are less efficient in finding a
solution than gradient-based approaches. Since gradient-based methods use information from
13
==PAGE:21==
2.4
PyWake
the objective function’s gradients, they can search the design space in a more clever way,
achieving a lower convergence speed than gradient-free methods.
In this project, both SLSQP and COBYLA are used and the necessary derivatives for
gradient-based optimizations were computed by finite-difference. The tolerance used for the
optimizations was kept to 1e−4, as a very small tolerance proved challenging for the optimizer
and simulations ran for too long.
2.3.4
Constraints
The most common type of optimization problem is a constrained optimization. Similarly
to OpenMDAO, the constraints in TOPFARM represent the limitations to the design variables
and can be characterized by boundary constraints, inequality constraints or equality constraints.
Frequently, constraints to the turbine spacing and boundaries of the wind farm are used.
For this project, several constraints are considered for the optimization. Firstly, a tur-
bine’s yaw angle is allowed to vary between a range of lower and upper bounds. Secondly, the
problem is constrained in terms of loading, where the Lifetime Design Equivalent Load (LDEL)
should not exceed a maximum value. Each load channel is normalized with their corresponding
maximum allowable value and checked that it does not exceed a 3% increase from the nominal
case. Thus, the constraint of the load is defined as Ls ≤1.03. Lastly, the wind farm bound-
aries constraints are set by the permissible range for inter-turbine spacing in both the x and y
directions, with an additional set of bounds for the grid rotational angle.
2.4
PyWake
PyWake is an open-sourced and Python-based software solution that relies on wake models
and acts as a wind farm simulation tool capable of computing flow fields, power production of
individual turbines as well as the annual production of a wind farm [26]. Developed at DTU,
PyWake is a mid to high fidelity tool that computes the wake flow field based on Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CDF). The tool is adapted from the extensive research involving the analysis
of wake interaction in wind farms, such as [27], [28]. Although the software is suitable for
computing the wake effects in a wind farm, the high computational costs make it unsuitable
for wind farm optimization.
14
==PAGE:22==
2.4
PyWake
Figure 5: Flowchart of PyWake’s main components.
Figure 5 shows PyWake’s architecture. The WindFarmModel represents the main object
in PyWake’s flowchart, and it can be initialized with the Site and WindTurbine objects. The
reference data corresponding to wind turbine positions and wind speed, wind direction and
turbulence intensity (WSref, WDref, Tref) are used by the Site object to calculate the local
conditions for each variable (WS, WD, TI) as well as the probability and distances between
turbines (cross-wind, down-wind and vertical). In addition, the Site object is responsable for
defining the Weibull A and k parameters corresponding to the conditions of the site in question.
Once the effective wind speed (WSeff) is calculated, the WindTurbine object will provide the
power and thrust curve (CT) for a specific type of turbine along with their height and diameter.
PyWake’s WindFarmModel will output the AEP of the turbine or wind farm with some plotting
capabilities to visualize the flow map of the object of study.
Figure 6: Flowchart of PyWake’s engineering models.
15
==PAGE:23==
2.4
PyWake
To better represent the intricacies within the flow and the interaction between turbines,
PyWake’s EngineeringModels object provides options to calculate wake deficit, wake superpo-
sition, rotor averaging, turbulence, blockage and wake deflection. Figure 6 shows the different
engineering models with their corresponding inputs and outputs.
Within the engineering models, the two main objects correspond to the PropagateDownwind
and All2AllIterative objects. The PropagateDownwind class is able to estimate the wake
deficit caused by a turbine in the downstream direction without considering blockage effects.
On the other hand, the All2AllIterative class considers blockage effects and iterates over
each turbine until the effective wind speed converges.
The following sections will present more detail into some of the most relevant PyWake
objects and models necessary for this project.
2.4.1
Site
The wind farm layout used for this study is fixed to a 3x3 distribution, with a total of
9 turbines represented by the DTU 10MW reference turbine.
However, the wind resource
used is specified according to the offshore wind farm Lillgrund.
A visual representation of
the atmospheric conditions is given by the wind rose, in which 12 wind direction sectors of
30° each are selected to represent the frequency of occurrence of the wind speeds at the site.
From Figure 7 it can be seen that the dominant wind direction is west and south-west, mainly
between 190-315°. Furthermore, the average wind speed at the site is between 8-12 m/s. This
information will be used to select the flow cases to study in the optimizations.
(a) Wind speed distribution.
(b) Wind rose.
Figure 7: Wind resource at the Lillgrund site.
The default characteristics in terms of shear exponent and ambient turbulence intensity will
be used for the PyWake calculation. Thus, a shear value of 0.2 is selected and the turbulence
intensity is kept at 10%.
16
==PAGE:24==
2.4
PyWake
2.4.2
Wake Deficit Model
As the wind passes through the turbine’s rotor and flows downstream it experiences a
reduction in its wind speed due to the wind turbine’s wake. The wake spreads as it moves
further from the rotor until it eventually recovers at a certain distance downstream from the
turbine. Modelling this interaction and wake behavior is very complex and has been a prominent
topic of study for almost 40 years. In 1983, Jensen [29] published a study of a wake model that
nowadays is referred to as the NOJ wake deficit model. In the study, the wake was modelled
with a "top-hat" shape and steady inflow to reduce complexity and computational cost.
Wake models, or wake deficit models, are often validated against full scale measurements
or derived from CFD simulations that use high fidelity models in order to better understand
the influence of wind turbine wakes and power production.
Most recently, Bastankhah and Porté-Agel [30] introduced a wake model which assumes
a Gaussian distribution for the velocity deficit in the wake. The authors applied mass and
momentum conservation and compared results with high-resolution wind tunnel measurements
and Large Eddy Simulations (LES). It was found that the results were in pretty good agreement
with the experimental data and that the model could predict the wake influence on power
production more accurately that Jensen’s model, for example.
The wake model used in this project corresponds to that of [30] and is referred to as the
Bastankhah-Gaussian wake model. Equation 9 describes the model’s approach.
∆U
U∞
=
 
1 −
s
1 −
CT
8 (k∗x/d0 + ε)2
!
× exp
 
−
1
2 (k∗x/d0 + ε)2
(z −zh
d0
2
+
 y
d0
2)!
(9)
where ∆U/U∞is the normalized wake velocity deficit.
2.4.3
Deflection Model
Since one aspect of this project is to perform a wake steering optimization, a model that
accurately describes the wake’s behavior with the turbine’s yaw misalignment is essential. The
deflection model used in PyWake calculates the deflected distances both downwind and cross-
wind between the source wind turbine and the turbines downstream.
The most common wake deflection model used is the one by Jiménez et al [13]. In the
study, the authors carried out a LES to characterize the turbulence behind a wind turbine given
the wake deflection created by different yaw angle and thrust coefficient settings.
Figure 8 is a visual representation of the Jiménez wake deflection model, where the skew
angle (α) represents the inclination of the velocity within the wake with the ambient velocity.
17
==PAGE:25==
2.4
PyWake
Figure 8: Schematic of the Jiménez wake deflection model, presented in [13].
Just behind the turbine, the skew angle α can be represented by Equation 10.
α|x=0 ≈cos2 θ sin θCT
2
(10)
where θ is the turbine’s yaw angle and CT is the thrust coefficient. This angle α is also
called the initial skew angle of the wake.
The calculation results obtained in the study show that bigger yaw angles lead to bigger
skew angles as well. However, increasing the turbine’s yaw angle above 30° yields a smaller
difference in the skew angle increase. Similarly, increasing the yaw angle reduces the wake’s
width (δ) and results in a quicker velocity decay.
2.4.4
Turbulence Model
The calculation of fatigue loads in the turbine components requires a fairly accurate es-
timation of the turbulence intensity in the wake.
The IEC 61400-1 describes a method to
account for the wake effects produced by the interaction of upstream and downstream turbines.
A parameter introduced as the effective turbulence intensity Ieff is established and used when
performing fatigue calculation during normal operation. The expression for the effective turbu-
lence intensity is given by the Frandsen model [31] developed in 2007. In this project, the latest
version (STF2017) of the model according to the 2017 IEC standard is used. The calculated
effective turbulence intensity is developed from the model integration of load conditions under
ambient turbulence intensity and waked conditions. Equation 11 shows the expression derived
for the effective turbulence intensity used in the model.
Ieff (Vhub ) =
Z 2π
0
p (θ | Vhub ) Im (θ | Vhub ) dθ
 1
m
(11)
where p corresponds to the wind direction’s PDF, I is the "turbulence intensity of the
combined ambient and wake flows from wind direction θ" and m is the Wöhler exponent of the
specific turbine structural component considered.
18
==PAGE:26==
3
Problem description
As a primary objective, the present study is aimed at investigating the effects of a cou-
pled strategy of layout and wake steering optimization under load constraints on a wind farm’s
AEP. Two approaches were explored: one with an integrated optimization and another with
a sequential approach. All this with the intention of comparing both methods and analyzing
their potential advantages and/or disadvantages, which serves as a secondary objective. Both
approaches are constrained by the Lifetime Design Equivalent Loads (LDEL). Besides examin-
ing the influence on power production, the trade-off between loading and power as well as the
influence of layout changes is studied. In this chapter, the study methodology for each approach
is explained and all the assumptions, limitations and optimization parameters are defined.
3.1
Integrated Optimization
The main optimization approach seeks to evaluate all design variables simultaneously, often
called the one-step approach, which is fully integrated. In most cases, the design variables in
layout optimizations associated are the individual turbine positions in the wind farm. Hence,
for each turbine, two design variables are considered. As for wake steering optimizations, each
yaw angle is dependent on the number of wind speeds (Ns) and wind direction (Nd) studied in
order to calculate the total AEP of a turbine. Because of this, the design variables for active
yaw optimization amount to NsNd per turbine. As a result, the total design variables in an
integrated optimization would equal to N(2 + NsNd), where N is the number of turbines.
Given the complexity and the large number of design variables this configuration would
give, the layout optimization is modified to take a variable for the wind farm grid, as opposed
to the individual positions of the turbines. The wind farm grid is specified by the inter-turbine
spacing (S) and grid rotation angle (θ) in the vertical direction between turbines, as seen in
Figure 9.
Figure 9: Visualization of wind farm layout configuration.
19
==PAGE:27==
3.1
Integrated Optimization
In the end, the design variables for the layout optimization are reduced to only two, which
are independent of the number of turbines. This way, the wind farm’s size is not a limitation
in the sense that it does not add too many design variables if the number of turbines was to be
significant. The idea is for the wind farm to expand, contract or rotate to find the best possible
combination of spacing and rotation angle that maximizes the AEP and minimizes wake losses.
Figure 10 shows the optimization flowchart. The design variables serve as input, where the
site-specific conditions are calculated through the wind farm model and the surrogate model
performs the load calculation. The optimization results in the maximized AEP that satisfies
the given constraints.
Figure 10: Integrated optimization workflow.
The optimization problem is described by Equation 12. The inter-turbine spacing, grid
rotational angle and yaw offset values are constrained by the bounds specified. Typically, a
layout optimization problem is constrained by the wind farm boundary and spacing between
turbines. For this case, the design variables chosen eliminate the necessity of constraining the
wind farm to a certain area and the bounds selected are enough to constrain the problem. A
common range for yaw angles between ±30° is adopted as the additional constraint in the wake
steering optimization. As for the loading, the LDEL of each turbine for each load channel
is calculated for nominal conditions, mainly when the yaw offset is 0° at the initial condition
selected for the spacing and rotation angle. The optimized LDEL is allowed to increase 3%
from the nominal value given the findings in Chapter 4 and to give the optimizer some room
to operate.
maximize
S,θ,Ψilk
AEP(S, θ, Ψilk)
subject to
3D ≤S ≤7D
0° ≤θ ≤90°
−30° ≤Ψilk ≤30°
Ls ≤1.03
(12)
20
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Sequential Optimization
For this integrated approach, a wind farm of 9 turbines in a 3x3 grid configuration is
selected. Given the large number of design variables that can be present due to the individual
turbines’ yaw angle, a small wind farm is to be studied and serves only as a preliminary
understanding of the influence of a coupled optimization on a wind farm’s AEP. It is thus
assumed that the results can be scaled to bigger wind farms. The final optimization setup is
presented in Table 1. The optimization is gradient-based and relies on finite difference to find
the derivatives of the problem.
Table 1: Integrated optimization setup.
Wind speeds
5-20 m/s
Wind direction
90-360°, bins of 4°
Load constraint
3% increase
Ambient TI
0.1
Ambient shear
0.2
Driver
SLSQP
Wake model
BastankahGaussian
As defined in Section 2.4.1, the wind resource is defined by the Lillgrund site. To reduce
the computational cost that is inherently present in this type of one-step approach, the flow
cases studied are selected as the most representative of the site in question. Although studying
all the wind directions is favorable for the layout optimization, the sectors excluded present
low probability of occurrence, where the wind speeds are mainly between 4-8 m/s and the
possibility for power increase is not very high nonetheless.
3.2
Sequential Optimization
Literature suggests that a two-step sequential approach is also able to yield promising
results, as seen in [9]. The problem is then divided into two sub-problems, where the layout and
wake steering optimizations are performed separately and the overall AEP improvement from
the two cases is aggregated. This optimization strategy attempts to reduce the computational
power and complexity that can arise from the integrated optimization by optimizing the wind
farm layout first and then finding the optimal yaw angles using the fixed and optimized layout.
The optimization workflow is presented in Figure 11. In the next sections, the characteristics
of each optimization and the parameters used are described in more detail.
21
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Sequential Optimization
Figure 11: Sequential optimization workflow.
Layout Optimization
As a first step, the layout of the 3x3 wind farm is optimized while considering the load constraint
for the LDEL of each turbine and load channel. The problem formulation is given by Equation
13. In this case, the problem is composed of only two design variables; the inter-turbine spacing
S and the grid rotational angle θ. Similar to the integrated optimization, the load constraint
is governed by an allowable 3% increase on the nominal load.
maximize
S,θ
AEP(S, θ)
subject to
3D ≤S ≤7D
0° ≤θ ≤90°
Ls ≤1.03
(13)
Table 2 shows the setup used for this optimization. Given the smaller set of design variables,
and knowing that layout optimizations are particularly sensitive to the wind direction sectors
chosen, a wider range of wind speeds and wind directions are considered. The optimization
algorithm used is gradient-free and the COBYLA driver is selected, the reason for this lies in
the difficulties the optimizer had when trying to run the optimization problem with a gradient-
based driver such as SLSQP.
Table 2: Layout optimization setup.
Wind speeds
5-25 m/s
Wind direction
0-360°, bins of 2°
Load constraint
3% increase
Ambient TI
0.1
Ambient shear
0.2
Driver
COBYLA
Wake model
BastankahGaussian
22
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Sequential Optimization
Wake Steering Optimization
After obtaining the optimized turbine positions, a yaw-based wake steering optimization is
performed for a fixed layout. The mathematical formulation of the problem is given in Equation
14. The design variables for this optimization case increase significantly, as the yaw angles are
conditioned on each wind speed and wind direction for each turbine. Thus, the total number
of design variables is defined as N ∗Ns ∗Nd.
maximize
Ψilk
AEP(Ψilk)
subject to
−30° ≤Ψilk ≤30°
Ls ≤1.03
(14)
Considering the higher computational resource needed for this optimization due to the
considerable increase in design variables, the flow cases selected for the optimization are re-
duced as done in the integrated optimization. To obtain a representative final result for the
AEP improvement, the final results are processed in such a way that they account for the
disregarded wind speed and wind direction sectors by imposing yaw offsets of 0°, as in the
nominal case. Although this approach makes the results comparable to the layout optimization
done previously, it also comes with some limitations that are further explained in Section 3.3.
Analytical gradients were available for this optimization, so a gradient-based approach with
SLSQP driver is performed.
Table 3: Wake steering optimization setup.
Wind speeds
5-20 m/s
Wind direction
90-360°, bins of 4°
Load constraint
3% increase
Ambient TI
0.1
Ambient shear
0.2
Driver
SLSQP
Wake model
BastankahGaussian
23
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Limitations and Assumptions
3.3
Limitations and Assumptions
Several assumptions were made throughout the project, which adds certain limitations
when it comes to analyzing the results.
• Wind farm layout: the layout considered for the project is very simple and consists
of only 9 turbines. The results are thus expected to differ when a bigger wind farm is
studied, offering scenarios that could be either advantageous or not. Nonetheless, an
improvement in energy production is expected even if the study is performed on a wind
farm with more turbines.
• Wake steering: for this study, all turbines are allowed to yaw, so the trade-off between
loading and power becomes individual for each turbine depending on the flow case stud-
ied. A different strategy where only certain turbines are yawed could drive down the
computational time. However, this approach was not considered.
• Modelling: problems with gradients were encountered in the layout optimization so a
gradient-free approach with COBYLA driver was employed. This could mean that the
results are not fully comparable with the integrated optimization, where a gradient-based
method with finite difference was used.
• Data analysis: due to the significant increase in the design variables, not all wind speeds
and wind directions were studied when performing the integrated optimization or the yaw-
based optimization in the sequential approach. Because of this, the final calculation of
the AEP is made by specifying nominal values of yaw angle (0°) for the flow cases that
were not part of the optimization.
• Surrogate model: the surrogate model used was already trained and no modifications
were made.
In addition, the surrogate proved to be very slow when performing the
load calculations.
This slowed down the optimizations made on a personal computer
tremendously, thus the use of a powerful cluster was necessary to carry on the simulations
in an acceptable time frame. Although parallelization was considered as a way to speed
up the simulations and to perhaps include more flow cases, problems with the surrogate
were encountered and the option was discarded given the project’s time frame.
24
==PAGE:32==
4
Surrogate Model Analysis
Before implementing any optimization, a preliminary study of the DTU 10MW-RWT sur-
rogate model is necessary to understand the physics behind turbines operating under yawed
conditions. Also, the implementation of layout optimization requires some insight into the in-
fluence of inter-turbine spacing on the calculation of the power and load of different turbine
components.
The simplest case to study is that of two turbines in a row aligned with the wind direction.
For this purpose, two sensitivity studies were performed:
• One where the effect of varying inter-turbine spacing is studied,
• And another where the influence of yaw offset is investigated.
An overview of the parameters used for both studies is presented in Table 4. The turbine
spacing was only varied for the first study where a yaw angle of 0° was maintained. For the
second study, a fixed turbine spacing of 5D was kept while the yaw angle was varied. Both
sensitivity studies were performed with the same flow case and default settings of turbulence
intensity and shear exponent, that is, 10% and 0.2, respectively.
Table 4: Surrogate analysis setup.
Wind direction [°]
Wind speed [m/s]
Turbine spacing [-]
Yaw offset [°]
270
6, 8, 12, 15
3D, 4D, 5D, 7D
-30 to 30
The main objective of these studies is to simulate different conditions and analyze the
response of the surrogate model for four different load channels pertaining to the DEL: blade
root flapwise bending moment, blade root edgewise bending moment, tower top tilt bending
moment and tower top yaw bending moment.
4.1
Turbine spacing sensitivity
Figure 12 shows a visual representation of the flow field around the two turbines when
positioned at a 5D distance and zero yaw.
25
==PAGE:33==
4.1
Turbine spacing sensitivity
Figure 12: Flow field at 5D of inter-turbine spacing.
First, the values of the power for both turbines are taken from the surrogate model at 8
m/s. The results in Table 5 show how the upstream turbine experiences the same power no
matter the spacing, as expected. For the downstream turbine, however, it can be seen that for
close spacing of 3D and 4D, there seems to be no power generation. At larger distances of 891.5
m (5D) and 1248.1 m (7D), the power in the downstream turbine decreases by 2.6 MW and 1.98
MW, respectively. This decrease in power is expected, as the wake effects further downstream
would reduce the effective wind speed reaching the rotor of Wt2. In addition, the zero power
generation at the lowest spacing is mainly due to a drastic reduction in the effective wind speed,
where the values go from 8 m/s to 3.50 m/s and 4.54 m/s for 3D and 4D, respectively. Since
the operational range of wind speeds for the DTU 10MW-RWT surrogate model is 5-25 m/s,
the result of no power production for these spacing is logical.
Table 5: Power results for different spacing.
Spacing
Wt1 - upstream
Wt2 - downstream
Power [MW] @ 8 m/s and 0° yaw
3D
4.010
0
4D
4.010
0
5D
4.010
1.404
7D
4.010
2.026
The behavior of the power of the downstream turbine with respect to the wind speed
is shown in Figure 13. It can be seen that as the incoming flow increases, the power to be
extracted at larger distances increases. This can be attributed to the fact that at some distance
downstream, the wake effects are no longer reducing the effective wind speed so significantly,
and thus, it can be said that the wake is "recovered", and the effective inflow entering the
downstream turbine’s rotor is closer to the ambient wind speed. The increase in power as the
turbines are positioned farther apart seems to be proportional to the wind speed.
26
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Turbine spacing sensitivity
Figure 13: Power vs wind speed for different spacing, downstream turbin.
Out of the two turbines studied, the downstream turbine is of more interest, since it allows
for the investigation of the turbine’s response due to wake interaction. The change in loading
in the downstream turbine is now studied and close attention is paid to the most important
parameters that influence these results: effective turbulence intensity and effective wind speed,
which represent the inflow conditions that reach the turbine’s rotor and can differ from the
atmospheric conditions due to wake effects. From the study, it was found that the effective
turbulence intensity appears to decrease as the inter-turbine spacing decreases. Similarly, the
effective wind speed increases with increasing distance, as the wake has had enough time to
recover at the downstream turbine, thus approaching the free stream velocity value. For lower
wind speeds, a sharp increase in turbulence intensity was found when the spacing was too close.
Values of TI in the range of 20-27% were recorded at wind speeds below rated and spacing of 3-
4D. These conditions could translate into a significant increase in loading for those components
which depend on the thrust, such as the blade root bending moment in the flapwise direction
and the tower top tilt.
To better understand how the loading for the different load channels behaves with the
inflow, the load response of the DTU 10MW-RWT surrogate model is studied for different
wind speeds and turbulence intensities. The results obtained correspond to a range in wind
speeds of 4-28 m/s and 1-30% TI, as can be seen in Figure 14.
From the results, it is evident that the loading magnitude appear to increase with increasing
wind speed and turbulence intensity. However, not all load channels show the same sensitivity
to the parameters. The blade root bending moment in the flapwise direction appears to be
more sensitive to the increase in wind speed, as the values change more in magnitude as the
wind speed increases in contrast with the increase in turbulence intensity. In the edgewise
direction, the DEL neither varies much in magnitude nor exhibits a particular sensitivity to
TI or wind speed, which can be attributed to the strong correlation that this load has with
gravity effects. The tower top tilt bending moment exhibits a low sensitivity to TI for lower
27
==PAGE:35==
4.1
Turbine spacing sensitivity
wind speeds, which becomes greater as the wind speeds are above rated. On the other hand,
the tower top yaw bending moment appears to have a higher sensitivity to TI than wind speed,
especially for inflow regions above rated wind speed.
(a) BRM Edgewise.
(b) BRM Flapwise.
(c) Tower top tilt.
(d) Tower top yaw.
Figure 14: DEL vs wind speed for different TI levels.
Figure 15 shows the evolution of the DEL for the four channels of interest when the inter-
turbine spacing is increased. In most cases, the increase in spacing translates into an increase
in loading. At larger distances, the inflow reaching the downstream turbine has more chance to
recuperate and approach the atmospheric conditions. When looking at the DEL in the flapwise
direction, it can be seen that lower wind speeds give rise to higher loading and that for higher
wind speeds, the DEL is smaller in magnitude. Although it was shown this load channel is
more sensitive to wind speed, the coupled effect of a reduction in turbulence intensity for higher
wind speeds could explain why the DEL seems to be lower in magnitude. Furthermore, the
sharp increase in turbulence intensity seen for close inter turbine spacing does not seem to
affect the DEL in the flapwise direction as much, and the lower loading at a spacing of 3D can
be associated with the significant drop in the effective wind speed at this distance; where a
28
==PAGE:36==
4.1
Turbine spacing sensitivity
value as small as 3.5 m/s was found. On the other hand, the blade root bending moment in
the edgewise direction presents little variation in magnitude as the spacing increases, which is
expected since this loading is mainly influenced by gravitational forces.
(a) BRM Edgewise.
(b) BRM Flapwise.
(c) Tower top tilt.
(d) Tower top yaw.
Figure 15: DEL vs spacing for different wind speeds, downstream turbine.
As for the tower top tilt, this DEL channel presents a similar trend to the flapwise bending
moment, where both the incoming wind speed and turbulence intensity have an influence on
the load magnitude. In the case of the tower top yaw, however, the coupled effect between
turbulence intensity and wind speed is not that evident. The DEL magnitude seems to decrease
as the wind speed decreases, and significantly higher loads are observed at close spacing when
compared with the flapwise and tower top tilt DEL. This could be attributed to both the
sensitivity this load channel has for turbulence intensity and the previous findings of a sharp
increase in TI at lower spacing and low wind speeds.
Overall, the behavior of the loads for different turbine components seems to follow the same
trend: as the inter-turbine spacing increases, the loading does also. The weak wake interaction
between the turbines at larger spacing and the consequent wake recovery at further distances
29
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Yaw angle sensitivity
could explain the rise in loading. However, a layout optimization where the AEP is maximized
and the loads are constraint will try to reach a trade-off between the spacing and the power
produced by the wind farm as a whole.
4.2
Yaw angle sensitivity
In the second study, a series of yaw angles were selected and varied during the power
and load calculation to study the effect yaw offsets may have on the wake interaction between
turbines. For this purpose, a constant value of 5D (891.5 m) was kept for the inter-turbine
spacing. In addition, only the upstream turbine was allowed to yaw and the influence in both
upstream and downstream turbines was investigated.
Figure 16 shows a 20° yaw offset in the upstream turbine. The wake is now deflected to
the left of the downstream turbine’s rotor, where a lower speed deficit can be observed at the
downstream turbine compared with Figure 12.
Figure 16: Flow field at 20° yaw offset for the upstream turbine.
When comparing the power values of the two turbines at 5D for zero yaw and a yaw offset
of 20°, the possible advantages for wake steering are evidenced. At 8 m/s, the upstream turbine
experiences a slight reduction in power, going from 4.01 MW to 3.94 MW, but the downstream
turbine increases its production by 0.3 MW. It can be argued that the power increment for the
downstream turbine could be greater for higher wind speeds, i.e close to rated values.
The power behavior versus yaw angles is shown in Figure 17. Here, the power curves
corresponding to the power of the upstream turbine under yaw, the power of the downstream
turbine, and the total power of the two turbines.
The power curves are in line with that
observed by [11], where the power of the downstream turbine appears to increase for larger
angles in both the positive and negative direction. When the angles are fairly big, the wake
has a higher chance of being redirected from the downstream turbine’s rotor, which in turn
increases the incoming inflow velocity and thus allowing for an increase in power. Looking at
the combined power, the highest power gain lies within a range of -25° to 25° yaw angles.
30
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Yaw angle sensitivity
Figure 17: Power on two turbines for U = 8 m/s.
Similar to the analysis made previously for the power, the change in loads for different yaw
angles is presented in Figure 18. The values were normalized against zero yaw conditions and
both turbines are investigated.
When looking at the blade root bending moments, it can be seen that large negative yaw
offsets result in an increase in loading for both the upstream (wt0) and downstream (wt1)
turbines. In the edgewise direction, the increase in loading seems to be higher for the upstream
turbine when the yaw offset is between -30° and -10°. On the other hand, the blade root loads
in the flapwise direction seem to increase significantly for the downstream turbine, where a
maximum increase of 15% is observed for large values of yaw offset. Furthermore, loads in
the upstream turbine appear to be asymmetric, where positive yaw offsets can result in load
alleviation. The coupled effect of an increase in wind speed and turbulence intensity affects
the loading for the tower top tilt and blade root flapwise in the downstream turbine, where a
significant increase can be observed. For a distance of 5D, the turbulence at the second turbine
goes from 10% to 19.5%, which could contribute to higher loads in the downstream turbine
when the inflow at the rotor is aligned with the mean wind direction.
In contrast, the tower top tilt shows a slight increase of 1% for some positive yaw offsets in
the upstream turbine, whereas the downstream turbine experiences an increase in loading, with
a maximum increase above 7% for yaw offsets between ± 20-30°. The tower top yaw bending
moment also exhibits a small increase for yaw angles between 0° and 10° and the downstream
turbine experiences some load alleviation for all yaw angles.
31
==PAGE:39==
4.3
Optimization with two turbines
(a) BRM Edgewise.
(b) BRM Flapwise.
(c) Tower top tilt.
(d) Tower top yaw.
Figure 18: DEL vs yaw angles for the upstream and downstream turbine.
4.3
Optimization with two turbines
A simple wake steering optimization is made with two turbines at 5.6D and 6.6D distances
for various wind speeds and wind directions. The wind speeds selected are representative of
conditions near rated, as the power gain is assumed to be highest in this region, mainly 8-12
m/s. The wind resource is denoted by the Lillgrud site, where the wind is coming mostly from
the west, being the most dominant sector at wind directions between 265-275°. A narrow scope
is selected for the optimization as it only serves as a preliminary study to verify the previously
obtained results to the optimized values in terms of yaw angles and spacing for possible load
alleviation. To give the optimizer some room to perform the wake steering optimization, an
allowable increase in load of 3% is permitted. Thus, for all LDEL channels, the optimization
constraint becomes LDEL ≤1.03.
The objective function becomes the maximization of the AEP and a gradient-based opti-
mization with an SLSQP driver running 100 iterations is selected. Furthermore, the yaw offsets
32
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Optimization with two turbines
are bounded between -30° and 30°.
At 5.6D, the AEP improvement is 11.43%. A constraint utilization ratio is calculated
where loads of each turbine at the last iteration are compared to the maximum allowable
loads for each load channel. When performing the optimization at a distance of 6.6D, the
AEP improvement found decreased to 8.92%. In the case of no wake steering, the increase in
distance was beneficial for the power production of the downstream turbine but unfavorable
for the DEL, as the effective wind speed entering the rotor is higher. At a distance of 6.6D, the
initial wind farm’s AEP would be higher, thus a lower AEP improvement is expected, as the
optimizer focuses more on load alleviation through wake steering.
Table 6 shows the constraint usage for all load channels and different spacing.
Table 6: LDEL usage for 2 turbine case wake steering optimization.
Spacing
5.6D
6.6D
Load channel
LDEL usage
LDEL usage
wt0
wt1
wt0
wt1
BRM flap
0.972
0.999
0.974
0.994
BRM edge
0.969
0.997
0.970
0.991
TT tilt
0.961
1.005
0.963
0.991
TT yaw
0.971
0.991
0.974
0.988
From the optimization results, it can be seen that at a 5.6D distance, the downstream
turbines are close to reaching the constraint, and full utilization of the constraint for the tower
top tilt is achieved. There seems to be no sign of load alleviation in the downstream turbine.
SSince the range of wind speeds and wind turbine directions is very narrow, the lack of LDEL
alleviation implies that adding more flow cases would dilute the effect of a single flow case.
Hence, considering more wind direction sectors will undoubtedly help the optimizer in finding
a balance between load and power and possible bring down the loads. On the other hand, larger
inter-turbine spacing seems to be favorable for decreasing the LDEL of the downstream turbine,
while slightly increasing the loads in the upstream turbine due to the differences in the optimal
yaw angles found. Overall, the optimizer finds similar yaw angles for both turbines for the
two spacing cases: 22.12° for the upstream turbine (wt0) and 5.54° for the turbine downstream
(wt1) at 5.5D and 21.27° for wt0 and 4.93° for wt1 for 6.6D.
33
==PAGE:41==
5
Results
In this section, the results and discussion from all optimizations performed are described.
First, the findings of the integrated optimization are presented, followed by the analysis of the
sequential optimization approach. A comparison between the two approaches is made and a
summary of the results is shown. Lastly, a sensitivity study of the grid rotational angle θ is
presented. As described in Chapter 2, all optimizations were run with the help of DTU’s Sophia
cluster to speed up the simulation time.
5.1
Integrated Optimization
For the integrated optimization, initial values for the inter-turbine spacing and rotational
angle were considered as 5D and 0°, respectively. All yaw angles were set to zero for their initial
positions. The optimization proved to be computationally expensive, where around 40 h were
necessary to run the simulation. Interestingly, the optimized spacing in both x and y converged
at 5D and a rotational angle of 0.23° was found. These values do not differ much from the
initial conditions, which could mean that for an integrated approach, large computational time
is possibly needed for the optimizer to move further in the design space. The AEP converged at
a value of 331.41 GWh, which represents a 1.30% increase from the baseline. Since the values
for the spacing and rotation angle are almost identical between the baseline and optimized case,
it can be said that the AEP improvement obtained is mostly governed by the wake steering
optimization part of the model. When calculating the wake losses, a reduction of 22% was
obtained, which is favorable and may be linked to the turbines’ yaw offsets.
Figure 19 shows the wind farm layout for the initial and optimized cases as well as the
individual AEP of each turbine. It can be seen how the position of the turbines is the same in
both instances, where a slight increase in AEP can be observed for the optimized case in some
of the turbines. As the yaw angles depend on the wind speed and wind direction studied, the
visualization of the optimized yaw offsets is only possible on a flow case basis.
(a) Initial wind farm.
(b) Optimized wind farm.
Figure 19: Wind farm layout for baseline and optimized cases.
34
==PAGE:42==
5.1
Integrated Optimization
The evolution of the AEP during the optimization is observed in Figure 20. Something
to note is that the optimization converges at around 28 iterations even though the simulation
time was significantly high. The load calculation seems to be very computationally expensive,
which also depends on the surrogate’s model speed. In addition, relying on finite-difference
instead of specifying analytical gradients can also slow down the simulation.
Figure 20: Evolution of AEP.
The load usage is presented in Table 7, where a value of 1 would mean full utilization of
the constraint. It can be observed that none of the turbines reach the constraint and the values
appear to show little variation. The blade root edgewise bending moment presents the highest
utilization ratio with a fairly uniform distribution. Overall, lifetime damage seems to be evenly
distributed in all turbines, which could mean the optimizer is balancing the LDEL while finding
a trade-off between load and power. However, this trade-off and the possible load alleviation
are best observed when evaluating the DEL for specific inflow conditions.
Table 7: Constraint utilization ratio, integrated optimization
Turbine
BRM edge
BRM flap
TT tilt
TT yaw
0
0.970
0.970
0.970
0.970
1
0.970
0.968
0.965
0.963
2
0.971
0.970
0.968
0.964
3
0.970
0.969
0.967
0.965
4
0.970
0.966
0.960
0.956
5
0.971
0.968
0.963
0.958
6
0.971
0.970
0.968
0.967
7
0.971
0.967
0.962
0.957
8
0.971
0.969
0.965
0.960
35
==PAGE:43==
5.1
Integrated Optimization
In Figure 21, the change in power is shown for every wind direction at 8 m/s when the
power for all turbines is summed up. The wind speed is representative of the mean wind speed at
the Lillgrund site and thus selected to examine the possible power gain at this condition. Wind
directions around 174° and 186° appear to have the highest power increase and a constant
decrease of power can be observed in sectors 0-15°.
From Figure 7 it is known that these
directions have a minimal probability of occurrence, so a small power decrease should not
influence the overall AEP calculation as much. On the other hand, the power seems to increase
for almost all wind direction sectors above 40°.
Figure 21: Change in power for every wind direction at 8 m/s.
When analyzing a flow case around 174° more closely, it is observed that the optimizer finds
large negative yaw offsets for all the turbines (see Table 8), which is most likely an attempt to
avoid the presence of partial wake overlap. From Figure 18 it can be seen that at these angles,
there should be a minimum increase in loading expected, and the tower top loads could be
alleviated.
Table 8: Results for optimized yaw offsets at 174° and 8 m/s
Turbine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Yaw angle [°]
-14.83
-16.14
-14.92
-12.66
-12.04
-14.77
-2.85
-2.28
-3.81
However, to say that the large negative yaw offsets will result in load alleviation for all
turbines is a oversimplification, as the study done in Chapter 4 accounts for a very simple in-
teraction of two turbines aligned with the turbine row. When the wind farm grows in size, the
turbines in the middle will have different behavior in terms of load due to yaw misalignment
since the atmospheric conditions around them are different and their definition of upstream/-
downstream turbine is relative depending on the pair of turbines studied.
36
==PAGE:44==
5.1
Integrated Optimization
(a) Original yaw angles.
(b) Optimized yaw angles.
Figure 22: Wake maps for flow case 174° and 8 m/s, baseline and optimized.
In Figure 22, the wake maps for both the original and optimized yaw angles at wind
direction 174° are presented. Here is clearer how most upstream turbines are able to redirect
their wake almost entirely, which explains the high power gain in this flow case. A histogram
with the difference between baseline and optimized DEL and power values for each turbine is
presented in Figure 23. As expected, the upstream turbines (wt 0, 1 and 2) present a decrease
in power due to the yaw misalignment but do not seem to display a significant increase in
loading. On the other hand, the rest of the turbines show an increase in power. In this flow
case, the tower top tilt loads show a maximum decrease of 8%, while the tower top yaw bending
moment is reduced by 9-11% for downstream turbines.
Figure 23: Change in load and AEP per turbine for flow case 174° and 8 m/s.
37
==PAGE:45==
5.1
Integrated Optimization
A similar analysis is carried out for a wind direction of 270°, as this represents the dominant
sector of the Lillgrund site. Some of the turbines in the middle column and downstream present
small and positive yaw offsets, below 5°. This is expected to slightly increase their loading for
all load channels, as seen in Figure 18. Table 9 show the optimized yaw offsets found.
Table 9: Results for optimized yaw offsets at 270° and 8 m/s
Turbine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Yaw angle [°]
-10.22
1.94
4.99
-17.8
1.11
-0.42
-17.26
-2.63
0.98
From Figure 24 it can be seen that some of the turbines are in partial wake and a change
in turbulence levels is expected as the turbines experience a transition from full wake to partial
wake overlap. By looking at the effective TI values reaching these turbines, an increase from
10% to almost 20% is observed, which could produce an increase in fatigue loading.
(a) Original yaw angles.
(b) Optimized yaw angles.
Figure 24: Wake maps for flow case 270° and 8 m/s, baseline and optimized.
The relationship between load and power is presented in Figure 25 and the results show
how the blade root bending moment in the flapwise direction increases for all turbines except
the ones upstream (wt 0, 3 and 6). There is an increase of almost 10% in the flapwise bending
moment for turbine 4 and a decrease of 5% is observable in the tower top tilt for some turbines.
Although the increase in loading is not negligible, a gain in power is also observed for this flow
case, where the optimizer finds a trade-off that can benefit the overall wind farm’s AEP and
have a possibly small impact on the LDEL. Worth noting is that for this flow case, there also
seems to be an increase in the tower top tilt load, whereas the tower top yaw decreases from
the baseline for almost all turbines except turbine 8.
38
==PAGE:46==
5.2
Sequential Optimization
Figure 25: Change in load and AEP per turbine for flow case 270° and 8 m/s.
From the results obtained with an integrated optimization approach, it was observed how
the optimizer finds yaw offsets that result in LDEL that are well below the constraint while
also obtaining an AEP gain of 4.25 MWh. Although the wake steering in the model seems
to provide adequate results, the optimizer finds it difficult to work with the design variables
chosen for the layout optimization as there is minimal variation between the initial and final
values for the inter-turbine spacing and grid rotation angle. It is thus argued that the way the
wind farm is rotating could be more beneficial when shifting the turbine columns instead of
the rows, as this probably will allow for a higher power gain in the dominant wind direction
(270°). This possibility will be explored further in Section 5.4.
5.2
Sequential Optimization
Having described the problem of the sequential optimization in Section 3.2, this section
presents the results obtained for both the layout and wake steering optimization. Throughout
the project, many simulations were run until the obtained results were reasonable. It is worth
noting that a multi-start approach was not taken, which could mean that the results obtained
are not guaranteed to be the global optimum, given the fact that the algorithms chosen for the
optimizations are local search. Only the most relevant results and parameters are outlined.
5.2.1
Layout optimization
In the layout optimization, the initial conditions for the TOPFARM problem correspond
to a 5D inter-turbine spacing and rotation angle θ of 0°. The optimized position of the turbines
as well as their AEP distribution are shown in Figure 26, where all the wind speed and wind
direction flow cases are aggregated.
39
==PAGE:47==
5.2
Sequential Optimization
An optimal spacing of 7D was found both in the x and y direction and a rotational angle
of 7.79° was obtained. From Figure 13 it is evident that larger spacing leads to higher power
production, so it makes sense that for an optimization that seeks to maximize AEP, the turbines
are moved to the upper bounds. With no wake steering, the initial configuration seen in Figure
26a would result in power loss in some sectors due to the wake interaction between turbines.
At θ = 7.79°, it is easier for the downstream turbines to be less exposed to upstream wake.
However, this wake deflection is dependent on the wind direction sector and it is better observed
per flow case. The layout optimization appears to be favorable in terms of AEP improvement,
where an increase of 10.08 MWh is obtained, representing an AEP gain of 3.08%.
When looking at the individual AEP of the turbines in Figure 26, those of turbines 0, 3
and 6 present the highest value. This can be linked to the fact that the prevalent wind direction
in the site is west, mainly around 265-275°. In this wind direction, the mentioned turbines are
operating at the free-stream velocity. It was also found that although turbines 4 and 5 are
experiencing higher wake effects in some flow cases, they present the largest improvement in
their AEP, showing a 5% increase.
(a) Initial wind farm.
(b) Optimized wind farm.
Figure 26: Wind farm layout and AEP for baseline and optimized cases.
Wake losses for the original layout amount to 8.09% and for the optimized configuration, a
total wake loss of 4.72% is obtained. The considerable reduction in wake losses is mainly due to
the large inter-turbine spacing. As the turbines are placed further apart, the wake interaction
between them diminishes, all that coupled with the fact that the wind farm has rotated some
degrees in the direction of the rows. This means that for some flow cases, the upstream turbines
may impose little to no wake effects on downstream turbines at all, thus increasing the power
production at each turbine.
The load usage is presented in Table 10, where a value of 1 would mean full utilization of
the constraint. All load channels are well below the constraint and load alleviation seems to be
lowest for the blade root edgewise bending moment compared to the other load channels, where
a maximum of around 3% alleviation is achieved. Furthermore, the edgewise LDEL usage does
not exhibit too much variation between turbines. This is expected, as the load is mainly driven
by the cyclic nature of the turbine rotation and depends on gravity effects and the rotor weight.
40
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Sequential Optimization
The largest load alleviation is observed for both the tower top tilt and tower top yaw bending
moments, where some turbines reach a 9% reduction in their LDEL values.
Table 10: Constraint utilization ratio, layout optimization.
Turbine
BRM edge
BRM flap
TT tilt
TT yaw
0
0.970
0.965
0.965
0.962
1
0.969
0.940
0.933
0.921
2
0.968
0.937
0.927
0.915
3
0.970
0.954
0.951
0.942
4
0.968
0.931
0.917
0.903
5
0.967
0.930
0.913
0.898
6
0.969
0.952
0.947
0.938
7
0.968
0.932
0.918
0.904
8
0.967
0.932
0.916
0.901
From the surrogate study, it was seen that for all load channels, an increase in distance
resulted in an increase in loading (Figure 15). The results obtained show how the large inter-
turbine spacing stems from the increase in power associated with it. The allowable increase in
load of 3% is large enough for the optimizer to find a solution where the AEP is increased and
the aggregate LDEL for the turbine components is lowered. Since they are not yawing, the
larger spacing between turbines "ensures" that the turbine rotors do not experience too high
turbulence intensity levels and that the wake has more chance to fully recover when reaching
downstream turbines. In this case, lower DEL for a particular flow case are expected, which
results in lower LDEL.
Figure 27: Change in power for every wind direction at 8 m/s.
41
==PAGE:49==
5.2
Sequential Optimization
Figure 27 shows the change in power between the baseline and the optimized values for all
turbines at each wind direction for a wind speed of 8 m/s. Interestingly, the largest increase
in power at this wind sped is found at 178° and 358°, despite being 270° the dominant wind
direction sector at the site. Computing the flow map at 178° revealed that the particular turbine
positions enable the upstream turbines to deflect the wake almost entirely from the downstream
turbines. Were the wind farm not allowed to rotate, the downstream turbines would experience
full wake conditions which translates into power loss. Although this flow case seems beneficial
in obtaining a power gain, the fact that the dominant wind direction in the site is west, this
power gain does not mean as much for the overall improvement of the AEP.
5.2.2
Wake steering optimization
In the yaw-based optimization, the inter-turbine spacing and grid rotation angle correspond
to those found in the previous section, and the initial position for the yaw angles is left to 0°
for each turbine. An AEP gain of 0.57% is found, with a final AEP value of 339.38 GWh.
The wake losses after the optimization reduce to 3.82%, meaning that for a simple 9 turbine
case, a sequential optimization of this kind reduced the wake losses by 50%. Even though
this represents a desirable result, it is argued that expanding this approach to a larger wind
farm would yield higher wake losses. However, the outcome obtained gives insights into the
potential advantages that performing a sequential optimization would have, specially when load
constraints are included in the model.
Similar to the results obtained from the layout optimization, none of the load channels
seem to reach the constraint for any of the turbines, as observed in Table 11. The edgewise
bending moment presents a LDEL usage of the same magnitude as in Table 10, with not much
variation between turbines. However, the other three channels experience an increase in load
usage, where load alleviation of 5% can be observed for the tower top yaw in some turbines.
It may be argued that the increase in loading comes from the optimizer finding optimal yaw
angles that sacrifice DEL to increase power production for some turbines in specific flow cases
and it does so in a way that the redistribution of the LDEL is relatively even across turbines.
Table 11: Constraint utilization ratio, yaw optimization.
Turbine
BRM edge
BRM flap
TT tilt
TT yaw
0
0.970
0.970
0.970
0.971
1
0.970
0.967
0.965
0.962
2
0.971
0.969
0.966
0.963
3
0.970
0.969
0.966
0.964
4
0.971
0.968
0.962
0.957
5
0.971
0.969
0.964
0.959
6
0.971
0.970
0.967
0.965
7
0.971
0.969
0.964
0.959
8
0.972
0.970
0.965
0.960
42
==PAGE:50==
5.2
Sequential Optimization
Figure 28 shows the change in power in every wind direction for a wind speed of 8 m/s.
In contrast with the layout optimization, the wind direction sectors that present the highest
increase are around 190° and 274°, with a maximum gain of almost 18%. It is worth noting that,
at this wind speed, the 270° sector experiences a reduction in power of 0.38%. This variation in
power could mean that the optimizer is finding a trade-off between loads and power, lowering
the DEL values in some cases and consequently bringing down the LDEL.
Figure 28: Change in power for every wind direction at 8 m/s.
The initial and optimized states of the yaw angles at wind direction 270° can be seen in
Figures 29a and 29b, respectively. At this wind direction, the optimal yaw misalignment is
expected to be larger in magnitude for the upstream turbines to redirect their wake as much as
possible from the downstream turbines. However, the angles found in this flow case are quite
small, mainly less than 1°. For the upstream turbines, the small yaw angles are representative
of higher loads, as per seen in Figure 18. The quantification of the possible load alleviation for
turbines in the middle column (wt 1, 4 and 7) is more difficult, as in some cases they will act
as a downstream turbine and in others as an upstream one.
43
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Sequential Optimization
(a) Initial yaw offset at 270°.
(b) Optimized yaw offset at 270°.
(c) Initial yaw offset at 190°.
(d) Original yaw offset at 190°.
Figure 29: Wake maps for initial and optimized yaw angles at 8 m/s.
At 190° wind direction, the initial and optimized yaw angles are observed in Figures 29c
and 29d. Here the optimizer opts for giving large yaw offset values to deflect the wake as much
as possible, thus increasing the effective wind speed reaching the turbines. This is confirmed by
calculating the inflow velocity of all turbines except the upstream ones, where values of around
7.4 m/s were observed. In addition, this case helps visualize how the rotation angle proves
beneficial in aiding the turbines to further deflect the wake. It is known from the surrogate
analysis that large yaw offsets are beneficial to alleviate loads, so in this flow case, there is
likely an increase in power production while still achieving some load reduction for some of the
turbines.
The previous cases serve as basic examples of how the optimizer finds the trade-off between
power and loads that can drive down the overall LDEL. From [4] it was found that a full
symmetric wake overlap, as seen in Figure 29b, results in a small increase in loading but is
also unfavorable for energy generation. In partial wake overlap, however, the power production
can be increased but at the cost of significantly higher fatigue loading. With no wake steering,
44
==PAGE:52==
5.3
Summary of Results
all downstream turbines in Figure 29c experience partial wake overlap. Because of this, the
optimizer chooses to increase the yaw misalignment and minimize the occurrence of partial
wake, thus increasing the power and lowering the loads at the same time.
Ultimately, the sequential optimization approach managed to maintain the LDEL below
the proposed constraint and resulted in an AEP gain of 3.66%. However, it is worth noting
that this improvement in energy production is influenced by the discrepancy in the flow cases
studied.
The methodology of setting values of 0° yaw misalignment in many of the wind
direction sectors could have some repercussions. Nevertheless, it is argued that analyzing the
wake steering optimization for all wind speeds and wind directions may yield a higher gain than
the 0.57% obtained.
5.3
Summary of Results
The present section highlights the difference between the integrated and sequential opti-
mizations performed in this project. Table 12 shows how the integrated optimization yields
a lower value of AEP when compared to the sequential approach. Furthermore, the layout
optimization seems to contribute most to the improvement in energy production in the sequen-
tial approach, with 10 GWh. Meanwhile, the wake steering optimization showed a 2.13 GWh
increase in AEP.
Most notably is the computational resources needed to perform these optimizations. To
speed up a process that would be considerably heavy on a single computer, the DTU Sophia
cluster was used to run the simulations. Still, there is a stark difference in computational time
used between the integrated and sequential optimization. Given that the AEP gain from the
integrated optimization is lower than in the sequential, the larger utilization of computational
resource is debatable.
Table 12: Summary of results for integrated and sequential optimizations
Optimization
Initial AEP [GWh]
Final AEP [GWh]
AEP gain [%]
Time in cluster [h]
Integrated
327.15
331.412
1.30
39
Sequential (layout)
327.15
337.24
3.08
1
Sequential (yaw)
337.24
339.38
0.57
6
For all optimizations, the load constraint does not seem to be active, as none of the turbines
reach the 3% increase limitation that was established. The power gain is best analyzed per flow
case and the influence of wake steering proved beneficial to reduce or sometimes avoid excessive
loading increase due to partial wake overlap. Furthermore, the existence of a trade-off between
load and power was presented, where the optimizer seems to find optimal yaw angle offsets that
yield a somewhat uniform distribution of the LDEL for all load channels.
45
==PAGE:53==
5.4
Sensitivity Study
5.4
Sensitivity Study
The individual contributions of the inter-turbine spacing and grid rotation angle are an-
alyzed from the layout optimization part of the sequential approach. It is then found that
increasing the spacing accounts for 2.92% of the AEP gain, while the remaining 0.15% is linked
to the grid rotation θ. Although the spacing between turbines is the dominant factor, a further
study into the influence of the rotation angle θ is warranted as a slight increase in AEP is
always desirable when developing a wind farm.
An extra optimization is thus performed where the positions of the turbines are fixed to
a 7D spacing, with the knowledge that at this distance, the power gain is highest. The grid
rotation and yaw angles are now the design variables and the loads are still constrained. From
this, an AEP gain of 0.61% and an optimal rotation angle of 1.30° were found. A slight increase
in AEP makes sense, as in this case, the optimization is starting from a point with an already
high AEP associated with large spacing. The rotation angle, however, does not seem to reach
a value closer to that found in the layout optimization in Section 5.2. Thus, a sensitivity study
is performed to investigate the behavior of the rotation angle when different initial values other
than 0° are specified.
The integrated optimization is then re-run several times with varied initial positions to
check if they all converge to the same point and have a more solid guarantee that the global
optimum has been reached. In addition, the way the wind farm is allowed to rotate is changed as
well, where the turbine columns are now shifting instead of the rows. With this, the expectation
is that the optimizer can find a configuration of grid rotation and yaw angles that are more
beneficial when analyzing the 270° flow case.
Table 13: Results from integrated optimization with different initial values of θ.
Optimization
1
2
3
4
5
Initial angle [°]
16.86
1.42
8
25
35
Final angle [°]
18.51
1.08
9.74
25.98
34.97
AEP gain [%]
0.31
0.72
0.85
0.74
0.79
Final AEP [GWh]
338.13
339.01
339
339.7
338.37
From the results in Table 13 it can be seen that the optimizations do not seem to be
converging to the same value of rotational angle. In addition, the optimized values are not
deviating much from the initial positions, which could mean that the design space is character-
ized for having a lot of local minima. An analysis of the AEP gain for these simulations may
not be very fruitful as there is not much variation between the initial and final values of the
turbine positions. Instead, the value of the optimized AEP is compared to that found in the
wake steering part of the sequential optimization, as the inter-turbine spacing is fixed at the
same value in both approaches. The difference between rotating the turbines’ rows or columns
can be seen in Figure 30.
46
==PAGE:54==
5.4
Sensitivity Study
(a) Layout with θ = 7.79° rows.
(b) Layout with θ = 9.74° columns.
Figure 30: Visualization of grid rotation angle for either rows or columns.
The yaw-based optimization’s AEP (Section 5.2.2) converged at a value of 339.38 GWh.
Here, the results indicate that the wind farm does not perform better with this configuration
(except for θ = 25°), although the difference is small.
Even though the power production
may increase for sectors around 270°, a reduction in power in other sectors may contribute
more to the overall decrease of the AEP. Increasing the inter-turbine spacing seems to be the
most dominant factor when maximizing the AEP as the objective function. Furthermore, the
coupling of grid rotational angle with wake steering appears to yield an optimization that is
heavily influenced by the change in yaw offset more than the way the wind farm is distorted.
A more detailed investigation of the results from Table 13 is made by accounting for the
effects of wake steering during the optimization. For this purpose, the results from optimization
3, which represents an initial rotation angle of 8° are analyzed. The case selection was based
on the fact that this optimization shows the largest difference between initial and optimized
values of rotation angle, plus it presents the highest AEP improvement.
Figures 31a and 31b show the wake maps for wind direction 270° at the initial and optimized
states.
Here it can be seen that the initial layout with a rotational angle of 8° is already
advantageous for the downstream turbines, as most of them are experiencing little wake overlap.
In the optimized case, the optimizer rotates the turbines a bit more while introducing yaw
misalignment, which proves beneficial as the downstream turbines are completely free from the
upstream induced wake. In this flow case, an AEP of 0.44 GWh was found, which represents a
0.11 GWh increase from the sequential optimization. In contrast, at 314° (Figures 31c and 31d),
the downstream turbines in the initial layout are experiencing some partial wake overlap, which
is almost avoided after the wind farm rotates to the optimized value and the wake steering is
performed.
47
==PAGE:55==
5.4
Sensitivity Study
(a) Initial yaw offset at 270°.
(b) Optimized yaw offset at 270°.
(c) Initial yaw offset at 314°.
(d) Optimized yaw offset at 314°.
Figure 31: Wake maps for initial and optimized yaw angles at 8 m/s.
The behavior of load vs power can be seen in Figure 32 for a wind direction of 270° and
wind speed of 8 m/s. Here, a high percentage of load alleviation can be observed for all load
channels. Moreover, some turbines present an increase in power, albeit small. Even though
there is not a significant gain in energy production, the substantial load alleviation is assumed
to help tremendously in driving down the LDEL.
48
==PAGE:56==
5.4
Sensitivity Study
Figure 32: Change in load and AEP per turbine for flow case 270° and 8 m/s.
From the results obtained it seems that, for an optimization that seeks to maximize the
AEP, operating the turbines with yaw offsets is much more influential than allowing the wind
farm to rotate some angle. However, although the change of direction in the wind farm rotation
did not yield a higher AEP than that obtained in the sequential optimization, there is still
some merit to the results acquired. Working with a regular wind farm instead of an irregular
one, where all turbines change position, does not seem to hinder the possibility of attaining
a beneficial AEP gain. Thus, it can be said that working with the inter-turbine spacing and
rotation angle in a layout optimization not only simplifies the problem but it is also assumed
to perform just as well as in the case of an irregular design. Furthermore, it is also argued that
keeping a wind farm with a regular layout could be beneficial in terms of cabling design. Hence,
further studies are necessary to assess the effect of such configurations on economic factors such
as cable costs or O&M costs.
49
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
The potential for a coupled approach that integrates layout and wake steering optimization
has been investigated in the present study with the addition of fatigue loading in the model.
Using a surrogate model for calculating the Lifetime Damage Equivalent Loads (LDEL), a
comparison was made between an integrated or one-step optimization approach and a sequential
one, yielding interesting results.
A preliminary analysis of the surrogate model and its load response showed that power
production and turbine loading increases with larger inter-turbine spacing due to greater wake
recovery and a subsequent increase in the free stream velocity. However, the mix between wind
speed and turbulence intensity effects leads to complex behavior of the DEL. It was observed
that turbine yaw misalignment is capable of increasing the power and alleviating the loads but
a flow-case-specific study is necessary to understand the interaction between the two.
From the optimizations performed for a simple 9-turbine case, it was found that the choice
of implementing an integrated optimization is questionable, as a more substantial computational
power and time are needed to obtain a lower AEP gain than in the two-step optimization ap-
proach. This is in part attributed to the slow response of the surrogate model when performing
the load calculations. Moreover, the use of finite difference for calculating the gradients in the
integrated optimization proved to be challenging, given the design variables used. It is argued
that using the inter-turbine spacing and grid rotation angle adds many local minima to the
design space. Thus, the optimizer requires much more simulation time to move further away
from the initial positions. On the other hand, the sequential optimization demonstrated some
potential in achieving a considerable power gain while complying with the load constraint.
In addition, a sequential approach showed some flexibility regarding the optimization driver,
where different drivers could be used and still obtain a feasible result. The layout optimization
was mostly dominated by the increase in inter-turbine spacing and the contribution of the grid
rotation angle was less than 1% from the overall 3.08% AEP gain found in this case. The
results obtained indicate that in both optimization approaches, the optimizer seeks to position
the turbines in a way that minimizes partial wake overlap whenever possible with full wake
interaction being the second preferred option.
A sensitivity analysis on the wind farm rotation angle showed that the model is not as
sensitive to the wind farm rotation as it is to wake steering, as the AEP gain is quite similar
to that obtained from the sequential optimization.
However, reducing the design variables
used in layout optimization has shown promise in other research [32], which states that a grid
configuration can perform just as well as an irregular layout configuration as the inter-turbine
spacing increases.
Although problems were encountered when performing a gradient-based
optimization, obtaining an AEP gain of over 1% is significant, thus the impact of turbine
spacing and rotation angle as design variables deserves further investigation.
Regardless of the assumptions and limitations inherent to the study, it can be concluded
that coupling layout and wake steering optimizations under load constraints can potentially
increase the Annual Energy Production of a wind farm. A trade-off between load and power
was evident throughout all optimizations, and the configuration of the wind farm, as well as
turbine yaw misalignment, is highly dependent on the wind direction and wind speeds studied.
50
==PAGE:58==
7
Future Work
The present project served only as a basic study on the implications of coupling a layout and
wake steering optimization when considering turbine loading. Although the results illustrate
the benefits of adding load constraints into the analysis, further work is necessary to improve
the model.
The limitations relevant to the study pave the way for possible improvements
that could yield promising results. First, expanding these results to a large-scale wind farm
can give insights into a more realistic AEP gain when performing a layout and wake steering
optimization under load constraints. In addition, a financial component such as minimization
of the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE) or inclusion of cabling costs constitutes as the natural
next step to study the economic feasibility of such an approach.
A smart start approach that takes random initial values for the design variables could also
lead to faster simulations that more likely guarantee finding the global optimum of the prob-
lem. Furthermore, given the flexibility found in the sequential optimization for using different
drivers, an optimization with a combination of gradient-free and gradient-based algorithms
could provide interesting results. An initial optimization with global search algorithms can be
used to obtain a preliminary optimized state, which can be later fine-tuned with the use of
local search methods. Parallelization could also help speed up the computations and allow for
the simulation of all wind flow cases.
The use of the DTU 10MW reference turbine surrogate model makes this study very specific
in terms of load behavior. Thus, extending the current analysis to other type of turbines could
support the validity of the results and the trade-off of load and power found. Including other
type of turbines could help in developing wind farms that operate under wake steering without
sustaining too large of a fatigue damage.
Finally, the use of the Frandsen turbulence model for load calculation and wake model-
ing can be limited, especially in situations where such complex wake interactions due to yaw
misalignment are present. Because of this, the use of the Dynamic Wake Meandering (DWM)
model could serve as a more accurate approach for exploring the interaction between full wake
and partial wake that is implicit with wake steering.
51
==PAGE:59==
References
References
[1] United
Nations,
“The
Paris
Agreement.”
URL
=
https://unfccc.int/
process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement
(visited
on
28/02/2022).
[2] Global Wind Energy Council, “GWEC Report: Global Wind Report 2022.” URL = https:
//gwec.net/global-wind-report-2022/ (visited on 28/02/2022).
[3] Wind Europe, “Report: Our Energy, Our Future,” 2019. URL = https://windeurope.
org/about-wind/reports/our-energy-our-future/ (visited on 28/02/2022).
[4] K. A. Kragh and M. H. Hansen, “Load alleviation of wind turbines by yaw misalignment,”
in Wind Energ., 17, pp. 971–982, (2014). DOI = 10.1002/we.1612.
[5] M. van Dijk, J.-W. van Windergen, T. Ashuri, Y. Li, and R. M.A., “Yaw-misalignement
and its impact on wind turbine loads and wind farm power output,” in Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 753, 2016. DOI = 10.1088/1742-6596/753/6/062013.
[6] R. Damiani, J. Dana, P. Fleming, J. Roadman, J. van Dam, and K. Dykes, “Assessment
of wind turbine component loads under yaw-offset conditions,” in Wind Energ. Sci., 33,
pp. 173–189, (2018). DOI = 10.5194/wes-3-173-2018.
[7] A. P. Stanley, J. King, and A. Ning, “Wind farm layout optimization with loads consid-
erations,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1452.1, (2020). DOI = 10.1088/1742-
6596/1452/1/012072.
[8] R. Riva, M. Liew, M. Friis-Møller, N. Dimitrov, E. Barlas, P.E. Réthoré and A.
Berzonskis, “Wind farm layout optimization with load constraints using surrogate mod-
elling,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1618.4, (2020). DOI = 10.1088/1742-
6596/1618/4/042035.
[9] P. Fleming, A. Ning, P. Gebraad, and K. Dykes, “Wind plant system engineering through
optimization of layout and yaw control,” in Wind Energ., 19, pp. 329–344, (2016). DOI =
10.1002/we.1836.
[10] P. Gebraad, J. Thomas, A. Ning, P. Fleming, and K. Dykes, “Maximization of the annual
energy production of wind power plants by optimization of layout and yaw-based wake
control,” in Wind Energ., 20, pp. 97–107, (2017). DOI = 10.1002/we.1993.
[11] M. Assmussen and M. Friis-Møller, “Production optimization in an offshore wind farm using
yaw steering subjected to load constraint,” (2021). [Master’s Thesis, Technical University
of Denmark].
[12] Rosgaard, M, “Documentation for the sophia hpc cluster, technical university of denmark.”
https://github.com/dtu-sophia/docs#readme, 2021.
52
==PAGE:60==
References
[13] A. Jiménez, A. Crespo, and E. Migoya, “Application of a LES technique to characterize
the wake deflection of a wind turbine in yaw,” Wind Energy, vol. 13, pp. 559 – 572, 09
2010.
[14] J. R. R. A. Martins and A. Ning, Engineering Design Optimization. Cambridge University
Press, 2021. ISBN = 9781108833417.
[15] J. Herbert-Acero, O. Probst, P.-E. Réthoré, G. Larsen, and K. Castillo-Villar, “A review
of methodological approaches for the design and optimization of wind farms,” Energies,
pp. 6930–7016, (2014).
[16] G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and B. Diviacco, “Optimization of wind turbine positioning in large
windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm,” Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial
Aerodynamics, vol. 51, pp. 105–116, (1994).
[17] A. Tesauro, P.-E. Réthoré, and G. Larsen, “State of the art of wind farm optimization,” in
Proceedings of EWEA 2012 - European Wind Energy Conference Exhibition, (2012).
[18] N. V. Queipo, R. T. Haftka, W. Shyy, T. Goel, R. Vaidyanathan, and P. Kevin Tucker,
“Surrogate-based analysis and optimization,” Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 1–28, 2005.
[19] N. Dimitrov, M. C. Kelly, A. Vignaroli, and J. Berg, “From wind to loads: wind turbine
site-specific load estimation with surrogate models trained on high-fidelity load databases,”
in Wind Energy Science, 3, pp. 767–790, (2018). DOI = 10.5194/wes-3-767-2018.
[20] T. J. Larsen and A. M. Hansen, “How 2 hawc2, the user’s manual,” 2007.
[21] Riccardo Riva, Jaime Yikon Liew, Mikkel Friis-Møller, Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov,
Emre Barlas, Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, Mads Mølgaard Pedersen, “Welcome to TOPFARM .”
URL = https://topfarm.pages.windenergy.dtu.dk/TopFarm2/index.html (visited on
07/03/2022).
[22] R. V. Rodrigues and C. Lengsfeld, “Development of a computational system to improve
wind farm layout, Part II: wind turbine wakes interaction,” Energies, vol. 12, no. 7, p. 1328,
2019.
[23] R. V. Rodrigues and C. Lengsfeld, “Development of a computational system to improve
wind farm layout, Part I: model validation and near wake analysis,” Energies, vol. 12,
no. 5, p. 940, 2019.
[24] J. Feng and W. Shen, “Solving the wind farm layout optimization problem using random
search algorithm,” Renewable Energy, vol. 78, pp. 182–192, 2015.
[25] J. Serrano González, A. L. Trigo García, M. Burgos Payán, J. Riquelme Santos, and
A. G. González Rodríguez, “Optimal wind-turbine micro-siting of offshore wind farms:
A grid-like layout approach,” Applied Energy, vol. 200, pp. 28–38, 2017.
DOI =
10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.071.
53
==PAGE:61==
References
[26] Mads M. Pedersen, Paul van der Laan, Mikkel Friis-Møller, Jennifer Rinker, Pierre-Elouan
Réthoré, “Welcome to PyWake.” URL = https://topfarm.pages.windenergy.dtu.dk/
PyWake/index.html# (visited on 07/03/2022).
[27] S. J. Andersen, J. N. Sørensen, S. Ivanell, and R. F. Mikkelsen, “Comparison of engineering
wake models with cfd simulations,” in Journal of physics: Conference series, vol. 524,
p. 012161, IOP Publishing, 2014.
[28] P.-E. Réthoré, P. van der Laan, N. Troldborg, F. Zahle, and N. N. Sørensen, “Verification
and validation of an actuator disc model,” Wind Energy, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 919–937, 2014.
[29] N. Jensen, A note on wind generator interaction.
No. 2411 in Risø-M, Risø National
Laboratory, 1983.
[30] M. Bastankhah and F. Porté-Agel, “A new analytical model for wind-turbine wakes,”
Renewable Energy, vol. 70, pp. 116–123, 2014.
[31] S. Frandsen, "Turbulence and turbulence-generated structural loading in wind turbine clus-
ters". PhD thesis, 2007. ISBN = 8755034586.
[32] A. P. J. Stanley and A. Ning, “Massive simplification of the wind farm layout optimization
problem,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 663–676, 2019. DOI = 10.5194/wes-4-
663-2019.
54
