==PAGE:1==
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-
sensorial perception in bone and air conduction
technology
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Hearing Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air
conduction technology
Master Thesis
September 2022
By
Gabriele Ravizza
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Auricle, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Hearing Systems, Ørsteds Pl., 2800 Kongens Lyn-
gby, Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months in collaboration with Auricle, a Copenhagen-
based Start-Up, and the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics.
Gabriele Ravizza - s205741
Signature
Date
ii
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors, Jeremy Marozeau and Pedro Costa, for their constant
support during the thesis work. In particular, I want to thank Jeremy for his valuable
suggestions on how to improve the experiment and the data analysis. His informal com-
munication style helped to create an environment where questions were always welcome
and ended up in a fruitful discussion.
I especially want to thank Pedro for welcoming me from the very beginning in a great
environment, allowing me to work with innovative technology and for always being sup-
portive. What he created at Auricle is precious, and I wish all the best to him and to the
Auricle Team (Guido, Sara, and Roberto). It has been a pleasure to experiment with how
the start-up environment and the freedom that it provides.
A special thanks go to all my friends in Denmark and Italy. Thank you for always being
there even in the most challenging times during the last two years. I could never make it
without you, I feel very grateful for having you all.
Thank you to my family, who saw me making the decision to move to Denmark in ten
days during the Summer of 2020. You have never had a doubt about this to be the right
choice, even when I had lots. Thank you for always being there for me, and for giving me
the opportunity to pursue my dream of studying acoustics in one of the most renowned
acoustics universities in Europe.
Preface
This document is divided into a research paper in the format used for scientific publications
and a more extensive section condensing all the supplemental material and background
of the thesis work.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Paper
1
2
Introduction
8
3
Background
9
3.1
Sound Transmission in Air Conduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Sound Transmission in Bone Conduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Sound Transmission in Cartilage Conduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Sound Evaluation and Loudness Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Experiment Design
17
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Loudness Matching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Vibration and Sound Quality Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Hypothesized Results
25
6
Results
33
6.1
Loudness Matching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Vibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Sound Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7
Conclusions
49
Bibliography
51
iv
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
Evaluation and modeling of subjective
multi-sensorial perception in cartilage and air
conduction technology
Gabriele Ravizza,1 Pedro Costa,2 and Jeremy Marozeau1
1Department of Health Technology, The Technical University of Denmark, Ørsteds Plads, Building
348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Copenhagen Capital Region, Denmark
2Auricle Headphones, Gammel Kongevej 11-13, 1610 Copenhagen, Denmark
(Dated: 3 September 2022)
Cartilage conduction technology has been seen mainly as a low sound quality invention for
wide spectrum sound reproduction since its first commercial applications in the ’70s. This
study focuses on assessing the characteristics and audio quality of sound delivered through
cartilage conduction devices with an utterly open-ear design and its comparison with air
conduction technology. To this end, we conducted a loudness matching experiment on two
cartilage conduction and one air conduction headsets.
In addition, we collected data on
vibration and sound quality to ensure that loudness matching was not biased by covarying
factors. Results show that the air conduction device could reach louder level at low frequencies
but performed similarly at mid-high frequencies. One of the cartilage conduction devices
performed statistically better than the other in paired t-tests performed at three mid-low
frequencies. No significant difference was found between vibration and sound quality of the
two devices across the frequencies and levels tested.
[https://doi.org(DOI number)]
[XYZ]
Pages: 1–6
I. INTRODUCTION
In a world where listening devices find new applica-
tions quickly, many new headphones find their way to
the market. Since its discovery in 2004 by Hiroshi Hosoi,
Cartilage Conduction (CC) has been explored as an al-
ternative pathway of hearing (Hosoi et al., 2019), in ad-
dition to the well-known Air Conduction (AC) and Bone
Conduction (BC, on the mastoid bone) pathways.
The three possible pathways in Cartilage Conduc-
tion are displayed in Figure 1. Nishimura et al. (2014)
(Nishimura et al., 2014) was able to measure direct
air-conduction (Direct-AC) and cartilage air-conduction
(Cartilage-AC) to be the dominant sound transmission
pathways in Cartilage Conduction.
They highlighted
how below 2 kHz, thresholds for BC were higher than
those for CC with the auditory canal blocked by an ear
plug. The difference in threshold with the ear plug in-
serted highlighted that Direct-AC does not represent the
main pathway in CC, even though the tympanic mem-
brane is involved in transmitting CC sound. Data col-
lected during this study suggested that vibration of the
cartilaginous part of the auditory canal can induce air-
borne sound. Shimokura et al. (2013) (Shimokura et al.,
2013) suggested that the acoustic impedance gap between
bone and cartilage is relatively high; thus, Cartilage-Bone
Conduction (Cartilage-BC) pathway isn’t probably the
dominant to hearing sensation compared to the other
pathways.
CC headsets exist on the market, claiming a wide
range of frequency responses, but no standard has been
established to measure the frequency response of a Car-
tilage Conduction headset. Since the signal is driven into
the skull, accelerometer or head and torso simulator mea-
surements of the transducer can only give a rough esti-
mation of the frequencies and intensities perceived by the
average listener. A loudness matching experiment and
vibration and sound quality assessment have been de-
veloped to investigate possible methods to measure the
perceived frequency response of such devices and com-
pare them with the more conventional consumer-level air
conduction-based headphones. It is to highlight that, for
marketing purposes, cartilage conduction headphones are
often addressed on their packaging as ”bone conduction”
headphones. In the current paper, we will use the scien-
tific term ”cartilage conduction”, since this is the correct,
specific word to indicate such technology.
We hypothesized:
• the Sony WH100-XM4 to require lower signal am-
plitude to match the same reference level in dB
SPL. It was to determine the magnitude of the dif-
ference.
• the cartilage conduction devices to show a poorer
performance in the bass if compared to the
WH1000-XM4 (will need higher signal amplitude
to match the same reference level in dB SPL). Fur-
thermore, it was hypothesized that there would be
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 3 September 2022
1
==PAGE:9==
FIG. 1. The three Cartilage Conduction pathways are referred
to as Direct-AC (blue), Cartilage-AC (green), and Cartilage-
BC (orange). (Nishimura et al., 2014)
a measurable difference in performance between the
two cartilage conduction headsets.
• the vibration to be stronger at low frequencies for
the cartilage conduction devices. Some vibration
might have been perceived while wearing Sony’s
headphones too.
• the perceived sound quality to be higher for higher
frequency, most likely due to the possible interfer-
ence of the vibration with the sound quality assess-
ment at low frequencies.
The study can be summarized as definition of the
methodological approach, experiment design, selection of
test populations, evaluation of material needs, running of
the experiment and processing of results.
II. METHODS
The initial approach was to investigate possible
methodologies to measure the performance of cartilage
conduction headsets, in particular at low frequency, since
no standard exists to accomplish such a purpose. After
researching strategies developed in the past for adjacent
applications, we decided to focus on a loudness matching
experiment, in which normal hearing participants would
have to match a reference played in one of their ears to a
tone played in the contralateral ear by the device under
test.
Along with the loudness matching task, the experi-
ment included a vibration and sound quality assessment.
We had a vibration evaluation to study the effect of vibra-
tion on the listening experience. As discussed by Schur-
mann et al. (2004) (Sch¨urmann et al., 2004), vibration
played along with sound can create an increased loudness
perception. Schurmann et al. highlighted how on aver-
age testers rated 12% lower intensities when touching a
vibrating tube in a loudness matching task. These results
indicate that in the cartilage conduction headsets’ case,
it is to expect an effect of vibration onto the loudness
matching results.
On the other hand, the sound quality assessment was
included in the testing to ensure that the loudness match-
ing task was performed successfully and the sound qual-
ity of the tones was also comparable i.e.: if the testers
could match a 100Hz tone but it was very distorted and
the frequency was totally shifted from the reference tone
because of transducers non-linearities, results would be
less reliable.
Thus, the experiment included a sound
quality assessment to check if the device under test can
have a sound quality similar to the reference headphones
(HD650), rather than just matching the loudness of the
tone presented.
Subject participants were not trained
listeners and provided their opinion about the similarity
between the two tones they had just matched.
A. Participants
Twenty normal hearing participants, aged between
19 and 33, were recruited for the experiment. All the par-
ticipants performed a pure tone audiometry before taking
part in the experiment. Their air conduction thresholds
were below 15dB HL for both ears in the frequency range
125-2000Hz, and the maximum allowed asymmetry be-
tween the left and right ear was 5dB. These criteria were
chosen according to the previous study carried out by
Stenfelt et Hakansson (Stenfelt and H˚akansson, 2002),
even stricter regarding symmetry (a maximum asymme-
try of 10dB was allowed in that study, 5dB in the cur-
rent one).
All participants provided informed consent
and all experiments were approved by the Science-Ethics
Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference
H-16036391).
B. Test Setup and Stimuli
The loudness matching experiment was performed
with the help of a GUI, developed with the MATLAB
App Designer, that presented the stimuli and recorded
answers. Three devices were included in the experiment:
Shokz OpenRun Pro, Auricles and the Sony WH1000-
XM4. The OpenRun Pro are a product from Shokz, one
of the most popular cartilage conduction brands avail-
able on the market. Auricles are a device from a Dan-
ish startup, with a peculiar patended clip system to at-
tach them to the ear. Auricles have not been released
on the market yet, the device tested in this study is a
late-stage prototype. The Sony WH1000-XM4 are very
popular ANC headphones. A loudness matching between
a pair of Sennheiser HD650 and each tested device was
performed. The HD650 are open, supra-ear headphones.
The HD650 were calibrated via a GRAS artificial ear and
a Norsonic Nor140 (calibrated with a B&K sound cali-
brator type 1251). MATLAB was programmed to apply
2
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 3 September 2022
==PAGE:10==
inverse filtering so that the HD650 Sound Pressure Level
was constant across frequencies in the range 50-17.000Hz.
All measurements took place in a sound-insulated booth,
with background noise lower than 30 dBA. Each partici-
pant wore the Sennheiser HD650 on the left ear and the
tested device under investigation on the right ear.
The OpenRun Pro and the WH1000-XM4 were con-
nected to the computer through Bluetooth 4.0 and
both devices were set on the default equalization. The
WH1000-XM4 had the ANC feature on. No external am-
plifiers processed the signal but the ones inside the two
devices.
The Auricles lab prototype was wired.
Tak-
ing into account that the signal was sent via an external
soundcard before reaching the device, the audio output
has been calibrated by Auricle to ensure the same output
as with a Bluetooth connection. All devices played with
the maximum output level (100) in the Windows sound
settings.
Since Direct-AC and Cartilage-AC represent domi-
nant contributions in the CC pathway, pure tones were
chosen as stimuli during the current experiment. Pure
tones stimuli represented a good solution for signals
played through the HD650 and the tested devices..
C. Procedure
MATLAB generated and played pure tone stimuli
between 70Hz and 2000Hz (70,100,125,250,500,750,2000
Hz) via the HD650 to the participants’ left ear, alternat-
ing with the tested device on the right ear.
Only the
relevant side of each device played (HD650 on the left,
tested device on the right).
The subject used a knob
to change the loudness of the tone of the tested device;
the know was infinite and one step was equal to 1dB FS.
The sound pressure level of the HD650 was constant dur-
ing each experiment session. Each session consisted of a
fixed reference level and 16 loudness matching tasks, two
for each target frequency. The pure tones alternated be-
tween devices every 1 s while the subject matched the
stimulus of the tested device (variable) to the reference
stimulus (constant). The stimuli had 50 ms linear rise
time, 900 ms on, and 50 ms fall time. When the HD650
played, the tested device remained silent and vice versa.
Stimuli presentations did not include any silence time.
Loudness was matched by bracketing, thus adjusting
the level of the tested device to be louder than the refer-
ence, then quieter until the two tones matched perfectly.
The GUI randomized the tested device’s initial level and
frequency presentation order. There was no time con-
straint when performing the matching. The user could
move on to the vibration and sound quality assessment
when the tone reached equal loudness. After that, MAT-
LAB saved all the data, and a new frequency was pre-
sented. After each run of 16 matching tasks, the subjects
could take a 5 minutes break.
Each test run consisted of three reference levels for
the cartilage conduction devices (60, 75, 85 dB SPL) and
two for the air conduction device (75 and 85 dB SPL).
FIG. 2. The vibration and sound quality assessment sliders
developed with the MATLAB App to perform the experiment.
Eight frequencies, repeated two times, for a total of 16
repetitions, were played for each reference level on each
tested device.
The OpenRun Pro and the Auricles were tested first,
and the WH1000-XM4 later.
Half of the participants
tested the Shokz first, and the remaining half tested the
Auricles first. Researchers undertook this approach to
average out possible bias due to the testing order.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Loudness comparison
In Figure 3, Figure 4 and Figure 5 below, loudness
matching results of the comparison between the Shokz
OpenRun Pro, Auricles and Sony WH1000-XM4 are dis-
played. The x-axis represents frequency, and results in
dB Full-Scale are plotted on the y-axis. In the y-axis, the
zero value is defined in the bottom part of the graph. It
decreases towards negative values reaching the top part
of the graph: the higher the dB FS value (bottom part of
the plots), the higher the signal amplitude to match that
specific frequency at the selected reference level. Mean
and standard errors are included.
The perceptual frequency response of the two car-
tilage conduction devices highlighted differences in the
overall trend and absolute results. The Shokz OpenRun
Pro showed a reasonably flat behavior, with the signal
amplitude needed to match the reference that increased
with frequency. The Auricles showed a more complex be-
havior, with a dip at 125 Hz. Overall, the Auricles (on
the right) showed a better behavior at mid-low frequen-
cies and similar behavior to the Shokz in the remaining
spectrum.
A statistical analysis of data from the OpenRun Pro
and the Auricles has been carried out in JMP Pro 16.
The analysis fitted a standard least square regression
model to the data.
In the first test, the analysis in-
cluded all devices.
Fixed factors were device (4) and
frequency (8).
The subject was included as a random
factor, and the dependent variable was the loudness rat-
ing. Results showed significant difference of the device:
F(2,38) = 63.23 p<0.0001 at 75dB SPL and F(2,38) =
77.07 p<0.0001 at 85dB SPL.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 3 September 2022
3
==PAGE:11==
FIG. 3. Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles loudness compar-
ison with reference level equal to 60 dB SPL. Values plotted
represent mean ±se.
FIG. 4. Shokz OpenRun Pro, Auricles and Sony WH1000-
XM4 loudness comparison with reference level equal to 75 dB
SPL. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
For the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles, paired t-
tests were performed at all frequencies at each reference
level. The Auricles performed significantly better at all
reference levels and 70 Hz, 100Hz, and 250Hz. Results
are Table I, Table II and Table III. All t-tests included
the Bonferroni correction, a statistical tool that allows
adjustment of the p-value when multiple statistical tests
are performed simultaneously. It multiplies the number
of comparisons with the p-value.
Regarding the Sony WH1000-XM4, results show a
lower signal amplitude needed to match tones at each
frequency under investigation at all reference levels. The
FIG. 5. Shokz OpenRun Pro, Auricles and Sony WH1000-
XM4 loudness comparison with reference level equal to 85 dB
SPL. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
60 dB SPL reference
70 Hz
F(1,78) = 223.60; p<0.0001
100 Hz F(1,78) = 98.77 ; p<0.0001
250 Hz F(1,78) = 21.88 ;p<0.0001
TABLE I. Summary of results for t-tests performed at 70Hz,
100Hz and 250Hz at 60dB SPL reference level for the Open-
Run Pro and the Auricles.
75 dB SPL reference
70 Hz
F(1,78) = 153.49; p<0.0001
100 Hz F(1,78) = 89.02 ; p<0.0001
250 Hz F(1,78) = 42.63 ; p<0.0001
TABLE II. Summary of results for t-tests performed at 70Hz,
100Hz and 250Hz at 75dB SPL reference level for the Open-
Run Pro and the Auricles.
85 dB SPL reference
70 Hz
F(1,78) = 111.41; p<0.0001
100 Hz F(1,78) = 36.10; p<0.0001
250 Hz F(1,78) = 26.19; p<0.0001
TABLE III. Summary of results for t-tests performed at 70Hz,
100Hz and 250Hz at 85dB SPL reference level for the Open-
Run Pro and the Auricles.
4
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 3 September 2022
==PAGE:12==
FIG. 6.
Sony WH1000 XM4 loudness matching plot when
matched to a reference of 85dB SPL (on the top) and Raw
Frequency response (on the bottom), limited in the range 70-
2000 Hz, as measured by the website rtings.com. Green dots
represents frequencies included in the perceptual testing. Val-
ues plotted on the left represent mean ±se. Each horizontal
grid line in the plot on the right represents a 10 dB SPL step.
Please note that the absolute difference in y-axis information
between the two sub-figures is not meaningful in the context
of this specific comparison.
perceptually measured frequency response and the mea-
surement taken by rtings.com with a Head Measurement
System (HMS) are compared in Figure 6. The picture
makes it easy to notice how the measurement on the
top (perceptual) highlights a boost in the low-frequency
end, consistent with the measurement taken on the head
and torso simulator (bottom). The relative maximum at
around 1.5 kHz, which can be seen in the bottom illus-
tration, could not be picked up by the perceptual mea-
FIG. 7. Shokz OpenRun Pro, Auricles and Sony WH1000-
XM4 vibration comparison with reference level equal to 85
dB SPL. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
surement since, in that range, the testing didn’t include
any frequency.
B. Vibration comparison
The amount of perceived vibration showed an in-
crease with increasing reference levels for both devices.
Figure 7 shows results for the OpenRun Pro and the Au-
ricles for the 85 dB SPL reference level. Slopes of results
are similar across frequency for the two devices. These
results suggest that if there is an effect of the vibration on
the loudness assessment, it is comparable in magnitude.
Participants also reported a feeling of vibration when
wearing air conduction headsets.
The vibration was
mainly present at low frequency and has been reported
as ”slight.” Still, it was a different sensation than car-
tilage conduction devices since they could feel it inside
their ear canal and tympanic membrane rather than on
their skin.
Statistical analysis was carried out on the vibration
data from the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles. At 60dB
SPL and 75dB SPL, the device did not represent a signif-
icant effect. At 85 dB SPL, the device was a significant
effect (F(1,19) = 5.95 ;p= 0.0247). The OpenRun Pro
data show a higher amount of perceived vibration. This
is an interesting result since the OpenRun Pro performed
worse in the low-frequency loudness matching task. If the
OpenRun Pro had shown a considerably lower amount of
vibration, this could explain the loudness results. Results
show that vibration levels are similar between the Open-
Run Pro and the Auricles. The Auricles had a smaller
vibration in the few frequencies with a statistically sig-
nificant difference.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 3 September 2022
5
==PAGE:13==
FIG. 8. Shokz OpenRun Pro, Auricles and Sony WH1000-
XM4 sound quality comparison with reference level equal to
85 dB SPL. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
C. Sound Quality
The sound quality assessment results at 85dB SPL
reference are displayed in Figure 8. The WH1000-XM4
had a much better sound quality in the mid-low frequency
range and a slightly better one in the mid-high range than
both cartilage conduction devices.
It is of interest to report the question asked to the
testers with regards to sound quality, which was: ”How
similar is the sound quality of the tone on the right when
compared to the reference?” (Figure 2), which embraced
possible positive bias towards air conduction since the
reference headset was of this type.
A standard least square regression model was fitted
separately to the data with reference level equal to 75dB
and 85dB SPL. All devices were compared, and the fixed
factors were device (4) and frequency (8). The subject
was included as a random factor, and the dependent vari-
able was sound quality.
The analysis of all devices resulted statistically sig-
nificant results with F(2,38) = 26.84; p<0.0001 at 75dB
SPL and F(2,38) = 31.36; p<0.0001 at 85dB SPL.
The analysis found no significant effects in the statis-
tical data analysis regarding the OpenRun Pro and the
Auricles only, at all reference levels.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, a method for estimating a perceptual
measure of the frequency response and assessing sound
quality and vibration for air and cartilage conduction de-
vices has been proposed. Results showed that air conduc-
tion is still more efficient at driving low frequencies, but
cartilage conduction devices improve their performance
along with frequency. Furthermore, Auricle headphones
performed better at three of the eight frequencies under
investigation at all reference levels compared to the Shokz
OpenRun Pro.
No statistically significant sound qual-
ity difference was found between the OpenRun Pro and
the Auricles but the medium-low sound quality rating
suggests that some distortion might have affected their
loudness matching performance.
Future research opportunities are investigating how
vibration can complement the smaller amount of low-
frequency information in the music listening experience
or innovative applications of cartilage conduction devices
(i.e., with hearing impaired users or as tinnitus relief
tools).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Hearing Systems
department at the Danish Technical University.
Hosoi, H., Nishimura, T., Shimokura, R., and Kitahara, T. (2019).
“Cartilage conduction as the third pathway for sound transmis-
sion,” Auris Nasus Larynx 46(2), 151–159, https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S038581461830943X,
doi:
10.
1016/j.anl.2019.01.005.
Nishimura, T., Hosoi, H., Saito, O., Miyamae, R., Shimokura, R.,
Matsui, T., Yamanaka, T., and Levitt, H. (2014). “Is cartilage
conduction classified into air or bone conduction?,” The Laryn-
goscope 124(5), 1214–1219, doi: 10.1002/lary.24485.
Sch¨urmann, M., Caetano, G., Jousm¨aki, V., and Hari, R. (2004).
“Hands help hearing: Facilitatory audiotactile interaction at low
sound-intensity levels,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 115(2), 830–832, http://asa.scitation.org/doi/10.
1121/1.1639909, doi: 10.1121/1.1639909.
Shimokura, R., Hosoi, H., Nishimura, T., and Yamanaka, T.
(2013). “Aural cartilage vibration and sound measured in the
external auditory canal for several transducer positions,” Jour-
nal of Temporal Design in Architecture and the Environment 12,
137–143.
Stenfelt, S., and H˚akansson, B. (2002). “Air versus bone con-
duction:
an equal loudness investigation,” Hearing Research
167(1-2), 1–12, https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0378595501004075, doi: 10.1016/S0378-5955(01)00407-5.
6
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. / 3 September 2022
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
2
Introduction
Bone conduction technology has been largely seen as a low sound quality invention for
wide spectrum sound reproduction since its first commercial applications in the ’70s. It
has now been 50 years - technologies are changing at a very fast pace, but the general
perception with regards to bone conduction did not change. New technology has enabled
innovative solutions in this field. Therefore, there are new factors to consider when evalu-
ating bone conduction technology as a high-quality multisensorial audio device with hear-
ing enhancement capabilities in quiet and noisy conditions. The aim of this project is to
assess the audio quality and characteristics of sound delivered through bone conduction
with a completely open-ear design and its comparison with air conduction technology.
Interest in bone conduction headphones has increased during the last few years. New
companies are emerging and trying to solve problems by proposing innovative solutions.
The conditions in which people today listen to audio content, from music to podcasts,
are fast and radically changing. People are listening to audio in every possible daily life
context and this empowers new solutions to come into play. The world of the so-called
hearables has been growing at a fast pace during the last 10 years, and new devices
have revolutionized the users’ habits. Bluetooth headphones and earbuds have become
the standard and big tech companies have invested a lot in this field. An example can
be noise-canceling headphones, which have been developed to isolate users from their
surroundings minimizing background noise. On the other hand, there are certain listening
conditions where surroundings awareness can represent an advantage. In these situa-
tions, bone conduction technology represents one of the potential technologies that would
be ideal for such situations.
Historically, bone conduction has suffered from several technical challenges that have
limited the feasibility of creating consumer-level headphones capable of delivering a good
listening experience. During the last decade, more advanced research on the topic has
opened new possibilities. With these premises, it is meaningful to evaluate and model
the sound quality and perception of devices based on bone conduction technology and
highlight possible improvements to tune-up in the future.
8
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:16==
3
Background
Research in auditory science and sound perception is rooted in studies carried out in the
19th century. Since then, scientists have made tremendous discoveries and findings, but
many questions still have received no answer. The field of hearing sciences still presents
many unsolved problems that researchers are constantly tackling. The human auditory
system is a complex structure, and hearing science has studied its behavior for almost
two centuries. Since this paper aims to compare sound perception through air and bone
conduction, it is interesting to present an overview of how sound reaches the brain when
conveyed in each of these two pathways.
3.1
Sound Transmission in Air Conduction
The human auditory system can take the information embedded in sound waves and
transform it into electrical impulses that the brain can decode and interpret into meaningful
sound. Hundreds of thousands of years of evolution have designed a structure composed
of three main parts: the outer, middle, and inner ear. A schematic view of the system is
displayed in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Schematic view of the Human Auditory System.
When sound reaches the outer ear, the pinna, a structure made of cartilage, conveys the
waves into the ear canal, at the end of which is the tympanic membrane, a thin structure
that can transform these waves into vibration. The vibration is transferred to three little
bones called ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) placed in the middle ear, which leads
the sound towards the inner ear. The most internal part of the auditory system contains, in
a well-protected position, the cochlea, a spiral-shaped cavity that works as a transducer,
transforming waves into electric impulses that reach the brain through the auditory nerve.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
9
==PAGE:17==
An auditory stimulus sent to the air conduction pathway can be perceived by normal hear-
ing subjects between 20 and 20.000 Hz. Hearing impairment can affect a person’s ability
to discriminate the level and frequency perceived. A measurement method called audiom-
etry can detect at which frequencies the listener lacks frequency sensitivity. A sufficiently
wide range of options is available to tackle the problem. With these premises and for the
sake of this paper, it is of primary interest to investigate hearing impairment caused by
conductive hearing loss, the name given to the group of complications that can affect the
outer or middle ear. Some reasons for conductive hearing loss are malformations of the
ear canal, chronic perforation of the tympanic membrane, or problems in the middle ear.
However, the common factor is that this hearing impairment represents an obstacle on
the path that sound waves need to travel toward the cochlea and later become meaningful
neural activity. On the other hand, sensorineural hearing loss is due to problems in the
inner ear or the auditory nerve. This type of hearing loss will also be of interest in the
following sections of this thesis.
3.2
Sound Transmission in Bone Conduction
Besides the air conduction pathway for sound transmission, there is another route that
sound waves can travel to reach the inner ear. This pathway is called bone conduction
(hereafter sometimes referred to as BC), and it has been known for more than a century.
In this case, the vibration transfers into the skull, and it travels partially bypassing the
outer and middle ear reaching the cochlea and the basilar membrane. From this point of
the path, the signal’s journey to the brain is the same as the air conduction. The main
difference is in the role of the outer and middle ear in transmitting sound.
Due to the reasons mentioned above, the possibility of bypassing the outer and middle ear
has been widely used in diagnostic audiology to detect diseases of the outer and middle
ear. For more than 70 years, bone conduction on the mastoid bone has been used in the
pure tone audiometry method to diagnose conductive problems. The first studies about
transmitting sound through the skull to the inner ear were carried out by von Bèkèsy in
1932 [1]. The main question was whether it was the cochlea to be stimulated through
bone conduction or whether there was a different organ involved. His first experiment
included achieving a 400Hz tone cancellation in two stimuli presented with a 180 ° phase
difference through AC and BC simultaneously.
”Some people don’t trust bone conduction measurements at all. In fact, the
results depend mainly on the quality of the instrument used and especially
on the bone conduction receiver. Reliable bone conduction tests are very
important for differential diagnosis, but we have always to consider two factors:
1. The accuracy of measurement of bone conduction data is smaller;
2. a bone conduction stimulus sets the whole skull into vibration, and there-
fore both ears are stimulated to about the same degree.” [2]
In the quote above, taken from a 1951 scientific paper about pure tone audiometry, the
reliability of the BC method on the mastoid was believed to be very dependent on the
quality of the instrumentation used. At the same time, the phenomenon of cross-talk
between ears was already known, and the researchers’ approach was to mask the sound
in the contralateral ear with noise while taking the measurements. These are experimental
challenges that have survived through the years until today.
Several aspects make BC a topic particularly difficult to master. One of the main points is
10 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:18==
that it is pretty complicated to set up experiments that can physically measure the behav-
ior of the auditory system when vibration travels through the skull. The skull is a complex
structure; its first feature is not transmitting sound. Different areas can create different
resonances, and the overall non-homogeneous density can affect the amount of signal
that reaches the inner ear. In BC, bone is not the only material that can transmit sound;
other tissues around it can also contribute to vibration transmission. In 2005, Stenfelt and
Goode investigated which different materials were responsible for sound transmission
other than bone and found that multiple processes such as inertia of the middle ear ossi-
cle, inertia of the cochlear fluids, compression of the cochlear walls, and transmission of
pressure from cerebrospinal fluids could play a role [3]. Other studies have investigated
the function of other soft tissues, like eyes, cheeks, and neck, and their contribution to
sound transmission [4–6]. The results of the studies mentioned above showed how ma-
terials other than bone could contribute to BC, implying that further studies on nonosseous
bone conduction could be of interest.
3.3
Sound Transmission in Cartilage Conduction
Air and bone conduction have been recognized for a long time as the only two pathways to
transmit sound to the inner ear. In 2004, Hiroshi Hosoi found that placing a transducer on
the aural cartilage could transmit audible sound in the inner ear [7]. This pathway differs
significantly from BC because the transducer can be small and light, requiring a relatively
small force to convey a considerable amount of sound into the auditory system. Hosoi’s
main findings can be summarized as:
• When vibration is driven into the aural cartilage, sound information, including speech,
would be perceived with the same precision as when transferred in AC or BC
• Researchers found the tragus to be the best placement for the transducer
• The loudness of the sound is directly proportional to the pressure between the trans-
ducer and the cartilage, highlighting a unique property if compared to bone conduc-
tion.
The Japanese researcher realized the potential of this discovery in several applications,
from hearing instruments to communication devices. For these reasons, he proposed the
new term ”cartilage conduction (hereafter often addressed as CC)” to identify the third
pathway that sound could follow to reach the inner ear and be perceived by the brain. A
schematic view of the different AC, BC, and CC paths is shown in Figure 3.2.
As briefly mentioned in section 3.2, other soft tissues contribute to the transmission of
sound other than cartilage. The difference lies in the amount of sound energy reaching
the inner ear. Indeed, sounds conveyed through one of these other soft tissues are not
perceived as well as AC or BC, but sounds transmitted through CC are perceived similarly
to BC and AC. Before Hosoi’s discovery in the early 2000s, multiple studies had high-
lighted the leaking of bone-conducted sound in the external ear canal. In 1976, Khanna
et al. demonstrated how low-frequency bone-conducted sound could radiate into the ear
canal [8]. The analysis of these results indicated that bone conduction could be due to
factors other than bone vibration and that sound leaking into the external ear canal was
likely a relevant factor. It remained unclear how sound transferred into the external ear
canal.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Schematic view of air, bone, and cartilage conduction comparison. [7]
As shown in Figure 3.2 above, the external auditory canal can be divided into two, de-
pending on the material of which it is composed: the outer part made of cartilage, the inner
part made of bone. Stenfelt et al. tried to estimate the contribution of the cartilage part
of the auditory canal by removing the outer part and soft tissues along the canal. Their
findings showed a difference of 10dB compared to BC stimulation [9], demonstrating that
the cartilage material could affect the radiation of sound into the external ear canal.
In a study titled ”Cartilage Conduction as the third pathway for sound transmission”, pub-
lished in 2019 on Elsevier, Hosoi and his team summarize three possible sound pathways
within cartilage conduction.
”The first possibility is a direct air pathway (ed: Direct-AC). A transducer on
the cartilage vibrates air as well as cartilage, so that this air vibration enters
the external auditory canal through its entrance. The second is cartilage-air
(ed: Cartilage-AC) pathway. When the aural cartilage and tissue surrounding
the external auditory canal are vibrated by the transducer, the air conduction
sound thus generated in the ear canal reaches the eardrum by AC. The third
one is a cartilage-bone (ed: Cartilage BC) pathway. Vibration in the cartilage
would be transmitted to the skull, and thereby stimulate the cochlea.” [10]
As suggested by Shimokura et al. (2013) [11], since the acoustic impedance gap between
bone and cartilage is conspicuous, this pathway probably doesn’t represent the domi-
nant contribution to hearing sensation compared to the other pathways. Nishimura et al.
(2014) [12] showed how Direct-AC and Cartilage-AC were the dominant sound transmis-
sion pathways in Cartilage Conduction. In particular, they found that below 2 kHz, the
thresholds for CC were significantly lower than those for BC, even with the auditory canal
blocked by an ear plug. Although the tympanic membrane plays a role in the transmis-
sion of CC sound, the difference in threshold with the ear plug inserted highlighted that
Direct-AC does not represent the main pathway in CC. Lastly, the data collected during
this study, via measurements of eight normal hearing participants, suggested that vibra-
tion of the cartilaginous part of the auditory canal can induce airborne sound. A schematic
12 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:20==
view of the three cartilage conduction pathways is given in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: The three Cartilage Conduction pathways are referred to as Direct-AC (blue),
Cartilage-AC (green), and Cartilage-BC (orange). [12]
3.3.1
Transducer's Placement
For pure Bone Conduction, the mastoid bone is the ideal area for the transducer. Several
studies have investigated Cartilage Conduction, focusing on which placements needed
the lowest power to elicit an equal-loudness perception. McBride et al. evaluated different
transducer locations using a test similar to audiometry in which participants had to push
a button when they could hear the tone played by an Oticon A20 bone vibrator. The
results of this experiment suggest that the mandibular condyle could be a valid candidate
location for transducer placement [13]. Xiuyuan et al. showed how the thresholds for the
transducer condyle placement were lower than those obtained with the mastoid placement
with the same input level. This difference also suggested the importance of Cartilage-AC
in the auditory path of Cartilage Conduction [14]. These results are consistent with the
findings of CC presented in section 3.3.
3.3.2
Practical Applications
Since its invention in 2004, CC has found applications in several practical applications,
from clinical to consumer. The development of CC hearing aids, smartphones, and head-
sets has grown due to the research carried out in the field. Below is a summary of the
devices brought to market.
Hearing Aids
Devices that made use of CC as a tool to fix hearing impairment have been developed
[15, 16]. CC hearing aids (CC-HA) have been on the market in Japan since 2017. In
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 13
==PAGE:21==
particular, when direct-AC and cartilage-AC are fully functional, this device might provide
enough amplification to treat mild or moderate hearing loss. As mentioned by [17] [18],
when direct-AC and cartilage-AC are not available, ideal CC-HA users are patients af-
fected by aural atresia, a malformation that affects the auditory canal. Nishiyama et al.
(2021) studied the ideal candidates for cartilage conduction hearing aids over a group
of 37 participants with different ear anatomy. The three groups were (1) auditory canal
stenosis patients, (2) abnormal auditory canal patients, (3) normal canal. They received 1
month of free usage of CC-Ha, and their purchase rate was collected. In the end, 60.47%
of the patients decided to purchase the product. The highest percentages were found
among patients with canal stenosis, while the results showed a lower purchase rate for
patients with regular canals, particularly when affected by severe hearing loss. This study
suggests that CC-HAs are a valuable option for patients affected by ear canal diseases,
but there is room for improvement in sensorineural hearing-impaired candidates.
Commercial Headphones and Daily Use
CC technology has been applied to consumer electronics to develop headsets that can
sit on the mandibular condyle and play sound, leaving the auditory canal open. Examples
of some of these products are shown in Figure 3.4.
(a) Walker’s Raptor (2020)
(b) Auricle Headphones (2021)
(c) TEAC HP-F100 (2007)
Figure 3.4: Different types of cartilage conduction headsets.
One of the main advantages of conveying sound into the auditory system this way is
maintaining awareness about the surrounding environment while listening to audio con-
14 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:22==
tent through the headset. With increasing interest in wearable technology devices, the
headset industry started to produce hearables and wireless listening devices based pri-
marily on Bluetooth technology. Within hearables, cartilage conduction headphones have
been marketed as a valuable solution for jogging, cycling, or listening to a podcast while
still being able to hear the surrounding environment while walking or driving. These new
trends in the market led researchers to investigate how much more environmental aware-
ness open-ear BC headphones enable. A study called ”The effect of distractor sounds
presented through bone conduction headphones on the localization of critical environ-
mental sounds” [19] analyzed the consequences of possible distractors presented simul-
taneously as environmental sounds. Six target stimuli were used: two natural sounds
(cicada buzz and birds chirping), two road alert sounds (bike bell and car horn), and two
broadband noise signals (pink and white noise). The distractor sounds were a spoken
story played with or without music. Twenty-four participants had to locate the target stim-
uli while the distractor sounds played. A bar graph showing the results when comparing
different distractors is shown in Figure 3.5. The testers could always locate the stimuli,
but the distractor sounds influenced the localization performance quantified between 15
and 25 degrees. Also, some of the target stimuli were statistically harder to localize when
playing the spoken story with music. In conclusion, the amount of environmental aware-
ness provided by BC headsets is significant, but it is smaller if compared to the absence
of any listening device and it depends on the level and type of distractor sound.
Figure 3.5: Localization error by distractor type. Red lines indicate a statistically significant
difference. [19]
3.4
Sound Evaluation and Loudness Matching
In 2001, Stenfelt and Hakansson [20] presented an equal-loudness investigation on the
comparison of sound transmission in air and bone conduction. Their work focused on a
loudness balance testing experiment conducted over a frequency range between 250 and
2000 Hz. It involved two groups of participants, normal hearing and sensorineural hearing-
impaired listeners. The reason to carry out such a study was to investigate whether the
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 15
==PAGE:23==
loudness curves in BC and AC are different and how they are related. The task was to
adjust the loudness elicited by a bone conduction headset, the Radioear B-71, placed on
the mastoid bone, and the loudness of a pair of Koss portaPro earphones.
Figure 3.6: Mean results of the loudness matching experiment for the normal hearing
(solid line) and hearing impaired (dashed line) group. [20]
Each participant’s BC results were normalized to be 30 dBBC for each frequency when the
loudness matching was performed at 30 dBAC. Then, the increase in BC stimuli for each
10 dBAC was added to the reference; thus, the absolute value of the sound generated by
the BC headset was not taken into account, but relative numbers were obtained through
normalization. The mean results for both groups are displayed in Figure 3.6. When look-
ing at the normal hearing group, the mean increase in bone conduction per 10 dBAC
increase was above 9 dBBC at all frequencies except at the highest intensities, where the
increase was to some extent smaller. With 250 Hz as an exception, the normal-hearing
and hearing-impaired group results are similar.
”It should be pointed out that for the normal hearing group, at all frequencies,
and over the range 30-80 dB HLAC, perceived loudness is more sensitive to
BC than AC, i.e. dBBC/dBAC < 1.” [20]
In 2012, Pollard et al. [21], developed a free field method to calibrate bone conduction
transducers. Before the publication of this paper, no calibration standard was available
for different devices, skull locations, and settings. The available calibration standards
focused on one device and a limited number of skull locations. Also, mechanical cou-
plers, like the B&K type 4930, showed inferior performance compared to experimental
data measured on human testers. To answer these needs, the researchers focused on
developing a free field method to calibrate bone conduction headsets similar to the one
used to calibrate AC headphones. The setup consisted of an experiment in which par-
ticipants had to adjust the loudness of one-third octave band noise (range 125-12.500
Hz, 22 test frequencies in total) between BC and AC. Two different transducers and two
skull locations were part of the testing. The method showed good intra- and inter-subject
reliability. The results showed better sensitivity in the case of the mandibular condyle for
both transducers, consistent with the existing literature summarized in subsection 3.3.1.
16 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:24==
4
Experiment Design
4.1
Introduction
The overall aim of the experiment design process is to develop a method to investigate
the difference in performance of cartilage conduction headsets compared to conventional
air conduction devices. The desired output is a perceptual estimation of the frequency
response of multiple consumer listening devices together with an assessment of vibration
and sound quality.
4.2
Background
Multiple brainstorming sessions were carried out in the beginning of the project, together
with the supervisors, in order to identify possible directions to take when looking at the
problem. The brainstorming led to five different ideas:
• Sound quality assessment for normal hearing together with a subjective evaluation
of multisensorial haptic sound perception (in comparison to air conduction).
• Psychoacoustic evaluation of cartilage conduction speech intelligibility enhance-
ment (compared to air conduction) for people with hearing loss in quiet and noisy
situations.
• Auralisation and spatial audio perception with cartilage conduction
• Hearing-related damage risk assessment with cartilage conduction technology (in
comparison to air conduction).
• cartilage conduction technology used as a tinnitus relief tool.
The initial ideas were discussed accord-
ing to the time available, and it was soon
decided to look into the first bullet point.
The design thus focused, at first, on in-
specting the sound quality of cartilage
conduction headsets and their compar-
ison to air conduction devices. An im-
portant topic with these regards is the
frequency response of a BC headset,
since these devices in the past have
been considered of poor low-frequency
performance, thus delivering a poorer
listening experience for music that con-
tains a lot of low-frequency information.
Figure 4.1: B&K Type 4930, Artifi-
cial Mastoid
There are several factors that can be in the way when evaluating the frequency
response of such headsets. One is certainly represented by the fact that it is not
guaranteed that a certain frequency that the vibrating transducer is able to reproduce
and can be picked up, for instance, by an accelerometer, will then be perceived by the
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 17
==PAGE:25==
listener. This is due to dampening and resonances in the skull that affect the overall
resulting perceived signal.
This problem has been tackled in the past by multiple studies. A comparison between
human perceptual data and a B&K Type 4930 artificial mastoid was carried out by
Pollard et al. (2013) [21].
Results showed a discrepancy between the human-generated data and the data
measured through the artificial mastoid, as displayed in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the human mastoid response (dashed black line) to the me-
chanical coupler response (solid gray line) and human condyle response (solid black line)
for the the SD02 transducer. Lines depict the mean response for six subjects at each
test frequency, ±se. The vertical axis indicates the signal level (dB re: 1 mV) that the
human subjects selected to perceptually match the bone conducted sound at the mastoid
to 45 dB of air-conducted sound in the free field. For ease of comparison, the mechanical
coupler curve and human condyle curve have been overlaid on the human mastoid curve
(vertically shifted by the average difference between each curve and the human mastoid
curve). for the Ooido SD02 transducer. [21]
In the case of the above mentioned study, a free field method was proposed to calibrate
bone conduction transducers. According to the experiment premises of this thesis, this
method couldn’t be applied. The reason is that, given that the goal was to perform a
comparison with air conduction devices, in order to be able to apply the free-field
method, both auditory canals had to be open for the whole duration of the experiment,
no matter which device was tested. This wouldn’t be possible because air conduction
headphones almost always block or cover the ear canal. These reasons led to a design
focused on a loudness matching experiment to perform with a reference device on one
ear and the tested device on the contralateral.
4.3
Loudness Matching
4.3.1
Subjects
In order to obtain meaningful results, all the participants to the experiment had their
hearing measured prior to the experiment through pure tone audiometry. A group of 20
18 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:26==
normal hearing subjects, aged between 19 and 33, participated in the loudness
matching experiment. Their AC thresholds were below 15dB HL for both ears between
0.125 kHz and 2 kHz and the maximum allowed asymmetry between left and right ear
was 5dB. These criteria have been set according with the previous study carried out by
Stenfelt et Al. [20], with a more strict approach with regards to symmetry (a maximum
asymmetry of 10dB was used in that study). All participants provided informed consent
and all experiments were approved by the Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital
Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
4.3.2
Procedure
To obtain the estimated perceptual frequency response, loudness matching between
Sennheiser HD650 headphones and each tested device was performed. The HD650
are open, supra-ear headphones. The HD650 were calibrated through a GRAS artificial
ear and a Norsonic Nor140 (calibrated through a B&K sound calibrator type 1251
(Figure 4.3)) and several MATLAB scripts that process the signal so that the
headphones output will match at all frequencies the sound pressure level set by the
researchers. Further details about calibration are discussed in subsection 4.3.3.
Figure 4.3: The B&K sound calibrator type 1251 used in the calibration procedure.
According to Nishimura et al. [12], Direct-AC and Cartilage-AC are the dominant
transmission pathways in cartilage conduction. Thus, cross-talk between ears when a
stimulus is presented through cartilage conduction on one side has been considered as
negligible. Furthermore, no information about cross-talk in cartilage conduction devices
was found in literature, thus this factor wasn’t included in the experimental
considerations.
All measurements have been performed in a sound insulated booth. The background
noise during all the measurements was less than 30 dBA. Each participant was
equipped with the Sennheiser HD650 on their left ear and, one at a time, the tested
device under investigation on their right ear.
The tested devices are:
• Shokz OpenRun Pro (Cartilage Conduction)
• Auricles (Cartilage Conduction)
• Apple Ear Pods (Earbuds, Air Conduction)
• Sony WH1000-XM4 (Supra-ear Headphones, Air Conduction)
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 19
==PAGE:27==
The OpenRun Pro and the WH1000-XM4 were connected to the computer through
Bluetooth 4.0. No amplifiers were used in this case but the ones contained in the two
devices themselves. The Auricles lab prototype was wired and its setup was designed to
take into account for the mechanical limitations of the transducer. Thus, taking into
account that the signal was sent via an external soundcard before reaching the device,
the audio output has been verified by Auricle to ensure the same output as with a
Bluetooth connection (equivalent to the final product). The Apple Earpods were wired
through a RME QuadMic II soundcard and then input into the computer through USB
connection. All devices were set to the maximum output level (100) in the Windows
sound settings.
Loudness matching data was obtained thanks to a MATLAB GUI, specifically
programmed for the purpose. The interface took care of presenting, recording and
saving the data. Figure 4.4 below displays the interface’s appearance. Focus of the
experiment was to study in particular mid and low frequencies, thus the frequencies that
were selected are part of the low-mid range. Previous loudness matching studies have
been performed with band-passed random noise centered around the frequency of
interest as stimuli. On the other hand, since cartilage conduction pathway has dominant
contributions by Direct-AC and Cartilage-AC, pure tones were chosen as stimuli during
the experiment. Another reason to use pure tones was represented by the technical
challenges encountered while generating and playing narrowband random noise without
distortion when centered around very low frequencies (70Hz, 100Hz). Pure tones
allowed to apply a functional approach both to the signals played through the HD650
and the tested devices.
Figure 4.4: The MATLAB App developed to perform the experiment, record and save the
data.
20 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:28==
Pure tone stimuli generated through MATLAB between 70Hz and 2000Hz
(70,100,125,250,500,750,2000 Hz) were presented to the subjects via the HD650 on the
left ear, alternating with the tested device on the right ear. Stimuli were panned so that
only the relevant side of each instrument was playing (HD650 on the left side only,
tested device on the right side only). The insulated booth was equipped with a knob,
which the subject could use to manipulate the loudness of the tone presented through
the tested device. Each step of the knob was equal to 1dB Full-Scale. The sound
pressure level of the HD650 was constant during each of the experiment repetitions.
Each repetition consisted of a fixed reference level and 16 loudness matching tasks, two
for each target frequency. The pure tones alternated between the reference and tested
device every 1 s while the subject matched the stimulus of the tested device (variable) to
the reference stimulus (constant). The stimuli were generated with 50 ms linear rise
time, 900 ms on, and 50 ms fall time. While the signal was played in the HD650, the
tested device remained silent and vice versa. One stimulus was always playing; stimuli
presentations didn’t include any silence time.
Test participants had to match the tone’s loudness by bracketing, thus adjusting the level
of the tested device to be louder than the reference, then quieter until the two tones
matched perfectly. The initial level of the tested device was randomized as well as
frequencies. Each subject didn’t have a time constraint while performing the matching.
The time to complete each loudness matching task was measured and the final average
was 29 s. When the tone reached equal loudness, the user could move on to the
vibration and sound quality assessment. When the user had evaluated vibration and
sound quality, data from the current presentation was saved, and a new frequency was
presented. After each run of 16 matching tasks, the subjects had the possibility of taking
a break of 5 minutes.
Each test run consisted of three reference levels for the cartilage conduction devices
(60, 75, 85 dB SPL, from here on in the document often addressed as ”60,75,85 dB”)
and two for the air conduction devices (75 and 85 dB) played through the reference
headset HD650 on the left ear versus the device under test on the right ear. 8
frequencies, repeated two times, for a total of 16 repetitions were played for each
reference level on each device.
The two cartilage conduction devices were tested first and the AC devices later. Half of
the participants tested the Shokz first, and the remaining half tested the Auricles first.
This approach was undertaken to average out possible bias due to the order of testing.
4.3.3
Calibration
The HD650 used as a reference headset during the experiment have been carefully
calibrated prior to the beginning of measurements. The calibration procedure required a
GRAS Ear Simulator IEC 60318-1, a B&K Sound calibrator Type 1251, and a set of
MATLAB scripts, developed specifically for this purpose in the Hearing Systems
department. The calibration output is a calibration filter object that was used in the GUI
to process the signal sent to the reference headset. The calibration is designed to
ensure an almost flat behavior, measured in dB SPL at the eardrum, across the
frequency range between 50 Hz and 17 kHz.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.5: The GRAS Ear Simulator IEC 60318-1 used to calibrate the Sennheiser
HD650.
4.4
Vibration and Sound Quality Evaluation
4.4.1
Vibration
Cartilage conduction headsets have the peculiarity of presenting vibrations together with
sound. It is of interest to this research to quantify the amount of vibration each device
can elicit in the user. The experiment interface included a slider specifically designed to
achieve this goal. The test subjects could choose any point between the slider’s
minimum and maximum values. A categorical scale was also present in the slider. Each
categorical label on the scale was places at 0%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the full
scale and were respectively ”None”, ”Slight”, ”Some”, ”Moderate”, ”Extreme”
(Figure 4.7). Each participant performed a training run to give the tester the opportunity
of experiencing a range of vibration sensations that would be part of the experiment.
Figure 4.6: The part of the MATLAB interface programmed to investigate vibration.
As mentioned by Schurmann et al. (2004) [22], vibrations can elicit an increased
22 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:30==
loudness perception. In the paper mentioned above, researchers showed how
participants chose on average 12% lower intensities in a loudness matching experiment
when simultaneously touching a vibrating tube. These results suggest that, also in the
cartilage conduction headsets’ case, an effect of vibration onto the loudness matching
results is to expect.
4.4.2
Sound Quality
Figure 4.7: The part of the MATLAB interface programmed to investigate sound quality.
The sound quality assessment was included in the testing to make sure that the
loudness matching task was performed successfully but the sound quality of the tones
was not comparable i.e.: the testers could match a 100Hz tone but it was very distorted
and the frequency was totally shifted from the reference tone because of transducers
non-linearities. Since the test participants were not part of a team of skilled assessors,
the sound quality slider asked the tester how similar the tone played in the tested ear (on
the right) compared to the reference (the left ear). This choice has been made to give
some insight to the testers about a reference sound quality they could use to judge the
tested devices. It has to be taken into account some possible bias due to the fact that
the listening experience of cartilage conduction headsets is different than the one of a
conventional air conduction headset. Nevertheless, within the conditions of this
research, this approach made it possible to have consistent results across subjects and
was thus an overall positive experimental choice.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 23
==PAGE:31==
24 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:32==
5
Hypothesized Results
Several accelerometer measurements have been performed at the beginning of the
experimental process to estimate the physical response of the different devices. The
response of the two cartilage conduction headsets to the pure tones later used in the
psychoacoustic experiment has been measured. These measurements allowed to
better understand the physical behavior of the systems before the perceptual testing.
Furthermore, the frequency response of the air conduction devices has been taken from
available online measurements performed with a head measurement system (HMS).
Hypothesized results include:
• Overall, air conduction devices will need lower amplitude of the signal to match the
same reference level in dB SPL. It is to be determined the magnitude of the
difference.
• Cartilage conduction devices will show a poorer performance in the bass if
compared to the air conduction ones (will need higher signal amplitude to match
the same reference level in dB SPL). It is to be determined if there will be a
difference in performance between the two cartilage conduction headsets.
• Vibration will be mainly present at low frequencies, with the effect of increasing the
perceived loudness in that frequency range.
• Perceived sound quality will be higher for higher frequency, most likely due to the
possible interference of the vibration with the sound quality assessment at low
frequencies.
5.0.1
Measurement Setup
The measurement setup consisted of:
• A Focusrite Scarlett 2i2 USB Audio Interface
• A B&K Charge Amplifier type 2635
• A B&K Accelerometer type 4375
• A MATLAB script, used to play and record signals
Figure 5.1: Measurement setup.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 25
==PAGE:33==
For the frequency response measurements, the script sent through the system an
exponential frequency sweep within the range 10-10kHz. The procedure repeated
automatically 10 times and results were averaged to obtain the frequency responses
displayed in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.4. A similar procedure was applied in the
measurement with pure tones, in which each tone was played 10 times and responses
were averaged to obtain the plots displayed in figures Figure 5.5a to Figure 5.12b.
5.0.2
Accelerometer Measurements Plots
Shokz OpenRun Pro
Raw frequency response plots for the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles are displayed
respectively in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.4. Plots have been limited to the range
20Hz-10kHz and all frequencies later included in the perceptual experiment have been
reported as ticks on the x-axis. The frequency response plot of the OpenRun Pro shows
a local peak at around 100Hz and a decay below that frequency. Another local
maximum is present at around 300Hz and, above 2kHz, the frequency response decays,
even though a considerable amount of measurement noise is present in this frequency
area. This noise is most likely due to the measurement setup, in particular to the amount
of bee wax which was needed in order to stick the accelerometer onto the very smooth
surface of the device. Overall, the frequency response of the OpenRun Pro suggests
that the performance in the low frequency area might be worse than in the mid
frequency area.
Figure 5.2: Frequency response of the Shokz OpenRun Pro measured through a B&K
type 4375.
A measurement of the raw frequency response of the OpenRun Pro for the right ear has
been taken from the headphones review website rtings.com, and it is displayed in
Figure 5.3. It is crucial to notice that the frequency response reported in this plot has
been measured using a HMS (Head Measurement System, a head and torso simulator),
which is developed for measurements on air conduction headphones, since it is
equipped with microphones inside the artificial ear canals, where the tympanic
membrane is located in a human being. For all of these reasons, it thus can’t be
26 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:34==
considered as a reliable measurement tool in this context. Nevertheless, this plot is
included here because it can give the reader insight about the limitations of the available
measurement methods for this type of headsets.
Figure 5.3: Raw frequency response of the Shokz OpenRun Pro for the right ear, as
measured by the website rtings.com.
Auricles
Figure 5.4: Frequency response of the Auricles measured through a B&K type 4375.
The raw frequency response plot of the Auricles shows a local resonance at around 150
Hz and a decay below 70Hz. Furthermore, another local maximum is present at around
250Hz and several dips can be noticed at around 1000Hz and above. It is not clear
which factors caused them, either they might be artifacts due to the measurement setup
or can be a consequence of the physical behavior of the transducer. It has to be noted
that, due to the Auricles’ clip, the measurement couldn’t be performed directly on the
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 27
==PAGE:35==
area that is in contact with the listener’s skin but just next to it, on the shell of the device.
This probably resulted in a discrepancy between what was measured and the effective
response of the plastic resin area that touches the skin during the listening experience.
A lot of the plastic shell modes could not be avoided in this measurement.
Response to Pure Tones Comparison between OpenRun Pro and Auricles
Response measurements to pure tones played through the OpenRun Pro and the
Auricles were performed in order to check how whether any other frequency
components were excited when a specific pure tone is driven through the device and to
detect possible harmonic distortion. Results are displayed in the figures below. Overall,
the behavior of the two transducers is similar. The Auricles analysis highlighted sharper
peaks when the 70 and 100 Hz tones were played in input but also a bigger amount of
harmonics when the 250 Hz and 750 Hz tones were played. By looking at these
measurements only, it would be very hard to compare the performance of these devices,
which is affected by other factors when a user is wearing the device, such as fit, pressure
on the aural cartilage, thus how much vibration the device is able to convey into the skull.
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 70 Hz measured through a B&K type
4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 70 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 100 Hz measured through a B&K type
4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 100 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
28 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:36==
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 125 Hz measured through a B&K type
4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 125 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 200 Hz measured through a B&K type
4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 200 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 250 Hz measured through a B&K type
4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 250 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 29
==PAGE:37==
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 500 Hz measured through a B&K type
4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 500 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure tone
of 750 Hz measured through a B&K type 4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 750
Hz measured through a B&K type 4375.
(a) Shokz OpenRun Pro response to a pure
tone of 2000 Hz measured through a B&K
type 4375.
(b) Auricles response to a pure tone of 2000 Hz
measured through a B&K type 4375.
30 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:38==
Apple Ear Pods
The raw frequency response of the Apple Ear Pods has been included in this section, as
measured by the review website rtings.com, so that the reader can gather insight into
the performance of such a device. The measurement setup is the same one described
in subsubsection 5.0.2, with a Head Measurement System (HMS), with 5 repetitions of
the measurements, that are later averaged to obtain the final result. The plot displayed
in Figure 5.13 show a poorer response below 100 Hz, likely due to poor sealing of the
ear canal. The website, that carried out a more thorough analysis of the overall
characteristics of this specific device which goes beyond the scope of this thesis, also
reported that measurements highlighted a non negligible difference in performance
across multiple users.
Figure 5.13: Raw frequency response of the Apple Ear Pods for the right ear, as measured
by the website rtings.com.
Sony WH1000-XM4
The raw frequency response for the right ear of the Sony WH1000-XM4 is displayed in
Figure 5.14. These headphones have a default equalization preset, used during the
loudness matching experiment, and also the one used to generate the plot mentioned
above, that presents a significantly boosted bass. A prominent low-frequency content is
a well-established trend in this type of consumer product; the Sony WH1000-XM4 is no
exception, with more substantial bass than the average headset from the same product
category.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.14: Raw frequency response of the Sony WH1000-XM4 for the right ear, as
measured by the website rtings.com.
A comparison of the two raw frequency responses of the Apple Ear Pods and the Sony
WH1000-XM4 is displayed in Figure 5.15. On the left, the difference in amplitude
between the two devices at low frequency is visible, even though most of the decay
happens below 70 Hz, the lowest frequency included in the loudness matching
experiment.
Figure 5.15: Raw frequency response comparison between the Apple Ear Pods and the
Sony WH1000-XM4 for the right ear, as measured by the website rtings.com.
32 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:40==
6
Results
The results section is divided into three subsections analyzing results from the loudness
matching task, the vibration, and the sound quality assessment. MATLAB was the tool
used to create all the plots in the raw results subsection. The statistical analysis have
been performed in JMP Pro 16.
As previously mentioned in subsection 4.3.1, 20 normal hearing subjects performed the
experiment. Results showed high intra- and inter-subject reliability in all devices but the
Apple Ear Pods, which had a lower intra subject correlation. The correlation was
calculated through the Pearson coefficient.
Inter-subject correlation
Intra-subject correlation
Shokz OpenRun Pro
0.736
0.820
Auricles
0.669
0.869
Apple Ear Pods
0.780
0.482
Sony WH1000-XM4
0.804
0.721
Table 6.1: Intra- and inter-subject correlation coefficients for each device.
6.1
Loudness Matching
6.1.1
Raw results
In Figure 6.1, Figure 6.2 and Figure 6.3 below, loudness matching results of the
comparison between the Shokz OpenRun Pro and the Auricles are displayed.
Frequency is plotted on the x-axis, and dB Full-Scale is plotted on the y-axis. Zero is in
the bottom part of the graph and decreases towards negative values reaching the top
part of the graph. Thus, the higher the y-value in dB Full Scale (lower part of the graph),
the higher the signal amplitude needed to match that specific frequency at the selected
reference level. Mean and standard error are plotted for each device, and black dots
represent individual results.
Figure 6.1: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles loudness matching plots when matched to
a reference of 60dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 33
==PAGE:41==
As displayed in Figure 6.1 above, the perceptual frequency response of the two devices
inspected here look different regarding their overall trend and absolute values. The
Shokz OpenRun Pro shows a reasonably flat behavior, with a slope that increases with
frequency, meaning that a higher signal amplitude was needed at low frequency to
match the reference tone. The Auricles show a more complex behavior, with a dip at
125 Hz. Overall, the Auricles (on the right) show a much better behavior at low
frequencies and similar behavior to the Shokz in the remaining spectrum. It is still to
determine whether this difference is statistically significant or not.
Figure 6.2: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles loudness matching plots when matched to
a reference of 75dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
As displayed in Figure 6.2 above, the behavior described for Figure 6.1 is consistent
with results when the reference level is increased by 10 dB, with a decreased value of
the standard error when inspecting frequencies equal to 250 Hz and 500 Hz. Results
are also consistent when the reference level is increased to 85 dB, as displayed in
Figure 6.3. It is interesting to notice how the spectrum is increasingly flat with the
increasing reference level, apart from the difference at low frequency. This result may be
due to intrinsic characteristics of the devices, or part of this behavior might be due to
increased vibration at low frequencies, which section 6.2 will analyze further.
Figure 6.3: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles loudness matching plots when matched to
a reference of 85dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
34 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.4: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles loudness comparison with reference levels
equal to 60, 75, 85 dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.5: Apple Ear Pods and Sony WH-1000 XM4 loudness matching plots when
matched to a reference of 75dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.6: Apple Ear Pods and Sony WH-1000 XM4 loudness matching plots when
matched to a reference of 85dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.7: Apple Ear Pods loudness matching plot when matched to a reference of 85dB
(on the left) and Raw Frequency response (on the right in red), limited in the range 70-
2000 Hz, as measured by the website rtings.com. Values plotted on the left represent
mean ±se. Green dots represents frequencies included in the perceptual testing. Each
horizontal grid line in the plot on the right represents a 10 dB step. Please note that the
absolute difference in y-axis information between the two sub-figures is not meaningful in
the context of this specific comparison.
Regarding air conduction devices, the plots displayed in Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6 show
a more flat behavior over the whole frequency range under investigation when
compared to the two cartilage conduction headsets included in the analysis. As
previously mentioned in subsection 4.3.2, due to the processing of the signal through an
external soundcard, the reader should focus on the Apple Ear Pods results mainly in
terms of the slope behavior, not taking into account the dB Full-Scale values reported on
the y-axis. In the Sony WH1000 XM4 case, it is meaningful to look at the absolute and
relative results since the signal amplification occurs in the device. Sony’s headset was
louder than both cartilage conduction devices. A lower signal amplitude was needed to
36 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:44==
match the reference tone at the three reference levels than the signal amplitude required
to reach the same reference with the cartilage conduction devices.
For ease of comparison, Ear Pods’ perceived frequency response was included in
Figure 6.7, next to the frequency response measurement also shown in Figure 5.13
(look at its caption for more details). It is possible to notice clearly how the trend of the
two plots is similar, with a slight drop below 100 Hz, a dip at around 750-1000 Hz, and
an increase in the range 1-2 kHz. This result indicates that the measurement procedure
returns a representative estimate of the actual frequency response of the device.
A comparison of the perceptually measured frequency response of the Sony
WH1000-XM4 and the measurement taken by rtings.com with an HMS is displayed in
Figure 6.8. It is clear how the measurement on the left (perceptual) captured a boost in
the low-frequency end, consistent with the measurement taken on the head and torso
simulator. The frequency response on the left of the figure also shows a relative
maximum at around 1.5 kHz, which the perceptual measurement could not pick up
since, in that range, the testing didn’t include any testing frequency.
Figure 6.8: Sony WH1000 XM4 loudness matching plot when matched to a reference of
85dB (on the left) and Raw Frequency response (on the right in red), limited in the range
70-2000 Hz, as measured by the website rtings.com. Values plotted on the left represent
mean ±se. Green dots represents frequencies included in the perceptual testing. Each
horizontal grid line in the plot on the right represents a 10 dB step. Please note that the
absolute difference in y-axis information between the two sub-figures is not meaningful in
the context of this specific comparison.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 37
==PAGE:45==
6.1.2
Statistical Analysis
All results gathered through the loudness matching task were processed through JMP
Pro 16. In particular, different sub-data-sets have been studied through least squares
regression models and paired t-tests.
Comparison between all devices
A standard least square regression model was fitted separately to the data with
reference level equal to 75dB and 85dB SPL. In Test One, all devices were compared
and the fixed factors were device (4), frequency (8). The subject was included as a
random factor and the dependent variable was loudness rating.
Test One main showed statistical significance of the device: F(3,57) = 62.75; p<0.0001
at 75dB, F(3,57) = 108.16; p<0.0001 at 85dB.
Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles comparison
Because of the similarity of the technology and features of the OpenRun Pro and the
Auricles, a statistical analysis of data from these two devices has been carried out. A
standard lest square regression model was fitted to the data. In Test Two the OpenRun
Pro and the Auricles were compared at each level. The subject was included as a
random factor and the dependent variable was loudness rating.
-10,39917305 + Match (device )


1
⇒1, 8772996582
2
⇒−1, 877299658
else ⇒.


+Match(frequency )














70
⇒0, 7726946039
100
⇒2, 2507211573
125
⇒4, 7344721768
200
⇒1, 335099236
250
⇒−1, 076632206
500
⇒−2, 102773557
750
⇒−1, 808511755
2000
⇒−4, 105069657
else
⇒.














+Match(device )

































70
⇒4, 3407531851
100
⇒1, 566730446
125
⇒−1, 839605148
200
⇒−2, 008636729
250
⇒0, 7509478387
500
⇒−0, 388409481
750
⇒−1, 963230454
2000
⇒−0, 458549658
else
⇒.
70
⇒−4, 340753185
100
⇒−1, 566730446
125
⇒1, 8396051485
200
⇒2, 0086367287
250
⇒−0, 750947839
500
⇒0, 3884094809
750
⇒1, 9632304542
2000
⇒0, 4585496575
else ⇒.

































(6.1)
38 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:46==
Test Two showed significance of the device: F(1,18.98) = 35.55; p<0.0001 at 60dB
F(1,19) = 46.66; p<0.0001 at 75dB, F(1,19) = 22.76; p<0.0001 at 85dB. In
Equation 6.1.2, the reader can see the model’s prediction expression for the statistical
analysis of the OpenRun Pro (device 1) and the Auricles (device 2) at 85dB.
Paired t-tests were performed at all frequencies at each reference level. Results were
significant at 70 Hz, 100Hz and 250Hz at all reference levels, where the Auricles
performed better. Results are in Figure 6.9, Figure 6.10, Figure 6.11, and Table 6.2.The
t-tests included the Bonferroni correction, a statistical tool that allows the researcher to
adjust the p-value when multiple statistical tests are performed at the same time. It
works multiplying the number of comparisons with the p-value.
Figure 6.9: Results from the t-test at 70Hz and 85dB SPL reference. Device 1 is OpenRun
Pro (on the left), device 2 is Auricles (on the right).
Figure 6.10: Results from the t-test at 100Hz and 85dB SPL reference. Device 1 is Open-
Run Pro (on the left), device 2 is Auricles (on the right).
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.11: Results from the t-test at 250Hz and 85dB SPL reference. Device 1 is Open-
Run Pro (on the left), device 2 is Auricles (on the right).
60 dB
75 dB
85 dB
70 Hz
F(1,78) = 223.60; p<0.0001
F(1,78) = 153.49; p<0.0001
F(1,78) = 111.41; p<0.0001
100 Hz
F(1,78) = 98.77 ; p<0.0001
F(1,78) = 89.02 ; p<0.0001
F(1,78) = 36.10; p<0.0001
250 Hz
F(1,78) = 21.88 ;p<0.0001
F(1,78) = 42.63 ; p<0.0001
F(1,78) = 26.19; p<0.0001
Table 6.2: Summary of results for t-tests performed at 70Hz, 100Hz and 250Hz at each
reference level for the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles.
40 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:48==
6.2
Vibration
Vibration assessment data is summarized in the following section. Data from the Shokz
and Auricles is presented first, because of the higher amount of vibration. Data from the
air conduction headsets highlighted that at low frequencies and high levels, test
participants rated a non negligible amount of vibration, which they reported they could
feel in their ear canal/tympanic membrane.
6.2.1
Raw Results
Results from the vibration assessment are displayed in Figure 6.12, Figure 6.13, and
Figure 6.14 below. Pictures show that when the frequency decreases, vibration
increases. This trend is similar in both OpenRun Pro and Auricles and has a similar
slope. As previously mentioned in subsection 4.3.2, half of the participants tested the
OpenRun Pro as the first device, and the remaining half tested the Auricles first.
Furthermore, before each experiment, each participant had a training run to familiarize
with the interface and experience a diverse range of vibration levels that would later be
part of the measurement.
Figure 6.21 below shows a vibration level comparison at the three reference levels. The
amount of perceived vibration shows an increase with increasing reference levels for
both devices. Overall, the slopes of the results of the devices are similar across
frequency. It is still to determine the possible statistical significance of this similarity.
Furthermore, these results seem to suggest that if an effect of the vibration on the
loudness assessment is present, it is similar between the two cartilage conduction
devices.
Participants also reported a feeling of vibration when wearing the air conduction
headsets. Results are summarized in Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16 below. Vibration is
exclusively present at low frequency and has been reported to be ”slight.” Still, it was a
different sensation than cartilage conduction devices since they could feel it inside their
ear canal and tympanic membrane rather than on their skin.
Figure 6.12: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles vibration plots when matched to a refer-
ence of 60dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.13: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles vibration plots when matched to a refer-
ence of 75dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.14: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles vibration plots when matched to a refer-
ence of 85dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.15: Apple Ear Pods and Sony WH-1000 XM4 vibration plots when matched to a
reference of 75dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
42 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.16: Apple Ear Pods and Sony WH-1000 XM4 vibration plots when matched to a
reference of 85dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.17: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles vibration comparison with reference levels
equal to 60, 75, 85 dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 43
==PAGE:51==
6.2.2
Statistical Analysis
Comparison between all devices
A standard least square regression model was fitted separately to the data with
reference level equal to 75dB and 85dB SPL. In Test One, all devices were compared
and the fixed factors were device (4), frequency (8). The subject was included as a
random factor and the dependent variable was vibration.
Test One showed device’s statistical significance: F(3,57) = 127.92; p<0.0001 at 75dB
and still device, F(3,57) = 128.16; p<0.0001 at 85dB.
Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles comparison
Similar to subsubsection 6.1.2, the statistical analysis was performed on a sub-dataset
that contained data from the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles only at each reference level.
At 60dB and 75dB, the device did not represent a significant effect. At 85 dB, the device
had a significant effect (F(1,19) = 5.95 ;p= 0.0247). The OpenRun Pro data show a
higher amount of perceived vibration, an interesting result since, as summarized in the
previous section, the OpenRun Pro by Shokz had a lower low-frequency loudness
performance, which might be an effect of a lower amount of vibration. Instead, these
results show that vibration levels are similar between the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles.
In the few frequencies with a statistically significant difference, the Auricles had the
smallest vibration.
6.3
Sound Quality
The reason the sound quality assessment has been included in the experiment is to
check if, rather than just matching a tone’s loudness, the device under test can have a
sound quality similar to the one of the HD650, which was the reference headset. Subject
participants weren’t skilled listening assessors and provided their opinion about the
similarity between the two tones they had just matched.
6.3.1
Raw Results
Sound quality assessment results for the cartilage conduction devices are displayed in
Figure 6.18, Figure 6.19 and Figure 6.20 below. The sound quality in the low frequency
was rated as lower than in the high frequency for both devices. The lower perceived
quality at low frequency might be due to an interference of the vibration with the listening
experience or to limitations due to the transmission of sound through the skull in that
frequency range. The slope of the results is similar in the OpenRun Pro and the
Auricles. The latter device presented a relative maximum at 100Hz. Generally speaking,
sound quality decreased as the reference level increased.
A visual comparison of result of these two headsets is in Figure 6.21.
44 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.18: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles sound quality plots when matched to a
reference of 60dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.19: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles sound quality plots when matched to a
reference of 75dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.20: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles sound quality plots when matched to a
reference of 85dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.21: Shokz OpenRun Pro and Auricles sound quality comparison with reference
levels equal to 60, 75, 85 dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Figure 6.22: Apple Ear Pods and Sony WH1000-XM4 sound quality plots when matched
to a reference of 75dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Regarding air conduction results, overall the perceived sound quality was rated as
higher compared to cartilage conduction by the listeners. On the other hand, the overall
experience of wearing a cartilage conduction device was commented as ”exciting” and
”new” by most of the participants in the experiment. A lot of them reported how they
46 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:54==
could listen to the bass tones through vibration over sound and this is certainly of
interest for future research on how vibration can complement low frequency information
during a listening experience.
One more factor to keep in mind in this context is the way listeners were asked to rate
sound quality through the question ”How similar is sound quality of the tone on the right
when compared to the reference?” (Figure 4.7, discussion for this choice can be found in
subsection 4.4.2), which embraced possible positive bias towards air conduction
devices. Plots displayed in Figure 6.22 and Figure 6.23 show consistent sound quality
across frequency, with a slightly worse performance at low frequencies for the Apple Ear
Pods at 75 dB SPL reference.
Figure 6.23: Apple Ear Pods and Sony WH1000-XM4 sound quality plots when matched
to a reference of 85dB. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
6.3.2
Statistical Analysis
A standard least square regression model was fitted separately to the data with
reference level equal to 75dB and 85dB SPL. All devices were compared and the fixed
factors were device (4), frequency (8). The subject was included as a random factor and
the dependent variable was sound quality.
The analysis of all devices resulted statistically significant results with F(3,57) = 17.21 ;
p<0.0001 at 75dB and F(3,57) = 27.27 ;p<0.0001 at 85dB.
No significant effects were found in any of the statistical analysis carried out in the
subset of sound quality data containing the OpenRun Pro and the Auricles at all
reference levels.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 47
==PAGE:55==
48 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:56==
7
Conclusions
Going back to the initial project plan and the learning objectives, it is possible to
conclude the extent to which work has been carried out and goals have been reached:
1. Describing state of the art regarding bone/cartilage conduction devices through
thorough literature research and review of all scientific papers relevant to this goal.
Chapter 3 described the characteristics and peculiarities of air, bone, and cartilage
conduction pathways. The objective was reached by reviewing more than 40
different articles, some of which were later selected and summarized in the current
document.
2. Determining the range of experimental conditions to include in a series of
psychoacoustic measurements to investigate the difference between air and
cartilage conduction devices available on the market. To reach this goal, literature
and meetings with Auricle were vital factors. Designing and conducting a
psychoacoustic test to assess perceived frequency response and sound quality of
air, other cartilage conduction devices available, and the Auricles. A MATLAB
application has been programmed from scratch without prior experience with the
MATLAB App Designer tool. This GUI was crucial to reach the project aim since it
allowed the author to perform the experiment and save the raw data that was later
analyzed to obtain the results.
3. Hypothesizing results before the perceptual measurements took place. This goal
was reached by performing accelerometer measurements on the devices included
in the investigation. Results of this part of the work are included in
subsection 5.0.2.
4. Recruiting test subjects that fit the parameters, ensuring that experimental
conditions are consistent across participants and conducting such experiment.
Description and several considerations regarding this objective are summarized in
chapter 4. A loudness matching test has been developed in the range 70-2000Hz,
and the four devices were measured with reference to a calibrated pair of
Sennheiser HD650 headphones.
5. Designing and conducting a test to study the subjective evaluation of
multi-sensorial haptic sound perception in comparison to air conduction. This goal
was achieved together with the loudness matching experiment.
6. Analyzing and discussing results of the experiment. The raw data processing into
meaningful results and illustrations is summarized in chapter 6. Statistical software
has been utilized (JMP Pro 16) to achieve this goal, and results have shown good
overall reliability and similarity with the hypothesized results.
Although the author’s initial will was to include in the document a study of the
increase in speech intelligibility that cartilage conduction devices can elicit when
used in ”transparency mode”, all the original learning objectives were reached. All
the knowledge acquired during the project played a key role in the final result and it
is the author’s opinion that it was successfully applied to evaluate and model
subjective multi-sensorial perception in cartilage/bone and air conduction.
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 49
==PAGE:57==
50 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
G. von Bekesy. “The theory of hearing in sound absorption through bone
conduction”. In: ANNALEN DER PHYSIK 13.1 (Mar. 1932), pp. 111–136. ISSN:
0003-3804.
[2]
Henk C. Huizing. “Pure Tone Audiometry”. In: Acta Oto-Laryngologica 40.1
(Jan. 1, 1951). Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint:
https://doi.org/10.3109/00016485109138907, pp. 51–61. ISSN: 0001-6489. DOI:
10.3109/00016485109138907. URL: https://doi.org/10.3109/00016485109138907
(visited on 02/10/2022).
[3]
Stefan Stenfelt and Richard L. Goode. “Bone-conducted sound: physiological and
clinical aspects.” In: Otology & neurotology : official publication of the American
Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of
Otology and Neurotology 26.6 (Nov. 2005). Place: United States, pp. 1245–1261.
ISSN: 1531-7129. DOI: 10.1097/01.mao.0000187236.10842.d5.
[4]
H. Sohmer et al. “Bone conduction experiments in humans - a fluid pathway from
bone to ear”. In: Hearing Research 146.1 (Aug. 2000), pp. 81–88. ISSN:
0378-5955. DOI: 10.1016/s0378-5955(00)00099-x.
[5]
Tomoo Watanabe, Sibylle Bertoli, and Rudolf Probst. “Transmission pathways of
vibratory stimulation as measured by subjective thresholds and distortion-product
otoacoustic emissions”. In: Ear and Hearing 29.5 (Oct. 2008), pp. 667–673. ISSN:
1538-4667. DOI: 10.1097/AUD.0b013e3181775dde.
[6]
T. Ito et al. “Bone conduction thresholds and skull vibration measured on the teeth
during stimulation at different sites on the human head”. In: Audiology &
Neuro-Otology 16.1 (2011), pp. 12–22. ISSN: 1421-9700. DOI: 10.1159/000314282.
[7]
H. Hosoi. “Discovery of phenomenon of cartilage conduction and application for
hearing aid, earphone and smartphone. Reports of the 2015 spring meeting the
Acoustical Society of Japan”. In: (2015), pp. 1497–1500.
[8]
Shyam M. Khanna, Juergen Tonndorf, and Judith E. Queller. “Mechanical
parameters of hearing by bone conduction”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 60.1 (July 1976). Publisher: Acoustical Society of America,
pp. 139–154. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.381081. URL:
https://asa.scitation.org/doi/10.1121/1.381081 (visited on 02/14/2022).
[9]
Stefan Stenfelt, Naohito Hato, and Richard L. Goode. “Factors contributing to bone
conduction: the middle ear”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
111.2 (Feb. 2002), pp. 947–959. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1432977.
[10]
Hiroshi Hosoi et al. “Cartilage conduction as the third pathway for sound
transmission”. In: Auris Nasus Larynx 46.2 (Apr. 2019), pp. 151–159. ISSN:
03858146. DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2019.01.005. URL:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S038581461830943X (visited on
02/07/2022).
[11]
R. Shimokura et al. “Aural cartilage vibration and sound measured in the external
auditory canal for several transducer positions”. In: undefined (2013). URL:
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Aural-cartilage-vibration-and-sound-
measured-in-the-Shimokura-Hosoi/01a0aa5cf32111c1a54a086d02da21cc1b90686c
(visited on 02/14/2022).
Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology 51
==PAGE:59==
[12]
Tadashi Nishimura et al. “Is cartilage conduction classified into air or bone
conduction?” In: The Laryngoscope 124.5 (May 2014), pp. 1214–1219. ISSN:
1531-4995. DOI: 10.1002/lary.24485.
[13]
Maranda McBride, Tomasz Letowski, and Phuong Tran. “Bone conduction
reception: Head sensitivity mapping”. In: Ergonomics 51.5 (May 1, 2008).
Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/00140130701747509,
pp. 702–718. ISSN: 0014-0139. DOI: 10.1080/00140130701747509. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00140130701747509 (visited on 02/16/2022).
[14]
Xiuyuan Qin, Sho Otsuka, and Seiji Nakagawa. “Estimation on the influence of
placement on bone conduction transmission by ear-canal sound pressure”. In:
Acoustical Science and Technology 41.1 (Jan. 1, 2020), pp. 384–385. ISSN:
1346-3969, 1347-5177. DOI: 10.1250/ast.41.384. URL:
https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/ast/41/1/41_E19297/_article (visited on
02/07/2022).
[15]
Tadashi Nishimura et al. “Benefit of a new hearing device utilizing cartilage
conduction”. In: Auris Nasus Larynx 40.5 (Oct. 1, 2013), pp. 440–446. ISSN:
0385-8146. DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2012.12.003. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S038581461300031X (visited on
02/16/2022).
[16]
H. Hosoi et al. “Development of cartilage conduction hearing aid”. In: Archives of
Materials Science and Engineering 42.2 (2010), pp. 104–110. ISSN: 1897-2764.
[17]
Tadashi Nishimura et al. “Cartilage Conduction Hearing and Its Clinical
Application”. In: Audiology Research 11.2 (June 3, 2021), pp. 254–262. ISSN:
2039-4330. DOI: 10.3390/audiolres11020023.
[18]
Takanori Nishiyama, Naoki Oishi, and Kaoru Ogawa. “Who are good adult
candidates for cartilage conduction hearing aids?” In: European archives of
oto-rhino-laryngology: official journal of the European Federation of
Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS): affiliated with the German Society
for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery 278.6 (June 2021),
pp. 1789–1798. ISSN: 1434-4726. DOI: 10.1007/s00405-020-06255-6.
[19]
Keenan R. May and Bruce N. Walker. “The effects of distractor sounds presented
through bone conduction headphones on the localization of critical environmental
sounds”. In: Applied Ergonomics 61 (May 2017), pp. 144–158. ISSN: 00036870.
DOI: 10.1016/j.apergo.2017.01.009. URL:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0003687017300170 (visited on
02/07/2022).
[20]
Stefan Stenfelt and Bo Håkansson. “Air versus bone conduction: an equal
loudness investigation”. In: Hearing Research 167.1 (May 2002), pp. 1–12. ISSN:
03785955. DOI: 10.1016/S0378-5955(01)00407-5. URL:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378595501004075 (visited on
02/07/2022).
[21]
Kimberly A. Pollard, Phuong K. Tran, and Tomasz R. Letowski. “A free-field
method to calibrate bone conduction transducers”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 133.2 (Feb. 2013), pp. 858–865. ISSN: 0001-4966.
DOI: 10.1121/1.4774273. URL: http://asa.scitation.org/doi/10.1121/1.4774273
(visited on 02/07/2022).
[22]
Martin Schürmann et al. “Hands help hearing: Facilitatory audiotactile interaction
at low sound-intensity levels”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
115.2 (Feb. 2004), pp. 830–832. ISSN: 0001-4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1639909. URL:
http://asa.scitation.org/doi/10.1121/1.1639909 (visited on 08/15/2022).
52 Evaluation and modelling of subjective multi-sensorial perception in bone and air conduction technology
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl., 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk/
