==PAGE:1==
Online Tools to Support Small
Enterprise Companies in Tailoring
Project Management Practices
Dorothea Georgiadou
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Akademivej, Building 358,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Project management methods and software have attracted wide attention from
both academia and industry. However, little attention has been given to their
actual use in the context of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). In this work,
we propose a universal project management framework targeted specifically at
SMEs that can not only be used through the whole life cycle of a project but also
as a method for a systematic evaluation of modern project management soft-
ware. To this end, we introduce the notion of activities aiming to highlight the
necessity of human involvement for the execution of different actions and clas-
sify project management methods in a hierarchical framework. Our qualitative
analysis provides novel insights in order to settle the activities and structured
methods that are relevant for SMEs. We further investigate the challenges of
Danish SMEs using a quantitative analysis methodology with the overall goal
to identify the most important actions for SMEs.
Both our qualitative and
quantitative analysis is used to validate and better adapt our framework to the
needs of SMEs. Finally, we demonstrate the power of our model by presenting
an extensive evaluation of the most widely used online tools in the market.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at Department of Technology, Management
and Economics of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU Management)
in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering in
Industrial Management and Engineering. The master thesis was assigned to a
workload of 30 ECTS and it was supervised by Associate Professor Christian
Thuesen and Chairman at MetierWestergaard A/S Per Juel Christensen. The
project has been approved by Associate Professor Michael Bruhn Barfod, Head
of Studies at the Industrial Management and Engineering M.Sc. program.
Lyngby, 4-September-2022
Dorothea Georgiadou
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The completion of this work would not have been possible without the assistance
of my both supervisors. I’d like to express my sincere gratitude and appreciation
to Associate Professor Christian Thuesen and Chairman of MetierWestergaard
A/S Per Juel Christiansen. Your positive attitude and constructive feedback
are greatly appreciated. I’d like to thank Christian in particular for his trust
and support as well as inspiring me throughout my studies.
In addition, I’d like to thank all of the project management experts who took
part in the interviews. Their input and contribution were critical to the com-
pletion of this research project. Their willingness to share their insights and
knowledge was a motivator for this study.
My parents, brother, and grandparents deserve special recognition for their sup-
port and faith in me throughout my studies. Finally, I’d like to thank you,
Paraskeva, for accompanying me on this journey. Your unconditional support
and encouraging attitude were motivating factors that embraced my aspirations
and attitude to constantly improve this work.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Small and Medium Enterprises
3
2.1
EU Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Basic Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
SMEs in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Project Management Methods
9
3.1
The Four Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3
Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.4
People . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Implementation in SMEs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Project Management Tools
25
4.1
Software Categorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Software Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Tools in SMEs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Research Methodology
33
5.1
Step 1: Problem Definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Step 2: Theoretical Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5.3
Step 3: Design Phase - Round 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Step 4: Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4.1
Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4.2
Quantitative Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Step 5: Design Phase - Round 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.6
Step 6: Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Evaluation and Results
43
6.1
Qualitative Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Importance of Project Management
. . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.2
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.3
Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1.4
Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.1.5
People . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.1.6
Use of Project Management Software . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.1.7
Challenges of Danish SMEs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2
Quantitative Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7
Proposed Project Management Framework
81
7.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.2
Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
7.3
Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7.4
People . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8
Evaluation of Online Tools
89
8.1
Modern Project Management Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
8.2
Evaluation based on Proposed Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
9
Discussion
97
10 Conclusion
101
Bibliography
103
Appendix A: Interview Questions
109
Appendix B: Interviews
115
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Project management seeks to organize the activities of a team within project-
specific constraints by providing methods to execute particular tasks. There are
well-established project management methodologies that aim to help businesses
to meet the primary constraints of projects such as scope, time, and budget. By
using methods associated with relevant constraints, organizations attempt to
fulfill their project objectives in order to bring value to the company and satisfy
all the stakeholders. Even though project management methods have attracted
wide attention, their relevance for Small and Medium Enterprise (SMEs) has
not been studied extensively. With the rise of technology, several project man-
agement software has been introduced to help companies apply specific project
management methods or with a project’s overall progress. The majority of the
current literature focuses on the evaluation of such tools but not in the context
of SMEs, while it could be also considered outdated. Given the competition, it
is very important for SMEs to be able to adapt to fast-paced environments and
leverage modern project management software.
The main goal of this project is to develop a universal project management
framework that can be used by SMEs not only to support them during the
whole life cycle of their projects but also to evaluate modern project management
software. A key part of the project is to identify project management methods
that are relevant for SMEs. To achieve this, we study the classification of project
management methods in a hierarchical framework as well as the challenges that
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
SMEs usually have to face using both a qualitative and quantitative approach.
Based on this analysis, we aim to find the elements that need to be included
in a general-purpose project management framework for SMEs. The last part
of the project is to investigate how modern project management software may
assist SMEs over the course of a project. In other words, we seek to answer the
following research questions:
• Research Question 1: What project management methods are relevant
for SMEs?
– How project management methodologies be classified in a hierarchical
framework?
– What are the challenges that usually SMEs have to face?
• Research Question 2: What are the elements that a holistic project
management framework should include to support SMEs?
• Research Question 3: How modern project management software can
support SMEs throughout the life cycle of a project?
The rest of the project is structured as follows. The relevant literature and the-
oretical foundation of our model are discussed in the following three Chapters.
More specifically, the used definition of SMEs, their main characteristics, and
an overview of Danish SMEs are presented in Chapter 2. An introduction of the
hierarchical levels used in our work as well as a survey of the existing project
management methods is given in Chapter 3. The current literature for project
management software with the main focus on their key features is discussed in
Chapter 4. The followed methodology of this work and its steps are described
in Chapter 5.
Aiming to answer Research Question 1, we provide extensive
qualitative and quantitative analyses in Chapter 6.
The suggested universal
framework specifically targeted SMEs is presented in Chapter 7, as a proposal
to Research Question 2. A presentation of modern project management tools
together with their evaluation using our framework is demonstrated in Chap-
ter 8. In this Chapter, we seek to answer Research Question 3. An in-depth
discussion of our results and the use of our proposed framework is provided in
Chapter 9. Lastly, conclusions are drawn in Chapter 10.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Small and Medium
Enterprises
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) are companies that maintain a
turnover, a balance sheet, and a workforce that falls below predetermined thresh-
olds. In general, different nations may have varied definitions of small businesses.
Many countries provide financial assistance and programs to cut business taxes
for SMEs because of the significance of SMEs to their national economy. The
acronym SME is a formal as well as a convenient term used not only by nations
but also by international organizations such as the European Union, the United
Nations, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization.
2.1
EU Definition
The economy of the European Union (EU) is heavily dependent on SMEs. This
is because the vast majority of the European enterprises are small or medium-
sized, while most of the workforce in the EU are employed in SMEs [1]. SMEs
also act as a driver of innovation and competitiveness in several economic sectors.
[2]. It is worth mentioning that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, several SMEs
saw a decline in their revenues in 2020–2021. [3].
==PAGE:14==
4
Small and Medium Enterprises
According to European Commission, the definition of SMEs is critical for these
businesses access to financing and EU support programs [1]. An SME can be
classified into three types as follows,
• Micro enterprise (Micro SME)
• Small enterprise (Small SME)
• Medium-sized enterprise (Medium SME)
The number of employees, the annual turnover, and the balance sheet size are
the key factors considered when classifying SMEs into different types [4]. The
European Commission formally defines SMEs as follows,
“The category of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
is made up of enterprises which employ fewer than 250 persons and
which have an annual turnover not exceeding 50 million euro, and/or
an annual balance sheet total not exceeding 43 million euro.” [5]
The three types of SMEs based on the European Commission’s definition, are
illustrated in Table 2.1 below.
SME Type
Number of Employees
Turnover
Balance sheet
Micro SMEs
0 to <10
€2 million
€2 million
Small SMEs
10 to <50
€10 million
€10 million
Medium SMEs
50 to <250
€50 million
€43 million
Table 2.1: The three types of SMEs according to EU definition.
In 2021, Micro SMEs accounted for 93.2% of all European SMEs operating in
the non-financial business sector (NFBS), while Small and Medium enterprises
accounted only for 5.9% and 0.9 % respectively [6]. With a rate of 44.3%, Micro
enterprises took the first place in terms of the number of employees, while Small
and Medium ones came in second and third place respectively. Furthermore,
the added value was almost equally distributed across the three types of SMEs.
In particular, as reported in the EU-27 NFBS annual report [6], Micro SME
created 35.2 percent of the total value, which was only 2.7% greater than the
value created by Medium enterprises and 2.9% greater than the value created
by the Small ones. Note that this information reflects businesses operating in
NFBS of the European Union, which leaves out industries such as agriculture,
forestry, and fisheries, as well as sectors related to education and health [7].
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Basic Characteristics
5
By reversing the formal EU definition for SMEs, Large enterprises can be defined
as companies with more than 250 employees and a yearly turnover and balance
sheet that exceed 50 million euros and 43 million euros, respectively. A basic
comparison between SMEs and Large enterprises is illustrated in Table 2.2. The
number of enterprises is given as a percentage of the total number of businesses
while the percentage of the created value and the employment rates are also
given. The information is extracted from EU-27 NFBS report [6].
Enterprises
Number of enterprises
Value added
Employment
SMEs
99.8%
51.8%
64.4%
Large
0.2%
48.2%
35.6%
Table 2.2: Comparison between SMEs and Large enterprises in terms of num-
ber of enterprises, value added and employment rates.
In 2021, SMEs accounted for 99.8% of the enterprises operating in the NFBS of
the European Union, while Large organizations accounted for only 0.2% [6]. De-
spite the fact that SMEs employed more people compared to larger enterprises,
there was only a slight variation in their added value contribution.
2.2
Basic Characteristics
A comparative analysis with larger organizations can help to demonstrate a
clearer picture of SMEs’ position in the market while examining the general
characteristics of SMEs. Murphy and Ledwith [8] identified the main differences
between SMEs and larger organisation based on four characteristics; structure,
procedure, processes and people. A key difference is that SMEs operate based
on simpler planning and control systems. Another difference is that employees
working in SMEs are resistant to change, which may make them less ready to
adapt to new technologies and innovations. Obviously, when compared to larger
organizations, SMEs can have both advantages and disadvantages. The main
differences between SMEs and large organizations are summarized in Figure 2.1.
SMEs have a lot of benefits compared to larger companies, including the abil-
ity to offer more customized products and services, a high degree of flexibility,
and the ability to develop close relationships with their customers [9].
Be-
sides the previously mentioned advantages, Abdulrahman and Rozan [10] argue
that changes in customer consumption patterns and preferences can be noticed
quicker due to the smaller number of clients [11]. Additionally, SMEs tend to be
more innovative and look for markets where their advantages matter rather than
==PAGE:16==
6
Small and Medium Enterprises
Figure 2.1: Main differences between SMEs and Large organizations.
The
differences are highlighted and grouped by the basic characteristics
of organizations. Figure from [8].
competing with their more powerful competitors such as larger organizations
[9]. Furthermore, SMEs have the advantage to respond quickly to challenges
and opportunities [12].
Due to their informal organizational structure, they
have the ability to anticipate and act rapidly on changes, giving them an advan-
tage over other competitors [10]. For example, decision-making may be faster in
smaller organizations because usually, the owner of the company is the person in
charge of making decisions and driving and encouraging all the changes. More-
over, SMEs can be distinguished by their effective internal communication [12],
which can be explained by the fact that employees in such organizations have
the opportunity to engage face to face and become acquainted with all of their
colleagues [10]. Usually, their informal evaluation and result-oriented mindset
help towards better internal communication (see Figure 2.1). Lastly, it is well-
known that SMEs create the groundwork for job creation, economic growth,
and are essential drivers of innovation [13, 10, 14], making positive impact in
the society and world economy.
On the other hand, SMEs usually have to face more workforce and financial
constraints, when compared to large enterprises [15, 16]. These significant chal-
lenges combined with some of the main characteristics of SMEs such as their
flat structures, and informal tactics may cause SMEs to fail at a higher rate
than large organizations [16]. Early works [17] highlighted that SMEs have lim-
ited resources in terms of materials and technology. In that sense, investing in
new ideas and supporting long-term research and development is very difficult
==PAGE:17==
2.3 SMEs in Denmark
7
for SMEs. Furthermore, according to Murphy and Ledwith [18], the usage of
project management approaches is limited in SMEs. Another disadvantage is
the lack of management and marketing strategies, as well as the absence of moti-
vation displayed by the project managers in SMEs [11]. Due to these challenges,
project managers in SMEs are often not able to employ project management
strategies in order to increase the success of new products and services [18].
2.3
SMEs in Denmark
Denmark is well-known for its economic growth and support for entrepreneurs
and businesses [19]. There is a large number of SMEs in Denmark, which are
very essential for the development of the national economy as well as for societal
and cultural progress. More specifically, the vast majority (99.7%) of Danish
enterprises are SMEs, with high rates of both employment and value added [7].
Moreover, 64.1% of the Danish workforce are employed by SMEs. Obviously,
this indicates that SMEs are crucial for creating and providing jobs for society
while contributing to public welfare. In comparison to larger organizations, the
value added contributed by SMEs is 21.6% higher which further demonstrates
the importance of SMEs in the Danish economy. An overview of the Danish
SMEs [7] in terms of the number of enterprises, employees, and value added
grouped by the type of SMEs is illustrated in Table 2.3. Despite the fact that
the number of Micro SMEs is greater than the number of Small and Medium
ones, the number of people employed by Micro SME is lower when compared to
the other two types of SMEs. In particular, Small and Medium SMEs employ
23.2% and 22.1% of the Danish workforce, respectively.
Medium enterprises
outperform Small and Micro ones in terms of overall value added, accounting
for 22%. Note that the data for Danish organizations from [7] in Table 2.3 were
estimated in 2018, before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Enterprise Type
Number of enterprises
Employees
Value added
Micro SMEs
88.2%
18.8%
19.3%
Small SMEs
9.6%
23.2%
19.5%
Medium SMEs
1.9%
22.1%
22%
SMEs
99.7%
64.1%
60.8%
Large
0.3%
35.9%
39.2%
Table 2.3: Overview of Danish enterprises in 2018.
In the literature, there is a limited amount of work that focuses specifically on
Danish SMEs. In [19], the ability of Danish SMEs to identify market oppor-
tunities is demonstrated, while in [20], it is shown that employees working in
==PAGE:18==
8
Small and Medium Enterprises
Danish SMEs have a strong ability to adapt to change. These key feature of
Danish SMEs contributes positively not only to their growth but also to soci-
etal development. Jedynak [19] systematically studied Danish SMEs in order to
identify their main strengths and weaknesses. The study concludes that there
is definitely room for improvement in certain areas such as the level of digi-
talization of SMEs in Denmark. In particular, the author argues that SMEs
should optimize their use of technology by storing and analyzing more data.
This finding is further supported by [7] where it is shown that the technical and
computer skills of the Danish workforce could be improved in order to increase
their digital readiness. In [19], the lack of financial resources is discussed as a
weakness of Danish SMEs. This weakness tends to prevent Danish SMEs from
investing in innovation and technological advancements that could help them
gain an advantage over larger organizations.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Project Management
Methods
A project can be defined in general as “a temporary endeavor undertaken to
create a unique product, service, or result” [21]. Historically, people quickly re-
alized the importance of project management in order to successfully complete
a project, even from the years of early civilization. Thus, the informal appli-
cation of the concept project management has been in existence for centuries.
Examples of informal project management practices had been observed when
the Chinese and Egyptians applied them to complete projects like the Great
Wall of China and the Pyramids thousand years ago [18].
Modern project management is a relatively new phenomenon that has been re-
established since the rapid growth of the information technology sector [22].
There are several methods for project management in the recent literature.
Projects In Controlled Environments (PRINCE2) [23] is considered the world’s
most practiced method for project management. According to PRINCE2 projects
are temporary, meaning that their start and end dates must be always clearly
delineated. Furthermore, the principals of PRINCE2 state that each project is
different in terms of stakeholders, location, and time, a fact that makes them
distinguishable. On top of that, projects are inevitably exposed to a number
of threats and opportunities giving them characteristic of uncertainty [23]. A
complete set of concepts, standard terminology, and guidelines that form and
establish the domain of project management is provided in the Project Man-
==PAGE:20==
10
Project Management Methods
agement Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) [21]. As specified by PMBOK, project
management is defined as follows,
“Project managements is the application of knowledge, skills, tools,
and techniques to project activities to meet the project requirements.”
It is now widely known that enterprises can execute successful projects thanks
to the use of project management methodologies. These practices can add sig-
nificant value to a company.
Generally, project management seeks to assist
the organization, monitor unexpected events and changes, as well as to satisfy
the expectations of stakeholders, and deliver the finished product on schedule,
within budget, and with the required standard of quality.
The lack or the
limited use of project management methodologies can result in projects that
exceed the agreed-upon budget and timeline [21]. In this way, these projects
can make inefficient use of available resources, as well as they can fail to satisfy
stakeholders.
3.1
The Four Perspectives
The seminal book “Images of the organization” [24] proposed a new approach
for project management that has attracted wide attention from both academia
and industry. The author claims that there are multiple ways to understand
and explore projects and proposes to analyze enterprises from numerous angles.
Even though this approach might appear complicated at first glance, it is ac-
curate to the real world of business [25]. In their book, Geraldi et al. [25],
suggest to assess projects based on four perspectives; Purpose, Complexity,
Uncertainty and People. This is an elegant approach that builds on top of
[24], while trying to keep it not only accurate but also simple.
This work follows the paradigm of Geraldi et al. [25] and aims to improve and
adjust to the needs of SMEs it based on the recent literature. In order to gain
an in-depth understanding of this approach is essential to explore and describe
the four perspectives.
The four perspectives and their interactions between
them are demonstrated in Figure 3.1. It is evident that all the dimensions are
interconnected with the people dimension placed in the centre as ”projects are
made by people and for people” [25].
==PAGE:21==
3.1 The Four Perspectives
11
Figure 3.1: The four perspectives of project management and their intercon-
nections.
Each perspective can be further breakdown into different categories. Different
from [25], it is proposed to divide each perspective according to relevant activi-
ties. Using this approach, it is aimed to highlight the need for different actions
within each perspective. In this work, an action or activity is defined a pro-
cess that requires human involvement and aims to complete different tasks of
the project. The proposed actions within each perspective are presented based
on their natural appearance during a project in Figure 3.2. Their importance
and impact on SMEs will be both qualitative and quantitative evaluated later
in Chapter 6. The proposed approach seeks to identify the activities that will
assist SMEs with their project management practices. This will form the basis
for a project management framework that can be used for the evaluation of the
project management software.
Figure 3.2: Our proposed activities within each perspective.
==PAGE:22==
12
Project Management Methods
3.1.1
Purpose
As described in [25], Purpose establishes the reason behind the shared objectives
a business seeks to attain from the project. In that sense, purpose influences
the success of the project while it establishes the parameters and direction the
project should take. Intuitively, purpose explains why an enterprise is doing
or should do a project, as well as it specifies what we aim to accomplish and
under what circumstances. In this work, the perspective Purpose is subdivided
into five actions, namely, living, succeeding, investing, aiming, and scoping. The
actions are illustrated in accordance with how they would naturally occur in a
project.
Living: The activity of living determines the life cycle model that will be used in
a project. According to PMBOK [21] “a project life cycle is the series of phases
that a project passes through from its start to its completion.”
It can either
be predictive or adaptive. The two life cycles differ in the phase of defining a
project’s scope, time, and cost. More specifically, in the predictive life cycle,
the aforementioned elements are established in the early stages of the life cycle,
whereas in the predictive life cycle, they are defined at the beginning of each
iteration [21]. A predictive life cycle includes the waterfall [21], Stage gate, and
sequential life cycle models. Agile, Iterative, Incremental [21], and Spiral [26]
are examples of adaptive life cycle models.
Succeeding: The evaluation of project management success lies in the pur-
pose perspective as a way to ensure that the project is delivered within the
agreed time, cost and quality. These three constraints are represented by the
Iron Triangle1 project management model. Recently, as mentioned in [25], the
application of the Iron Triangle has been criticized.
This is because, at the
beginning of a project, the available information and knowledge are limited and
the uncertainty is quite high. Thus, the use and precision of the Iron Trian-
gle for project evaluation are limited. This is also why many projects fail to
achieve the agreed-upon time, cost, and quality parameters as their estimations
are based on initial assumptions and early guesses for the project. In [27], the
authors also argue that the aforementioned triple constraints are only internal
criteria for evaluating the success of a project. However, they mention there are
also external dimensions that can be used to measure success. In particular,
customer and business satisfaction, are the two key perspectives that should
be considered when assessing a project. Finally, the evaluation of the overall
project performance is also very a important dimension of success and it should
never be omitted. An illustration of the criteria for evaluating projects success
as used in [27] is provided Figure 3.3.
1http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/Iron_triangle
==PAGE:23==
3.1 The Four Perspectives
13
Figure 3.3: Dimensions for evaluating projects success. Figure from [27].
Investing:
The financial appraisal of a project determines whether the value
it provides is worth the investment. Every business case includes an analysis of
the investment along with the benefits, risks, and timelines of the project [23].
Given that risk and schedule, analysis is not connected to the perspective of Pur-
pose, they are described later in the perspectives of Uncertainty (Chapter 3.1.3)
and Complexity (Chapter 3.1.2), respectively. The are several project manage-
ment methodologies related to investing described in PRINCE2 [23], namely, the
evaluation of Return on Investment (ROI), Net Present Value (NPV), whole-
life cost, payback time, and discounted cash flow. ROI is a ratio that shows
how much profit a firm will make in comparison to its initial investment, while
the NPV shows ”the total value of discounted future cash inflows less the initial
investment ”. The whole-life cost is related to the overall cost of completing a
project including the operation, transitional, and maintenance costs. The pay-
back time is the amount of time required for the ROI to pay the total initial
investment and the discounted cash flow demonstrates the predicted benefits
according to ”the current value of money” [23].
All these methods can help
project managers with the financial evaluation of the project and give the op-
portunity to decide whether the purpose of the project creates an advantage for
the enterprise.
Aiming: Every project must have a clear vision in order to justify the reason
an enterprise should invest in it. In other words, creating a vision statement
is critical to ensuring that the purpose of a project is clearly understood and
communicated to the relevant stakeholders.
At the same time, the Purpose
perspective is closely connected with the value and the benefits that will be
gained from the execution of the project [25]. Specifically, PRINCE2 [23] defines
benefits as the measurable improvements that satisfy stakeholders’ expectations.
==PAGE:24==
14
Project Management Methods
The realization of benefits is a very important part of the project’s purpose
since benefits have no value unless they are delivered or realized by the key
stakeholders [28].
For this reason this process entails identifying, executing,
and sustaining project benefits [29]. In the initial phase of a project life cycle,
a project manager can map the stakeholders using Value Proposition Canvas
[30]. The application of this project management practice aims to realize the
value that the organization generates for its customers. Intuitively, it helps to
better understand how project managers plan to meet customers’ needs and
expectations, and how they mean to tackle customers’ “pains”, such as concerns
or weak areas. Apart from that, it also helps in identifying the products or
services for which an enterprise intends to create value.
Scoping: The definition of project’s scope is a critical component connected
to the perspective of Purpose. The significance of scope management is also
discussed in [31], where it is stated that the project’s scope should be defined
right from the very beginning of a project. This is because the scope estab-
lishes the project’s constraints for quality, cost, and timing. There are different
project management practices that can assist project managers in defining all
the tasks that need to be completed in order to deliver a project successfully.
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) [32] has been identified by [25, 31] as one
of the most important practices for task definition. More specifically, WBS is
a practice of reducing project complexity by breaking down all the tasks of the
project in order of priority. A goal-breakdown structure is a good alternative
to a work breakdown structure because it allows the project manager to as-
sign goals to team members while keeping them motivated, understanding what
their contribution to the project is and allowing them to adapt to modifica-
tions [25]. Additionally, a project manager can ensure that the objectives of
the project could be achieved by setting goals which are specific, measurable,
assignable, realistic and time-related, i.e, SMART2 goals. However, the scope of
a project could change throughout projects’ life-cycle and thus it is important
to ensure that any potential changes can not affect and derail the original scope.
Ultimately, the collection and documentation of project’s requirements is essen-
tial in determining the scope. The requirements include but are not limited
to stakeholder requirements, quality requirements, and technical requirements
[21].
3.1.2
Complexity
The perspective of Complexity represents “a dynamic system composed of a large
number of interconnected elements” [25]. In general, the execution of projects
2http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/SMART
==PAGE:25==
3.1 The Four Perspectives
15
includes various tasks which are depended on people with diverse knowledge,
skills, and personalities. The complexity perspective seeks to answer the ques-
tion; how can a specific project be managed? In order to answer this question,
the activities of the project usually need to be broken down and assigned to all
involved people. As a project progresses, it is subject to numerous changes. For
this reason, it is necessary for project managers adaptive to new circumstances.
The complexity perspective aims to achieve the project’s goal by simplifying
and organizing the work to be performed setting realistic goals and deadlines,
and avoiding the repetition of previously completed work. In this work, the
perspective of Complexity is subdivided into seven actions, namely, estimating,
scheduling, resourcing, budgeting, contracting, and improving. The actions are
presented depending on how they would naturally appear during a project.
Scheduling:
Geraldi et al. [25], consider the activity of scheduling as one of
the most common practices of project management. It involves the identification
and planning of the activities that indent to support enterprises to accomplish
their purpose. The definition of activities and milestones is a process that should
be carried out during the first phase of project planning.
The next step is the estimation of the duration of the activities. In PMBOK [21],
there are several techniques to support the estimation calculation. Examples are
analogous estimating, three-point estimating, and bottom-up estimating. In a
nutshell, analogous estimating is a method that makes use of historical data.
The duration of future projects can be predicted using parameters from previous
projects. The three-point estimating is an approach that takes into considera-
tion the uncertainty that exists in projects. By creating a realistic, optimistic
and pessimistic scenario, the project manager can oversee what would be the
consequences in the project’s schedule. The bottom-up estimating calculates
the duration of a project by summing down the hierarchy elements of the WBS
[21, 32]. The Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) is another
approach for assessing the duration of an activity by taking into account its
optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely duration [33].
The network plan analysis3, is used to create the project’s schedule. In this
case, a network diagram graphically depicts the sequence and dependencies of
activities and improves monitoring of the overall activities of the project. Intu-
itively, a network diagram is used to define the project’s duration and critical
path [34]. For instance, the Critical Path Method 4 (CPM) is network diagram
that calculates the path that takes the most time to be completed.
Other than the aforementioned project management strategies, Gantt Chart5
3https://blog.mitsde.com/network-analysis-in-project-management/
4http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/The_Critical_Path_Method_(CPM)
5http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/Gantt_Chart
==PAGE:26==
16
Project Management Methods
is absolutely essential when it comes to task planning and tracking. This is
because a Gantt Chart can not only support project schedules but they can
also provide an overview of human resource allocation to ensure that people are
not assigned to activities that exceed their capacity. It is worth noting that
Gantt Charts can be found in the majority of scheduling software as a standard
method for presenting a project’s schedule [34].
Precedence Diagramming Method (PDM) [35], is a technique used to clarify the
relationship among activities. The terms predecessor and successor are used to
indicating that the latter should begin only after the predecessor activity has
begun. In PDM, there are four different categories of dependencies, also called
logical relationships, which aims to assist in the creation of project schedule
network diagrams:
1. Finish to Start: Only after the processor activity has completed can the
successor activity begin.
2. Finish to Finish: Only after the processor activity is completed can the
successor activity be completed.
3. Start to Start: The successor activity cannot begin until the processor
activity has begun.
4. Start to Finish: Before the processor activity has begun, the successor
activity cannot be finished.
The Lead and Lag concept can be utilised by enterprises in order to identify
the ”the amount of time a successor activity can be advanced with respect to a
predecessor activity” [21]. This allows the dependencies between activities to be
established.
Resourcing: In PMBOK [21], the identification, acquisition, and management
of resources that support a project throughout its life cycle is defined as resource
management. In their book, Geraldi et al. [25], examine the importance of re-
source management and how it relates to the complexity perspective. According
to the authors, resource management reflects on the question of who is in charge
of the project’s activities. In principle, it is expected that people with various
skills and backgrounds can be assigned to carry out different project activities.
However, it is critical to assign the most suitable person to each task in order
to ensure that the outcome can be delivered on time and can meet the prede-
fined standards. In PMBOK [21], it is suggested that, first of all, the number of
resources required to execute the identified activities should be estimated. On
top of that, bottom-up estimating and analogous estimating are two techniques
that can be used for estimating resources apart from estimating the duration of
==PAGE:27==
3.1 The Four Perspectives
17
activities. It is worth mentioning that resource allocation may be challenging
since it necessitates negotiation to obtain the right people for a project [21, 25].
Budgeting: Budgeting is a practice that attempts to answer the question; how
much money the project will cost? In order to avoid overruns in the budget,
the identification and estimation of the costs should be made [25]. The plan
for estimating, managing, and monitoring costs should be established first. The
cost management plan comprises all of the information that provides a structure
for managing and controlling costs. This may be accomplished by establishing
performance measuring guidelines and defining thresholds that demonstrate the
adjustments that must be made to prevent undesirable consequences [21]. Ac-
cording to [36], standard estimating techniques such as three-point estimating,
analogous estimating, and bottom-up estimating can be used to calculate the
expected cost of a project. Once the cost has been calculated, the elements of
costs should be defined [37]. Additionally, the budget of the project should be
determined. To calculate the overall budget, the cost estimates for each activity
are combined together to provide a cost baseline [21]. Note that it is important
to also define the time that every cost will occur to create the project budget
[36].
Contracting: There are a lot of enterprises that choose to collaborate with
one another for a considerable number of projects in order to provide the final
deliverable. This means that there are components that must be supplied or
tasks that must be completed by a different organization.
In this case, the
complexity of the project increases and it is essential to create contracts among
the involved enterprises. For this reason, companies establish the motivation
and form of their collaboration by signing either fixed price or cost plus fee
contracts [25].
Improving: This activity tries to give solutions that will improve the project’s
performance.. Apart from standard scheduling, a strategy for handling sched-
ule delays is also very important.
In [31], three ways that can be used for
minimizing time are presented.
First, by rearranging the network activities,
the fast-tracking approach may be used to enable several activities to execute
simultaneously. Crashing is the second methodology. In this method, more re-
sources are introduced to the project in order to shorten the critical path while
maintaining the original order of the operations. The final option to shorten the
timeline is to produce a deliverable with lower quality requirements.
Estimating:
As previously stated, there are numerous ways for predicting
time, resources, and money. Because the plurality of the estimating methods
are shared by the activities textitScheduling, textitResourcing, and textitBud-
geting, it was decided to introduce an activity that focuses only on estimation
approaches. We feel that by doing so, we will avoid repeating the same tactics
==PAGE:28==
18
Project Management Methods
in each activity. For instance instead of including the estimating technique from
the bottom up in each activity, it is chosen to create a collective concept for all
estimation techniques.
3.1.3
Uncertainty
The perspective of Uncertainty captures the inevitable fact that projects are
exposed to a number of threats that may not be measurable. Generally, projects
encounter unexpected events and changes due to their unique nature [25]. Risk
management is considered the closest method that is relevant for dealing with
uncertainty. However, risk management and uncertainty have key differences.
The basic characteristic of risk in risk management is that can be quantified. In
contrast, in uncertainty the likelihood or result of an occurrence is unknown and
thus it is difficult to be measured. Nevertheless, even if it is not quantifiable
there are subjective techniques that can be used to assess uncertainty.
[38].
Additionally, flexibility and adaptability can be used in order to assist a project
manager to deal with uncertainty and effectively managing uncertainty. This
perspective encompasses the methods required to control, monitor, and capture
the lessons learned. Using these methods project managers can avoid repeating
the same mistakes or prevent an unwanted event from occurring. In this work,
the perspective of Uncertainty is subdivided into six actions, namely, identifying,
accessing, responding, monitoring, adapting deciding, and learning. The actions
are presented based on their natural appearance within a project.
Identifying: General risk management techniques can be used to identify the
risks. Processes for risk identification, evaluation, and mitigation have the bene-
fit of enabling both future predictions and the development of an action plan for
events that are already detected [25]. Depending on the outcome of the event,
risk can be either an opportunity or a threat [38]. For the identification of the
risks, the use of techniques such as brainstorming, checklists, and interviews are
suggested in PMBOK [21]. All of them can be used for data collection that
is expected to assist in the identification of project threats and opportunities.
Specifically, checklists are a list of points based on historical data that should
be taken into consideration, whereas brainstorming and interviews are both
techniques used to gather information from specialists or stakeholders. For the
assessment of the collected data the Root Cause Analysis6 (RCA) and Strength
Weakness Opportunities and Threats7 (SWOT) analysis are recommended in
PMBOK [21]. SWOT is a method used for identifying a project’s strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats whereas the root cause analysis supports
the risk identification process by examining the causes of a particular problem
6http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/Root_cause_analysis_(RCA)
7http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/SWOT_Analysis_Framework
==PAGE:29==
3.1 The Four Perspectives
19
[38]. Finally, a risk register may be utilized to record important information
regarding recognized dangers [21].
Accessing: Once the risks are identified they should also be assessed. In other
words, the risk has to be prioritized and if possible measured. A qualitative
risk analysis can be performed for risk prioritization.
In PMBOK [21], the
use of probability and impact assessment is proposed for every captured risk.
This method is used for evaluating the probability of a risk happening along
with the consequences that may have on the project. Threats have a negative
impact, whereas opportunities have a opposite effect. Later the result of this
analysis can be captured in a probability and impact matrix. Apart from that,
a quantitative risk analysis can also be performed by using techniques such as
Monte Carlo Simulation8 which “simulates the combined effects of individual
project risks and other sources of uncertainty to evaluate their potential impact
on achieving project objectives” [21].
The definition and framing of the risk environment is critical for better and
more efficient risk assessment [39]. This includes the determination of the risk
tolerance, risk assumptions [39], risk thresholds [21].
Responding: The members of the project have to handle numerous hazards
and respond to threats and opportunities in accordance with the response plan.
In other words, risks must be handled and managed by selecting the best strat-
egy and actions.
Obviously, the risk strategy is differentiated depending on
whether the risks are threats or opportunities. In PMBOK [21] the principles
escalate, avoid, transfer, mitigate, and accept are proposed as options for re-
sponding to threats. As response to opportunities five tactics are suggested;
exploit, escalate, share, enhance, and accept. All the risk information may be
stored in a risk register table in form of documents that contain information on
the detected risks, such as their priority level, the responsible person, etc.
Monitoring: Due to the high level of uncertainty in a project, the action of
monitoring and capturing of changes is very important [25].
In order to to
prevent unexpected events and to react fast to changes, different reporting and
controlling techniques can be used. ISO 215009 [40] recommends the ongoing
monitoring and controlling of scope, resources, time, cost, change, risk and
quality. According to PMBOK [21] the Earned value analysis can be utilised for
monitoring the scope, the schedule and the cost of the project. Furthermore, by
indicating the remaining work that has to be performed, the burndown chart
may assist in monitoring the schedule of the project. Trend analysis may also be
used to assess the status of operations and determine if they are having problems
8http://wiki.doing-projects.org/index.php/Monte_Carlo_Simulation_of_Risk
9https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_21500
==PAGE:30==
20
Project Management Methods
or progressing. For performance evaluation, performance reviews may be used to
compare the project’s actual performance to its baseline. Furthermore, Quality
Control Measurements is a method for documenting quality control actions [21].
Note that as previously mentioned, uncertainty goes beyond risk management
and there is need to manage it through out the life-cycle of the project.
Adapting:
Adapting to changes is an important part of project management.
Firstly, changes in the scope should be taken into consideration. The identifi-
cation of the factors that can lead to a change in the scope should be defined.
When a project’s scope is changing rapidly, it is experiencing scope creep [25].
Furthermore, agile and adaptive environments may help businesses adapt to
change. In other words, retrospectives are a method that tries to optimize and
discover areas that require modification [21].
Deciding:
Given the variety of options and possibilities, it is crucial to conduct
a systematic analysis of them in order to decide on the most efficient strategy
to deal with uncertainty. Decision tree analysis can be used to compare various
possibilities and choose the best one. This is a method that evaluates uncertainty
by measuring the expected monetary value of every alternative [21, 38]. Another
strategy that assesses different options based on their weighted score is the
multiple criteria decision-making method [21]. Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) [21]
is another strategy for estimating the financial benefits and costs of each option
and deciding on the most beneficial one. Intuitively, CBA is all about envisioning
various scenarios and attempting to identify potential outcomes and effects.
More precisely, this analysis may be carried out by examining the question;
“what if the situation represented by scenario X happens?” [21].
Learning:
The execution of previous projects can produce fresh insights and
lessons that may be able to reduce the uncertainty that might arise in subsequent
initiatives. This mostly refers to epistemic uncertainty, which is associated with
the inadequate knowledge. Geraldi et al. [25] emphasize the fact that lessons
learned from prior projects may be incredibly useful during the execution of
a new one since they can aid in the identification and resolution of issues. In
PMBOK [21], it is also noted that the lessons learned can record the knowledge
obtained throughout the project’s execution.
3.1.4
People
Geraldi et al. mention that [25] “projects are made by people and for people”.
This statement illustrates that people are a core element in projects. The per-
spective of People involves the practices that improve the communication be-
tween the project members, motivate people and manage conflicts and crises. In
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The Four Perspectives
21
this work, the perspective of People is subdivided into six actions, namely, team-
ing, communicating, engaging, leading, motivating, and mediating. The actions
are presented depending on how they naturally emerge in a project.
Teaming: The development phase of a team, i.e, teaming is of most importance
for creating a strong and effective team. The five-stage model for team devel-
opment can support this practice with the following phases; forming, storming,
norming, performing, and adjourning. Originally, the model included only the
four 4 steps of forming, storming, norming, and performing but Tuckman and
Jensen [41] revised the concept in 1997, adding the fifth phase of adjourning.
Additionally, team building and training can help in establishing effective teams
[21]. For instance, team building can with this process by increasing the time
team members spend together. Training also contributes to the development
of effective teams by strengthening the skills and capabilities of both new and
experienced team members. Finally, taking into consideration people’s skills,
competencies, educational background, and experience is always helpful.
Communicating: Communication is an essential part of project management.
People engage on a daily basis by exchanging information through emails or
meetings. However, there might be challenges when information is not shared
efficiently. Project participants may spend more time than necessary going over
all of the shared information, and they may become distracted from important
project information [25]. Obviously, communication can take many forms, in-
cluding written, spoken, formal, informal, gestures, and media. In PMBOK [21],
the two phases required for successful communication practice are defined. To
begin, a communication plan should be developed that meets the expectations of
both the project and its stakeholders. This means that a communication strat-
egy must be created to determine how the information is presented in terms of
format and media. Subsequently, all information used for communication needs
to be gathered, saved, tracked and produced in accordance with the communi-
cation management strategy. Apart from that, active listening is a method that
can support the execution of effective communication by “clarifying and confirm-
ing, understanding, and removing barriers that adversely affect comprehension”
[21].
Engaging:
Stakeholder engagement is a very important aspect of the per-
spective of People.
Geraldi et al.
[25] state that stakeholder identification,
evaluation, and engagement serve as crucial processes in project management.
In particular, stakeholder identification and evaluation include the analysis and
mapping of the relevant stakeholders.
In PMBOK [21], several methods for
stakeholder engagement and management are proposed.
The power/interest
grid, power/influence grid, or impact/influence grid are all methods used for
the categorization of stakeholders. Another similar approach is the direction of
influence technique, where stakeholders are categorized as upward, downward,
==PAGE:32==
22
Project Management Methods
outward, or sideward. This classification is based on their impact on the project.
The stakeholder engagement assessment matrix may be used in projects to mea-
sure the level of engagement of stakeholders. Based on this assessment, actions
can be taken to achieve the desired level in cases where the stakeholders, for
example, can be an obstacle project due to high resistance. This assessment cat-
egorizes stakeholders into the following five groups; unaware, resistant, neutral,
supportive, and leading [21].
Leading:
A leader must have specific skills and behavior skills in order to
manage effectively a project and its participants [42]. Thus, leading is also a
very important action for the people perspective. Geraldi et al. [25] describe all
the key characterised a good and successful leader should have. For example, An
essential characteristic of an effective leader is self-awareness. On top of that,
A leader must be able to comprehend and regulate his or her own emotions.
Good leaders are able to overcome challenges and advance both personally and
professionally by being aware of both their own strengths and weaknesses as
well as those of the team members. Another critical factor for the action of
leading is the relationship between the follower and the leader. Leaders should
motivate and aid followers in improving and developing themselves so that they
may attain their goals and targets. The amount of flexibility and inspiration
supplied by the leader to the follower are leadership style qualities that influence
the connection between the leader and the follower [42]. Based on his or her
main characteristics, a leader can fall into different types.
Formally, Myers
Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) divides leadership types into four categories;
explorers, coordinators, drivers, and administrators [31].
Motivating: As previously mentioned, a leader in order to be successful should
never undermine the motivation of the employees and project participants. [25].
It is critical that individuals are engaged with their job and duties, and that an
exciting working environment and circumstances are provided. This is because
employees seek challenges and excitement in their work in order to build a
foundation for personal and professional development. Besides this, employees
often seek extrinsic motivation, which is connected to rewards like pay raises,
bonuses, and favorable working conditions. Several ideas have been proposed to
investigate motivation and how it influences employee performance. The Maslow
hierarchy and the Herzberg two-factor theory are two theories that investigate
motivational requirements and components [43]. Moreover, the theory X and
Y described in [25] and the job characteristic model presented in [43] are both
utilized to boost motivation connected to the work characteristics. Lastly, job
satisfaction illustrated in [43] is another parameter that can be used fr boosting
employees motivation. Job satisfaction is connected with the way an employee
perceives his or her work.
Mediating: The action of mediating, i.e, conflict resolution is the last common
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Implementation in SMEs
23
practice in the perspective of People. In general, it is widely accepted that a
disagreement might occur for a variety of reasons. Miscommunication, unclear
goals, expectations, and various points of view and backgrounds are some ex-
amples. Negotiation is a way to manage conflicts described in [25]. In [31], the
authors recommend problem-solving, withdrawal or avoidance, and compromise
as methods to manage conflicts.
3.2
Implementation in SMEs
While the relevance of project management techniques has been extensively
studied, little attention has been given to the use of project management meth-
ods in SMEs [18]. Even though such organizations do not frequently employ
project management techniques [44], Sensini et al. [45] attempted to investigate
the impact of project management on the performance of SMEs. Specifically,
having collected data from 72 SMEs located in Argentina they aimed to inves-
tigate the usage of project management methods in SMEs as well as to analyze
the influence of such methods on the performance of SMEs. They found that the
use of project management methodologies in SMEs is very narrow. Additionally,
they proved that these techniques are closely related and affect the overall per-
formance of SMEs. More precisely, they showed that configuration management
and cost projections had the greatest positive impact on performance.
==PAGE:34==
24
Project Management Methods
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Project Management Tools
Prior to software development, project management activities were mostly per-
formed on paper, resulting not only in increased paper use but also in a lack of
transparency [46]. Even long before the rise of personal computers (PC), project
managers had realized that leveraging early computers may help them avoid
the traditional decentralized document gathering and exchange. Historically,
Univac, originally tested in 1950, is considered the first project management
software [46]. It was developed by Remington Rand on behalf of Dupont Chem-
ical. In Univac, the Critical Path Method (CPM) of the network schedule was
implemented in order to support the management of the construction of a new
power plan. Over the same period, US Navy and Lockheed Aerospace developed
software that implemented Project Evaluation Review Technique (PERT) for
the Polaris Missile program which was operated on an IBM mainframe. Dur-
ing the 1980s, mainframe and minicomputers were very useful tools for project
management [46]. After that, PCs became widely available and they dominated
the market the project management software market.
The growing complexity and unpredictability of the business sector inspired the
creation of a variety of online project management tools to help with a project’s
overall progress. [47, 10]. Formally, a project management software “provides
the framework for collecting, organizing, storing, and processing project infor-
mation. It provides the basis for assessing the status of the project with respect
to time, cost, and performance goals and objectives” [48]. For instance, project
==PAGE:36==
26
Project Management Tools
managers can use this kind of tool in order to get an overview of a project’s cost-
time performance and the interaction of these two parameters throughout the
project’s life cycle [49, 50]. More precisely, project management software can be
used for a wide range of applications that includes activities such as resource,
time, and cost planning, scheduling, controlling, and allocating [46]. It goes
without saying that internet-based applications are now considered standard to
ensure project member collaboration and communication, as well as to enable
the simple sharing of documentation and information [10, 46].
4.1
Software Categorization
In general, there are two approaches to the distribution of software; closed-
source and open-source. The latter refers to the source availability paradigm
of free and open-source software (FOSS). FOSS are typically free but there are
organizations like Red Hat that provide open source software while they sell
support to companies that use their software. Obviously, close-source software
is non-free and often expensive. Following the same logic, project management
software can be classified into two main categories:
• Open source: “Open Source software represents publicly accessible soft-
ware design, which means that available material may be freely amended
by its users” [47]. Often, there are people that argue that software that
is paid for and closed gives superior support and quality. Yet, open and
free solutions are considered very suitable for small enterprises [51] as it
enables several project management activities, including time, resource,
and cost management [47].
• Proprietary: The definition of proprietary software as “closed source”
software states that only the individual, team, or business who created it
is allowed to change the source code. Only the product’s creators have
the legal right to reproduce or modify their product while still retaining
sole ownership of them. There are many proprietary projects managing
tools aiming to cover various disciplines, such as planning, budgeting,
resource management, risk management, decision-making, documentation,
and reporting [47].
Abramova et al. [47] analyzed and compared the features of several open source
and proprietary tools for project management, and concluded that both solu-
tions have almost the same capabilities.
However, even if open source tools
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Software Categorization
27
provide and cover almost the same functionality as proprietary software, typ-
ically the latter tends to be more user-friendly. Other more specific ways to
classify different project management software are discussed in [46, 51]. Kundu
et al. [46] classify project management tools into five types; desktop applica-
tion, web-based, personal, collaborative and non-specialised tools [46]. Margea et
al. [51] rank project management software into three categories; client server,
general project management tools, and online/web-based (as in [46]). Yet, the
definition of the client server and the general project management tools is insuf-
ficient to offer a comprehensive explanation of their features and thus they are
not used in this work. Next, the five categories described in [46] are presented:
• Desktop: It is software that is installed on each user’s desktop. It is a
quick and visually sophisticated interface that improves cooperation and
information exchange. The user has the option of storing data in a file or
in a centralized database. Files can be shared across users if they are on
a shared drive and they can be accessed only by one user every time.
• Web-based: It refers to a solution that is available over the internet [46,
51] and does not require software to be installed on the user’s computer.
Furthermore, it provides a centralized database, and several users may use
the program at the same time, increasing engagement and transparency.
However, the response time is slower than that of a desktop application,
and users do not have access to data while they are not connected to the
internet [51].
• Personal: It is a software solution that is mostly used to manage personal-
small projects and for self-organization.
• Collaborative: It is a system that can accommodate several users at the
same time while allowing them to update and adjust their tasks. The web-
based tools are included in this category, however, they need an internet
connection to provide users access to the system.
• Non-specialised: There is a wide range of non-project management soft-
ware available for scheduling and planning project tasks. For example,
spreadsheets are a widely used solution that project managers typically
exploit in small projects in order to support them with project calcula-
tions and estimations. Note that these tools can operate without the use
of the internet.
==PAGE:38==
28
Project Management Tools
4.2
Software Features
Project management tools have attracted wide attention from the research com-
munity and their features have been studied extensively. Between 2006 and 2017,
several papers [52, 53, 51, 46, 10, 47, 54, 49] have been published in the field
exploring and evaluating the features of project management tools. These stud-
ies explored the existing tools at that time, while they provided a conceptual
understating of the basic distinguishing characteristics, i.e, features of project
management software. Given the rapid growth of the information technology
sector, the specific tools examined in the aforementioned works could be consid-
ered outdated. However, these works are important since they have established
the theoretical foundation of the domain. Recently, [55, 56, 57, 58] explored and
compared modern project management tools by analyzing their main features.
In the literature, the most discussed features of project management tools are
the following; communication, time management, resource management, bud-
get management, risk management, performance, reporting, and documentation.
The most important features are illustrated in Figure 6.5.
Figure 4.1: The main features of project management tools.
Abdulrahman and Rozan [10], consider communication as an important require-
ment for a project management software. Naturally, communication allows par-
ticipants to collaborate. This is usually archived by sending and receiving emails,
participating in online meetings, and posting updates for the latest news and
the status of the project that may be relevant and interesting to stakeholders In
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Software Features
29
[49], the use of a WIKI is proposed as a way to improve communication by al-
lowing users to create and share web pages on which they can decide and change
the subject matter. The importance of communication as software requirement
is further supported by [55, 51, 53].
Risk management features should also be supported by a project management
software as it gives the opportunity to the project manager to prevent and
eliminate mistakes and to act quickly in unexpected events [53]. Additionally,
[49, 55] provides a more thorough explanation of the aspects of risk management
that software should cover. For instance, [49] recommends that such software
should provide PERT and Simulation analysis, issue management, and incident
management, as features. Leopoulos et al. [59] evaluate software tools that
could be utilized by SMEs specifically for quantitative risk management. The
authors argue that software must provide Monte Carlo simulation, sensitivity
analysis, scenario analysis, as well as an implementation of different statistical
distributions since these features are required for quantitative risk analysis.
Time and resource management are often considered two of the most impor-
tant features because they can help a project manager with the planning and
organization of a project [53, 51, 55]. Thus, it is no wonder that these activities
are covered by the majority of the available project management software in the
market [55]. In particular, many project management solutions have function-
alities for planning, monitoring, and tracking project activities and milestones
[53]. Besides these features, [51] highlights that these tools should provide Gantt
Charts in order to help project managers identify the different dependencies ex-
isting in the project as well as to design and as present project’s timelines.
Furthermore, in order to help project managers fulfill project requirements and
avoid task delegation and overloaded resources, these tools should provide fea-
tures for the determination of the resource capacity and allocation [53, 51]. In
[52], the project management tools have been evaluated using both the Earned
Value Analysis and the Critical Path Method.
The latter has been used as
sub-feature in [55] as it assist a project manager with planning the project’s
activities.
Budget management is another feature that has been discussed in several stud-
ies [54, 57, 47] for the analysis and evaluation of project management software.
Throughout the life cycle of a project, the budget should be controlled by mea-
suring the cost of the finished work and comparing the planned and budgeted
costs [54]. For this reason, project management tool should incorporate tech-
niques for budget management.
Documentation management and reporting has been identified as important fea-
tures and they have been used for the evaluation of project management software
[53, 51, 55]. Cicibas et al. [53] state that documentation management “enables
==PAGE:40==
30
Project Management Tools
managers or necessary project members to customize, share, distribute, recover,
authenticate, secure and also manage versions of the documents”.
Micale et
al. [55] used the generation, tracking and recording of changes of reports as
well as the monitoring of the different project components via dashboards as
sub-features of reporting. In their study, the authors propose these sub-features
as criteria for the evaluation of project management tools. More precisely, the
project management tools have been evaluated using the Critical Path Method
which has been used as sub-feature since it supports a project manager with
planning the project’s activities.
In [55], the performance or progress evaluation is considered as a key feature
that should be included in a project management application.
Generally, a
project manager has to make sure that the project or product satisfies all of
the predetermined requirements. Therefore, the protocols for auditing the final
outcomes should be included in a project management platform [55]. This is
further supported by [53], where it is proposed that in order to guarantee a
high-quality product, elements like quality assurance, quality planning, quality
regulating, and quality upgrades should all be taken into account.
Apart from the previously discussed features, a project management software
should have the characteristics that make it simple for its end user to use. When
selecting an project management tool, the type of software and license should
always be taken into consideration [49, 53, 52]. For instance, its is of utmost
importance to decide whether the tool will be open source or proprietary [49] as
well as whether it will be installed on the team’s computer or accessed through
a network. Another factor to consider is the capability to import and export
data from/to a project management software [47, 49]. Software applications
should also provide end-user assistance and support to make sure that concerns
or issues with the system may be quickly addressed and resolved [51, 49].In
[53, 55], access control is defined as a feature for monitoring and regulating the
level of access a team member should have to the program as well as to the
project’s files and data.
It worth noting that scope management has not been discussed as a feature
for evaluating project management tools in the literature. The major empha-
sis has been placed on activities related to project planning and monitoring
throughout the project’s life cycle. This fact is demonstrated by [60], where the
authors try to identified the most commonly found feature in project manage-
ment tools. The features under observation were; “requirements/scope, deliv-
erables/products, activities WBS, (human) resources, materials, suppliers, bud-
get, time/schedule, stakeholders, communication, risks, issues, reports” . The
feature time/schedule was included in 94% of the examined tools, while activ-
ities/WBS and (human) resources were implemented in 88% and 76% of the
studied tools, respectively. Only 16% of the tools included requirements/scope,
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Tools in SMEs
31
deliverables/products, suppliers, and issues. Risks were the features that could
be found less frequently in project management software.
In a different work, Micale et al. [55] evaluated various project management
software based on the following features; “activity planning, resource planning,
control, risk analysis, reporting, utility, communication, access permit”. The
authors conducted two separate surveys to determine the importance of the fea-
tures. The ranking scale method was used in the first survey and 67 specialists
rank features in order of importance, starting with those that could be easily
excluded. The majority of the participants considered activity planning to be
an extremely important feature to include in a software, while access permits
was the least important. The second survey, was conducted using the Design
of Experiment method, and it served as the foundation for the authors to cre-
ate some functionality packages. The conjoint analysis was used specifically to
evaluate and determine whether the presence of a functionality or the parallel
interaction of several functionalities can make one software superior to another.
After this analysis, control was rated the most important feature, while asset
permits was again ranked last.
4.3
Tools in SMEs
Even if project management tools have been extensively studied, little attention
has been given to their actual use in the context of SMEs [10]. Particularly,
there is limited amount of work in evaluating software that could be used to
strengthen project management methodologies. Analogously, little effort has
been invested in supporting SMEs for the selection of the most appropriate
tools according to their needs. In general, SMEs often struggle to deal with
knowledge management, poor cooperation, communication policies, and a lack
of information sharing. In order to address these challenges, [61] propose that
SMEs’ utilization of information and communication technology needs to be
improved.
Choosing a project management software can be challenging for
SMEs which means that SMEs may end up choosing software that does not add
value to their work. This is probably, due to the fact that SMEs typically have
fewer IT specialists to provide a solution to this challenge [10]. Besides that,
choosing the best software is a crucial choice for an SME because the majority
of them are unwilling to create their own application and thus they will have to
compare the capabilities of the software available in the market.
==PAGE:42==
32
Project Management Tools
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Research Methodology
In this work, the classic Design Science Research [62] (DSR) methodology is
used. This study hopes to contribute to the advancement of human knowledge
by expanding and improving technology and science, which is the major goal of
this methodology. Furthermore, it is regarded as a suitable approach since it is
useful for problem solutions through the creation of new artifacts. Given that
there is an iterative association between the different processes, this methodol-
ogy allows returning to a prior step [63]. For all these reasons, the application
of DSR is appropriate for this study. In the implemented methodology, several
iterations occur between the design and evaluation of the proposed framework
in order to finalize it and use it for the assessment of the project management
tools.
In Figure 5.1 the steps used in this study are illustrated.
Next, the
methodological processes of this work are discussed in detail.
5.1
Step 1: Problem Definition
Three research questions serve as the foundation for this research. By framing
and trying to answer the following questions the overall goal is the development
of a universal project management framework that cannot only support SMEs
for general practices but also evaluate modern project management tools.
==PAGE:44==
34
Research Methodology
Figure 5.1: The six steps of the followed research methodology.
Research Question 1: What project management methods are relevant for
SMEs?
The first research question can be further broken down into two sub-questions:
• How project management methodologies be classified in a hierarchical frame-
work?
• What are the challenges that usually SMEs have to face?
Research Question 2: What are the elements that a holistic project manage-
ment framework should include to support SMEs?
Research Question 3: How modern project management software can support
SMEs throughout the life cycle of a project?
5.2
Step 2: Theoretical Foundation
The evaluation and analysis of the literature begin with exploring the SME
sector. It is critical to investigate the characteristics of SMEs since they serve
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Step 2: Theoretical Foundation
35
as a stepping stone for identifying their strengths and weaknesses. This iden-
tification can serve as a base for developing a project management framework
suitable for SMEs. To achieve this, the project management approach developed
by Geraldi et al. [25] is adapted to the needs of SMEs by defining the notion of
actions (see Chapter 3.1). This approach is selected to be extensively examined
by investigating the practices associated with and engaged in the four dimen-
sions Purpose, People, Complexity and Uncertainty. The goal of this analysis
is to provide an answer to the first and second research question. Moreover,
the recent literature on project management software is extensively discussed
aiming to have a deep understating of the field (see Chapter 4). This review
and analysis form the theoretical foundation of the main features that project
management tools should have in order to support project managers. The goal
of this analysis is to provide an answer to the third research question. Given
the gap in the literature for the evaluation of modern project management soft-
ware, we analyze their capabilities after the finalization of the proposed project
management framework (see Chapter 8).
Several search engines can be utilized to compile the necessary bibliography.
Google Scholar and DTU Findit are particularly used for this reason.
This
process is optimized with the use of the most suitable keywords.
The core
keywords that this research examined to locate the desired information are the
following; SME, SME characteristics, SME in Denmark, SME and Project Man-
agement, Project Management, Project Management Practices, Project Man-
agement tools, Schedule Management, Time Management, Cost Management,
Resource Management, Stakeholder Management, Scope Management, Commu-
nication Management, Risk Management, Motivation, Leadership, Project Man-
agement Online tools, SMEs and Project management Software, Project Man-
agement Software, and Project Management Success factors.
The academic literature is divided into three groups to serve as the founda-
tion for structuring and organizing the research material into three chapters as
follows:
• Group 1 - SMEs (Chapter 2): The EU definition for SMEs is chosen in
this research. This decision is made initially in the review of the literature
and serves as a basis for selecting the additional papers and publications.
In other words, all of the assessed literature on SMEs adhere to the Eu-
ropean Commission’s criteria.
Following the assessment of the sector’s
strengths and shortcomings, the characteristics of SMEs are determined.
When large organizations are compared to SMEs, we understand what
they lack or do better in terms of project management methods. By doing
this, we can improve our intuition regarding the areas that require more
focus in order to improve project management techniques. Lastly, atten-
==PAGE:46==
36
Research Methodology
tion is given to Danish SMEs by exploring articles and reports about their
size, market share, and capabilities.
• Group 2 - Project Management Methodology (Chapter 3): The
paradigm of the four perspectives (see Chapter 3.1) provides the skeleton
of the analysis of the literature. This is the basis for identifying project
management practices that can be involved in each perspective. Different
from the original work of Geraldi et al.
[25], the notion of actions or
activities is proposed in order to subdivide the four perspectives and better
identify the relevant methods for SMEs within each dimension. To verify
this claim, several papers, articles, and books are discussed and evaluated.
PMBOK [21] gives a comprehensive overview of project management and,
as such, is one of the primary sources of reference for selecting and verifying
the practices that might be used in each perspective. This is supplemented
with further academic study. In practice, we do not only focus on the
literature on general project management techniques but also on more
specialized and specific practices [25]. The purpose of this assessment is
to ensure that the most important project management approaches are
identified and addressed during the initial design phase.
• Group 3 - Project Management Software Features (Chapter 4):
In this group or chapter, the academic work related to the project man-
agement software is presented in detail. Several studies are reviewed that
compare project management software as a way of evaluating their capa-
bilities. These studies establish the theoretical foundation for the features
required for project management software. The most important features
discussed in the literature are presented in Chapter 4.2. This review is very
important since it provides an overview and establishes the connection be-
tween project management and technology by presenting the requirements
and features that a competent project management software should have.
After the analysis of the literature, the following step is to create the initial
project management framework and assess the capabilities of various software
before deciding which ones can be included in this research.
5.3
Step 3: Design Phase - Round 1
Following a thorough analysis of the related academic work, the initial design
phase begins. The first development of the project management framework takes
place during this methodological step. In addition, the project management
software that will be later evaluated in this dissertation is examined.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Step 3: Design Phase - Round 1
37
The project management model is divided into three levels of hierarchy. The
first fundamental level is the perspective of project management, namely, Pur-
pose, People, Complexity, and Uncertainty, described in Chapter 3. These four
dimensions are added to the model, and their definitions are provided as a
starting point for identifying the methods that can be included in each, thereby
optimizing the overall project management performance of SMEs. In the second
level, the actions that support the four perspectives are identified. By actions,
it is meant the operational process to achieve a specific goal in the context of
each dimension.
The baseline activities discussed in [25] are included or re-
framed in the first design of the model. Based on the current literature, new
comprehensive actions, as well as improved grouping of the related methods,
are proposed and included in the first project management framework. Once
all of the actions are chosen and incorporated into the model, the practices
and methodologies that could support them are studied and described. The
practices are the project management framework’s third and final level. This
level includes the applicable project management theories and tools that can be
used as enablers for implementing the actions of each perspective. The relevant
bibliography is reviewed in order to collect the appropriate methodologies that
take part in the first design of the project management framework.
Following the completion of the initial development of the project management
framework, the research into the software under consideration begins. Initially,
several project management software packages are evaluated because it is nec-
essary to investigate and comprehend their capabilities before settling on the
five that will be used in the final model. There is limited recent literature work
on how to select project management tools. In this work, the methodology of
Cicibas et al. [53] is followed when selecting project management software. In
particular, the authors propose the following four criteria in order to choose the
tools:
1. The tools gave been reviewed and evaluated in previous academic studies.
2. People and enterprises are using them to support their project manage-
ment practices.
3. The tools have been reviewed in websites, blogs and forums.
4. They are easy to gain information about their functionalities and packages.
The address of the websites used for selecting the tools can be found in Table
5.1. The project management software under evaluation are listed in Table 5.2.
==PAGE:48==
38
Research Methodology
#
URL Addresses
1
https://www.appsruntheworld.com/top-10-project-portfolio-management
-software-vendors-and-market-forecast/
2
https://www.softwarereviews.com/awards/emotional-footprint-awards-
2022-project-portfolio-management-enterprise
3
https://www.wrike.com/blog/wrike-named-leader-in-frontrunners
-project-management-report-q3/
Table 5.1: Addresses of websites used for software selection.
#
Project Management
Software
1
Wrike
2
Asana
3
Trello
4
Monday
5
Jira
6
Smartsheet
7
One Point Project
8
Adobe Workfront
9
Project Online
Table 5.2: Project management software under consideration.
The selected tools are examined and evaluated in accordance with the initial
layout of the project management framework. This evaluation’s goal is to assist
in the identification of the five project management tools that could support the
developed model. Following the second design of the framework, the five tools
are selected. This is because it seems more acceptable to finalize the analytical
model and choose the tools based on it.
5.4
Step 4: Evaluation
The project management framework developed in accordance with the theoret-
ical foundation is evaluated using both qualitative and quantitative analysis.
More specifically, two distinct sorts of sources are utilized for this purpose (see
Chapter 6). Interviews with project management specialists are used as part of
the qualitative analysis to collect information and get inspiration from practices
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Step 4: Evaluation
39
and methodologies used by SMEs. As the second source of evaluation, a data
set collected by Christian Thuesen is used to analyze the difficulties that vari-
ous Danish SMEs encountered when completing their projects. The qualitative
analysis is presented in Chapter 6.1 while the quantitative analysis is illustrated
in Chapter 6.2. Note that these two analyses are independent of each other.
5.4.1
Qualitative Analysis
Five interviews are conducted to assess the developed model. The interviews are
carried out in order to identify the project management practices used by SMEs
when running projects. The names of both the participants and the companies
are kept strictly confidential. Information about the type of industry, the size of
the company, the role of the interviewee, and the sector in which the company
operates are provided in Table 5.3. All of the businesses are based in Denmark
and they are a segment of the private sector. The people participating in the
interviews are identified by Christian Thuesen and Per Juel Christensen.
#
Industry
Sector
Company’s
Size
Position
1
Healthcare
Private
Small
Project Manager
2
IT & Development
Private
Medium
Vice President
3
IT & Development
Private
Medium
Product Manager/owner
4
IT & Development
Private
Medium
Project Manager
5
Infrastructure
Private
Medium
Vice President
Table 5.3: Participants contributed in the development of the Project Man-
agement framework.
Every interview is planed virtually in Microsoft Teams for 60 minutes.
Ap-
pendix A contains the questions and materials related to the interviews. The
interview’s goal is to have a fruitful discussion with project management experts
in order to assess the suitability of the four perspectives, described in Chapter
3.1 for SMEs. Furthermore, the interviews seeks to assess the use of project
management software in SMEs. It is thought important to identify to what
extent SMEs are using software for executing project management practices.
To achieve this, the interview questions are divided into three categories, be-
==PAGE:50==
40
Research Methodology
ginning with introductory questions and progressing to questions for the model
and SMEs.
Specifically, the steps for the interview sessions with the survey
respondents are the following:
1. Initially, an overview of the project and its objectives are presented. Once
the scope of the research is understood, the four dimensions are introduced.
The terms Purpose, People, Complexity, and Uncertainty are introduced
to the participant, along with a brief explanation of their definitions and
concepts.
2. During the first round of questions, the participants are asked introduc-
tory questions about their background, position in the organization, and
project management journey.
This group of questions focuses on their
general thoughts on project management methodologies and software.
3. In the second round of questions the interviewees are asked questions about
the activities included in each perspective. The questions are designed to
identify the practices that SMEs use to perform the actions across all
dimensions. Questions about the technology that supports these practices
are introduced once the interviewees share how they organize and run
projects.
This is because it is important to explore if SMEs consider
project management software as an enabler for executing their practices
and which software is more frequently used by them.
4. The last round of questions aims to identify the challenges that SMEs
need to overcome. This information is critical not only for the further
development of the project management model but also for determining
the relevance of these challenges to technology. In other words, it raises the
potential criteria that can be incorporated into the model for evaluating
project management software.
5.4.2
Quantitative Analysis
A dataset provided by the supervisor, Christian Thuesen, serves as the second
source of evaluation. Christian Thuesen gathered the data from all years of
implementation of the Project Management1 course at DTU. It is worth men-
tioning that the course follows the project management methodology developed
by Geraldi et al. [25]. The dataset includes information for 627 projects and
reflects on the challenges the organizations faced in their projects according to
the four perspectives. Given that the dataset do not include only SMEs, pre-
processing of the dataset is required in order identify the projects that were
1https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/42429
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Step 5: Design Phase - Round 2
41
carried out by SMEs. The identification of SMEs is done based on the organi-
zation’s size, turnover, and balance sheet. Based on the EU definition described
in Chapter 2, 58 of the projects in the dataset were led by SMEs. However, only
for the 43 cases, there are available data for analysis.
The dataset includes information about the best practices and challenges SMEs
faced during the execution of their projects. Aiming to evaluate the first iter-
ation of the model, the challenges are grouped by identifying the appropriate
action that reflected a challenge. In other words, the actions identified in the
initial design of the framework are used as the referring point in finalizing the
categorization of the challenges. In this way, we can evaluate the ability of the
model to capture the challenges faced by SMEs. On top of that, the most chal-
lenging category in each dimension can be also measured given the data set. In
that fashion, the importance of each activity can be quantitatively evaluated.
5.5
Step 5: Design Phase - Round 2
Once the qualitative and quantitative data are collected, the second round of
design begins. Starting with the qualitative analysis, each interview is recorded,
transcribed and thoroughly reviewed. Every perspective’s activities and asso-
ciated practices are examined individually.
In this way, we aim to map the
interviewee’s responses and identify patterns in how they manage projects. For
instance, in the Complexity perspective, the replies of all respondents to the
activity Scheduling are recorded in order to identify the relationship between
their practices and those mentioned in the literature.
The data collected from the quantitative analysis are used to identify the activ-
ities that SMEs face challenges. When these challenges are not concerned the
success of the project might be threaten. In other words, when the associated
activities are not considered or applied the overall implementation of the project
might be at risk. The dataset is used to reinforce the answers collected form the
qualitative analysis. More specifically, given the small sample of the interviews
that dataset is used as a supplementary source of evaluation. With the insights
retrieved from the dataset we are able to identify challenging activities and ver-
ify conclusions from the interviews and thus adapt our framework to the needs
of Danish SMEs.
In this phase five online tools are selected to be evaluated based on the pro-
posed project management framework. Three criteria are taken into considera-
tion when choosing a software. In our evaluation the tools that do not include
the main features described in Chapter 4.2 are excluded from this study. Fur-
==PAGE:52==
42
Research Methodology
thermore, tools that demand extra funding to provide advanced capabilities are
excluded from this work. Finally, we assess the ability of the tools to cover and
support the activities and concepts of every perspective in our framework.
5.6
Step 6: Communication
Both supervisors initially reflected on the developed project management model.
This aimed in the further improvement of the framework. Additionally, feedback
was provided for the evaluation of the online tools. Finally, this work will be
communicated through a publication in the DTU library.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Evaluation and Results
6.1
Qualitative Evaluation
The purpose of the qualitative evaluation is to settle the actions and methods
that are relevant for SMEs. In other words, the goal is to identify the activities
and their associated practices that need to be included in each perspective. The
activities discussed in Chapter 3.1 serve as the foundation for conducting the in-
terviews. The collected information is used to evaluate the project management
framework developed in the first iteration and adapt it to the needs of Danish
SMEs. Each dimension originally proposed by the Geraldi et al. [25] is examined
separately. Each interviewee is asked whether they have a systematic strategy
for each proposed activity in our framework. Additionally, they are questioned
regarding the project management practices followed in order to assist and ex-
ecute every activity. All the questions that are used in the interviews can be
found in Appendix A, while our methodological approach is discussed in Chap-
ter 5.4.1. The transcriptions of all the interviews are illustrated in Appendix
B. In the following section, the main findings and insights of the interviews
are reported, along with explanations of the activities and the associate project
management techniques that are considered in each perspective.
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation and Results
6.1.1
Importance of Project Management
Before focusing on the activities of our framework and the accompanying project
management methodologies utilized by the analyzed SMEs, we first summarize
and analyze the project manager’s view on the importance of employing project
management practices and software. The views of the respondents vary, with
some claiming that methods give structure and are essential for project success,
while others note that the project manager’s soft skills are the key factor for
successful projects. For example interview 5 states,
“. . . I would definitely be very interested in choosing the right method-
ology. But at the end, I think it’s more important that the mindset and
the ability of the project manager and his or hers ambitions to actually
succeed, that’s the most important thing.”
– Interviewee 5
More precisely, Interviewee 5 argues that a project manager should strive for suc-
cess, with a methodical project management technique in place for every area of
a project serving as a secondary need. However, Interviewee 3 emphasizes that
having a project management technique is critical and important in their orga-
nization. According to the interviewee’s words, it establishes a common ground
of work inside the organization and facilitates communication with stakeholders.
Interviewee 4 agrees, stating that a construction project management approach
might lead a project to success.
On top of that, Interviewee 5 outlines risk
management and stakeholder engagement and assessment as practices that, if
not applied, might contribute to project failure.
When it comes to project management software Interviewee 4 expresses a favor-
able attitude about the usage of technology as a facilitator for project execution,
“I think the methodology can be very important, because often when you
fail in project, it’s because you didn’t make risk analysis, because you
didn’t make an evaluation of which people are involved, which stake-
holders do we have. So I think the management practice is more suc-
cessful, if you use some of the methodology and some of the models
that are designed.”
– Interviewee 4
This can be explained by the fact that the majority of the interviewed companies
are within the IT sector and thus are aware of the benefits that technology can
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
45
provide to an organization. According to Interviewee 1, project management
software may be highly valuable for a project, but it should not be assumed
that it can confront and solve every problem and obstacle. We agree with this
statement because software is designed to help project managers improve their
existing style of working.
Another interesting finding is that transparency is a crucial quality that projects
ought to have. According to the interviews, all project participants should be
capable of finding the information they require, and using project management
software may make this easier. Resistance is shown only by one project manager
(Interviewee 4) who explains that in that particular SME they are not using
software to tailor project management practices. The project manager expresses
their concern that people are used to working in a particular way and thus the
introduction of new technologies might be hard for them to accept.
“So even though we have a project organization tool, we don’t use it as
such. I used it on an early project. The first one I was included in
but it was only me and the other project leader that use the tool and
when we try to introduce it to our colleagues then they’re like, We don’t
want to go in there and be ended up. Sending the documents we upload
with there on mail to our colleagues or put it in a shared the file. So
I don’t have that much success in online tools, even though I’ve tried
two times.”
– Interviewee 4
We think that further research is necessary to fully understand this resistance,
which is outside the scope of this work. However, giving individuals the neces-
sary training on how to use new technologies and outlining the benefits such soft-
ware can bring, might eliminate employees’ negative attitudes toward change.
6.1.2
Purpose
As previously discussed in Chapter 3.1.1, Purpose includes all actions that ex-
plain why a project is necessary as well as the objectives that must be met
to complete a successful project. Figure 6.1 below shows the suggested activ-
ities based on the recent literature. It is worth noting that most interviewees
agree that their organization approaches each of these activities in a systematic,
deliberate way.
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation and Results
Figure 6.1: Proposed activities included in the Purpose perspective.
6.1.2.1
Living
Living is used to establish the life cycle model that a SME will utilize to execute
their projects. The majority of the interviewed Danish SMEs use an adaptive
approach for managing the life cycle of their projects. Interviewee 2 in partic-
ular describes how their company uses the Agile Manifesto in their projects.
Interviewee 2 explains that this is the reason they do not have a very strict
project management framework to follow.
“But having a tight framework I think we’re looking at this ourselves
right now is belongs to a little bit of an older world, in what we call the
post Agile world . . . ”
– Interviewee 2
Similarly, Interviewee 3 uses the Agile methodology, whereas Interviewees 4 and
5 say they decide whether to use a predictive or adaptive approach based on the
project and its size. It is worth noting that Interviewee 5 tends to prefer agile
over waterfall, whereas Interviewee 4 likes waterfall.
6.1.2.2
Succeeding
In this work, succeeding is used as the activity for the assessment of project
management success. The project’s success might be evaluated using the triple
constraint model called the Iron triangle (see Chapter 3.1.1).
That is also
demonstrated and confirmed in the example of Danish SMEs, where time, cost,
and quality are used to measure success. Interviewee 3 explicitly states that
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
47
these criteria are used to evaluate the project’s performance both internally and
externally, depending on whether the customer’s expectations are satisfied.
“So the success is often based on facts . . . But we also have an evalu-
ation at the end of the project saying both internally but also towards
customers, how do they think it went? . . . did we do it within the time
and money that was set aside . . . ”
– Interviewee 3
Through the interviews, it is also discovered that assessing customer satisfaction
is a factor in determining how effectively SMEs handled projects. According to
Interviewee 2, acquiring new consumers and keeping them on board are essential
components in determining how much money the company will make. For this
reason, that particular SME, follow a more data-driven approach for calculating
the expected amount of people purchasing their product. According to their
criteria, a product is considered a failure when significantly fewer consumers
purchase it and when customers quit using it because they are dissatisfied with
its features and capabilities. This indicates that they did not meet their ex-
pectations, and as a result, they are not willing to pay for it. In particular,
Interviewee 2 states,
“. . . So we tried to be very data driven in that approach . . . but it’s def-
initely about the outcome for the customer, but then that turns into
revenue, right? So for us, it’s revenue, but it has to be tied to cus-
tomer success and customer happiness. Because there are two parts to
revenue. There are new revenue and then there is retaining revenue.
So how many customers can we keep because we built this or how many
Customers can we win because we build this.”
– Interviewee 2
As mentioned in Chapter 3.1.3, projects face conditions that might cause changes
in many of their components. Once modifications occur, the parameters used
to assess the project should be re-evaluated. At the interview, a project man-
ager stated that after the criteria are defined at the beginning of the project,
they are not examined and re-evaluated. This can be a challenge and might
cause misalignment because, as the project progresses, changes in the scope of
the project may occur owing to the high level of uncertainty. In the projects
manager’s words,
“So we made this formula . . . written in the start of a project where it is
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation and Results
specified, what is the goal of the project, what is the criteria of success,
when to be achieved . . . now we make this in the beginning of project.
But it’s rare that we go and visit the document again throughout the
project, which would be useful, but the practice is not the vehicle, the
practice is in the beginning.”
– Interviewee 4
6.1.2.3
Investing
The financial appraisal of the project is an important step that evaluates if a
project will be profitable for the company. (see Chapter 3.1.1). The importance
of having a structured and systematic approach when evaluating the invest-
ment of the project became apparent from most of the interviews. In the first
interview, the project manager notes,
“ . . . at the end of the day, money is more important than many other
things. So being able to track your investments, being able to forecast
your spent being able to report actual spend is one of the key things,
is one of the boring things, but it’s one of the key things in project
management. Because that’s the kind of investment it’s all about, it’s
all about money, right?”
– Interviewee 1
By employing tools for predicting and monitoring investment, a company may
gain a better understanding of its potential revenue and losses.
It appears
necessary since, as discussed in the literature, SMEs have financial resource
constraints (see Chapter 3.1.1). One of the small businesses that took part in
this research uses a more qualitative approach to assessing its investment.
“So we have this way of measuring what we’re doing, which is a version
of weighted shortest job first. But to say, how much revenue can we
get out of this feature? . . . How difficult is it to do? How long time
will it take on? And is this time critical for our customers? To do so
we try to give the different things that we could be doing a score based
on that. And it’s not that score in the end that defines it, that score is
a way for us to talk about what is important, and whether we want to
do something? Because . . . it comes down to, can we generate revenue
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
49
from it or does it satisfies some customers and how big a piece of work
that is this? And it’s sort of that evaluation that we continuously take.”
– Interviewee 2
A business case is a technique used by SMEs to assist in the financial evalua-
tion of their projects. The business case is either owned by the corporation or
provided by a client. According to the project manager of the third interview,
the business case is generally held by a customer, and in their company, they
consider if it would benefit them to participate in the project.
In another interview, the Vice President of an infrastructure business reveals
that a market study is included as part of this process. More precisely, the cor-
poration employs business analysts who are in charge of analyzing “the business
potential of the product and thereby also supplementing the business case of what
do we think will happen in this case”. On top of the analyst is responsible to
explore and study “if the market is growing, is it shrinking, do we have larger
competitors coming into the market”. All that data are included in the business
case and assist in the evaluation of the investment. The need of assessing the
realized business case is an intriguing conclusion about the business case. Ac-
cording to Interviewee 5, once the project is done, it is critical to determine if
the advantages of the business case were realized. However, while this is a tech-
nique that might help the firm, none of the SMEs participating in this research
have applied it.
“ . . . There’s a business case, and there’s an expected business case,
and there’s a realized business case as well. We’re not that good of
actually looking at the realized business case, we should do that. For
instance, one year after implementation, looking back and saying, did
we actually gain the business case that we expected? We don’t have
tables? Who says we should do that, but we’re not doing that.”
– Interviewee 5
6.1.2.4
Aiming
Aiming is the activity that attempts to provide an answer to the question; “why
are we doing this project?” [25]. An intriguing result from the interviews is that
the vision of a project drives any change. This finding is consistent with the
literature (see Chapter 3.1.1). Aiming in projects is the vehicle that gives the
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation and Results
incentive and rationale for making any changes. According to a project manager,
analyzing and examining the benefits can assist minimize people’s resistance
to change and increasing their understanding of the impact the project can
potentially have.
“All the things that are not customer facing that is for me very im-
portant because if you try to change anything in that organization, you
need the why? Because otherwise people will sit with crossed arms say-
ing but we don’t understand we don’t see. So the impact, the vision
could it also mean the benefit of it i think that’s the whole foundation.
If you don’t know that, then what are you gonna measure?”
– Interviewee 3
Another finding is the significance of making the company’s vision clear to all
the participants. In other words, the business value of the project should be
communicated and understand by the engineers of the projects. As Interviewee
3 explains “we have the best people in the world regarding the engineers, they can
fix anything technical, but they do have a hard time understanding the business
level of why we’re doing this. And not just focusing on the technical part.” This
outlines the importance of communicating and clarifying to the team the aim
of this project and the objectives that are not only technical but also related to
the business side of the project. In the projects manager’s words,
“. . . We are trying to put some business objects into our statement of
work.
So this is the business object and this is the technical object
. . . But we are trying to every time we evaluate this the customer say-
ing you’re so good at the technical part, we need you to be better at
understanding the business part of all of this.”
– Interviewee 3
But occasionally, there isn’t a compelling purpose for undertaking a specific
project.
According to a Vice President in the infrastructure industry, there
is the possibility that a company can face a negative business case.
As the
interviewee explains,
“It could be, for instance, a security project. There we want to elabo-
rate and elevate our security level, security maturity as well. And it’s
a negative business case. It might even cost us a lot of money, both
in investment in tools, but also in efficiency . . . And the only real rea-
son for why we’re doing is because it’s part of us being on the market
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
51
. . . because we believe that with the request that comes from the cus-
tomers, if we are not ISO certified, we will not be able to sell to them
. . . I don’t think there’s very much positive in an ISO 20,000, I don’t
think you’ll get much more efficient or people will be happier work-
ing by the audit of the ISO certified, but we have to do it to stay on
the market to stay competitive. So this is the typical case where yeah,
we’re doing that for this reason, and we’re not actually measuring the
benefits of it because it’s it’s black or white.”
– Interviewee 5
6.1.2.5
Scoping
As discussed in Chapter 3.1.1, scoping is an essential activity of the Purpose
perspective. The need for scoping in projects is also emphasized by respondents,
however, some of them state that there is currently no systematic strategy for
this activity in their organization. As Interviewee 1 notes, the decision-making
process is influenced by regular changes in the scope, which necessitates great
transparency and communication of these changes to the team.
“Then I am in the process of scoping because I think scoping is actually
one of the key parameters, especially in a company like ours, because we
have so many visionary entrepreneurs or startup people. It’s a young
company. So there’s a lot of research, there’s a lot of vision, there’s a
lot of entrepreneurship, but there is very little structure . . . and this also
impacts the scoping because if we on Monday this week, we decided that
we would go for option A then it’s very likely that come Friday, this
week, we will have five people in another meeting, agreeing to go for
option B. So what I’m working on now is really trying to put a structure
into how do we do decisions? How do we adhere to decisions? And
how do we communicate decisions?”
– Interviewee 1
Furthermore, WBS is a practice used by the examined SMEs for executing the
scoping in projects. This finding is aligned with the related academic literature
discussed in Chapter 3.1.1. As Interviewee 5 explains “It depends on whether
or not the technology is scalable, so to speak, can you break it down into phases
where you can start with some part of the company and make a trial and get
some feedback, we’d love to do that we love to just make a small, incremental
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation and Results
implementation to start with some of the people that normally don’t like our
products to start with them, because then we get the best feedback.” That tech-
nique adheres to the agile methodology, in which scope planning is done in
smaller phases. Furthermore, engagement with customers via feedback is crit-
ical in recognizing their key concerns and improving them accordingly. In this
way, they “try to figure out who doesn’t want this and make them committed to
the project.”
A similar approach is followed by an SME in the IT & Development sector. For
instance, Interviewee 2 states,
“We break down what we need to do . . . We do the problem, we do the
approach and then we do the solutions and what does that solution
actually look like. And and we break down the scope wise. We do some
high level estimates together with like a tech lead on the technical side
of it . . . And that’s how we hand over to the technical side of the team
to break down tasks. And then the total scope will then see in our own
product as we break the tasks down.”
– Interviewee 2
The examined Danish SMEs run the activities of Purpose perspective by having
a systematic approach. The triple constraint model and customer satisfaction
are used as parameters for determining project success. Danish SMEs use the
development of a business case to assess the financial viability of a project.
Based on the analysis of the interviews, the project’s vision and impact are the
pillars for explaining why a project should be established. When it comes to
the activity of scoping, WBS is a standard method used by the interviewees to
clarify the work that needs to be completed.
6.1.3
Complexity
The perceptive of Complexity includes the actions that explain how project
managers run projects in their organizations. The concept and practices covered
in this dimension, are can be found in Chapter 3.1.2. Thorough the interviews,
it becomes clear that Complexity is a perspective that has attracted SMEs’
attention as they already have or plan to develop a systematic approach for
managing all actions and operations of this dimension. Figure 6.2 provides a
summary of the activities that are discussed in the following sections.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
53
Figure 6.2: Proposed activities included in the Complexity perspective.
6.1.3.1
Estimating
There are several techniques for estimating the time, resources, and budget in
projects (see Chapter 3.1.2). Even if these methods are presented as common
approaches in the literature, this observation is not on par with the responses
of the interviews. The examined SMEs tend to follow a different methodology
for estimating the duration, the money, and the people that are needed for the
execution of a project. To quote,
“We don’t have one overall . . . ”
– Interviewee 3
Obviously, having a single estimating strategy for all the activities is not neces-
sary, while the reverse approach displays the businesses’ flexibility in picking the
optimal technique according to the project’s details. Interviewee 1 underlines
the need of having an estimation method on hand.
“I would say that there should be a practice for estimating and pretty
much everywhere I have been the there was a practice and it’s an in-
valuable.”
– Interviewee 1
Interviewee 1 notes that their SME lacks a structured strategy to estimating.
However, the interviewee highlighted the value of having a historical database
==PAGE:64==
54
Evaluation and Results
from past initiatives. Interviewee 1 believes that this can help businesses esti-
mate how long an activity will take, as well as how much money and resources
would be needed.
Interviewee 1 says that this may generate a baseline for
standardized tasks, which is especially important in sectors with repeated oper-
ations.
“I also think it’s good to if you can build up a kind of a historical
database, if you have time registration capabilities in your company,
then you can build up a baseline. So if you have activities that you
often repeat, like in the pharmaceutical industry, or in the offshore
industry, where you basically do a number of the same activities on
many different projects, then maybe you can gather historical infor-
mation and figure out from time restraints, and how many hours it
actually went into it.”
– Interviewee 1
We think that using the analogous estimation approach discussed in Chapter
3.1.2 and creating a historical database will help organizations make estimations
faster and more accurate since there will be evidence from previous projects that
can be used for future developments.
Furthermore, Interviewee 2 mentions that they break the project into smaller
parts in order to estimate the time, resources, and budget. It is observed from
the interview that their methodology is inspired by the Scrum Framework as
they plan in sprints and usually 3 months ahead. In the projects manager’s
words,
“We estimate them in the person weeks of person sprints. That’s our
overall estimation technique, but then we actually break it down into
hours. So we, of course, go through a cycle of we start with . . . how
many people, for how many months? And then how many people for
how many days . . . how many person days, and then we go down into
specific hours . . . So we do sprint planning, we typically work in about
three months ahead, as much as possible.
But like I said, we keep
getting wise. And so we keep sort of grooming our backlog and kind of
say, Okay, well, what do we then need to take in? And how much can
we actually do in the in the different different weeks.”
– Interviewee 2
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
55
6.1.3.2
Scheduling
Several strategies are presented with regard to how SMEs schedule their tasks.
While Interviewee 1 describes how their organization is in the midst of building
a framework for integrating scheduling. Also, Interviewee 1 states that they
would like to design standard plans to help him with project activity planning.
We also believe that this idea would be extremely beneficial for SMEs with
repeated activities. To quote,
“I have often been building what I call standard plans, knowing that
there is no such thing as a standard plan. So you can’t put a standard
plan in your online tool, because it varies from industry to industry.
But within the pharmaceutical industry, there are certain activities, or
activities that you need to repeat every time. And then you can build a
standard plan. And that is gold, because that is one of the shortcuts to
have a plan book fast. That is good. And, and again, do I really care
whether it takes five days or six days to complete an activity? from a
planning perspective? No, from an execution perspective, I care.”
– Interviewee 1
We argue that having a method is critical in scheduling since it will assist the
company in determining the best sequence of operations and the shortest time
to complete the project.
Interviewee 3, project manager in SME of the IT
& Development sector, explains that they have a process for identifying the
activities sequence.
“. . . We do have in regards to the sequence and how we do that, that is
actually on a high level identified in the statement of work, because we
need to identify hours that needed to be spent and so on, we a lot of our
products are based either on fixed price or time and material. So, we
break a lot of these down in our statement of work. So the customer
knows what they can expect.”
– Interviewee 3
The interviewee notes that the prioritization of the activities is also an important
aspect of their process. The interviewee emphasizes that if an action demands
a decision, it should be prioritized because the decision may take some time
to finalize. We believe that this technique can avoid delays caused by conflicts
among the stakeholders participating in the decision-making process.
==PAGE:66==
56
Evaluation and Results
The use of the Critical Path method in Danish SMEs seems to be is aligned
with the literature discussed Chapter 3.1.2. In a project manager’s words,
“Like every week I’ll have a look at so where are we and what should
be prioritized? . . . What is the critical path and what should I start a
on early and my experience is that often what I need to prioritize is
decisions.”
– Interviewee 4
6.1.3.3
Resourcing
Interviewee 2 states that their company lacks a framework for distributing re-
sources. This is explained by the fact that they do not allocate individuals to
projects, but instead have stable teams that they assign to projects according
to their capacity. While this strategy differs from traditional resource alloca-
tion, it may promote and embrace the establishment of dynamic teams. More
specifically, when people are allocated to stable teams can work collectively by
acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of all the team members and by de-
veloping the mechanisms for having high productivity. In the project manager’s
words,
“That’s what we say, really don’t do. Because we work in these teams,
right?
So the capacity in our world, we don’t do here’s a project,
and then we allocate people to the projects we do here’s a team which
projects can we then put in? So it’s flipped. If you talk about sort of
value stream funding, then we can talk about team funding. So we de-
cided that we have a team of this amount of people that cost this much
to have. And then we say with the capacity of this team, what can we
then put it in to fill up their capacity? So it’s the other way around.”
– Interviewee 2
Interviewee 5 manages resources in a slightly different manner. The interviewee
argues that once the project has been broken down into tangible tasks, the
project owner is responsible for determining what competence employees should
have to carry out the needed activities. If no one on the scrum team has the skills
and capacities to work on this work, resources can be obtained from another
team or from an external vendor.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
57
“If you have the resources within your own scrum team, you use the
resources there just by prioritizing if you we need a specific expert that’s
not available for the project or the project needs additional? One PO
will go to another PO to ask if they can lend resources from another
agile team. Or we can bring in external consultancy or collaborations
with external partners to do that.”
– Interviewee 5
Despite the fact that the majority of SMEs have a system in place for managing
resources in their projects, Interviewee 1 notes that there is currently no formal
strategy for this activity. Moreover, Interviewee 1 claims that, while resource
planning may be beneficial to a project. Also the interviewee feels it is a time-
consuming process that may not provide the maximum potential value to the
project. To illustrate this argument, Interviewee 1 stated that in many cases,
their projects had been ended but the project managers had not finished their
resource planning.
“In resources, you can spend hundreds of hours of making a resource
allocation plan.
I mean, you probably know about people who break
down their project plans to hours or days or at least weeks. And they
spent maybe two months building the plan and two months on executing.
And I have been working with people who worked so much on the plan
that the project was completed before they finalize their plan, because
they got drowned in details on resource planning. I think if you ask
me about the value of resource planning, I think it’s good. I think it’s
necessary to have a feeling about how much how many resources will
this take.”
– Interviewee 1
However, it is important to always remember that SMEs have resource con-
straints. This conclusion is backed by both the interviews and the literature.
As a result, we strongly believe that resourcing can assist SMEs in optimizing
resource allocation and guaranteeing that there are no delays in the delivery
and execution of particular tasks.
6.1.3.4
Budgeting
Interestingly, the considered SMEs do not have a methodology for managing the
budget of a project. From the interviews, it seems that budgeting is the weakest
==PAGE:68==
58
Evaluation and Results
activity in the Complexity perspective. Even though Interviewee 1 emphasizes
that capital is crucial for a project, the lack of a concrete approach might rise
challenges. Interviewee 1 suggests developing standard operating procedures.
While this is not an approach used by their company, they believe it may help
the firm budget more efficiently.
“On the budget, again, you can have standard budgets for standard ac-
tivities that is very useful. And I think too few people are using that
regularly. Based on what I have seen and heard about. I find it ex-
tremely valuable because at the end of the day, I said before, money
is very important. And it’s also very difficult. Because do you bud-
get with contingencies do you budget with aggressively do your budget
conservatively? I mean, it is difficult to budget, and this is one of the
things that you will always be measured on.”
– Interviewee 1
6.1.3.5
Contracting
During the implementation of a project, a company may need to select whether
to create a service or a product in-house or to outsource it from an external
partner (see Chapter 3.1.2). This activity is very relevant to the SMEs partic-
ipating in the interviews. Interviewee 1 emphasizes that in order to make such
a decision, they must weigh the benefits and downsides of producing a product
or service in-house against purchasing it from an external partner.
“. . . What I would like to achieve here is that we have a structured
approach for figuring out what are the benefits of making it in house
and what are the downsides and then the same exercise for buying it
and then comparing the two.”
– Interviewee 1
An intriguing finding is that three out of five SMEs use the business case to
execute this approach. When it comes to a decision like this, there are differ-
ent factors that need to be evaluated, as mentioned by Interviewee 2. More
specifically, the interviewee states that the effort, the skills, and the cost are all
parameters considered in the activity of contracting. For instance, if the effort
and expense are too high, and the staff lacks the necessary abilities to manu-
facture a product or service in-house, the corporation will choose to outsource
such an offering. To quote,
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
59
“. . . We have had have a couple of cases of this and make or buy def-
initely comes down to effort but also skill like how is this part of our
core business? Is this something that is very important that we own or
is it something that somebody else can do better. Then the cost is ei-
ther comparable or better, just also in terms of it’s opportunity cost. So
what else could we do if we just bought it from somebody else and those
somebody else are much more skilled at actually doing this particular
thing.”
– Interviewee 2
Accordingly, Interviewee 3 adds that they must investigate the value it brings to
the organization. Furthermore, they seek to know if creating a product or service
can make a difference in the market. In other words, they seek to differentiate
themselves from the competition, in order to have the ability to achieve a market
edge and hence more clients. In this manner, it will be a profitable investment
in terms of money. In the projects manager’s words,
“We’re back to the business case, so often is what value will it bring?
. . . But then again, if it can differentiate us from the rest of our com-
petitors, we will look into saying, Okay, what will it cost, both to support
and develop? And how big of a differentiator will it be?”
– Interviewee 3
6.1.3.6
Improving
Interviewee 2 explains that by being Agile, they are able to improve things very
quickly Optimizing and improving the way they are working, appears to be a
priority in their enterprise.
“I’d like to say very fast because we’re agile, but we do, we do retrospec-
tives as part of the the work that we’re doing. That’s part of the the
basic scrum methodology to do some retrospectives and we continuously
improve. And that’s also back to the empowerment of the teams. Each
team also improve on their processes so they can be the most efficient
in terms of what works for them. And of course we try, we improve on
the overall processes, but that has very much to do with the commu-
nication and how they communicate to sort of the wider organization
and that’s pretty much my perspective.”
==PAGE:70==
60
Evaluation and Results
– Interviewee 2
To sum up, Danish SMEs tend to apply project management methodologies to
merit the Complexity perspective. The use of a historical database is proposed
by one of the interviewees as a practice to estimate the time, resources, and
budget in a project. Most of the considered SMEs use Agile project manage-
ment. This means that their estimation and planning of human, financial, and
time resources is done in small iterations throughout the project’s life cycle. A
business case is used to determine whether it is more profitable for a company
to manufacture or purchase a service or product. From the interviews, it seems
that SMEs do not use a structured approach for the actions of improving and
budgeting.
6.1.4
Uncertainty
The perspective of Uncertainty seeks to manage and monitor the unexpected
events and changes that may arise during the process of a project (see Chapter
3.1.3).
The qualitative evaluation of this perspective is very interesting and
raises a number of questions. More specifically it appears that SMEs use more
informal techniques to manage the continuous uncertainty that exists in projects.
The findings for the activities summarized in Figure 6.3 are reported in the
following section.
Figure 6.3: Proposed activities included in the Uncertainty perspective.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
61
6.1.4.1
Identifying
Risk identification is a process that focuses on preventing and forecasting inci-
dents that might either harm or benefit the project (see Chapter 3.1.3). It is
extremely fascinating to discover that SMEs in our study do not have an orga-
nized strategy for this activity. According to Interviewee 1, this is a common
occurrence in the corporate world.
“Risk management is a underrated exercise or discipline. I think risk
management is very important.So do we have a store in practice here
and what I have seen in my past is that very few companies are very
good at risk management . . . we don’t have a project management risk
management project practice here.”
– Interviewee 1
Likewise, Interviewee 2 admits that their company does not have a systematic
approach to risk management. However, they have a problem-solving mindset
that they utilize to remove uncertainty in their initiatives. Their strategy can
also be explained by the fact that they operate Agile projects, which need short
and frequent iterations and thus they conduct reviews and identify hazards
throughout the project’s life cycle.
“I think we’re not very structured around risks as such. But what we do
is you know there’s high amount of involvement across the team which
I think is 1 sort of very important parameter to look at feasibility of
the things that we’re looking at and so that’s you know there’s never
something that comes from the product manager and just hand it over
to a tech lead and the tech leads and they’re like what is this? And then
we spend a lot of time on customer interviews. So we try to make sure
that we can document and understand the problem fully to reduce the
uncertainty of what we’re actually doing.”
– Interviewee 2
Interviewee 4 highlights brainstorming as the method their company uses to
acquire data and complete the risk identification phase. Furthermore, Intervie-
wee3 who works at an SME of the IT & Development industry states that they
use PRINCE2 for doing risk management.
“We’re using PRINCE2. So that is a lot towards that. And in regards
to risk and the identification of those the biggest risks that we identi-
==PAGE:72==
62
Evaluation and Results
fied during the statement of work we also write into those that can be
hardware delivery, that can be the customers maturity, that can be a
lot of different things.”
– Interviewee 3
While the responses above depict risk primarily as a threat, Interviewee 1 em-
phasizes that risk may also be an opportunity and that both demand the same
level of attention.
“The same goes for opportunity identification and assessment. It’s the
same story. You need an approach and yes, you should have it. Yes.
Do I have it? No. Would I like to have it? Yes.”
– Interviewee 1
6.1.4.2
Assessing
An intriguing conclusion regarding risk assessment is that none of the examined
Danish SMEs do a quantitative risk analysis to manage uncertainty.
Their
study is primarily qualitative, while as Interviewee 4 mentions, they use the
influence/interest matrix as a technique that aids the project manager in risk
assessment. To quote,
“You know this matrix where I say . . . That’s gonna happen is we’re
unlikely, but the consequence is gonna be crazy or the consequence is
gonna be minimal.
So we’ll put in.
Which risk do we have in the
problem project and where are they now? And then if we put them into
the model then will follow them until they’re out of the model.”
– Interviewee 4
Nonetheless, from the interviews, it seems that Danish SMEs do not have an
established framework for the action of accessing.
According to Interviewee
5, their SME does not have a framework in place for this activity. Similarly,
Interviewee 2 mentions that they evaluate and monitor risk through continuous
communication without having a structured approach in place.
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
63
6.1.4.3
Responding
Interviewee 5 explains that in their organization there is a responding approach
for managing cyber risks. More specifically, Interviewee 5 mentions that they
have a formal process for managing cyber security. However, the development
side of the organization does not have a formal strategy for responding to risks.
In the project manager’s words,
“When we talk about cyber security, we have a risk framework. We have
a major incident process that we know what to do. So as long as we’re
in my areas, I can tell you we have definitely, we have frameworks, we
have an IT security organization, we have a major incident process,
we have business continuity plan and and stuff like that. So in that
area, yes, we do. When we talk about it in the development side. I
don’t think the risk is that high in that area. So I don’t think we have
anything there.”
– Interviewee 3
The remaining interviewees claim that they do not have a risk response plan
in place. While Interviewee 1 acknowledges the need of having a defined risk
response approach, their SME does not have one.
“. . . risk responding and the monitoring and the adaption and decision
making, it falls back to the thing I said before, about transparency and
it boils back to having a structured approach to monitor your risks so
that you can actually track. So which have I mitigated and which do
I still need to focus on. So some risk I have eliminated some I have
managed, but they can still start to burn again. I mean, every time
you put out a fire, you should always go back to day after and check
it’s actually still not burning. And it’s the same addresses. They can
come back and haunt you. So it’s about a structured approach. It’s
about a a decision log or a risk management lock. It’s about structural
for, yeah, regular following up.”
– Interviewee 1
==PAGE:74==
64
Evaluation and Results
6.1.4.4
Monitoring
PRINCE 2 is used by one of the danish SMEs that operates within the IT
& Development sector.
Their project manager explains that since they are
running Agile projects they also you SAFe as guidance in their risk management
approach.
“It’s the same . . . it is PRINCE2.
So how you identify it, how you
follow up on it. The more we learn or the more we work with agile, we
have also the SAFE with the methodology that we are leaning towards.
So you can say you have a risk, who owns it? Or is it accepted and so
on.”
– Interviewee 3
Communication is used by Interviewee 2 for responding to risks. As the project
manager explains, they lack a structured approach to risk management, partic-
ularly in their main initiatives. However, the interviewee emphasizes that their
large projects follow a more structured plan. Their method for risk control is
to constantly communicate with the teams about new risks or how the detected
ones are progressing. To quote,
“It’s not that structure at all. like the particular risk monitoring like no.
Probably not. If there is some risk to something, then we communicate
and then we sort of highlighted. So we continuously talk about whether
there are risks to what we’re doing.”
– Interviewee 2
In one of the evaluated SMEs, parameters are utilized to measure cyber security
risk. Several tools and systems are used to facilitate this task. They do tests
and evaluations of the parameter patterns. However, it is critical to note that
this is not the methodology for managing risks in projects, but rather a method
of monitoring cyber security threats. In other words, the same approach is not
followed in the development area. In the project manager’s words,
“Yeah. We wanted to have through a lot of different systems and tools
and. . . parameters of course, we look at the daily cyber security . . . we
have a lot of tools that actually do penetration test and we have active
proactive tools and our firewall doing pattern analysis to figure out
malicious activities and stuff like that. I guess all in all I have between
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
65
5 and 7 different tools doing monitoring of risk when we talk about
cybersecurity and malicious activities. So there’s a lot of tools there.
And we use them all every day..”
– Interviewee 2
6.1.4.5
Adapting
The activity of adapting relates to how a company manages change (see Chap-
ter 3.1.3). Interviewee 5 follows a methodical strategy to perform this action.
According to the interviewee’s remarks, parameters are used to evaluate the
change.
“We have a risk framework for changes where we look at the severity
and the impact, if it goes wrong and stuff like that and we document it
and we follow up and we do evaluation of that. ”
– Interviewee 5
For the SMEs complying with the Agile Manifesto, change adaptation is guided
by the SAFe and PRINCE2 principles. The tasks are broken down and evaluated
according to their impact.
This is the factor that determines how they will
respond to a change. This is the factor that determines how they will respond
to a change. In one of the project manager’s words,
“That is depending on what it is. I actually think that is why we are
leaning more towards agile and not agile in a loose way of handling
things. But actually agile in SAFE methodology where we identified,
we breakdown the different jobs that we have or tasks we have and then
saying OK but customer if you can’t reach your deadline within this
then we can take this task instead. But be aware of the impact this will
have and then we show that towards them. So that’s between PRINCE2
and SAFE depending on the project.”
– Interviewee 3
==PAGE:76==
66
Evaluation and Results
6.1.4.6
Deciding
Interestingly, the decision-making process differs among the Danish SMEs under
consideration. One of Interviewee 3’s major goals is the definition of governance.
We agree that the definition of governance should be well-defined in the early
stages of this activity. To quote,
“We have a government. So when we start a project, we define the gov-
ernance and the project saying who can decide what’s within the man-
date of conscience and the project manager, what’s within the mandate
between the two project managers from the customer and content and
so on. What is for the steering committee to decide and what is above
the steering committee to decide.”
– Interviewee 3
The Rice model is utilized by Interviewee 2 as a method of doing the evaluation
of several options under consideration. Additionally, the financial impact and
customer value are used as criteria for the decision-making process. Additionally,
the fact that they use Agile practices, enhances the continuous reevaluation of
their decisions. In the project manager’s words,
“Our way of working is very agile in that sense. So we’re sort of always
reevaluating our decisions on this.
I think the rise model and then
looking at revenue and customer value is something that we do and
then we continuously IT valued those data points in as we have them”
– Interviewee 2
6.1.4.7
Learning
The knowledge and expertise gained from past projects might help the com-
pany enhance its operations and foresee potential pitfalls. Despite the fact that
their organization do not have a process for managing lessons learned from past
projects, Interviewee 1 recognizes the relevance of this activity with the Uncer-
tainty perspective. The Interviewee believes that this approach should be well
structured and documented.
“But it is important and I think we’re doing it too little and I think if
we could do it better and if we could do it more structured, if we could
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
67
do it more documented better it could be a good thing.”
– Interviewee 1
While the documentation of lessons learned is not followed by their SME, Inter-
viewee 2 explains that they embrace knowledge sharing through communities of
practice. We consider that this is a really great and relevant method for SMEs
when human resources are limited, and therefore knowledge sharing might en-
able employees to contribute to more tasks. In the project manager’s words,
“We do have these communities of practice. So we have a community
of practice for our product managers community of practice for our
designers and community of practice for our tech leads and community
of practice for our researchers. And just to always share knowledge and
experiences and see if there’s some new processes we should implement
or just, you know, here’s something that we’ve done that was really
great. You could take it or leave it. And so I think that’s maybe one
thing”
– Interviewee 2
According to Interviewee 3 all the learning are registered in a system and eval-
uated. This method is familiar with the risk register as mentioned in Chapter
Section 3.1.3.
“When we have had the internal and external evaluation if there are
some new lessons that we haven’t reached before, we have our Conflu-
ence site where we store those and then I can assign them. So I can
assign them to different parties in content. Because if it’s something
like handing over to managed service and then let’s say the difficulties
was that they didn’t have the resources needed when I hadn’t needed to
hand it over. Then I signed that learning to the manager for that de-
partment. So that he can say, OK, this is what the project came with.
I will look into that and if it comes again and again and saying OK,
we have maybe something really need to look into here that we need to
work on.”
– Interviewee 3
To conclude, in terms of project management methodologies, the Uncertainty
perspective is the least structured. An interesting finding is that the investigated
==PAGE:78==
68
Evaluation and Results
SMEs do not use formal practices for identifying, assessing, and monitoring risks.
Their Agile project management approach enables them to adapt to changes
quickly. Finally, SMEs recognize the value of learning from previous projects
and experiences by registering and exchanging knowledge in order to improve
their performance.
6.1.5
People
The People perspective focuses on the practices that can improve and optimize
the way an enterprise is managing its human resources (see Chapter 3.1.4). The
considered Danish SMEs demonstrate a profound interest in their practices for
managing people. The proposed activities under examination are presented in
Figure 6.4. The following section presents the practices used by the examined
Danish SMEs in each activity.
Figure 6.4: Proposed activities included in the People perspective.
6.1.5.1
Teaming
The formulation of a team that has a good dynamic is crucial for Interviewee 1.
Their strategy is to have a consistent team that is assigned to various initiatives.
This approach is also followed by Interviewee 2 whose company assigns teams
to projects rather than individuals. To quote,
“No, it’s the teams are long standing teams. So of course, we compose
those but that’s generic for all the teams that they consist of a certain
combination of people. But it’s not a new team. We stand up for every
project that team exists continuously.”
==PAGE:79==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
69
– Interviewee 2
We believe that this strategy is appropriate for SMEs because it allows for the
formation of strong bonds among team members as well as the ability to learn
about all teammates’ capabilities and skills. By maximizing each other’s knowl-
edge and skills, this strategy can be quite advantageous in terms of effective
collaborative working, especially given the restricted human resource availabil-
ity in SMEs as stated in Chapter 3.1.3.
Another parameter that Interviewee 3 uses when forming a team is the identi-
fication of people with relevant knowledge. The attitude and relationships that
a person can develop with customers are also considered. We believe that this
is a reasonable criterion for selecting team members. Collaboration with the
customer is critical in projects, so selecting people who can engage with them
can have a positive impact on project execution. To quote,
“That that is either PRINCE2 or a SAFE. So we look very much into
seeing if it right people that can do the technical part. That’s of course
the most important, but also do they fit into how the project is needed
to be structured. You know is it a long Project short project and also,
do they fit into?
The more you saying that the chemistry towards
the customer that’s also important and do they work well together and
stuff like that and yeah, so it’s an overall dialogue we have with the
consultant director saying, OK, do we think it’s the right fit for this
type of of project.”
– Interviewee 3
Interviewee 5 adopts a similar approach, emphasizing that the qualities and
capabilities of the people are taken into account when forming a team.
In
addition to that, the interviewee mentions the use of software that assists them
with this process.
“We have an application called people plan on where everyone is regis-
tered with their capacities and the qualities and they are availabilities.
So when you start off a project, you can see who’s available and who’s
not available. When we’re talking about the more pure development in
regards to the agile team, of course there are members.”
– Interviewee 5
==PAGE:80==
70
Evaluation and Results
Interviewee 5 also mentions employee education as a critical practice that busi-
nesses should implement.
6.1.5.2
Communicating
Several practices are used by the analyzed SMEs to communicate efficiently.
Slack was mentioned as the software used by two SMEs for communication. In-
terviewee 2 explains that Slack is specifically used for internal communication.
Furthermore, they are utilizing communication channels for more efficient in-
formation flow and interaction among stakeholders. In the projects manager’s
words,
“And so for the beginnings too, it’s like I said, would you these ex-
ecutive check-ins for communication?
We use slack as our internal
communication tool and everything goes there. So we have channels
for information that comes out of the of the projects for people to com-
municate. And so that’s how we do a lot of that and then together with
our own tool where there’s also a certain amount of commenting and
interaction going on.”
– Interviewee 2
Interviewee 3’s communication strategy varies depending on the project man-
agement methodology that they use. The interviewee mentions that there is no
structured communication plan in Agile projects that follow the SAFe guide-
lines, but rather a Scrum approach or stand-up meetings.
“Yes, we have.
If we use a communication strategy because let’s be
honest, you’re not always using that. But if we are is PRINCE2, we are
using for that one. It can be safe, so we have scrum meetings or stand
ups and stuff like that in regards to the Day-to-day communication
between the different engineers and stuff like that.”
– Interviewee 3
6.1.5.3
Engaging
The activity of engaging investigates how companies are engaging with their
stakeholders. Interviewee 2 mentions that stakeholders are engaged differently
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
71
according to their power and influence on the project.
“It depends on the stakeholders . . . everything we do is almost stake-
holder management. So we have talked about the stakeholders in the
organization that we talk about sort of the executive check-ins . . . which
is towards our C level of the organization. We do these discovery of
fruits presentations where each team presents what they’ve been do-
ing and what they found out in terms of what we’re building. We do
presentations to the rest of the organization on what we’re doing. ”
– Interviewee 2
In the same SME, customer feedback is used as a practice for engaging with
stakeholders.
Customers, in particular, are important stakeholders for that
particular enterprise, and their opinions and satisfaction are critical.
In the
project manager’s words,
“We work closely with our customers, which I’m very big stakeholder
in what we’re doing right and in online meetings and show what we’re
doing with them and take their feedback all the time. So stakeholder
engagement is sort of very much at the forefront of what we do all the
time.”
– Interviewee 2
According to Interviewee 3, meetings are the fundamental practice for engaging
with stakeholders in their organization. The meeting’s frequency is determined
by the stakeholder’s role in the project. For this purpose, the project manager
identifies and maps them in an excel document.
“We have normally weekly meetings with the customer project manager
and also internally we have the project once a week we have a project
meeting. We are also have a steering committee meetings at least once
a month, maybe more often, if that’s relevant. And then often we try to
sit locally at the customer just to, you know, engage with them and so
on. But the stakeholder we don’t necessarily have a methodology except
what I just talked to you about in the steering committee and so on.
But going outside. It’s more that we try to identify the stakeholders
and then write down why and stuff like that. That is often done in an
excel sheet.”
– Interviewee 3
==PAGE:82==
72
Evaluation and Results
Interviewee 4, mentions that it is critical for them to ensure that all relevant
stakeholders are aware of the project’s vision and the value it provides. They
are more motivated when they understand the impact each stakeholder has on
the project and the value they bring.
“We are back to the why, you know, if they understand if we have been
good enough writing down the customers, why we often have higher
motivation. That’s my experience. So if everyone understands why we
are doing this, not technically, but why are we doing this? What value
do we bring and why is each member important.”
– Interviewee 4
6.1.5.4
Leading
What are the characteristics and practices that a good leader should follow?
The response to this question of the project managers of the examined SMEs
reveals interesting information about the importance of this activity and its
relevance to SMEs. According to Interviewee 1, honesty and transparency are
the two key elements a leader should have.
“And then have some good advices and if you ask me, I will repeat
myself and say rule number one about people is about transparency and
honesty.”
– Interviewee 1
An interesting opinion of Interviewee 1 is that people develop the skills to man-
age people primarily through experience or through their personality. While
many books suggest how a manager should lead and motivate employees, Inter-
viewee 1 believes that usually comes down to a person’s soft skills.
“So I think all these people skills, as I mentioned before are about the
soft skills. Because none of these are are kind of you can read . . . 10
books about motivating people . . . But if you use them I would say use
them the way that you as a sort of inspiration and a source of kind of
I should try to remember all of this, and then I should do what I think
is most right in the given minute. I have to do it, so a placeholder for
like. Don’t forget to treat people with honesty and respect I think that’s
the key.”
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
73
– Interviewee 1
According to Interviewee 3, the key is to set clear expectations with customers
and project participants. It is critical in their approach not only to ensure that
everyone is aware and understands what is expected to hand in but also to
ensure that the deliverable is what the customers expect from them in order to
be satisfied. To quote,
“Setting an expectation both toward the customer but also towards the
participants in the project. We’re doing that in the kickoffs we have
both internally and with the customer saying, OK, this is what I’m
expecting to deliver. Does that live up to what you expect and so on
but And then we are using PRINCE2 or SAFE? And so that can change
what they can expect.”
– Interviewee 3
There are also SMEs that do not follow a systematic approach to leading their
projects and people. For instance, Interviewee 2 states,
“Not within project management. I think we go back to talking about
our empowered teams. That’s how we work. And so my role is of course
lead by example in any way we can get around it but most importantly
for someone like me and for the product managers is to constantly talk
about why we’re doing what we’re doing. So we we lead with why we
lead with customer problems and customer pains and in everything we
do. But I don’t think we have any other sort of leading practices as
such.”
– Interviewee 2
6.1.5.5
Mediating
Interviewee 2 reveals that they do not have a conflict resolution strategy. In
particular, they take a more haphazard approach in order to perform the activity
of mediating. The same pattern is observed in many of the considered SMEs.
In Interviewee 2’s words,
“No. And there’s only say it as soon as there is a risk, and then we’ll
deal with it. That there’s no methodology.”
==PAGE:84==
74
Evaluation and Results
– Interviewee 2
Furthermore, Interviewee 2 explains that it is all about culture when it comes
to avoiding conflicts.
They do not have a strategy because the interviewee
believes that when an organization’s culture is healthy, employees can have
disagreements that are easily managed.
“No, I don’t think that. I think if you need to have an approach for
conflict management, then you’re in a tight spot. And so conflict man-
agement has to do with being with people. We’re back to having a col-
laborative approach and a culture where you can respectfully disagree
and that we can have open discussions around.”
– Interviewee 2
Interviewee 3 highlights that conflict is a topic very relevant to stakeholder
management. However, the interviewee states the way one manages conflicts
varies according to the authority level an employee or a manager has.
“Then we have going also back to the governance in the project. So if I
have a conflict, when do i escalate it If it’s not within the limits I can
handle.”
– Interviewee 3
6.1.5.6
Motivating
The examined Danish SMEs are very keen on motivating their employees. In-
terviewee 2 interprets challenging assignments as a good way to keep employees
motivated. Interviewee 2 explains that people usually like to improve their skills
and abilities, and that difficult tasks can help them achieve this goal.
“It’s very much how we work on motivating people and trying to give
them challenging assignments so that they can continuously build and
and develop themselves and I think that’ what we do to motivate.”
– Interviewee 2
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
75
Additionally, the same SME uses data analysis to ensure that all employees
are doing well and feeling comfortable with their workload. They consider this
method very transparent which is a very important parameter for motivation.
“. . . we try to always get back to us trying to be data driven. And so we
do surveys E, NPS surveys and so employee NPS surveys and then we
do biweekly. It’s going to be biweekly or monthly actually and where
we just started gathering, doing like temperature checks on the orga-
nization too. To understand how they are feeling, how they’re doing?
And so we always have sort of a check in with the people to understand
you know where they are and I think a big part of motivation is also
transparency. So we talk a lot about what’s going on and what we’re
doing and where we’re heading and.”
– Interviewee 2
Interviewee 5 considers the development of employees’ skills also an element
for increasing their motivation. In their enterprise, they have a career plan for
people who are interested in doing the extra mile and developing themselves on
a professional level. To quote,
“We have a career plan for for every developer and of course we try
to match the career plan to to the real life in case of someone wants
to develop a new set of skills. But then again, sometimes it’s just not
possible because we need a guy or girl who has this capacity and this
is exactly what this developer has and this debatable wants to handle
another technology, but now we need to have this so I think it’s very
much when the line manager and the resource to figure out the career
plan and hopefully the everyday life also supports the career plan but
it’s not easy.”
– Interviewee 5
Overall, People perspective is a crucial element for every project. In the case
of Danish SMEs, all interviewees emphasize the importance of a structured
approach to that activity. When forming a team, parameters such as the em-
ployee’s skills and qualities are taken into account. In terms of communication
and information flow, businesses have a strategy for communicating any changes
and updates to the appropriate stakeholders. The level of engagement with a
stakeholder is determined by their degree of influence and interest. The prac-
tices for leading a project and a team are associated more with the soft skill of a
==PAGE:86==
76
Evaluation and Results
person. Specifically, transparency and honesty are considered essential charac-
teristics of a good leader. Moreover, conflicts are mainly managed at the point
of occurrence. Employee motivation is a primary concern of the considered Dan-
ish SMEs. In particular, they try to keep their employees motivated by helping
them develop further their skills and assigning them challenging tasks.
6.1.6
Use of Project Management Software
In this work, we are also interested in investigating the use of use project man-
agement software in the context of SMEs. Thus, all interviewees are questioned
whether they use software to perform the activities that are associated with
each of the four perspectives discussed in Chapter 3.1.
Two of the interviewees mention that they do not use any project management
tool to tailor their project management practices. According to Interviewee 1,
the organization is still growing and they are in a place to start developing their
methodologies. This is the reason they have not invested in project management
software yet. Interviewee 4 is hesitant to include the software in their regular
project management activities due to their aversion to new technologies. On the
other hand, the remaining examined SMEs use project management software in
order to perform different activities. More specifically, they use software to carry
out all of the activities in the Purpose perspective. For example, Interviewee 2
notes that they have software to execute every action, however, Interviewee 3
adds that they use Excel and PowerPoint in some tasks because the software they
use, does not support specific practices. Note that MS Office is not considered
project management software in this work.
The Complexity perspective is the most popular among the examined SMEs. In
particular, they use project management software to conduct activities such as
scheduling, resourcing, and budgeting. They either employ a centralized system
or independent ones to manage all of the activities. Improving is one activity
that is not clear whether the considered organizations use the same tool as the
one they use for planning or they employ a new one solely for this activity.
The same is true for contracting, as the majority of interviewers state that the
practice they have for this activity is the formulation of the business case. It is
assumed that they do not use any software for building business cases because
none of the respondents mentions it.
When it comes to the People dimension, all examined SMEs use systems for
managing the aspects related to the human factor in a project. More specifi-
cally, the use of software to support the practices related to engagement with
stakeholders, communication, and team formation. However, it is worth noting
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Quantitative Evaluation
77
that some actions, such as leading, mediating, and motivating, are difficult to
document and support using project management software. This is reinforced
by the interviews in which the SMEs have a practice in place but do not use any
software. Finally, it seems that limited or no project management software tools
are used for managing the Uncertainty in projects. This can be also explained
by the fact that the examined SMEs do not use a structured approach for the
activities related to risk management.
6.1.7
Challenges of Danish SMEs
The challenges that the considered SMEs usually face during their projects are
also considered for the qualitative analysis.
As discussed also in Chapter 2,
Danish SMEs seem to face financial and human resource limitations. According
to Interviewee 1, a shortage of financial resources leads to a “small knowledge
base”, as team expertise variety is always constrained. Additionally, SMEs lack
organizational structure in terms of procedure and process standardization, and
transparency. The aforementioned arguments are supported by Interviewee 4 as
well. Furthermore, one of the biggest problems SMEs face is the cap on capital
investment.
More particular, Interviewee 3 claims that because the scope is
usually narrower, it takes longer to persuade people that a business case is
advantageous for the firm. However, some interviewees emphasized that the
small size of the enterprise provides them an advantage in the way they run
their projects. More specifically, Interviewee2 explains that SMEs can merit
stakeholder management due to their small size.
6.2
Quantitative Evaluation
The quantitative evaluation seeks to assess the project management model cre-
ated during the first round of the development of the framework. To achieve
this, the dataset described in Chapter 5.4.2 is used. After the prepossessing of
the dataset, 43 project cases operated by various SMEs are available. There is
information for each case on whether the project had challenges in each of the
four perspectives. The challenges for each perspective are grouped according to
the activities identified during the theoretical foundation (see Chapter 3.1 and
Chapter 5.2). Note that more than one challenge can be present for one case
in each perspective. For example, an SME can face a challenge both during
the activities of scoping and investing within the perspective of Purpose. For
each perspective, we calculate how many times each of the activities occur as
a challenge as well as the total number of recorded challenges. In this way, a
==PAGE:88==
78
Evaluation and Results
percentage that represents the frequency of occurrence for each activity is cal-
culated separately for all the perspectives. Intuitively, this percentage is used
to determine the significance of each action in each perspective.
The challenges the analyzed SMEs encountered from the Purpose perspective
are illustrated in Figure 6.5. The challenges are grouped by each activity and
illustrated in a ascending order. In total, 22 challenges are identified for this
perspective within the dataset. It is evident that more than half of the challenges
(54.6%) presented in the dataset fall into the action of scoping, making it the
most significant challenge from this perspective.
Around 2 out of 10 of the
challenges come from either the action of succeeding (22.7%) or the action of
aiming (18.2%).
The least important challenge in the dataset is the one of
living.
Figure 6.5: Challenges in the Purpose perspective.
Figure 6.8 illustrates the challenges the assessed SMEs encountered from the
Complexity perspective. Again, they are calculated for each activity and sorted
based on their importance ratios. In total, 25 challenges are identified for this
perspective within the dataset. Scheduling is by far the most challenging action
given that almost 5 out of 10 of the challenges come from this activity. Resourc-
ing (16%), budgeting (16%), estimating (12%) comes also with challenges for
SMEs. Form the Complexity perspective, contracting and improving appear to
be the actions that SMEs find the least challenging.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Quantitative Evaluation
79
Figure 6.6: Challenges in the Complexity perspective.
The results calculated from 25 challenges recorded in the Uncertainty perceptive
are shown in Figure 6.5. The challenges are grouped by the activities and sorted
based on their importance. From this perspective, identifying and assessing can
be considered as the most challenging activities that an SME has to face during
a project. The actions of responding is also essential with an importance ratio
of 11.5%. For the examined SMEs, monitoring, learning, and deciding may be
not significant, since each of these activities is present only once as a challenge.
In general, for more than 3 out of 10 cases (34.6%), the lack of risk management
methods is associated with challenges occurred in the perspective of Uncertainty.
Figure 6.7: Challenges in the Uncertainty perspective.
==PAGE:90==
80
Evaluation and Results
The results for People perspective, are grouped by the activities and presented
in ascending order in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: Challenges in the People perspective.
From the recorded cases, it seems that in the People perspective occurs the most
challenges for SMEs. More specifically, 36 challenges in total are identified for
this perspective within the dataset. From this perspective, by far the most chal-
lenging activity is communicating. The actions of teaming, engaging, mediating
are also important with ratios of 19.4%, 16.7%, and 11.1% respectively. The
least challenging actions for SMEs seem to be leading and motivating.
In summary, the quantitative analysis offer the necessary overview to better
understand the challenges that SMEs usually have to faced during their projects.
To have a better intuition where the challenges originate, they are grouped
depending on the actions in each perspective. From the analysis, it is evident
that the proposed project management framework is capable of identifying all
the challenges. On top of that, the analysis also demonstrates the actions that
SMEs find the most challenging. In this way, we can highlight the areas that
required the most attention from the side of SMEs in our framework.
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 7
Proposed Project
Management Framework
In this Chapter, we propose a general project management framework, targeted
specifically at SMEs, that can be used throughout the whole life cycle of a
project. The first iteration of the model is both qualitatively and qualitatively
evaluated in Chapter 6. After the extensive evaluation, we are able to have
a better intuition about the challenges and usual practices of SMEs and thus
better adapt the proposed model to their needs. In this way, we seek to provide
a structured and methodological framework in order to help SMEs deliver suc-
cessful projects. The proposed model is organized into three hierarchical levels,
with the first being the paradigm of Geraldi et al. [25], in which projects are
assessed using four perspectives; Purpose, Complexity, Uncertainty and People.
Different from [25], the second level of hierarchy includes the activities associ-
ated with each perspective specifically targeting SMEs. By using the notion
of activities, we aim to highlight the need for human involvement in the com-
pletion of different actions within each perspective. The last level includes the
applicable project management methods for SMEs that can be used as enablers
for implementing the proposed actions. In the following sections, we present the
proposed project management model by depicting the activities and practices
associated with each of the four perspectives.
==PAGE:92==
82
Proposed Project Management Framework
7.1
Purpose
The first part of the proposed project management framework is for the per-
spective of Purpose and it is illustrated in Figure 7.1. The activities within this
perspective are namely, living, succeeding, investing, aiming, scoping. A detailed
description of each action can be found in Chapter 3.1.1.
Figure 7.1: Project management framework for the Purpose Perspective.
The activity of living is classified into Predictive and Adaptive life cycle models.
The Waterfall, Sequential, and Stage gate model are all predictive paradigms.
In our framework, the adaptive life cycle method encompasses models such as
Iterative, Agile, Incremental, and Spiral.
Three separate factors are evaluated in the activity of succeeding More specifi-
cally, the Iron triangle triple constraint model is used to analyze the success of
the project’s internal elements. i.e, Internal Factors. In this way, the project’s
success is assessed by whether it is completed within the agreed-upon Time,
Cost, and Quality. The second component is concerned with the project’s cus-
tomer, i.e, Customer Factors. A project is regarded as successful if the customer
is satisfied and willing to use the delivered project. Finally, the Profit and Mar-
ket share gained by the project’s execution can be used to evaluate it. These
are the two Organizational Factors for assessing a project’s success.
For investment evaluation, i.e, the action of investing, the business case is used
as suggested by both the literature and our qualitative analysis. We strongly
believe that the construction of the business case should include an analysis
of the financial evaluation as well as a market study. These components are
==PAGE:93==
7.2 Complexity
83
covered in our model, and we suggest numerous methods for carrying out the
Financial Evaluation and Market Analysis, respectively. The practices of this
activity are illustrated in Figure 7.1.
The action of aiming explains why an enterprise is doing a project. This activity
is found to be extremely important for SMEs, and hence it is included in this
model. Specifically, the project’s Vision is utilized to describe the company’s
ambitions. We propose that the Project Vision Statement is an appropriate
practice in this instance. Furthermore, defining the project’s Value is a practice
that can be utilized to explain why a project is being undertaken. The last ele-
ment is the examination of the Impact this project can have on the organization.
We suggest Benefit Realization, as well as the definition and continual evalu-
ation of the output, outcome, and benefit, as the most appropriate techniques
for identifying and evaluating the impact that a project can have.
From our analysis, scoping is considered a very relevant activity for Danish
SMEs, and thus it is essential to include it in our project management model.
This activity can be divided into the Scope Definition and Requirements Col-
lection. WBS, Goal Hierarchy, and SMART goals are three approaches that can
help determine the scope of a project. The requirements collections include,
but are not limited to, Business, Technical, Customer, Quality, and Stakeholder
requirements.
7.2
Complexity
Five activities are included in the Complexity perspective of our proposed model,
namely, estimating, scheduling, resourcing, budgeting, contracting. A detailed
description of each action can be found in Chapter 3.1.2. This part of the pro-
posed framework is illustrated in Figure 7.2. Note that improving is not included
in the framework’s final version. This activity was initially suggested based on
the literature and it was incorporated into the first design iteration. However,
after completing both the qualitative and quantitative analyses, we determined
that improving is not a relevant activity for Danish SMEs and hence we removed
it from the Complexity perspective and our final model. This activity can be
included in a more general project management framework that is not solely
focused on SMEs.
The activity of estimating includes the methods and techniques that can be used
to calculate the amount of time, resources, and budget the project requires.
The estimate methodologies that are applicable to our project management
framework for SMEs are shown in Figure 7.2.
==PAGE:94==
84
Proposed Project Management Framework
Figure 7.2: Project management framework for the Complexity Perspective.
According to the literature and both the qualitative and quantitative evalua-
tions, scheduling is crucial for managing project complexity. Firstly, the tasks
necessary to complete the project should be identified. Note that the tasks are
also called activities in PMBOK [21] which is different from our definition of
activity or action. For identification, the Kanban board, the list of the activi-
ties that need to be finished, and the list of milestones are all included in our
model. Furthermore, it is important to identify the Dependencies between the
various activities. The use of techniques like Precedence Diagramming Method
(PDM) and Lead & Lag can aid with this. The choice of their proper Sequence
follows the identification of the dependencies.
More explicitly, in this work,
project management techniques including CPM and Gantt charts, the priori-
tization of are considered in order to help with determining the best order of
project activities.
The methods that can assist SMEs to merit their approach to resource manage-
ment, are Resource Identification, Assignment, and Allocation. The action of
resourcing begins with the identification of the human resource Competencies
required for the project. Determining the Resource Assignment requires consid-
eration of the RBS, Resource Capacity, and Resource Availability. Finally, for
the best use of the human factor, a plan for Resource Allocation can be used.
The action of budgeting begins with cost planning in our framework. A cost
management strategy, in particular, may be used for this procedure. Further-
more, the cost factors should be established and measured. Finally, the budget
may be determined by establishing the baseline.
The action of contracting is also considered in our framework. The business case
==PAGE:95==
7.3 Uncertainty
85
is used to convince SMEs if they should manufacture or purchase a product or
service. This choice is examined in this framework using Financial, Market, and
Value analysis. The Cost Evaluation is a catalyst for determining whether it
is worthwhile to develop a product in-house or purchase it. Furthermore, the
evaluation of Competition and Market Opportunities are critical components of
this analysis. An organization may consider producing a product if it believes it
would provide opportunities for growth. Finally, an evaluation of the Benefits
that this product will provide is required.
7.3
Uncertainty
The Uncertainty perspective includes seven activities, namely identifying, as-
sessing, responding, monitoring, adapting, deciding, learning. These are illus-
trated in Figure 7.3.
A detailed description of each action can be found in
Chapter 3.1.3. From the interviews, it seems that Danish SMEs do not use a sys-
tematic project management approach to handle Uncertainty in their projects.
Yet, from our quantitative analysis, it is evident that SMEs face at least one
challenge in each of the associated activities. In general, there is always a con-
cern that the success of a project may be at risk due to the lack of project
management practices.
Even though the qualitative evaluation may suggest
that Danish SMEs do not use project management approaches to control un-
certainty, we choose to incorporate this perspective into the model. This choice
is strongly supported not only by the literature but also by our quantitative
analysis.
Figure 7.3: Project management framework for the Uncertainty Perspective.
The activity of identifying includes Data Gathering, Data Analysis, analysis,
==PAGE:96==
86
Proposed Project Management Framework
and Documentation of project risks. Our study considers risks as challenges
that can have either good or negative consequences. A risk, in more particular
terms, might be a threat or an opportunity. Data should be collected before
beginning the analysis. We propose using Brainstorming, a Risk Checklist, or
interviews to get the essential information. To examine the data and determine
the root causes of a problem, methodologies such as SWOT analysis are utilized
in our model. Moreover, a Risk Register can be utilized to better document
potential threats and opportunities.
A qualitative or a quantitative approach might be used to evaluate the identified
risks during the action of assessing. This activity starts by defining the Risk
Environment and more specifically, with the establishment of the Risk Tolerance,
Assumptions, and Thresholds.
An SME has the flexibility to decide which
assessment approach is best for the project. The probability/impact matrix is
proposed for the qualitative approach, while Monte Carlo simulation is suggested
for the quantitative approach.
The third activity focuses on risk responding. Two risk-response strategies are
suggested in this model. On the one hand, there is the Negative Risk response,
which includes techniques like Avoid, Transfer, Mitigation, and Acceptance.
Conversely, the Positive Risk response points to tactics like Exploit, Share,
Enhancement, and Acceptance.
The action of monitoring includes two practices in order to monitor Uncertainty
in projects. In particular, the continual monitoring of the Cost & Schedule is an
important element of this operation. The milestone Trend Analysis, Burndown
Chart, and Earned Value are the proposed practices. Furthermore, monitor-
ing Performance & Quality through Performance Review and Quality Control
Measurements is suggested.
We also include in our project management framework a change adaptation
activity, i.e, the action of adapting.
SMEs can use Scope Creep to manage
changes in project Scope, while Retrospectives and Re-prioritization can help
enterprises effectively manage change in Agile/Adaptive Environments.
The activity of deciding is used for optimizing the decision-making process. Our
model strives to empower SMEs with the tools they need to make strategic de-
cisions. To this end, Scenario Analysis can be applied to Future Elucidation.
Fault Trees and Event Tree Analysis can be used to form a decision tree anal-
ysis. Finally, the Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) and Multiple-Criteria Decision
Analysis (MCDA) can be used for the evaluation of different alternatives.
Lastly, learning is the seventh activity of this perspective. This activity com-
prises learning and maturing practices from prior projects and experiences, as
==PAGE:97==
7.4 People
87
well as effective knowledge exchange. More specifically, a Lessons Learned reg-
ister and a Learning Plan can be employed to document the knowledge that the
company has gained from previous projects. Communities of practice can be
utilized to improve people sharing their knowledge and assisting their colleagues.
7.4
People
People is the last perspective of our project management framework. This di-
mension includes the following activities; teaming, communicating, engaging,
leading, mediating, and motivating. Figure 7.4 illustrates the part of our frame-
work for this perspective. A detailed description of each action can be found in
Chapter 3.1.4.
Figure 7.4: Project management framework for the People Perspective.
The activity of teaming reflects on the practices needed for Setting, Developing,
and Educating a team. In other words, when forming a team, the Role definition,
the required Competencies and Skills, and Personality are all considered. For
team development, the Five Stage Model can be employed. Finally, the On-
boarding and Training of new employee Education are critical to ensuring that
a person has the necessary expertise to contribute to the organization and the
project.
In our model, we consider the exchange of Information and Communication as
the main elements of communicating. Information should be easily available
to all the project members in order to increase transparency. Furthermore, the
establishment of Information Channels can support providing a more structured
approach to information transmission. For efficient communication, we recom-
mend SMEs define their communication Strategy and Frequency. Furthermore,
==PAGE:98==
88
Proposed Project Management Framework
we advocate developing a communication strategy and defining the communi-
cation approach toward stakeholders.
The third activity of this perspective is called engaging. In particular, it includes
the practices related with the Identification, Assessment and Engagement of
the stakeholder. The best practices for effective stakeholder management are
illustrated in Figure 7.4.
A part of leading a project and its participants is to keep employees motivated
and inspire them. Our model takes into consideration the behavioral character-
istics, i.e, Behaviours of a leader by including practices such as Self-awareness
and MBTI. We believe that a project’s leader should adopt an inspiring leader-
ship style by fostering trust and assuring Transparency.
The action of mediating is suggested for managing Conflict and defining Gov-
ernance. We propose, Problem Solving, Compromise, Withdrawal, and Nego-
tiation as practices to manage crises between employees. Apart from that, the
definition of Governance is an important point. It is recommended to establish
an individual’s level of power at an early stage in order to determine whether
he or she can manage the disagreement or if it should be escalated.
Finally, the practices for keeping employees motivated are included in the activ-
ity of motivating. We believe that the Personal Characteristics of individuals
is a parameter that can increase their motivation. Additionally, Job Charac-
teristics can also influence their motivation. Lastly, the Job Satisfaction that
employees receive from their job can also affect their motivation level.
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 8
Evaluation of Online Tools
Our proposed framework described in Chapter 7 can be utilized by SMEs not
only as a model for executing project management practices but also as a method
for systematic evaluation of contemporary project management software. This
chapter demonstrates the power of the proposed framework to assess the fea-
tures of commercial online tools. By mapping a software’s capabilities into our
model, we can methodically evaluate its capacity to positively contribute to the
effective implementation of the project. For instance, for a specific tool, the key
features are first identified, and subsequently, their correlation to the activities
and practices from each perspective is captured into the model.
This study
evaluates five project management software by comparing their properties using
the elements of the proposed model.
==PAGE:100==
90
Evaluation of Online Tools
#
Project Management
Software
1
Wrike
2
Asana
3
Trello
4
Monday
5
Jira
6
Smartsheet
7
One Point Project
8
Adobe Workfront
9
Project Online
Table 8.1: Project management software under consideration.
Several online tools were discovered during the project management framework’s
initial design phase in Chapter 5.3. For convenience, we provide again a sum-
mary of all the examined tools in Table 8.1. Note that all of them are proprietary
software. This choice is due to the fact proprietary software usually provides
ad hoc support and a friendly user interface. This is probably why proprietary
software is widely used in the industry. Given that SMEs may show resistance
to new technologies we believe that these characteristics of propriety software
can better motivate SMEs to use online tools. In our work, we consider that
the most famous commercial project management software.
In order to select five of them, we evaluated their ability to provide services to
the majority of the main features discussed in detail in Chapter 4.2. The key fea-
tures mentioned in the literature are namely communication, time management,
resource management, budget management, risk management, performance, re-
porting, and documentation. We exclude from the final evaluation the tools that
required additional funding for providing features apart from the default one.
Given the limitation of the financial resource of Danish SMEs [19] we believe
that a solution with limited standard features will not be beneficial as it only in-
creases its cost. The last parameter for choosing the software under assessment
is its ability to provide a solution to the activities included in every perspective
of our model. This is because our work provides a holistic project management
framework that is crucial for the successful implementation of an SME’s project.
In other words, software that does not meet the criteria of our general frame-
work is not considered relevant for SMEs. To this end, online tools that do not
include features for at least one perspective are excluded from this study. Note
that the features of reporting and documentation are not explicitly covered as
activities in our model. Yet, these functionalities can obviously be performed
by using the practices included in the activity of monitoring.
Trello is not considered in this research as it only includes the features commu-
==PAGE:101==
8.1 Modern Project Management Tools
91
nicating, time management, performance. Since the majority of the key features
previously mentioned are not part of this software we believe that it is not
capable to assist SMEs to tailor their project management practices. Wrike,
Smartsheet, Microsoft Project are also excluded from the final evaluation be-
cause of their inability to capture the elements of the perspectives of Purpose
and Uncertainty. Lastly, Jira even if could be considered a general-purpose tool
it provides only limited standard solutions. The extra features can be added
with extra costs making the tool expensive for SMEs. The five project man-
agement software this study assesses are: Asana, Monday, Onepoint Projects,
Adobe Workfront, and Project Online.
8.1
Modern Project Management Tools
1. Asana1 is an project management software that provides project man-
agement solutions since 2008. It is a web-based solution used by businesses
to foster cooperation and communication among project participants [64].
It is also used for scheduling and resource management planning and or-
ganization.
Finally, it incorporates communicating, time management,
resource management, performance, documentation and reporting among
the essential qualities listed in the literature.
2. Monday2 is a web-based platform launched in 2014 enabling users to
build customized applications for project management. It aids in opti-
mizing how project members work and communicate with one another.
It offers five products that are targeted at particular sectors of a busi-
ness. More precisely, we have included two products in our work that are
relevant to SMEs project implementation. To begin, Monday Work Man-
agement is concerned with optimizing the project’s timetable. Second, the
Monday project delivers broad solutions that may be applied throughout a
project’s life cycle. It is worth mentioning that budget management is the
only features described in the literature that is not among its capabilities.
3. Onepoint Projects3 has been a piece of software that helps businesses
customize their project management procedures since 2005.
A project
can be supported by this web-based software during its entire life cycle.
There are four steps that make up the tool’s concepts.
First of all, it
offers features related to a project’s planning phase. Additionally, it orga-
nizes the tasks and activities necessary to advance and complete a project.
Thirdly, it enables constant surveillance to verify that actions are taken to
1https://asana.com
2https://monday.com/
3https://www.onepoint-projects.com/en
==PAGE:102==
92
Evaluation of Online Tools
prevent unanticipated events that might jeopardize the project. To help
with decision-making, it also provides forecasting features. It includes the
majority of the features mentioned in the academic bibliography except
budget management.
4. Adobe Workfront4 Workfront is an online project management tool orig-
inally launched in 2001. It promises to serve as a stepping stone for con-
necting people, data, processes, and technology. It is built on three pillars,
the first of which is identifying the project’s objectives and goals. Then,
these actions may be continuously monitored to ensure that any changes
are detected. Apart from that, project planning elements are also included
in this tool. Interestingly, it provides consumers with the option of inte-
grating other software. Risk management, and budget management are
the key features that are not included in Adobe Workfront.
5. Project Online5 is a web-based tool provided by Microsoft. It is consid-
ered as one of the oldest project management software initially released
in 1984. Currently, its features can support several project management
practices including the planning of schedules and resources. Additionally,
Project Online can also be used to monitor and forecast future occur-
rences. One advantage of this tool is the incorporation of extra features.
The extra features include numerous common project management oper-
ations and might give the organization the ability to have a centralized
system to handle projects. It is the only software that supports all the
features mentioned in literature.
8.2
Evaluation based on Proposed Framework
The proposed project management framework described in Chapter 7 is used
to evaluate five modern software solutions, namely, Asana, Monday, Onepoint
Project, Adobe Workfront, Project Online. The project management capabilities
of the aforementioned tools are summarized in Table 8.2. The default features
are highlighted with a black cross, while the optional features are highlighted
with a red cross. It is worth noting that the tools are evaluated on a higher
level, implying that attention is given to the main activities associated with each
perspective. In other words, we do not consider the specific concepts or methods
included in each activity for the high-level evaluation illustrated in Table 8.2.
This is because we believe that this level of detail is not required for the main
evaluation. Despite the fact that we exclude this degree of detail from Table
8.2, a detailed description of the capabilities of each tool is provided below.
4https://www.workfront.com/
5https://project-online.com/
==PAGE:103==
8.2 Evaluation based on Proposed Framework
93
Asana provide limited support for the Purpose perspective.
There are only
features to support the definition of the scope, i.e, the action of scoping, such
as WBS and the definition of goals and sub-goals. On the other hand, Asana
includes a lot of features to accommodate the Complexity perspective.
The
software provides the foundation for project scheduling by supporting methods
such as the Kanban Board and the creation of lists of milestones and tasks.
Moreover, the Critical Path Model can be used in regard to the optimal sequence
of activities. Furthermore, the tool includes features for the identification of task
dependencies. Apart from that, the tool is supplied with resource assignment
and allocation capabilities. In particular, it allows for the implementation of an
RBS and the measurement of resource workload. The main drawback of Asana
is its inability to support the activities that manage Uncertainty in projects.
When it comes to People perspective, this software can be used to implement
communication and information exchange.
Monday contributes to the Purpose perspective by reinforcing the financial eval-
uation of an investment and defining the scope of a project. More specifically,
the tool includes a cash flow template to help with project investment evaluation,
while WBS and goal definition and tracking can help with project scoping. Ad-
ditionally, it enables both predictive and adaptive life cycle models. In terms of
Complexity, the tool assists with project scheduling and resourcing. The Kanban
Board can assist with activity identification, while the Gantt Chart and task pri-
oritization can be used for the activity of sequencing. Furthermore, the software
can assist in the detection of task dependencies and the creation of a baseline to
track the status and progress of the activities, i.e, tasks. Furthermore, the tool
includes the capability of resource assignment and allocation. On top of that, it
offers several features that cover many activities of the Uncertainty perspective.
Specifically, it includes a risk register template for documenting the identified
risks. Foremost, the software strengthens the qualitative risk assessment. It
also has attributes for monitoring the Cost & Schedule and Performance &
Quality. For the People perspective, Monday facilitates information flow and
communication among project members, while it can also provide feedback to
keep employees motivated.
Onepoint Project also includes features for scope definition while it aids initia-
tives that use an adaptable life cycle strategy. As the aforementioned tools, it
does not support other activities of Purpose. When it comes to Complexity, this
software also supports activities such as scheduling and resourcing. The Kanban
Board, the Gantt Chart, the identification of dependencies, and the development
of a roadmap are all features that can be used to define the project’s activities,
optimal sequence, and interconnections. More specifically, the tool can assist in
the assignment and allocation of resources by capturing their availability and
creating an allocation plan. While it does not directly support risk identifica-
tion, it can perform a qualitative assessment of opportunities and threats. Fur-
==PAGE:104==
94
Evaluation of Online Tools
thermore, it manages Uncertainty by monitoring multiple aspects of a project.
Changes can be adapted by re-prioritizing and capturing task re-privatizations
while the tool has the capability of creating scenario analysis, assisting in the
future elucidation and thus the decision making. From the People perspective,
Onepoint Project supports the activity of communicating while it also helps in
the evaluation of stakeholders and employee motivation.
Adobe Workfront support the activities of scoping and living in the Perspective
perspective as the previously discussed tools. From the perspective of Com-
plexity, this software reinforces the practices associated with project scheduling.
More precisely, it allows the creation of Kanban Boards, Gantt charts, and base-
lines. Recently, the assignment and allocation of resources were added as a new
feature of the tool. Yet, there are still no risk management features from the
perspective of Uncertainty. On the other hand, it already includes features for
monitoring the Cost & Schedule and Performance & Quality attributes. Fur-
thermore, it embraces decision-making by predicting the future through scenario
analysis. Adobe Workfront can only help with the optimal flow of information
and communication from the People perspective.
Project Online is the only software that offers project management solutions for
the majority of activities. Note that the tool offers extra features in addition
to the standard ones. The standard features are highlighted in black, while the
optional features are highlighted in red in Table 8.2. As the previously men-
tioned software Monday, Project Online can support the financial evaluation
of a project when examining a project from the perspective of Purpose. The
evaluation and analysis of the benefits can be added as extra features. This
makes it the only software that provides a solution for assessing the impact of
the project. Capabilities to support the action of scoping can be added as extra
features. From the Complexity, perspective the software offers numerous solu-
tions for scheduling and the activities of the projects. In particular, the Kanban
Board, the calculation of the critical path, the Gantt Chart, the definition of
the timelines, and the dependencies are all supported. For the activity of re-
sourcing, the tool includes the assignment and allocation of human resources.
Notably, is the only tool that includes default features for budgeting. When
it comes to Uncertainty, a risk register can be available in the tool for docu-
menting identified risks. In addition, the qualitative assessment of risks can be
also supported. The tool includes another additional feature that is solely for
adapting to changes. Furthermore, it is the only online tool that can capture
the lessons learned, assisting in the elimination of uncertainty. From the People
perspective, this software enables the creation of a new team by capturing the
employees’ roles, skills, and availability. Project Online can also be used for
efficient communication and information exchange, while it can also help in the
identification and assessment of stakeholders.
==PAGE:105==
8.2 Evaluation based on Proposed Framework
95
Activity
Practice
Asana
Monday
Onepoint
Project
Adobe
Workfront
Project
Online
Living
Predictive Models
Adaptive Models
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Succeding
Internal Factors
Customer Factors
Organisational Factors
Investing
Business Case:
1. Financial Evaluation
2. Market Analysis
x
x
Aiming
Vision
Value
Impact
x
x
Scoping
Requirements
Scope Definition
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Estimating
Estimating Techniques
x
Scheduling
Activities
Sequence of Activities
Dependencies
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Resourcing
Resource Identification
Resource Assignment
Resource Allocation
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Budgeting
Cost Planning
Cost Elements
Determine Budget
x
x
x
Contracting
Business Case
1. Financial Evaluation
2. Market Analysis
3. Value Analysis
x
Identifying
Data Gathering
Data Analysis
Documentation
x
x
Assessing
Risk Environment
Qualitative Analysis
Quantitative Analysis
x
x
x
Responding
Strategies
1. Negative Risks
2. Positive Risks
x
Monitoring
Cost & Scheduling
Performance & Quality
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Adapting
Scope
Agile/Adaptive Environment
x
x
x
x
x
Deciding
Future Elucidation
Decision Tree Analysis
Alternatives Evaluation
x
x
x
x
Learning
Learnings
Knowledge Sharing
x
Teaming
Setting a Team
Developing a Team
Education
x
x
Communica-
ting
Information
Communication
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Engaging
Identification
Assessment
Engagement
x
x
x
Leading
Behaviours
Inspirational Leadership
Mediating
Conflicts
Governance
Motivating
Personal Characteristics
Job Characteristics
Job Satisfaction
x
x
x
x
Table 8.2: Evaluation of modern online tools based on proposed framework.
The default features are highlighted with a black cross, while the
additional features are highlighted with a red cross.
==PAGE:106==
96
Evaluation of Online Tools
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 9
Discussion
In this study, a generic project management framework tailored to SMEs is
proposed. The suggested model is structured into three hierarchical levels, be-
ginning with project management perspectives, progressing to actions or ac-
tivities, and concluding with practices. Our framework can be used by SMEs
not only to structure the way they manage their projects but also to evaluate
project management software in a methodical manner. In order to finalize and
strengthen our model, qualitative and quantitative evaluations were employed.
Five interviews with project management specialists from varied Danish SMEs
contributed significantly to our findings. Since the number of interviews was
restricted, a dataset was used as a secondary source of assessment by examining
the challenging activities that SMEs experienced in their projects. Apart from
identifying the challenges, the analysis of the dataset also served as a validation
step, in order to evaluate the ability of our framework to capture the challenges
based on our proposed activities. Indeed, our framework is able to capture all
the challenges in the dataset.
Our qualitative analysis suggests that SMEs take into account the vast majority
of our proposed project management activities using a structured methodology.
More specifically, Danish SMEs heavily rely on the activities of Purpose perspec-
tive, with a particular emphasis on the actions of aiming and scoping. From the
Complexity dimension, the activities of scheduling, resourcing and contracting
attracts the attention of SMEs. For this reason, they are the most structured
==PAGE:108==
98
Discussion
activities of this particular perspective in our model. Even if the importance of
managing the financial resources of the project is emphasized in the literature it
seems that SMEs are not adequately organized in this action of budgeting. In the
same way, the actions of Uncertainty are managed in a vague manner by SMEs.
Furthermore, it appears that risk management practices are not applied by the
examined Danish SMEs. In terms of the People dimension, SMEs benefit from
having fewer human resources since they can manage their staff and interact
with their stakeholders more effectively. Finally, the employment of adaptive
life cycle models by the considered SMEs indicates that the businesses have the
flexibility to improve their operations and progress as a consequence of regular
interaction among team members.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to extensively study the challenges
of Danish SMEs. Levering the available dataset, we can conclude that SMEs
encounter the most difficulties when they need to perform the activities of scop-
ing, scheduling, and communicating. Despite the fact that from our qualitative
analysis it seems that SMEs do not handle Uncertainty in a systematic manner,
our quantitative analysis suggests that the absence of risk management practices
is of particular concern for Danish SMEs. Even though SMEs lack a system-
atic approach to the tasks of budgeting, identifying, assessing and responding
they are all covered in our model. This is because the quantitative analysis
demonstrates that these are all extremely challenging areas. Given that both
the qualitative and quantitative analysis proposes that the lack of a structured
strategy for improving is not a concern for SMEs, we chose to remove it from
our model.
While most of the SMEs considered during the interviews are open to employing
software to modify their project management processes, only one shows resis-
tance to new technologies. This is because of the lack of knowledge about the
capabilities of online tools, as well as the time required to become acquainted
with their interface. The examined software includes most of the fundamental
features described in Chapter 4.2. Even if the features of documenting and re-
porting are not explicitly included in our framework it is assumed that these can
be achieved using the practice of monitoring which is supported by all the con-
sidered tools, e.g, by using dashboards. A common capability of all of them is
to provide assistance for the activities of scheduling and resourcing. This is also
consistent with the relevant literature discussed in Chapter 4.2, where sched-
ule and resource management are highlighted as important aspects of project
management software. Similarly, every piece of software offers ways to improve
collaboration and information exchange. We believe that this is one of the most
significant features that software should have, particularly considering that the
post-COVID area has exposed corporations to the hybrid mode of operation.
Additionally, the definition of scope is the only activity of Purpose perspective
supported by all the examined tools. On the other hand, all of the software
==PAGE:109==
99
under consideration has minimal risk management capabilities.
None of the
tools provide quantitative risk analysis, and their capabilities are limited to risk
documentation and qualitative evaluations. This conclusion is compatible with
[60]. On top of that, none of the online tools provides a solution for the action of
succeeding. We believe that this is an essential activity that should be integrated
into online tools as it provides the parameters that will evaluate the success of
a project and thus they should be visible to all team members. Moreover, the
activities of leading and mediating are not covered in any of the tools. While
this is an identified limitation of the modern project management software, it
can be explained by the high involvement of the human factor in them. It is
worth mentioning that from all the examined tools, only Project Online provides
a solution to the majority of activities that are relevant for SMEs and their as-
sociated practices. Even though this tool requires the purchase of additional
applications it can provide a centralized system for managing projects.
Given the limited number of interviews we believe that a bigger sample of project
management specialist could provide a more diverse overview of the practices
applied by SMEs. This way in the qualitative analysis more patterns between
the enterprises could have been unidentified providing more accuracy to the
final results. However, it is worth mentioning that even though the qualitative
sample is considered low, the data for the 42 case of the dataset is used to
reinforce this work and to provide valuable results. In case the model needs to
be employed for a specific sector of the industry, we suggest conducting more
interviews with project managers of the target sectors in order to fine-tune the
framework.
Our model can be used by SMEs to provide direction in the way they manage
their projects and to assist them in evaluating and therefore selecting a project
management software that accommodates their requirements. Even though it
is a general purpose model it does not assess the technical characteristics of the
projects. In other words, the proposed model is solely focused on the evaluation
of the project management capabilities of the online tools. We believe that the
assessments of the technical capabilities of the software can further enhance their
overall evaluation and can better assist SMEs in the selection process. This is
out of the scope of this work, but it is an inserting direction for future studies.
Given the limited financial resource of SMEs, the investigation of the cost of the
tools can be an important criterion for the selection.
Our work opens up another exciting direction for future research. The proposed
framework can be easily extended into a maturity model. We strongly believe
that our model could be further developed and assess the project management
maturity of SMEs. That assessment could be the baseline for identifying the
areas in which the project management activities of the SMEs could be further
improved.
==PAGE:110==
100
Discussion
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
This study provides a comprehensive project management model that targets
specifically the needs of SMEs. The proposed framework does not intend for a
specific group of management practices but it seeks to provide a universal ap-
proach that can help SMEs merit their project management practices through-
out the life cycle of a project. SMEs can use the framework not only as a guide
for carrying out project management procedures but also as a way to evaluate
modern project management software in a systematic manner. In this way, our
approach can serve as a foundation for evaluating tools and their relevance for
SMEs. The model was qualitative and quantitative evaluated for providing an
accurate and valuable project management framework. From our analysis, we
are able to identify not only the activities and their associated practices that
are applicable to SMEs but also the challenges they usually face when executing
their projects. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide a quan-
titative analysis of the challenges of Danish SMEs. Using our framework we
also provide a systematic evaluation of the features of five modern online tools
namely, Asana, Monday, Onepoint Project, Adobe Workfront and Project On-
line. We believe that our approach open-ups exciting new directions for future
research.
==PAGE:112==
102
Conclusion
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1] “Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs: Entrepreneurship
and Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) - European Commission.”
https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/smes_en, 2022.
[2] L. J. Cueto, A. F. D. Frisnedi, R. B. Collera, K. I. T. Batac, and C. B.
Agaton, “Digital innovations in msmes during economic disruptions: Ex-
periences and challenges of young entrepreneurs,” Administrative Sciences,
vol. 12, no. 1, p. 8, 2022.
[3] The innovation response: 2021 activity report. European Investment Bank,
2022.
[4] P. Muller, S. Devnani, R. Ladher, J. Cannings, E. Murphy, N. Robin,
S. Ramos Illán, F. Aranda, S. Gorgels, M. Priem, S. Smid, N. Unlu Bohn,
V. Lefebvre, and I. Frizis, Annual report on European SMEs 2020/2021:
digitalisation of SMEs. Publications Office, 2021.
[5] “Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs: SME definition
- European Commission.” https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.
eu/smes/sme-definition_en, 2022.
[6] “Annual report on european smes 2021/22 smes and environmental sustain-
ability,” 2022.
[7] E. Commission, “2019 SBA Fact Sheet DENMARK,” 2019.
[8] A. Murphy and A. Ledwith, “Project management tools and techniques in
high-tech smes in ireland,” 2006.
==PAGE:114==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] D. B. Audretsch, Y. M. Prince, and A. R. Thurik, “Do small firms compete
with large firms?,” Atlantic Economic Journal, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 201–209,
1999.
[10] S. Abdulrahman and M. Z. Abd Rozan, “Web 2.0 collaborative tools for
smes: A survey,” 2006.
[11] A. Ledwith, “Management of new product development in small electronics
firms,” Journal of European Industrial Training, 2000.
[12] T. Edwards, R. Delbridge, and M. Munday, “Linking innovative potential
to sme performance: An assessment of enterprises in industrial south wales.
paper for 41st european regional science association meeting, zagreb, croa-
tia, august 2001.,” 2001.
[13] M. Kartiwi et al., “Case studies of e-commerce adoption in indonesian smes:
The evaluation of strategic use,” Australasian Journal of Information Sys-
tems, vol. 14, no. 1, 2006.
[14] J. Temtime, ZT & Pansiri, “Proactive marketing and financial management
for small and medium enterprises,” Botswana Institute of Administration
& Commerce Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 53–67, 2006.
[15] M. Hudson, A. Smart, and M. Bourne, “Theory and practice in sme perfor-
mance measurement systems,” International journal of operations & pro-
duction management, 2001.
[16] D. Ščeulovs and E. Gaile-Sarkane, “Classification of micro and small enter-
prises,” Small, vol. 50, no. 10, 2012.
[17] R. Rothwell, “Successful industrial innovation:
critical factors for the
1990s,” R&d Management, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 221–240, 1992.
[18] A. Murphy and A. Ledwith, “Project management tools and techniques in
high-technology smes,” Management research news, 2007.
[19] E. Jedynak, “Small and medium-sized enterprises in denmark,” 2016.
[20] “OECD SME and Entrepreneurship Outlook 2021 Country Profiles,” 2021.
[21] P. M. Institute and P. M. Institute, A guide to the project management
body of knowledge (PMBOK guide).
[22] G. M. Fox, Project Management in the Business Start-up Environment: Is
There a Role for Project Management in Achieving Improved Success Rates
for Start-up Businesses? PhD thesis, University of Limerick, 2004.
[23] A. AXELOS, Managing successful projects with PRINCE2 2017 edition.
Stationery Office Limited, 2017.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[24] G. Morgan, “Images of organization,(2" edition),” Thousand Oaks, London,
and New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1997.
[25] J. Geraldi, C. Thuesen, J. Oehmen, and V. Stingl, How to DO Projects?:
A Nordic Flavour to Managing Projects. Dansk Standard, 2017.
[26] B. Boehm and W. J. Hansen, “Spiral development: Experience, principles,
and refinements,” tech. rep., CARNEGIE-MELLON UNIV PITTSBURGH
PA SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INST, 2000.
[27] P. Patanakul, B. Iewwongcharoen, and D. Milosevic, “An empirical study
on the use of project management tools and techniques across project life-
cycle and their impact on project success,” Journal of General management,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 41–66, 2010.
[28] G. Bradley, Fundamentals of benefit realization.
The Stationery Office,
2010.
[29] P. P. M. Institute, “Benefit realization framework,” tech. rep., PMI Project
Management Institute.
[30] J. Pokorná, L. Pilař, T. Balcarová, and I. Sergeeva, “Value proposition can-
vas: identification of pains, gains and customer jobs at farmers’ markets,”
AGRIS on-line Papers in Economics and Informatics, vol. 7, no. 665-2016-
45080, pp. 123–130, 2015.
[31] M. H. Sherif, Managing projects in telecommunication services. John Wiley
& Sons, 2006.
[32] T. R. Devi and V. S. Reddy, “Work breakdown structure of the project,”
Int J Eng Res Appl, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 683–686, 2012.
[33] W. D. Cottrell, “Simplified program evaluation and review technique
(pert),” Journal of construction Engineering and Management, vol. 125,
no. 1, pp. 16–22, 1999.
[34] PM4DEV, Project Schedule Management. Project Management For Devel-
opment Organisations, 2021.
[35] P. Sanghera, “Planning for project schedule management,” in PMP® in
Depth, pp. 155–197, Springer, 2019.
[36] S. Whitaker et al., Pass the PMP Exam. Springer, 2016.
[37] T. I. O. C. S. O. INDIA, “Cost and management accounting,” tech. rep.,
THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA, 2017.
==PAGE:116==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[38] A. Ahmed, B. Kayis, and S. Amornsawadwatana, “A review of techniques
for risk management in projects,” Benchmarking: An International Jour-
nal, 2007.
[39] M. Metheny, Federal cloud computing. Elsevier, 2017.
[40] I. S. ISO, ISO 21500, Project, programme and portfolio management - Con-
text and concepts. ISO, International Standard, 2021.
[41] T. Rickards and S. Moger, “Creative leadership processes in project team
development: an alternative to tuckman’s stage model,” British journal of
Management, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 273–283, 2000.
[42] M. Horner, “Leadership theory: past, present and future,” Team Perfor-
mance Management: An International Journal, 1997.
[43] M. Bassy, “Motivation and work-investigation and analysis of motivation
factors at work,” 2002.
[44] H. J. Thamhain and J. W. Weiss, “Project management methods: Strategic
and competitive uses in high-technology companies,” Engineering Manage-
ment Journal, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 19–26, 1992.
[45] L. Sensini, A. Shan, and M. Vazquez, “Project management tools and tech-
niques and sme performance: Empirical evidence in the context of develop-
ing countries,” International Journal of Economics and Financial Issues,
vol. 11, no. 5, p. 45, 2021.
[46] J. Kundu, T. K. Bishoi, M. Bhattacharya, and A. Chowdhury, “Project
management software–an overview,” International Journal of Current In-
novation Research, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 129–135, 2015.
[47] V. Abramova, F. Pires, and J. Bernardino, “Open source and proprietary
project management tools for smes,” Journal of Information Systems En-
gineering & Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 177–186, 2016.
[48] S.-K. Lee and J.-H. Yu, “Success model of project management information
system in construction,” Automation in construction, vol. 25, pp. 82–93,
2012.
[49] M. Enea, C. Muriana, et al., “An ahp-based approach to pmiss assessment,”
Int. J. Bus. Environ, vol. 7, pp. 32–60, 2014.
[50] D. I. Cleland, W. R. King, et al., Systems analysis and project management.
McGraw-Hill, 1975.
[51] R. Margea, C. Margea, et al., “Open source approach to project manage-
ment tools,” Informatica Economică, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 196–206, 2011.
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[52] A. Mishra and D. Mishra, “Software project management tools: a brief
comparative view,” ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, vol. 38,
no. 3, pp. 1–4, 2013.
[53] H. Cicibas, O. Unal, and K. A. Demir, “A comparison of project manage-
ment software tools (pmst).,” in Software Engineering Research and Prac-
tice, pp. 560–565, 2010.
[54] M. Sajad, M. Sadiq, K. Naveed, and M. S. Iqbal, “Software project man-
agement: Tools assessment, comparison and suggestions for future devel-
opment,” International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security
(IJCSNS), vol. 16, no. 1, p. 31, 2016.
[55] R. Micale, C. M. La Fata, A. Lombardo, and G. La Scalia, “Project man-
agement information systems (pmiss): A statistical-based analysis for the
evaluation of software packages features,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 23,
p. 11233, 2021.
[56] H. C. de Paula, J. Bernardino, A. Bozzon, F. Mayo, and J. Filipe, “An
application of osspal for the assessment of open source project management
tools.,” in WEBIST, pp. 411–417, 2019.
[57] J. F. Marques, J. Bernardino, J. Dietz, D. Aveiro, and J. Filipe, “Evaluation
of asana, odoo, and projectlibre project management tools using the osspal
methodology.,” in KEOD, pp. 397–403, 2019.
[58] S. Cruz, J. Bernardino, J. Dietz, D. Aveiro, and J. Filipe, “Project man-
agement tools assessment with osspal.,” in KEOD, pp. 390–396, 2019.
[59] V. N. Leopoulos, K. A. Kirytopoulos, and C. Malandrakis, “Risk manage-
ment for smes: Tools to use and how,” Production Planning & Control,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 322–332, 2006.
[60] A. G. Silvius and C. M. Silvius, “Exploring functionality of mobile ap-
plications for project management,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 64,
pp. 343–351, 2015.
[61] I. Hamburg, S. Engert, P. Anke, and E.-C. A. im IKM Bereich, “Communi-
ties of practice and web 2.0 to support learning in smes,” in 6th Romanian
Educational Network (RoEduNet) International Conference, Craiova, Ro-
mania, pp. 152–155, 2007.
[62] J. vom Brocke, A. Hevner, and A. Maedche, “Introduction to design science
research,” in Design science research. Cases, pp. 1–13, Springer, 2020.
[63] J. R. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. L. Baskerville, “Choosing a design
science research methodology,” 2017.
==PAGE:118==
108
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[64] A. Majstorovic and V. Majstorovic, “Practical application of contemporary
project management software.,” Annals of DAAAM & Proceedings, vol. 7,
no. 1, 2020.
==PAGE:119==
Appendix A: Interview
Questions
Introduction to the project
Before we begin, I’d like to ask if you would agree to give me permission to record
this session. The input of the interview will be used anonymously. Thank you
very much for your interest in participating in the interview. I am Dorothea a
master’s student from DTU and currently I am working on my thesis project
focusing on how online tools can support SMEs in tailoring project management
practices. In this meeting, we will discuss about the project management prac-
tices and technology that you use in your organization when running projects. In
other words, the purpose is to identify the practices and the tools that drive the
following project management dimensions: Purpose, Complexity, Uncertainty,
and People.
Introductory Questions
1. Could you tell me a little about yourself and your role in your organization?
2. Based on your experience and role how important do you think the use
of project management methodologies for the execution of a project? Are
they a key factor for projects success?
3. Do you believe that the use of online project management tools is impor-
tant for you work? If yes, are you using many tools when it comes to
project management in your organization?
==PAGE:120==
110
Appendix A: Interview Questions
Discussions for the model
Purpose
1. How do you run projects life cycle? (Do you have a model for doing life
cycle assessment?)
2. What is your practice for assessing projects success? Are you using online
tools to run this process?
3. How are you doing the assessment of the investment? What tools are you
using to support these practices?
4. What are your practices to assess the vision and impact of the project?
What online tools support this practice?
5. How do you scope the project? What online tools are you using?
Figure 1: Material used in the interviews for discussing the Purpose perspec-
tive
Complexity
1. How are you estimating the time, the resources and budget? What online
tools are you using to support you with this?
2. What practices do you use to implement project scheduling? What online
tools are you using to support you with this?
3. How do you allocate your resources and budget? What online tools are
you using to support you with this?
4. How do you decide whether you should make or buy a product or a service?
What online tools are you using for that?
==PAGE:121==
111
5. How do you improve (optimize) your project plan? What online tools are
you using?
Figure 2: Material used in the interviews for discussing the Complexity per-
spective
Uncertainty
1. What is your practice to risk and opportunities identification? What on-
line tools are you using for that?
2. How are you assessing risks and opportunities? What online tools are you
using to support that?
3. What is your practice to respond to risks? What online tools are you using
to support you with this?
4. How do you monitor risks? What online tools are you using for that?
5. What is your practice to adapt to changes? What online tools are you
using for that?
6. How do you make decisions in projects? What online tools are you using
for that?
7. What are your practices for the learning you have gained from the projects?
What online tools are you using for that
People
==PAGE:122==
112
Appendix A: Interview Questions
Figure 3: Material used in the interviews for discussing the Uncertainty per-
spective
1. How do you create a team? What online tools are you using to support
that?
2. What are your communication practices when you run a project? What
online tools are you using to support you with this?
3. How do you engage with your stakeholders? What steps do you follow in
this process What online tools are you using for that?
4. What is your practice to Lead a team? What online tools are you using
for that?
5. How do you manage conflicts? What online tools are you using for that?
6. What are your practices for motivating your teams? What online tools
are you using for that?
Figure 4: Material used in the interviews for discussing the People perspective
==PAGE:123==
113
Conclusion
1. Based on your experience and role what are the main challenges related
to project management an SME might face?
2. After going through the model what do you believe people tend to overlook
in terms of project management practices?
==PAGE:124==
114
Appendix A: Interview Questions
==PAGE:125==
Appendix B: Interviews
Interview 1
Dorothea: Could you tell me a little about yourself and your role in
your organization?
Interviewee 1: Well, basically, I have been my I have a background in political
science. And I have been doing project management for XXX. I worked for a
number of Danish companies like XXX and XXX, met in a small startup. And
as part of that journey, I also worked for XXX. And then, about four months
ago, I changed to where I am now. I don’t know if you read anything about
XXX but XXX is basically a startup company, doing medical device analytical
equipment, small, very neat little you should Look it up analytical device that
can basically do measurement of biomarkers. And I’m in essence, I’m supposed
to be building up the project management organization and also doing kind of
not really project management more like a portfolio or program management. So
there are a number of project managers running different sub projects or under
smaller projects, and then I’m supposed to be responsible for the overarching
plan or roadmap or program, your program portfolio management.
Dorothea: Based on your experience and role how important do you
think the use of project management methodologies for the execution
of a project? Are they a key factor for projects success?
Interviewee 1: That is a good question. I actually I do have a Prince, you
know, a Prince certificate from some years ago.
But basically, I started in
==PAGE:126==
116
Appendix B: Interviews
product management when it was not a structured or recognised title. And it
was definitely not a title as widely spread as it is today. So I never had any real
formal training in project methodology. I’m all learned on the battlefield, so to
speak, or in the battles.
But basically, I have been taught project management in XXX. But of course,
I learned a lot from kind of school book or textbook knowledge about project
management over the years, and I think it’s useful.
I think the tools are a
small part of doing project management, I think you need to be able to build a
plan, you need to know what dependencies I know need to know the necessity
of charges and purposes and scopes and you know, the textbook chapters, but
I think that the real key in project management is down to the more soft skills.
I mean, people management leadership skills, strategic skills, and that is hard
to learn from a textbook. So, to be directly respond to your question, I think
the tools are useful.
Have I ever used tools 100% In a accordance with the
textbook? No. Have I learned and sneak peek in textbook? Yes. To understand
the textbook? yes. But I think my challenge though is when people come to me
and say they are project managers, because they have a print certificate, I say
Okay, that’s great. Because that doesn’t really make them a project manager
and in my, in my book.
Dorothea: Do you believe that the use of online project management
tools is important for you work?
If yes, are you using many tools
when it comes to project management in your organization?
Interviewee 1: Right now, I have nothing. I have a Microsoft Project installed
on my laptop, I know different project managers or project owners who have
various program tools. Some are using Excel, some are using applications that
I don’t even have heard about before. So right here, no, I don’t have anything.
From my past, I have been using and been establishing numerous templates.
I build the project management planning system tool.
So from a planning
perspective, yes, I use. And from a template perspective, yes, I use. I really
believe that you there are certain things you can bring with you from one project
to another or like you need a plan. You need a team, you need a a reporting
structure. You need a steering committee. You need stuff, you need a charter.
You need all that. But every project is different on the soft skills. And the way
you implement your leadership or your project management leadership skills,
whatever you choose it actually also impact how you use your online tools or
your arsenal of tools you have in your in your suitcase. So I’m not a big use of
online tools.
Dorothea: Don’t you think that they can work as an enabler?
Interviewee 1: I actually do believe they can work as an enabler. I think the
==PAGE:127==
117
problem with online tools is if you use them as this is my magic past to fix all
my problems, then I believe you will probably create problems for yourself. But
if you use them, as you just say, as an enabler as a supportive tool as a guidance
as an inspiration, source of inspiration, I think it’s great.
What practices and methodologies do you follow in the purpose per-
spective in your organization?
Interviewee 1: I need to respond based on historical experience, because where
I am right now, we are in the process of launching product number one and a half.
So talking about lifecycle management, in that perspective is a little overkill.
Measuring project success, where I am right now is basically about making it
happen. That will be the first success factor. And the second one we would be
for somebody to buy it. So I think the vision comes from I mean, we have two
founders of the company who basically are and Company Number four, I think
so. So they are visionary, but do they have a structured approach? No. Do
they have a visionary approach? Definitely. Are they successful? Absolutely.
Scoping is actually interesting, because I’ve been here four months now and
in my first four months I have basically not done any project management. I
have been doing building management because we just moved to a new building.
But now that our move to the new facility is approaching an end, a good end
and a successful end.
Then I am in the process of scoping because I think
scoping is actually one of the key parameters, especially in a company like ours,
because we have so many visionary entrepreneurs or startup people.
It’s a
young company. So there’s a lot of research, there’s a lot of vision, there’s a lot
of entrepreneurship, but there is very little structure. So I’m going to and this
also impacts the scoping because if we on Monday this week, we decided that we
would go for option A then it’s very likely that come Friday, this week, we will
have five people in another meeting, agreeing to go for option B. So what I’m
working on now is really trying to put a structure into how do we do decisions?
How do we adhere to decisions? And how do we communicate decisions? So we
have a transparent and common platform to work on. Together. But so I can
ask you about what we want to achieve. I can answer the question by focusing
on what we want to achieve. But it’s difficult to say what we have. Okay. So
that would make sense, then I say, from a lifecycle perspective, the device I told
you about before is basically a multi purpose device, the challenge is to develop
assays that can be analyzed in the device, which means that if you have 100
different assays, or 100, disparate, different biomarkers you can measure, then
the challenge is to figure out which of these assets will be developed first. So
yes, we do need some kind of framework or some kind of tracking tool or some
kind of the platform to enable us to do effective Lifecycle Management following
the launch of the first assay. So we don’t have a practice, what I would see as
a practice that should come is really a structured approach to selection of what
and how should we continue the development of this product? It’s pretty much
==PAGE:128==
118
Appendix B: Interviews
about structure, it’s about transparency. And an implicit in what I just told you
numerous times is that no, we don’t have any online tools. No, I don’t use them
yet, because I haven’t really started yet. But yes, any inspiration or starting
point, I mean, if I can take one step and basically move lifecycle management or
project success five steps, by using an online tool? I would go there. Absolutely.
None of it, because it boils back to what you said before, that if an online tool
kind of brings me a framework that makes sense that I can utilize and insert
values or words or concepts or success criterias or whatever I would start using
it. Because it would be a replica, it would provide me with a with the steeps.
Dorothea: Is the company using any online tools to support these
practices?
Interviewee 1: No. But I believe some are doing planning in Excel, some
are doing planning in in Word tables, some are doing planning in all kinds of
online project management planning tool. I think I have identified four different
software’s being applied. So if I could find something that could kind of bring
these different variants together in one common platform, yes, that would be
beneficial. But you know, that’s about people again, it’s very hard to go up
to somebody and say you can’t use word anymore. Because you have to use
Could you put because put is a new software company that just developed this
excellent tool. So I don’t know, no, people can’t do it with Excel. And one
of the challenges we have here is that we have standalone plants and and then
we have then we have standalone solutions but but the coordination between
the different sub projects is lagging and that is a constant sub optimizing of
efforts and energy. So software to an online platform that could kind of collect
a structure or serve as a as a source of structuring would be beneficial.
Dorothea:
How are you doing the assessment of the investment?
What tools are you using to support these practices?
Interviewee 1: I haven’t engaged too much into the investment perspective
at my current position. From my past, at the end of the day, money is more
important than many other things. So being able to track your investments,
being able to forecast your spent being able to report actual spend is one of the
key things, is one of the boring things, but it’s one of the key things in project
management. Because that’s the kind of investment it’s all about, it’s all about
money, right? So again, the problem with the investment online tools is that you
very often have to repeat what is always already in your finance department.
Very few project managers I have met the they may have a budget, and they
may have rights and and decision making power over that budget. But but at
the end of the day, if the chief financial officers say that instead of 3 million
you have 2 million is not really their call, their call is just to do a consequence
analysis and then and then complain and weep. But but that’s basically it.
==PAGE:129==
119
So one of the challenges I see with online tools for project management on
investments or finance in general is that we very often repeat what they already
do in finance. What I have done actually together with PS company years ago
was that we built this project planning tool that was communicating with the
finance department, so that if I moved an activity six months, I moved the
budget in finance and the finance caught my budget by 2 million in SAP they
kind of in the planning to close, but in that was cool, but I had never seen that
anywhere else. But of course finance and Money are important and anything
that can give you an easy or things don’t need to be easy, but but a smart
way of tracking, reporting and working with your budgets from an investment
perspective is valuable.
Dorothea: What practices and methodologies do you follow in the
Complexity perspective in your organization?
Interviewee 1: So, let me answer on complexity based on my history, because
where I am right now there is nothing. So yes, I would say that there should be
a practice for estimating and pretty much everywhere I have been the there was
a practice. And it’s an it’s an invaluable. In resources, you can spend hundreds
of hours of making a resource allocation plan.
I mean, you probably know
about people who break down their project plans to hours or days or at least
weeks. And they spent maybe two months building the plan and two months
on executing. And I have been working with people who worked so much on
the plan that the project was completed before they finalize their plan, because
they got drowned in details on resource planning. I think if you ask me about
the value of resource planning, I think it’s good. I think it’s necessary to have
a feeling about how much how many resources will this take. I also think it’s
good to if you can build up a kind of a historical database, if you have time
registration capabilities in your company, then you can build up a baseline. So if
you have activities that you often repeat, like in the pharmaceutical industry, or
in the offshore industry, where you basically do a number of the same activities
on many different projects, then maybe you can gather historical information
and figure out from time restraints, and how many hours it actually went into
it. Because if you asked me, How long do I need to write a monster report? I
would probably say two hours. And that would be wrong, because sometimes
it takes me 30 minutes and sometimes it takes me four. So resource estimation
is difficult. If by time you mean, how long does an activity take? Yeah, that is
absolutely critical. And again, if you have activities that are repeated, I have
often been building what I call standard plans, knowing that there is no such
thing as a standard plan. So you can’t put a standard plan in your online tool,
because it varies from industry to industry.
But within the pharmaceutical
industry, there are certain activities, or activities that you need to repeat every
time. And then you can build a standard plan. And that is gold, because that is
one of the shortcuts to have a plan book fast. That is good. And, and again, do
==PAGE:130==
120
Appendix B: Interviews
I really care whether it takes five days or six days to complete an activity? from
a planning perspective? No, from an execution perspective, I care. But from
a planning perspective, I think if I’m planning an activity or a project that is
going to have a duration of say 12 months. In my planning phase, I don’t really
care about plus minus two days in my execution phase, I do but then I’m not
using my plan anymore. They don’t know what I’m doing today and tomorrow.
And I’m tracking on actual progress rather than adjusting my plan. On the
budget, again, you can have standard budgets for standard activities that is
very useful. And I think too few people are using that regularly. Based on what
I have seen and heard about. I find it extremely valuable because at the end
of the day, I said before, money is very important. And it’s also very difficult.
Because do you budget with contingencies do you budget with aggressively do
your budget conservatively? I mean, it is difficult to budget, and this is one
of the things that you will always be measured on. So it is important a good
budgeting tool is is gold. I mean, really with the caveat that you run the risk
of repeating what findings or is doing?
Dorothea: Are you using specific estimation techniques?
Interviewee 1: When I have been responsible and accountable for project
budgets I have.
I ask the people who know about it, so if I’m running an
activity with an external partner and they’re supposed to bring a project from
1 to 2, they are really the ones who know what the cost would be. So I always
ask the people who are responsible for for the activity. And even when I had
been doing pharmaceutical development for 20 years, I had a backbone peeling,
but I would never discuss with an activity responsible on any project if he or
she tells me that cost have just increased 20%. I will ask why and then I will
trust because I don’t think project management is about detailed budgeting. I
think Project management is about the big numbers and putting them into the
right buckets. So I would rely on the people I’m working with on the project.
Dorothea: What procedure do you follow in terms of procurement?
Interviewee 1: Where I am right now, we don’t really have a structure. What
I would like to achieve here is that we have a structured approach for figuring
out what are the benefits of making it in house and what are the downsides and
then the same exercise for buying it and then comparing the two. So again,
I mean it’s about transparency. If you do this, it will give us that and if you
do this, it will give us that and then we can compare the two and then we can
make a decision. But it’s about structure. It’s about trying to circumvent the
people in house who think they can do everything better than everybody else
and i think structure is a good way of doing that. And so again, any online tool
that can kind of facilitate or support the process of creating such transparency
would be better I would look at. I mean would I use it depends on the quality,
==PAGE:131==
121
but I would look at it. I think the keyword for me in project management is
really about transparency because nobody likes surprises except for Christmas.
So if people know what’s going on and understand what’s going on and know
the risks are related to what’s going on then you have a much higher degree
of decision making, power and flexibility as a project manager manager.
In
contrast to when you keep things in the dark and I’m mentioning that because
that’s also could be a value of of an online tool that is is good, that it actually
supports creating that transparency.
Are you using any online tools to support these practices?
Interviewee 1: No. This is spreadsheet and finance.
Dorothea: What practices and methodologies do you follow in the
Uncertainty perspective in your organization?
Interviewee 1: Risk management is a underrated exercise or discipline. I think
risk management is very important.So do we have a store in practice here and
what I have seen in my past is that very few companies are very good at risk
management.
And which also indicates that I’m not.
I have not been very
good in risk management. But the more I think about it and more I learn the
more important I think it is. No, we don’t have a project management risk
management project practice here. But what we do have is that because we
work on the XXX and have a quality insurance and because we need to submit
regulatory documentation in order market a product. We have a quality driven
risk management approach like do you have in the Pharmaceutical industry like
they have in the chemical engineering industry like you have in in many, many
industries. And I think the challenge here is to build the bridge between the
formal regulatory driven risk management process and the more unstructured
at heart driven project management, risk management perspective approach. I
think you need both. One of the challenges is to build a bridge between the two
because a number of companies have a number of templates or online tools for
doing risk management on a project, but that’s from a that’s regulatory driven.
That’s because in the chemical industry and in the Pharmaceutical industry and
in the device industry as you may know, you need to be able to document that
you have actually thought about what it is you’re doing before you did it and you
need to consider the risks and you need to document that the risks. Following
implementation of any given solution is acceptable or acceptable, so a number of
companies and the number of industries have. Quality driven risk management
procedures but very little project management risk driven. And The challenge
is really to build the bridge between the two. I mean, even the FDA in the US in
America they have a guideline for risk management. The European Union, the
media, have a guideline for risk management and but that’s a regulatory driven
risk management. And I think that the trick for you, if you’re building a online
==PAGE:132==
122
Appendix B: Interviews
risk management tool, is to make it Project specific because the project related
risks may be different than the regulatory driven risks because from the project
perspective, you have a number of of risk factors from the that are not tangible.
I mean you it’s not about having a given solvent that is toxic or non toxic. It’s
about do you how do you ensure organizational support? How do you ensure
timely contracts? How do you it’s a different angle. So the project management
risks are very often much more process oriented than outcome oriented. For
example if I’m installing a new water equipment in a factory. I have a number
of risk related to that water equipment.
Like is the piping correct is the is
the pressure correct is the temperature correct and I can document that I have
manage these risks when acceptable level. And that’s that. Yes, that is project
risks, but that’s outcome oriented risks. In contrast to, I get the parts for my
water unit on time.
Do I get have the right people at the right time to do
the right thing? Is it it? Is it’s two different kind of risks? And the project
management risk management tool should, I think, focus on the project related
risks, which are more process oriented.
The same go to to to let that goes for for opportunity identification and assess-
ment. It’s the same story. You need an approach and yes, you should have it.
Yes. Do I have it? No. Would I like to have it? Yes. And then, of course,
the risk responding and the monitoring and the adaption and decision making,
it falls back to the thing I said before, but transparency and it boils back to
having a structured approach to monitor your risks so that you can actually
track. So which have I mitigated and which do I still need to focus on. So some
risk I have eliminated some I have managed, but they can still start to burn
again. I mean, every time you put out a fire, you should always go back to
day after and check it’s actually still not burning. And it’s the same addresses.
They can come back and haunt you. So it it’s it’s about a structured approach.
It’s about a a decision log or a risk management lock. It’s about structural for,
yeah, regular following up.
Dorothea: What are your practices for the learning you have gained
from the projects? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 1: The challenge here is that it’s a very important aspect whenever
to talk about it but when it comes down to actually doing it, it’s very, very hard.
Because if you work in a department with with six different project managers,
each of these project managers are basically measured on his or her success. The
project management group is not measured on this total success. So the lessons
sharing or the lesson learned sessions in my experience are rare and seldom and
the structured approach to having a kind of let’s sit down and do 4 hours of
project evaluation right through five PowerPoint slides and and tell about our
failures and successes. A lot of people do it, and for the people who are doing it
is it is very healthy but for other people in the organization I have very rarely
==PAGE:133==
123
seen it actually being used outside the team who actually did it. I mean, I
learned a lot from project evaluations, but I learned most from the ones I did
myself. With the teams I had been working with. But it is important and and
I think we’re doing it too little and I think. If we could do it better and if
we could do it more structured, if we could do it more documented better it
could be a good thing. I think what we often do is that and I think about the
place I’m working now is that we complain about the things not working, but
we do it at the coffee machine or during lunch break rather than calling in for
a 2 hour meeting and actually going through, so we all bragged about this. We
all complained about this over the last two weeks. How can we fix it? Because
that’s that’s another lesson learned approach, right? And we don’t do that right
now. But maybe you should. I don’t know. I’m not. Maybe we should.
Dorothea: What practices and methodologies do you follow in the
People perspective in your organization?
Interviewee 1: We’re still small company. So we have one team and I basically
discussed with some line managers who should be on it and then we formed it
but I have never been in a company where I as the project manager could
choose the people I wanted on my team and actually I don’t think that project
manager should and I think that the people who know people based are the
people managing the people. So I think they should be able involved in team
formation. We don’t have a phone process team formation. And actually I the
only formal process I have seen for for team information is that the line managers
or the line managers manager were asked and then they assign somebody to the
teams that’s that’s I have never worked in organization. As I said we have a
project managers picked the people. And that is a hard one. I mean that is a
hard one for an online tool I mean. And conflicts. I think again it goes back to
leadership and listening, yeah. I think conflict management is an inherent part
of project management and because you have the stakeholders and you have the
teams and you have the line function and you have all the people who thinks that
everything be done much faster. But then again, that is something that is very
hard to read about. You can read about some golden rules about honesty and
transparency and open communication. But it’s a hard one to really. No, no.
But what you could consider was kind of a a placeholder for. Do not forget to
think about. And then have some good advices and and and if you ask me, I will
repeat myself and say rule number one about people is about transparency and
honesty. Because we have all, I don’t know many people, especially definitely
myself, have tried to receive a piece of information or a. Set up data or an e-mail
or an envelope or way back when the letters were brought up by people and and
then putting it in a drawer, and then they will probably go away tomorrow and
it never goes away. I mean, do things face it and act? Don’t hide things away
because it will always come back and haunt you. I mean, I’m not talking about
a personal perspective. I’m talking about a project management perspective,
==PAGE:134==
124
Appendix B: Interviews
but at the same at on the other hand, it’s the same with French friends and
wives kids. So I think all these people skills, as I mentioned before are about
the soft skills. Because none of these are are kind of you can read or you could
probably you can probably show me 10 books about motivating people. And
you probably read them all. But if you use them I would say use them the
way that you as a sort of inspiration and a source of kind of I should try to
remember all of this, and then I should do what I think is most right in the
given minute. I have to do it. so a placeholder for like. Don’t forget to treat
people with honesty and respect I think that’s the key. You really bearing in
mind that very, few people comes to work in the morning with the with the
intent of being stupid, lazy and ignorant. I mean, most people actually come to
work because they want to make a difference, right? I mean you go, studying
every day because you want to learn, right? Not because you wanna sit and
sleep in the class. I win in this. In the seminar. Sorry, but but. And and I have
met. I have met very few people who come to work with the ambition of being
dumb, lazy. They may be it, but that’s a different story.
Dorothea: What are the practices for quality?
Interviewee 1: I would, yeah. Fairpoint. I was putting quality in the box
of purpose because in my purpose discussion, I would define why are we doing
this project and what we want to achieve is you’re heading right? So that I
read as a unique to define your threshold for success and failure. So my vision
would also be this is what I want to achieve. In order to demonstrate that I
have achieved what I would like to achieve, I need to read these standards of
deliverables. So I would put quality in there and I would say you could put
you could make vision. Because impact is impact. Is, is is almost a part of
your vision. If I have a vision about this that will impact the world, so they
will dramatically change their attitude. But the level of the the quality of my
vision should also specify. What level of quality? Or What level of functionality,
which is all the quality should I achieve in order to claim that I have successfully
reached my vision, see what I mean? So if I say that if I read 7 on a scale to 10
on. Unusability for handicapped patients or handicapped people. I have success
because everything they have today is a 5 but if I only read six, I should lean
back and reconsider. That’s one quality perspective. That’s the kind of quality
you without thinking about, right? I think that should be covered in the vision
part. I mean creating a vision is a long and complicated process but once you
have your vision. You will try to make it more concrete and tangible. So I have
like the old like the old one like. Kennedy in the 60s. I wanna bring him into
the moon. That’s a vision. OK. How they did it? Is about defining quality.
Quality perspective number one was we wanna bring him up. We wanna bring
a man to the moon. They didn’t discuss women like then. So I that’s why I’m
saying from the women. That’s historical anecdote. Right. So we wanna bring a
individual to the moon and we wanna bring her back again alive. Letter quality
==PAGE:135==
125
statement another quality statement is we need to bring him or her to the moon
in less than two years because otherwise we will need so much food on the rocket
that we can’t fly. That’s another quality statement, so you kind of break down
your vision into specific product deliverables and that’s your quality statement.
That’s your quality hurdles in your project that makes sense. So I think if you
if think about tooling your vision part and make the tool for that, but it’s about
breaking down your vision into things you can actually measure and things you
can actually say box ticked, we delivered box ticked, we delivered box tick, we
delivered only 60% pathetically acceptable because people are not dying, people
not starving, people, not bored.
Dorothea:
Based on your experience and role what are the main
challenges related to project management a SME might face?
Interviewee 1: Yeah, I think they’re actually a number of of challenges. One
is the shortest of people and because if you make ambitious plan because you
want to grow your company your ambition is bigger than your organization, and
that’s an inherent conflict. Then it’s about it’s actually also about knowledge,
because if you have a small resource base, you also have a small knowledge base.
Even if we hire very clever people and experienced and skilled people, then you
still have with 40 people you have. A smaller brain source than if you have 200
people. And even if we add quote, what is it? Three or four people away from
each other from on Facebook globally. But but that’s a long distance. If you
are 40 people sitting in closed door and one thing so you have you have the
resources you have knowledge.
Funding or available available funding because your cash flow is is very often
comparable to your organizational size.
So people, knowledge, money.
And
then you have organizational structure because when organization grow. The
the necessity of having some kind of organization. It it doesn’t need to be rigid,
it doesn’t need to be very, very fixed, but but you need some procedures, some
processes to make things coming back to my favorite word, transparency to
make sure that people know what’s going on, to make sure that people know
who they should ask about what. To make sure that if you expect that you
are supply Department actually purchase what you asked them to purchase. I
didn’t travel stuff, really but but but organized sales organizational structure is
another thing. So for just gonna resources, knowledge, money, organizational
structure.
And then maybe clarity on ambition. But I think clarity about vision, do we
wanna grow to be Eli Lilly or no or no knowledge or are we actually content with
being 200 people. Because it it it’s too different. It’s the two different routes
requires two different Rd maps. What kind of business do we want to have in
five years? Do we wanna be 5000 people with sales subsidiaries spread over the
==PAGE:136==
126
Appendix B: Interviews
world. We wanna sell in Asia, Philippines, Costa Rica. We wanna go to Costa
Rica by the way, but I mean that is difficult because the the whole system, as
it as it, I mean the financial system is is running like biggest beautiful, right.
So with this kind of a build in necessity of growing. But growth is not always
positive. Because if you don’t know how you do it or when you do it, or why
you do it. If you’re just doing it because you can, that’s it’s not very. And I
didn’t make notes, so let’s see if I can remember him.
And then you need facility facility. You need the facilities to be able to support
your mission, so if you wanna do biochemical biochemistry biochemical assays,
you need a lap. If you wanna do, if you wanna double your output of of chemical,
any game chemical ingredient or chemical, whatever you need to be able to have
to build your factory to expand your factory, you need to you need facility to
support.
Dorothea: Do Smaller organizations follow or have more practices in
place compared to larger organizations.
Interviewee 1: I think I think all about resource planning because in a small
organization you can do resource planning until you feel sick. But at the end of
the day if we have promise, or agreed to deliver on 2 weeks from now. Doesn’t
really matter how much how many resources it takes. You do it. Whereas in
this big organization you have more people, you have more hands. Which means
that you can you can. You can actually deliver in these two weeks and adhere
to resource planning and and at here to leaving the office at 4:00 and then
then and then. But I think in small organizations. The absence of structural
approaches is very often driven by the fact that if we really have to do it, we
do it. Whereas larger organizations, delays or hiccups are kind of sucked into
the overwhelming number of successes. But you want to have a practice about
scoping, but in the end you might do not have it. No, I think I think I get you,
I think if you in a small organization have a very often I think there is none,
but then again, if you have one so that you have agreed all around the table.
At least for the people who have a saying, hopefully all knows and then that
this is what we wanna this is the scope of what we’re doing right now. Let’s
go do it. If you have that in place, you have a tremendous starting point. You
have an excellent starting point. Because if you look at the other thing, if we
have, we have these excellent processes for go doing what we think we need to
do. But then you may up end up doing different stuff. So the scoping is, I think
the scoping would be more critical than the procedures on how to do it because
in an in a small organization there are a few dozen Donuts and then, which
means that something’s goes easier. And then there’s a lot of chaos. But. But
if the scoping is right, you can fix it on the way. But if you have the processes
but not the scope, you’re really doomed. But but many small SMEs are are
struggling with it. Would actually, I think that was a good point. The the
==PAGE:137==
127
balance between scoping and processing. Because I think it’s easier to write
a standard operating procedure for how to do things. Then it is to agree on
how to scope things excellent. I think I think it’s easier to reach agreement in
SMEs and very often you have fewer political battles or mean political battles in
smaller companies. So smaller. Yeah. Companies then in larger. But you know
what? There are political battles, and there are different opinions. As soon as
you have three people in the room you can start that debate and actually also
with two.But in in theory I agree with you and I’m not sure whether I agree
with you in practice that it should be easier in a small. Of course it should
be easier in a small company. I mean everybody everybody I ever worked with
talks about small companies being able to fast decision making, rapid change
implementation in contrast to the large super tankers like the Norman orders of
the world. And that is true.
But there is a very delicate balance between making fast decisions and making
wrong decisions. And there’s a very delicate balance between centralized deci-
sions and decentralized decisions, because in the small organization, there’s also
a a, a tendency, I think from experience that. Because we’re small, we can make
fast decisions because we can make fast decisions. I don’t need to talk to every-
body. So I can make this decision, so I make this decision and I demonstrate
decision power and then leadership skills and strategic outside and denied the
coming Monday, I realized that the man next door to me or down the corridor
was actually making the same exercise with the competitive match completely
different outcome. So in the end, we wasted a week because we didn’t make a
centralized decision, but rather demonstrated how. Great reward and that is
difficult in a bigger organization. Because the mistakes are so expensive, you
know. Big mistake in a big long message. So yeah. But there is an interest-
ing that and and yeah, and I’m talking talking, talking, but there is a there
is an interesting dynamic playing in smaller medium sized companies because
there is this we know each other better. And that is true. And there is this.
We have a common goal. That comes back to the leadership chapter because
not everybody understands the goal, even if you’re 10 people, you can have a
different interpretation of the goal. Is lag right? It’s like reading or writing a
thesis or an article. If you’re three people writing, you can start up believing
that everybody know what you want to write about. But then after two weeks
of writing together, you realize it didn’t really agree. You may have experienced
that. So there are very interesting dynamics in small, medium size companies.
==PAGE:138==
128
Appendix B: Interviews
Interview 2
Dorothea: Could you tell me a little about yourself and your role in
your organization?
Interviewee 2: I’m VP of product here at XXX, which is a startup where we
are about 90 people now. I joined just over two years ago, and been working here
for for that period of time. I’ve been VP of product since December. And that
means that we have our four product managers referred to meet. Previously,
I’ve been in another startup and before that, I was a management consultant
in IT transformations for three and a half years of running big projects and
programs as PMO in large Danish companies. And of course engineer them
from DTU and here at forecasts now my role is to set out the roadmap for
our products as XXX is a software as a service company, where we provide
a project management platform, which has been targeted very much towards
consultancies.
But basically, we can do project management along with resourcing and fi-
nancials and time registrations and all that stuff. So because the whole time
registration of financial pieces why we’ve been sort of PSA oriented in and what
I do, like I said, together with the product managers define what should we
actually be? What’s next thing we should be building? And why? And how do
we improve on the product? And how does that fit within the overall product
strategy that I work closely with our CTO in, in building? So we were building
the overall product strategy, and then working with the PMs to define okay,
then what should we be doing in a very autonomous manner. So I think, for
this, for the purpose of this research you’re doing here, it’s relevant to know
that we see ourselves as an agile organization. And if you say projects in my
organization, people be like, No, we don’t want run projects we have, you know,
we have initiatives that we organized, we’re building features. But, but sort
of the traditional project management as a digital project management in sort
of terminology is a little bit different when we think of it in the Agile context.
And that’s because we are, you know, modern, what we call a modern software
company. So we also run very differently. So each of the product managers
sit in autonomous teams. And those teams then consist of developers and UX
designers. And each run with their areas, and they all work a little bit different
sort of, overall, we have some guidelines, but they’re free to self organize within
their teams. I think there’s sort of from the initial introduction, how that makes
sense.
Dorothea: Based on your experience and role how important do you
think the use of project management methodologies for the execution
of a project? Are they a key factor for projects success?
==PAGE:139==
129
Interviewee 2: Some degree of importance, because it gives, it sets out a
framework to how to think about how we work and also for the ability to, to
work together. That’s actually sort of from our point of view, the important
thing. But having a tight framework I think we’re looking at this ourselves right
now is belongs to a little bit of an older world, in what we call the post Agile
world, where there’s been a whole period of time where everything had to be
really sort of this is how you do it. And it’s all the way down to these details.
I think what I have experienced personally, and what we’re looking here is sort
of what are those guidelines? You know, what are the principles and an overall
level that we work towards, but with freedom to operate.
Dorothea: Do you believe that the use of online project management
tools is important for you work?
If yes, are you using many tools
when it comes to project management in your organization?
Interviewee 2: Now, I think that they’re hugely important, the tools, but
they’re there, they have no value in and of itself, right? So projects are all about
people, when it comes down to project failure, success doesn’t come doesn’t have
anything to do with the tool that you’re using. It has to do with the people
that you’re that you’re working with, and how you manage that, which is why
I like the people part here where you have sort of the whole the communication
piece, right? So you don’t succeed at a project if you’re just moving tasks on a
virtual board in a task management tool, right? That doesn’t tell you anything
about successful projects. But it is enabler for for understanding for planning.
And we’re back to planning is everything, a plan is nothing but planning is still
important. And having, you know, that common overview of understanding
where we’re going, and often also very much important for reporting, right. So
a lot of this also comes down to stakeholder management. And so one thing is
organizing your team and your team’s work. But a lot of it also comes to how
do you communicate about it outwards to other stakeholders? So I think it’s
super important. But it’s it has no value in and of itself.
Dorothea: What practices and methodologies do you follow in the
purpose perspective in your organization and what online tools are
you using?
Interviewee 2: Thankfully, we use our own tool. But we also, for this particular
piece that has to do with why are we doing this project and what do we want to
achieve a PowerPoint because we’re back to the elements of what we’re doing and
what we want to achieve. That doesn’t have to do with a with a tool, as such, as
it has more to do with the stakeholder management, the communication and sort
of putting that together. What we do is we work in our product management
practices very much according to a guy called Marty Cagan and dual track
agile, which is, which is sort of our overall practice from a product management
==PAGE:140==
130
Appendix B: Interviews
perspective and here, the why are basically looking at what are the customer
pains? Because most of what we’re doing when I talk about projects I mean
the product organization, so we’re all about what value we’re delivering to our
customers. So why we’re doing this project has to do with, why is this relevant
for our customers?
So we do this we call it a PACE document, which is a
problem approach and solution. So we define the problem, why is it a problem?
Why is it relevant to solve? How are we going to solve it? And then finally, of
course, solving it? But the first is the problem. So yeah, that’s how we started.
Dorothea: How do you run projects life cycle? Are you using online
tools to run this process?
Interviewee 2: What we do so, and I think that’s down to the type of company
we are right now. So, when we set out, like I said, before we do this problem
solution. So in our approach we define how innovative do we want to be on
this versus how versus how ambitious are we on it?
So like how much this
is a differentiator, but also how big of a attempt at this do we want to take
and then that to some degree defines the process that we dive into in terms of
the discovery. So if it’s not something we want to be the best and it’s not very
differentiating so we know a lot about it, then our discovery process becomes very
validation oriented. We say, well, we’re just going to go out with a hypothesis
tested with the customer and then go implement whereas if it’s something where
we’re seeing, it’s highly differentiated and we want to be really ambitious on this,
that means we’ll do a much longer process of discovery and understanding and
really trying to find out where we can do something differently. So it very much
impacts the discovery process, depending on where we land on that.
On that scale in a part of this is of course also how new is this to us? How much
do we know about it to begin with, and how much of a risk are we willing to
take here. So if we’re willing to be to be very risky, well, then we can be much
more experimental. And we can be be less sure about the things that we’re
putting out. As a software service company, what we do is, we put stuff out to
our customers and close betas and open betas and general availability, which
are more phases of the finalization of a project. So depending on again, the type
of thing that we want to do, the problem we’re attacking will also define if we
need to go into closed beta, open beta and general availability.
We use our own product for the development planning. So that’s where we do
well, here are the initiatives that we have on our projects, if you want to put
it that way. And then we break it down into tasks, and then we’ve run into
running sprints. So, we use our own tool for that. And then we use, like I said,
PowerPoint for all of the other conversations or communication that we have.
Dorothea: What is your practice for assessing projects success? Are
==PAGE:141==
131
you using online tools to run this process?
Interviewee 2:our users or users using what we put out there? So we use a tool
called Amplitude for product analysis. And in that we define some parameters
for what do we actually expect in terms of how many users start using it? Or
what what period of time? Do they need to start using it? And how often are
they revisiting this feature? And so if we put something out, nobody uses it,
then we failed, right? So we tried to be very data driven in that approach. So
Amplitude is definitely tool there. But also measures of success, we also tie it
two to two revenue. So our sales team will put parameters on why we win a
customer, and they’ll add in, well it’s it’s because of the product, and it’s because
of these specific things in the product. So we’re marrying everything we’re doing
in product two, you know, why are we losing? Why are we winning? And then,
you know, we should stop losing on something, if we build it, we should start
winning on something because we build it and we should see our customer start
using what we’re doing.
Dorothea: Is it more like customer satisfaction that defines the suc-
cess of a product or a project? Or is it also the revenue that you gain
and if you finish it on time?
Interviewee 2: On time is less important. We’re trying to be more time time
driven, but it’s definitely about the outcome for the customer, but then that
turns into revenue, right?
So for us, it’s it’s revenue, but it has to be tied
to customer success and customer happiness. Because there are two parts to
revenue. There are new revenue and then there is retaining revenue. So how
many customers can we keep because we built this or how many Customers can
we win because we build this.
Dorothea:
How are you doing the assessment of the investment?
What tools are you using to support these practices?
Interviewee 2: So we have this way of measuring what we’re doing, which is a
version of weighted shortest job first. But to say, how much revenue can we get
out of this feature? Do we think it? How difficult is it to do? How long time will
it take on? And does this is this time critical for our customers? To do so that
we try to give the different things that we could be doing a score based on that.
And it’s, again, it’s not that score in the end that defines it, that score is a way
for us to talk about what is important, and whether we want to do something?
Because like I said, it comes down to, can we generate revenue revenue from it?
Or does it satisfies some customers and how big a piece of work that is this?
And it’s sort of that evaluation that we continuously take. But funding wise,
we have our product teams. So to say we fund by having the product teams as
a core, and then we don’t sort of assign, well if we expect the project to cost
==PAGE:142==
132
Appendix B: Interviews
this much we don’t do that.
We have an Excel model where we where we just you know, punching? What
we think these these numbers are? So that’s an adaptation of the rise model,
which is reach, impact. Confidence and efforts. And like I said, it’s and then
we’ve adjusted a little bit, so it’s closer to the west Jeff way to show the job
first. And then we use an Excel just an Excel sheet to, to to punch numbers in
and get a little bit of a of an output on that.
Dorothea: How do you scope the project? What online tools are you
using?
Interviewee 2: We break down what are we then actually need to need to do?
So that comes down back to what I said before. We do the problem, we do the
approach and then we do the solutions and what does that solution actually look
like. And and we break down the scope wise. We do some high level estimates
together with like a tech lead on the technical side of it. But then we work in
Figma. Everything we do is visualized in in Figma. And that’s how we hand
over to the technical side of the team to break down tasks. And then the total
scope will then see in our own product as we break the tasks down.
Dorothea: How are you estimating the time, the resources and bud-
get? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 2: We estimate them in the person weeks of person sprints. That’s
our overall estimation technique, but then we actually break it down into hours.
So we, of course, go through a cycle of we start with, you know, how many
people, for how many months? And then how many people for how many days,
or you know, how many person days, and then we go down into specific hours.
So that’s, as we know, more. That’s the process we go through of breaking
things down. And like I said, we do that in hours, we this piece of work is
mostly done, like I said, in the in development side, we’ve talked about the
discovery process, it’s much more sort of, okay, well, we’ll time box this piece of
discovery, based on you know, the approach, how big is it? How new is it? We’ll
say, Okay, well will we think we can do this in approximately two months if we
don’t want to talk to this amount of customers. And then we do sort of a high
level blobs for that work. And then as we go along, that’s where we talk to the
tech leads to get the overall estimates and then breaking that down as we move
along. We were scheduled that then into sprint store specific estimates. So we
do sprint planning, we typically work in about three months ahead, as much as
possible. But like I said, we keep getting wise. And so we keep sort of grooming
our backlog and kind of say, Okay, well, what do we then need to take in? And
how much can we actually do in the in the different different weeks.
==PAGE:143==
133
That’s our own tool. So we have sprint planning in our tool, we might do a
sprint overview, where we do the very high level stuff on, again, sort of just the
PowerPoints where we’re saying, Well, this is the approximate overview of the
of the personal weeks we have. And then, but then the actual sprint breakdown
and planning of that actually happens inside our own product.
Dorothea: What practices do you use to implement project schedul-
ing?
Interviewee 2: Don’t think there’s an approach to that.
if we’re handing
over from products to development we typically do a little workshop where we
present the solution and then in discussion with the development can say, Okay,
well, what are the things that needs to get done from a development point of
view and then sort of use that session to understand the scope of work so the
developers can then break it down afterwards into tasks
Dorothea: Do you have your own tool for that?
Interviewee 2: Yes.
Dorothea: How do you allocate your resources and budget? What
online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 2: That’s what we say, really don’t do. Because we work in these
teams, right? So the capacity in our world, we don’t do here’s a project, and
then we allocate people to the projects we do here’s a team which projects can
we then put in? So it’s flipped. If you talk about sort of value stream funding,
then we can talk about team funding. So we decided that we have a team of
this amount of people that cost this much to have. And then we say with the
capacity of this team, what can we then put it in to fill up their capacity? So
it’s the other way around.
Our tool actually does the complete opposite of that. And so that’s actually
something we’re looking at because many modern product organizations do the
other way around, like you’ve decided to have this team, how do you then make
sure you fill up the capacity of that team in the best possible way. There’s
specific to I think, the type of organization that works in these empowered
teams and that’s why I’ve been asking a little bit about who you’re who you’re
looking. Because if you compare a construction company to us, that would be
a very different way of working.
Dorothea: How do you decide whether you should make or buy a
product or a service? What online tools are you using for that?
==PAGE:144==
134
Appendix B: Interviews
Interviewee 2: Ooh, I like your make it or buy it because we have had have a
couple of cases of this and make or buy definitely comes down to effort but also
skill like how is this part of our core business? Is this something that is very
important that we own or is it something that somebody else can do better.
Then the cost is either comparable or better, just also in terms of it’s opportunity
cost. So what else could we do if we just bought it from somebody else and those
somebody else are much more skilled at actually doing this particular thing. So
we’ve just implemented something called Advanced analytics on our platform
and basically we went out and bought access to a BI tool and then we just model
that data. But the BI tool is, you know standard, they’re experts at building
this. So we just make sure that we surface our data there. So that’s a sort of
very relevant question and that comes down to a whole business case, right then
we do a little bit of a business case on that.
Dorothea: Do you make business cases more for deciding weather to
make it or buy something?
Interviewee 2:Yes.
Dorothea: Because i have included the business case as part of doing
the evaluation of an investment.
Interviewee 2: Ok, yeah, but it, but it’s that’s where we do the do the detailed
business case. We don’t do that on our stuff, the stuff that we know and that
we house right.
Dorothea: How do you improve (optimize) your project plan? What
online tools are you using?
Interviewee 2: I’d like to say very fast because we’re agile, but we do, we
do retrospectives as part of the the work that we’re doing. That’s part of the
the basic scrum methodology to do some retrospectives and we continuously
improve. And that’s also back to the empowerment of the teams. Each team
also improve on their processes so they can be the most efficient in terms of what
works for them. And of course we try, we improve on the overall processes, but
that has very much to do with the communication and how they communicate
to sort of the wider organization and that’s pretty much my perspective.
Whereas sort of their the detailed operations of executing a project within the
product teams and improvements on that sort of left to their group and to to
improve upon. But they do right constantly.
We’re also a growth business. So it’s also to say that it constantly changes. If
==PAGE:145==
135
you look back a year, we had one, one product manager and 1 1/2 product teams
and now we have 4 product managers, 4 product teams and so as we scale that
complexity of organization and communication. It continuously happens and
and it’s that balance of of control versus freedom. And control always have to do
with the right information at the right time, because it’s not micromanagement,
but then also giving the autonomy and freedom to move. So there could be as
efficient as possible.
Dorothea: What is your practice to risk and opportunities identifica-
tion? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 2: I think we’re not very structured around risks as such. But
what we do is you know there’s high amount of involvement across the team
which I think is 1 sort of very important parameter to to look at feasibility of
the things that we’re looking at and so that’s you know there’s never something
that comes from the product manager and just hand it over to a tech lead and
the tech leads and they’re like what is this? And then we spend a lot of time
on customer interviews. So we try to make sure that we can we can document
and and understand the problem fully to reduce the uncertainty of what we’re
actually doing.
And then we gather a lot of data, so our sales team and our customer success
team are very, very good at in documenting what our customers are looking for,
what they want, and then we also use them very much for sparring. So as we’re
doing our initial discovery and consideration of whether we should do a project,
we talked to the CS team, we talked to the sales team and kind of understand,
you know, where should we be looking, what seems to be the right thing.
Research is a massive piece of what we do in. So we have a whole, we have a
center of excellence in research. That feeds all the teams and so we use them
for some of these things. We don’t do and it just looking at this right, we don’t
do sort of a risk monitoring. We do a little bit on our very big initiative. So we
do have some very big initiatives. So we and we check in with the exact team
and sort of highlight you know are any other risks as we see it in terms of the
the overall timeline that we’ve given or in terms of the resources capability to
deliver on that and that’s kind of it. So I think this is probably where we’re the
least structured but reducing uncertainties the nature of the practice of product
managers and in what they do.
Dorothea: So you would say that probably in identification assess-
ment reporting and responding and monitoring?
Interviewee 2:It’s not that structure at all. like the particular risk monitoring
like no. Probably not. If if there is some risk to something, then we communicate
==PAGE:146==
136
Appendix B: Interviews
and then we sort of highlighted. So we continuously talk about whether there
are risks to what we’re doing.
Dorothea: How do you make decisions in projects? What online tools
are you using for that?
Interviewee 2: That’s where all of our rice model comes in. Because that looks
at what is the potential of something over something else? So decision making
comes down to understanding the impact that the whatever the initiative will
haven and our customers and then we continuously evaluate that towards new
things that are coming in. So we can also put stuff on pause and or stretch that
as we put something in, right. So we don’t, you know we don’t say well, this
is the project now let’s go do it. We continuously evaluate whether OK do we
need to turn this down and turn up for something else and then so.
Our way of working is very agile in that sense. So we’re sort of always reevalu-
ating our decisions on this. I think the rise model and then looking at revenue
and customer value is something that we do and then we continuously IT valued
those data points in as we have them
Dorothea: What are your practices for the learning you have gained
from the projects? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 2: They immediately get built in if there are something. But
we don’t do a document lessons learned.
We need to start using them sort
of straight away. Because we always run projects so it’s and there are always
overlapping the projects that we do run. Maybe that’s a good point.
We do have these communities of practice. So we have a community of practice
for our product managers community of practice for our designers and commu-
nity of practice for our tech leads and community of practice for our researchers.
And just to always share knowledge and experiences and see if there’s some new
processes we should implement or just, you know, here’s something that we’ve
done that was really great. You could take it or leave it. And so I think that’s
maybe one thing.
Dorothea: How do you create a team?
What online tools are you
using to support that?
Interviewee 2: No, it’s the teams are long standing teams.
So of course,
they’re they’re we compose those but that’s generic for all the teams that they
consist of a certain combination of people. But it’s not a new team. We stand
up for every project that team exists continuously.
==PAGE:147==
137
Dorothea: What are your communication practices when you run a
project? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 2: And so for the beginnings too, it’s like I said, would you these
executive check-ins for for communication? We use slack as our internal com-
munication tool and everything goes there. So we have channels for information
that comes out of the of the projects for people to communicate. And so that’s
how we how we do a lot of that and then together with our own tool where
there’s also a certain amount of commenting and interaction going on.
Dorothea:How do you engage with your stakeholders? What steps do
you follow in this process What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 2: It depends on the stakeholders, but what would you right? We
have every everything we do is almost stakeholder management. So we have
talked about the stakeholders in the organization that we talk about sort of the
executive check-ins that we have that which is towards our our C level of the
organization we have we have. We do these discovery of fruits presentations
where each team presents what they’ve been doing and what they found out in
terms of what we’re what we’re building. We do presentations to the rest of
the organization on what we’re doing. We work in these platoons where each
product manager has a sales representation, representative CS representative
and marketing representative to which to make sure that communication about
what we’re doing is being surfaced to them.
We work closely with our customers, which I’m very big stakeholder in in what
we’re doing right and in online meetings and show what we’re doing with them
and and take their feedback all the time. So stakeholder engagement is sort of
very much at the forefront of what we do all the time.
Dorothea: What is your practice to Lead a team? What online tools
are you using for that?
Interviewee 2: Not within project management. I think we go back to talking
about our empowered teams. That’s that’s how we work. And so my role is of
course lead by example in any way we can get around it but most importantly
for someone like me and for the product managers is to constantly talk about
why we’re doing what we’re doing. So we we lead with why we lead with with
customer problems and customer pains and in in everything we do. But I don’t
think we have any other sort of leading practices as such.
Dorothea: How do you manage conflicts? What online tools are you
using for that?
==PAGE:148==
138
Appendix B: Interviews
Interviewee 2: No. And there’s only say it as soon as there is a risk, and then
we’ll deal with it. That there’s no methodology.
Dorothea: What are your practices for motivating your teams? What
online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 2: Yeah. Then we’re back to in in power teams, right. That’s what
we build our entire organization. Empowerment, influence, collaboration. When
we set out the product strategy, we involve the entire product organization in
that right and so involvement and empowerment and freedom to make decisions
within frames.
It’s very much how we work on motivating people and trying to give them
challenging assignments so that they can continuously build and and develop
themselves and I think that’ what we do to motivate.
Are are people sort of generally and then we work, you know, we we try to
always get back to us trying to be data driven. And so we do surveys E, NPS
surveys and so employee NPS surveys and then we do biweekly. It’s going to
be biweekly or monthly actually and where we just started gathering, doing like
temperature checks on on, on the organization too. To understand how they are
feeling, how they’re doing? And so we always have sort of a check in with the
with people to understand you know where they are and I think a big part of
motivation is also transparency. So we we talk a lot about what’s going on and
what we’re doing and where we’re heading and. No, like, there’s not far from
an employee, from a developer to our CEO, right? He just walks around here
in the office and and is approachable and always talks about where we’re going
and which is exciting.
Dorothea:
Are you using any specific tool for doing temperature
checks?
Interviewee 2: Yes and so that’s our HR system, XXX. And can do can do
all this and we were talking about culture and we didn’t actually use it, I think
because it was too expensive. And so but with our HR system can can do these
these surveys on a regular basis. So we get the data in.
Dorothea: You said that you do not have an approach for conflicts.
Do you think it is important to have that maybe?
Interviewee 2: No, I don’t think that. I think if you need to have an approach
for conflict management, then you’re in a tight spot. And so conflict manage-
ment has to do with being with people. We’re back to having a collaborative
approach and a culture where you can respectfully disagree and that we can
==PAGE:149==
139
have open discussions around.
Dorothea:
Based on your experience and role what are the main
challenges related to project management an SME might face?
Interviewee 2 I don’t think that has to do with the with an SMES such.
I think the challenge is that we’re seeing as an organization is our constant
evolution because we’re startup. So for our type of SME actually feel like we
have a benefit in running projects and because we are so small, we have a
chance of actually talking across the organization. There’s less ambiguity about
what we’re doing, less stakeholder management, even though there is a lot of
stakeholder management that only gets worse, I should actually scaling up your
organization. So in terms of running projects, I actually feel like we have a we
have a benefit.
Interview 3
Dorothea: Could you tell me a little about yourself and your role in
your organization?
Interviewee 3: I have two roles where I work. So one of them is product
owner for service management and project management, which means that I
have the responsibility of figuring out how we can technically support our busi-
ness in regards to service management and project management across all our
countries, contract had companies in different countries, and they all need to be
supported, and they all have more or less the same systems but integrated with
local systems. So that is one of them. And the other part is that I am a product
manager for customer projects, or programs. So it’s two very different things,
but they they support each other very well.
And you can say that product
owner is more with developers, so software development, stuff like that. And
the customer facing is more technicians. And they are they are two different
worlds more or less. And then on the side of that I have a business development
work on the side. So that is a whole new way of looking into it. So three very
different ways. Very different environments also and expectations, what they
expect of me but also what I can expect of them.
Dorothea: Based on your experience and role how important do you
think the use of project management methodologies for the execution
of a project? Are they a key factor for projects success?
Interviewee 3: I think it’s very important. I have a hard time thinking that
==PAGE:150==
140
Appendix B: Interviews
you know you have one that fits all but but I think it’s very important, how
the common ancestor is, how you have the project, how the communication is.
Also how mature the customer, can also have a huge impact on how you run
a project. And what you can expect but also, if it’s technicians or developers,
there is also a long history of how you do stuff, and how you communicate and
where you communicate and as not necessarily systems, but just in what detail
you communicate. That’s also very different
Dorothea: Do you believe that the use of online project management
tools is important for you work?
If yes, are you using many tools
when it comes to project management in your organization?
Interviewee 3:
At least, I don’t know if I necessarily look at this as needing
to be online, but at least needing to be able to share the information between
both between internally in the project but also towards customers. And if that,
that can be physically placed somewhere and they can have access to it. But
no, you shouldn’t only have paper and stuff like that. But if it’s in the cloud,
or if it’s locally placed, I think the importance is that everyone can access the
needed information. So you don’t have to do anything twice.
Dorothea: How do you run projects life cycle? Are you using online
tools to run this process?
Interviewee 3: If we take the cut, it’s a bit different if it’s internal or customer
facing. But overall, we use what is called PRINCE2 more or less, we are starting
to use the Agile also in customer facing projects. And that’s a new thing, we
also within the last two years, three years, we have a managed service, which
means that prior when the project stopped, we handed it over to the customer.
Now we are more and more handing it over internally to our managed service
which sets a whole new part of the lifecycle because then suddenly, after a year
or two, they can come to us saying okay, now we need to refresh something or
upgrade something and and if it’s big enough for project then we handle it in
the product management team. But but we start with having a pre sale so we
have the account manager and then a pre sale going to the customer when they
have the overall scope not in detail. But the overwhelming customer says yes, I
would like a quote for this they go to a product manager saying we would like
you to help with during a statement of work which is more or less a contract.
So we do that in dialogue with the customer and the engineer that is going to
work on this if the customer accepts when we have an an architect and stuff like
that. And when we have done that and the customer have signed it. We are
doing a more or less normal project. A lot of them are still waterfall projects.
Because this is in it and you kind of need the hardware before you can implement
things and stuff like that. And then we have different gates of course doing its
prints too. And when we have done on through all of the different things in the
==PAGE:151==
141
statement of work, we we hand it over either to the customer or to ventures.
We were using for both is a service management and project management, we’re
using ServiceNow.
Dorothea: What is your practice for assessing projects success? Are
you using online tools to run this process?
Interviewee 3: So the success is often based on facts, which, of course, is
important, but it’s more technical if we do what we set out to do.
But we
also have an evaluation at the end of the project saying both internally but
also towards customers, how do they think it went? How do they think that
collaboration? When did we do it within the time and money that was set aside
and stuff like that. the Statement of Work, and the evaluation is right now in
Word?
The Statement of Work, and the evaluation is right now in Word? But we are
looking into seeing if it should be in ServiceNow, they have a tool for it. But
then we’re back to what we can expect from engineers, and then in that field
with the technicians, because they, they are not good at the detailed work and
documenting that where my work with the software developers, it isn’t they are
very much used to the detailed documentation. And I would at any time be
able to tell them, we’re using this tool, and this is what we’re going to work
forward with. But right now it’s in Word this.
Dprpthea: How do you measure success?
Interviewee 3: You can say that it’s both in to the soft part of it, is in the
word as explained. But in regards to how many hours and time and stuff like
that, that is in ServiceNow
Dorothea:
How are you doing the assessment of the investment?
What tools are you using to support these practices?
Interviewee 3: But often the when a customer comes to us, they have the
business case, of course, it’s important for us to know but but they have it for
that’s for my So, the customer projects are the customer owns the business case
for that one. So they are doing it themselves. And in regards to product owner
and the business development part. I’m doing that. So, we are looking into
saying okay, we have this course now, where are we at both in regards to that
could be licenses and stuff like that, for that we are using two things. So we are
using PowerPoint to present it at least as most most people probably do and
then we are using Revision.
==PAGE:152==
142
Appendix B: Interviews
Dorothea: What are your practices to assess the vision and impact
of the project? What online tools support this practice?
Interviewee 3: All the things that are not customer facing that is for me at
a very important because if you try to change anything in in that organization,
you need the why? Because otherwise people will sit with crossed arms saying
but we don’t understand we don’t see. So the impact, the vision could it also
mean the benefit of it i think that’s the whole foundation. If you don’t know
that, then what are you gonna measure?
Right?
But we are definitely not
strong in that part in regards to our customer facing one because they own
the business case, we are still working on it, maybe standing a bit back we
have the best people in the world regarding the engineers, they can fix anything
technical, but they do have a hard time understanding the business level of why
we’re doing this. And not just focusing on the technical part. That means that
it’s especially as as product managers that have that responsibility of trying to
tell the engineers why are we doing this? Why are the customer doing this?
Or why are they reacting in a certain way for different things, but we don’t
have any systems for this. This is only verbal dialogue, maybe an email or two
but it’s verbal. We are though, we are trying to put some business objects into
our statement of work. So this is the business object and this is the technical
object. But yeah, it’s more or less it’s not anything in any online system at all.
But we are trying to every time we evaluate this comes up something from the
customer saying you’re so good at the technical part, we need you to be better
at understanding the business part of all of this
Dorothea: How do you scope the project? What online tools are you
using?
Interviewee 3: We have a whole flow for this and that is where we have the
statement of work that is owned by the account manager because it’s a customer
contract more or less and that is where when an account managers have that
dialogue with the customer and they say yes, we would like a contract for this
and look through what it is how many hours and stuff we have, you know, saying
okay, this whole document something is the customer needs to sign off. But we
have engineers that are responsible for one thing we have account managers that
are responsible for filling out something project manager is responsible for filling
out some things and stuff like that. But we have a whole flow for this it’s we are
very much looking into or leaning up against how Cisco is doing it because we
were at that point mostly a Cisco house. But that is actually one of the things
we’re very strong at but again, it’s in Word. So we don’t have the only thing
you can say that is supported online is that all the tragic tasks that we put into
these statement of works they are then put into ServiceNow if it ends up being
a project so we can measure the things in there.
==PAGE:153==
143
Dorothea: How are you estimating the time, the resources and bud-
get?
Do you have a common estimation technique for all?
What
online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 3:
We don’t have one overall I’m now saying just for Denmark,
because we have in regards resources we are not doing it the same way overall in
concept but in in Denmark the resources we don’t have a resource management
department that is handled by the different consultant directors. So and that is
actually already done when we’re doing the statement of work. So we are saying
okay, do we have these resources available if we are to to get this contract signed?
And then the time and they’re Two parts of that. So, there is the overall project
time we are doing that in this project. But we have and breaking that down, but
we also have the hours. How many hours? Are we to invoice? And how many
hours are they using the engineers that is in ServiceNow in regards to budget,
so, the the budget for ours and invoicing those are also on ServiceNow. But
the hardware budget is right now, in addition, we are working towards having
all of it innovation, I actually have a project for that going on. So all our our
both our planned effort, our actual effort and what we have invoiced and stuff
like that all of that will be in a project module in addition not a project as we
know, but a project as you know, what have we sold to a customer. So, that
growth will just be hardware or whatever Yep
Dorothea: What practices do you use to implement project schedul-
ing? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 3: That is also in regards to PRINCE2 too, mostly, but we do
have in regards to the sequence and how we do that, that is actually on a high
level identified in the statement of work, because we need to identify hours that
needed to be spent and so on, we a lot of our products are based either on fixed
price or time and material. So, we break a lot of these down in our statement
of work. So the customer knows what they can expect. And after that, when
we have done that, and the customer has signed it, I call for a key goal for the
instrument projects and then we start looking into Okay, these are what we have
identified in statement work this is what we have promised the customers I sit
with the engineer saying okay, so what would that may mean, in regards to the
project in general, what is it and then we put that into MS Project and present
it to the customer and going in dialogue with them.
In terms of tasks that they are to work on that sensor is now when they are to
work on it, that is very freely in Denmark, at least that is very freely with the
consultants. So if you say you have the deadline here, then for smaller projects,
so within, under, I don’t know 1000 or 2000 hours, they can more or less decide
when to work on it.
But the programs I’m running, I have a requirements
saying you need one or two days, we’d fixed because you need to be able to
==PAGE:154==
144
Appendix B: Interviews
work internally together at the same time. And that is harder if you are a 12
or 15 people. But that is controlled in their outlook calendar when that is we
don’t use resource management tools in culture.
Dorothea: How do you allocate your resources and budget? What
online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 3:
In regard to allocations that is aligned with first the consultant
director, and afterwards when he appointed the different consultants that can
be on the project. We take that in the project saying how can we reach the
deadlines? When do you need the allocations and stuff like that? So that is
internally in the project, we don’t have any support for that. Then going back
to we don’t have a resource management tool for the budget we have for hours
that’s in ServiceNow but in regard to hardware that is in Navition and that
was where I said we are planning to have everything visible in Navision within
I don’t know probably a year
Dorothea: How do you decide whether you should make or buy a
product or a service? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 3:
We’re back to the business case, so often is what value will it
bring? And often it more or less says, Why do we need to make it. So because
normally we would like to have a standard and out of the box, that’s our way
of seeing it that if you have something that is standard or out of the box, it’s
easier to get supported. And it’s, you’re also less likely to be vulnerable. If
these people that develop it stops. But then again, if it can differentiate us
from the rest of our competitors, we will look into saying, Okay, what will it
cost, both to support and develop? And how big of a differentiator will it be?
Yeah. But in the projects we have, you know, it’s in a long way, it there are
no us deciding. So if they need the hardware, they, you know, they need the
hardware, we’re not going to make the hardware, but the optimization part of
it, that is often something will look into, is it feasible for the customer, that
we are using time on optimizing something? Or is it easier just to manually
do something because they are not going to use it that many times. So we are
looking into time spent for either or for that decision, but the rest of it? That’s
very, because it’s technical, it’s very much this is how it can be done, you know,
you need to buy that because otherwise you can’t move forward.
Dorothea: How do you improve (optimize) your project plan? What
online tools are you using?
Interviewee 3:
We’re using ServiceNow, for a lot of that. But because we
have customers saying yes, that’s fine, but we want the change in this document,
if we are to approve it, or we want a service. So that depends a lot of the time,
==PAGE:155==
145
we have to do double work. So we have it in ServiceNow. But we also have
something towards the customers. And that is because right now ServiceNow
has a module where you can have customer facing dialogue but we don’t have
that yet. And my expectation is that it will be at least a year and a half before
we have that at the earliest, probably two years. So that means that right now
we’re doing double work our big cup, or big customers, they have a very strict
change management, way of working that is leading to the ITIL way of working,
that means that they expect a bit a certain standard when we deliver changes
to them. And it’s not the same going across the different customers. That is
why we are using templates for that. But we are doing changes for PRINCE2.
We are doing changes for everything that is not in the Statement of Work.
What is your practice to risk and opportunities identification? What
online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 3: We’re using PRINCE2. So that is a lot towards that. And in
regards to risk and the identification of those the biggest risks that we identified
during the statement of work we also write into those that can be hardware
delivery, that can be the customers maturity, that can be a lot of different
things. But after that we are doing the same as change management totally the
same. So we do it in ServiceNow. But we are also doing it in a template for the
customer.
How are you assessing risks and opportunities? What online tools
are you using to support that?
Interviewee 3:
It’s the same. Normally we have Yeah, it’s both in ServiceNow
and it is but but it is PRINCE2. So how you identify it, how you follow up on
it. The more we learn or the more we work with agile, we have also the SAFE
with the methodology that we are leaning towards. So you can say you have a
risk, who owns it? Or is it accepted and so on. But again, it’s in ServiceNow,
and it’s on a template for the customer.
Dorothea: Are you using any molel like the Monte Carlo simulation?
Interviewee 3: No
So the assessment is mainly qualitative?
Interviewee 3: Yes
What is your practice to respond to risks? What online tools are you
using to support you with this?
==PAGE:156==
146
Appendix B: Interviews
Interviewee 3: Again PRINCE2.
How do you monitor risks? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 3: Again PRINCE2.
What is your practice to adapt to changes? What online tools are
you using for that?
Interviewee 3: That is depending on what it is. I actually think and that
is why we are leaning more towards agile and and not agile in a loose way of
handling things. But actually agile in in SAFE methodology where we identified
we breakdown the different jobs that we have or tasks we have and then saying
OK but customer if you can’t reach your deadline within this then we can take
this task instead. But be aware of the impact this will have and then we show
that towards them. So that’s between PRINCE2 and SAFE depending on the
project.
How do you make decisions in projects? What online tools are you
using for that?
Interviewee 3: We have a government. So when we start a project, we define
the governance and the project saying who can decide what’s within the mandate
of conscience and the project manager, what’s within the mandate between the
two project managers from the customer and and content and so on. What is for
the steering committee to decide and and what is above the steering committee
to decide.
For some, it’s in ServiceNow for some they just have it in the PowerPoint pre-
sentation where that they used when you have the kick off with the customer
and so they that that is where the they get the sign off for the governance.
What are your practices for the learning you have gained from the
projects? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 3: When we have had the internal and external evaluation if there
are some new lessons that we haven’t reached before, we have our Confluence
site where we store those and then I can assign them. So I can assign them
to different parties in content. Because if it’s something like handing over to
managed service and then let’s say the difficulties was that they didn’t have
the resources needed when I hadn’t needed to hand it over. Then I signed that
learning to the manager for that department. So that he can say, OK, this is
what the project came with. I will look into that and if it comes again and
again and saying OK, we have maybe something really need to look into here
==PAGE:157==
147
that we need to work on.
Dorothea: How do you create a team?
What online tools are you
using to support that?
Interviewee 3: That that is either PRINCE2 or a SAFE. So we look very much
into seeing if it right people that can do the technical part. That’s of course
the most important, but also do they fit into how the project is needed to be
structured. You know is it a long Project short project and also, do they fit
into? The more you saying that the chemistry towards the customer also that’s
also important and do they work well together and and stuff like that and yeah,
so it’s an overall dialogue we have with the consultant director saying, OK, do
we think it’s the right fit for this type of of project.
All the documentation that is in a project, we use OneDrive. As long as we
have the project, because that means that we can work on it. All at once, if
that is needed, yes, and then it is locked down to only the project, so it’s only
relevant people that can access that one. Of course. If the customer is OK with
that because we have a dialogue with the customer saying where can we store
documentation?
Dorothea: What are your communication practices when you run a
project? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 3: Yes, we if we have, if we are to use a communication strat-
egy because let’s be honest, you’re not always using that.
But if we are is
PPRINCE2, we are using for that one. It can be safe, so we have scrum meet-
ings or stand ups and stuff like that in regards to the Day-to-day communication
between the different engineers and stuff like that. We are using a a communica-
tion tool called Slack. And then we just create either group or channel. That’s
what it’s called. And then we they write back and forth there.
Dorothea: How do you engage with your stakeholders? What steps
do you follow in this process What online tools are you using for
that?
Interviewee 3: We have normally weekly meetings with the customer project
manager and also internally we have the project once a week we have a project
meeting. We are also have a steering committee meetings at least once a month,
maybe more often, if that’s relevant. And then often we try to sit locally at
the customer just to, you know, engage with them and and so on. But the
stakeholder we don’t necessarily have a methodology except what I just talked
to you about in in the steering committee and so on. But but going outside.
It’s more that we try to identify the stakeholders and then write down why and
==PAGE:158==
148
Appendix B: Interviews
stuff like that. That is often done in an excel sheet.
Dorothea: Is it the same for stakeholder influence/interest?
Interviewee 3: Yes. It is the same place.
Dorothea: What is your practice to Lead a team? What online tools
are you using for that?
Interviewee 3: Again, that’s very different, right, because I have colleagues
and we are not doing it necessarily the same way, but we are still leaning to-
wards. Setting an expectation both toward the customer but also towards the
participants in the project. We’re doing that in the kickoffs we have both inter-
nally and with the customer saying, OK, this is what I’m expecting to deliver.
Does that live up to what you expect and so on but And then we are using
PRINCE2 or SAFE? And so that can change what they can expect.
Dorothea: Do you use any platform?
interviewee 3: No, not necessarily. You can say that if we are using SAFE
normally we use. ServiceNow and the Visual Task Board for the different stories
they work on, and they can communicate in these and we go through those
stories either every morning or once a week or whatever the project is set up to.
So if we are to use. Anything that would be ServiceNow.
Dorothea: How do you manage conflicts? What online tools are you
using for that?
Interviewee 3: It’s a mix between PRINCE2 and how you are you identify
the team and and how you motivate the team and then how you have the
stakeholder engagement part because often it’s a stakeholder thing. You can
also have stakeholders in within the project participant right? So so it is often
handled.
Then we have going also back to the governance in the project. So if I have a
conflict, when do i escalate it if it’s without. If it’s not within the limits I can
handle.
Dorothea: What are your practices for motivating your teams? What
online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 3: Exactly. And and we are back to the why, you know, if they
understand if we have been good enough writing down the customers, why we
often have higher motivation. That’s my experience. So if everyone understands
==PAGE:159==
149
why we are doing this, not technically, but why are we doing this? What value
do we bring and why is each member important.
And that is set up is best. I’m using specially the part for SAFE you know. So
how you identify and motivate the team members. Because it’s different. But
most importantly in that we are leaning towards them, feeling that they are
doing it different.
Dorothea:
Based on your experience and role what are the main
challenges related to project management an SME might face?
Interviewee 3: I think in overall it’s easier to be or a medium size company
at least from a conscious point of view because there is a that high of a higher
accuracy, so it’s easier to get things done, but then having to finance different
changes internally it can be harder to convince that the business case is good
because the scope will no matter what you do, be smaller. I think that is actually
the biggest negative part of it.
Dorothea: After going through the model what do you believe people
tend to overlook in terms of project management practices?
Interviewee 3: I think there’s a lot of things people tend to overlook. As I
mentioned, you know, you said, what about communication strategy and yes,
that is part of the PRINCE2 and yes, you should do it. But I think it’s often
done through the different meetings setup and then also people are missing the
important of knowing the customers. Why? Because the customers why and
also as vendors, that’s not necessarily the same or often it’s not the same, right.
And the communication you have with the customer, it’s so important that you
know there why. And we don’t have anywhere where we can store their why?
Which might might be beneficial to know. OK, why do they want to do this?
What are the benefits for them? What are the struggles for them? But then
will they tell us the truth? Some probably will, but someone. I think that is an
important thing.
Then also the motivation for the different participants in the project. And that
goes maybe a bit also up against the stakeholder engagement and stuff like that
because you can have stakeholders that are very much engaged and you need
to tell them the status all the time, but they don’t really benefit your project.
But then you have some that they don’t care, but they you need them to be
engaged because they’re valuable for the project. And I think sometimes you
can underestimate that or sometimes you might not discover it until it’s too
late. And yeah, and I think finding a tool that can support all of that, I think
that might be hard, but it would be nice. But think it It would be hard to find
a tool that can do everything, because at least what I hear is that people would
==PAGE:160==
150
Appendix B: Interviews
like to work within one tool, and it’s hard to find the tools I can do.
Dorothea: Do you think that make it or buy it should be placed in a
different perspective maybe in purpose (investing)?
Interviewee 3: Yeah, I think so because you should figure that out prior to
and it doesn’t necessarily have anything to do with complexity. Does that make
sense? It’s sometimes it’s just the fact and it’s a lot towards the vision, impact
part If you should buy it or make it.
Interview 4
Dorothea: Could you tell me a little about yourself and your role in
your organization?
Interviewee 4: I am a project manager. So I use most of my time with project
management problems in an IT organization. So will be technical IT projects.
I don’t know that much about IT. But I am good at coordinating people. So,
typically, on big projects, I will have a colleague in the municipality, that is
also a project manager and that person will take the part that is organizational,
like talking to the people who is using this could be software. So, I will rarely
talk to the end user, but I will be talking to my colleagues who are specialized
in it. So, they will be setting up the system and make sure that it works and
that security is to the level that is agreed. And then I will communicate to the
project manager in the municipality and say, we are suggesting that this is the
setup or if we can do it this way, because we have this technical issues and make
it impossible to ou this way and stuff like that.
Dorothea: Do you believe that the use of online project management
tools is important for you work?
If yes, are you using many tools
when it comes to project management in your organization?
Interviewee 4:
I have tried different many project management tools. But
at the moment, I have the feeling that I have the most success using a software
that my colleagues use. So I will make my project plan maybe in a project
management tools but I will work daily in a plan that is just an Excel. And I
will coordinate with my colleagues through Outlook. So my experience is that
once I had a project where my colleague in the municipality suggested we use
the Monday and my experience is that my colleagues don’t like to go into new
tools every time there’s a new project. And when you have an organization
that is mainly one and infrastructure, and project is just a small part of it, then
==PAGE:161==
151
there it will be other programs and they don’t want to go into online tools. So I
cannot make my colleagues go in and see their task today in an online tool and
therefore I end up managed in the tools they will actually use. So if they go to
their mailbox every day, then I can write them a mail, we agreed that you are
going to do this have you done it or I can pass by their table. So I don’t have
that much success using online tools.
We also have a project management tool called Project place and the main use
that we do is to share documents with the municipalities or with other in our
organization, especially if we have to make sure that not they remember every
employee in my organization has access to the document, then you put it here
because if you just put it in the files, then most of my colleagues have the rights
to go into File because they are technical specialists. So even though we have an
project organization tool, we don’t use it as such. I used it on an early project.
The first one I was included in but it was only me and the other project leader
that use the tool and when we try to introduce it to our colleagues then they’re
like, We don’t want to go in there and be ended up Sending the documents we
upload with there on mail to our colleagues or put it in a shared the file. So I
don’t have that much success in online tools, even though I’ve tried two times.
Dorothea: Based on your experience and role how important do you
think the use of project management methodologies for the execution
of a project? Are they a key factor for projects success?
Interviewee 4: I think the methodology can be very important, because often
when you fail in project, it’s because you didn’t make risk analysis, because you
didn’t make an evaluation of which people are involved, which stakeholders do
we have. So I think the management practice is more successful, if you use some
of the methodology and some of the models that are designed.
Dorothea: How do you run projects life cycle?
Interviewee 4: I am not that structured around it. We have just introduced
a startup process for projects. Like procedure, if the some in our organization,
get a request for a project, how should we handle it as an organization? And
how should it get to a decision board that will accept or deny the project? And
that we have introduced half a year ago, but it is the only practice we have. It
is how to start a project? I’m free to arrange my project as I like. And I have
been working as a project manager for a few years. So I feel I’m stealing in a
learning. How do we do it? So there’s not a real life cycle model we use.
Dorothea: Do you use any tools?
Interviewee 4: No we don’t.
==PAGE:162==
152
Appendix B: Interviews
Dorothea: What is your practice for assessing projects success? Are
you using online tools to run this process?
Interviewee 4: Again, half a year ago, we tried to structure it a bit. So we
made this formula that should be fooled, written in the start of a project where
it is specified, what is the goal of the project, what is the criteria of success,
when to be achieved what we started to do. But I don’t have the we’re not
we’re now we make this in the beginning of project. But it’s rare that we go
and visit the document again throughout the project, which would be useful,
but the practice is not the vehicle, the practice is in the beginning. We have
the experience we’re not good enough to be aligned on what is The purpose
other than what is necessary to make the project a success, what is the goal,
what are we going for in measurable points But then again, we lose it.
So
it’s gaining on us, but we’re not good at practicing it. Even though I think
it is a very important part of the project, to be very clear about what am I
working to achieve, and agree on that part and actually go back and look at
the documents see, obviously working for this, because project often turns a bit
in that direction, and then they should be taken to the board again, and they
should agree, okay, now we have this and that, and therefore we make different
success criterias. So again, it’s just a word document in the beginning of the
project, and then we don’t visit it again.
Dorothea:
How are you doing the assessment of the investment?
What tools are you using to support these practices?
Interviewee 4: Typically, it is the municipality that most of our projects will
say, we need to do this, can you help us do this, and then we will make an
investigation. And we can do it this way, that way or that way, and the cost
will be this or that or that, and the consequences, technically, because this can
support it this way, and so on. And sometimes it’s also in turn like we have
to make network renovation, what should be a new standard, the hardware but
again, it’s a process, where they will call in a meeting of experts and say, who
should we ask for a price list? And what should we ask him that the program
should fulfill? And then we’ll ask a few, maybe three or four different companies,
get it back, evaluate, and then back and forth from the experts to the delivery.
But it will mainly be by email or/and documents and meetings. And then we’ll
end up having an Excel lightful filled in we’ll kind of do this, can I do this? Can
I do this? Yes, no? Three, four different brands. And then what is the price of
this and this and this?
Dorothea:hat are your practices to assess the vision and impact of the
project? What online tools support this practice?
Interviewee 4: Again, it is a part of our startup project document, where we
==PAGE:163==
153
will say what are we going to do? Why are we gonna do it? What is the success
criteria? Which impact will it have? Is there anything that we can close? If
we get this new PowerPoint system? Can we then close the other PowerPoint
system? Or do we have to have two different PowerPoint versions? And what
are we not going to look at? If we’re going to take a new PowerPoint, we then
also taking a new windows for the computers or we can I move to Exchange
Online or just give them a new version of Outlook.
And so we will try to
describe what are we going to do? What are we not going to do? And what is
going to be the different for the end user if there’s going to be any. But it is
back to one document that we make in the beginning of the project and it is
quite new to us that we actually have a formality about we’ll make this one your
startup project and it has only been there for half a year so there’s no routine
and going back So it should do it. And maybe we’re gonna do it because most
of our problems will also one over more than half a year. So I hope it’s going
to be a live document that will visit every time there’s a change to the project.
Because it’s kind of the the contract, this is what we’re going to do. And we
should agree when we can do something else. But it’s not that on the backbone
yet.
Dorothea: What’s the process for defining the vision of the project?
Interviewee 4: It’s very simple. I’ll ask a person who orders the project. And
sometimes they will not answer, then they will suggest the mission. Is it because
of this or that? So I will take a wild guess and say, this is why, we’re gonna
do it. And then I hope that it is somehow where should be, but it’s also some
projects are? Well, we want to have this new software to the dental clinic. And
then I can ask why budget like that. But it could also be politics, like, now
you have to do something. Well, because they have to. But there might be can
we add something? So it’s more like is it’s going to be nice project but some
projects are just we need to do it.
Dorothea: What online tools support this practice?
Interviewee 4: We have this one of the reasons they decided to take the IT
department and put it into one company from four municipalities was to officiate
the processes and make more specialized. So if they do it the same way, in all
formatting these penalties, it’s very easy for us to handle. And we can be better
at what we do. So if they have the same version of PowerPoint everywhere, then
it will take us less time to manage this. And it will be better at it. So if you
call and say I have a problem with my PowerPoint, I don’t first have to look
which version of PowerPoint to have. I know already. So I will help you right
away. And this is a what I will bring into the project. If one dental clinic it’s
not into the software but it is like with the MIDI, then I will be the message
that says now all four municipalities can have this and you have to do the same
==PAGE:164==
154
Appendix B: Interviews
way. Let’s say okay, we use the same ground platform for immediately. And
then I’ll say yes, but the texting should also be the same. Or you should have
a very good reason for different texting. And they say, Oh, we’re not going to
use it for this little group. And I say yes, we use it for everybody. So I have a
vision for my company that says as long as it makes sense and as long as there’s
no way we could reason not to do it exactly the same way, then I have to force
him to do exactly the same. And so I’ll bring this into the problem as enterprise
vision for my firm that they have to make it the same way because it makes it
better and cheaper and more efficient.
Dorothea: How do you scope the project? What online tools are you
using?
Interviewee 4: I try to make the project document bit clear, what are we
going to do, What are we not going to do but I find it very hard because often
in technical projects, it is not easy to know what is possible to do before you
start a project. And therefore I think it could be nice if I once a month took this
document and say am I still doing this? Is this something that has changed?
Some projects are given like I want this software, and we have to make it work
in the platform. And then there’s not much to scope. But when we add it is
more like, Okay, we’re going to handle it this way. And we’re also going to use
this feature. And it’s gonna end up delaying end user to have this experience.
And by the moment, I’m trying to make the four municipalities take this MIDI
solution and give it to the end users in a short period, and then not agreed on
which period is the best.
And this is not the end project. But for us, it’s very important because they’re
going to use it as a password reset. And if we’re going to manage the password
reset, we’ll have a year it is big fast, because it’s going to take a lot of resources,
compared to just do it and do it in a month.
Once tried to find a good way to present a timeline in PowerPoint, and I used
office timeline. But I didn’t like it the way I think the end product was not
communicative good. Because not that I have the feeling, it looks very modern
so we have this nice design but my message was, we’re going to do this that day,
and it’s gonna take this much resources, or we’re gonna do it over this period
and here’s a milestone. And when I made this model in office timeline, and I
looked at it, I was like it’s not visible enough. All these different people, it’s not
people who used to look at off the timeline so they’re not a common to their
version. So if I take Excel, and I’ll put a timer in the top, and I’ll put it to do
sit down. And then I’ll just color some of the squares, then I had I think that
my message will come mostly through even though my PowerPoint look like I’m
from the 90s. So I would like that it was easy to make something that look
more modern, and more nice. But my experience is that when I try to find a
==PAGE:165==
155
new tool, I’ll use spend a lot of time trying to make my models in this new tool.
Of course, if I’ve used the tool for 10 times, it will be easier. But the result is
not as good as the result from Excel. Maybe it’s look smart but my message is
not that it should look smart. My message is we’re going to be very, very busy
in June. And that messesage has to come to the people I talk to and when I
spend a lot of time trying a new tool and the resolve this Okay, so when there’s
a star in October that’s going to be nice. And the message they’re reading is
not June’s gonna be busy. It’s a risk when I go back to Excel even though my
PowerPoint looks a bit.
Dorothea: How are you estimating the time, the resources and bud-
get? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 4: That part I will visit all the time.
I will go back to my
sometimes we use MS Project. I think this can show we’re nice. Now we’re
doing this and this and this, and if you change this is going to do this is being
done before that, then it will show it compared to just making it in Excel, then
you have to be do it manually every time you make a change. So I think it’s very
nice for timeline, I don’t think communicating at MS Project is good. It’s not
good at a PowerPoint, it’s not good. The meeting to put up this, because the
layout was not good. That’s my experience. I can use it as a project manager,
but it’s going to be my own document, if I’m going to communicate to the
project group or to the people in the municipality or to the board it shouldn’t
be in MS project, because communication is evil, I don’t get through with the
message VPs in June, they’ll just see, oh, there’s 20 lines or whatever it could
be.
But I use spend a lot of time to the time schedule, the resources. I try to get
into routine once a month to get an estimate, how many hours are my colleague
gonna use on my project per week. But we do wicker and I to go back and
register it in Excel.
And once a month, we will go to my manager and I’ll
say this is how much I’m using different people in different projects. But it’s
not followed that much. And it’s not like if I agree with one person, you should
spend the seven hours per week on my project. If there’s a big thing that maybe
they have no internet, in one municipality, of course, it’s not going to work on
my project. And he’s not even going to tell me that he’s not working on my
popular project, who’s just used spinning zero hours that week, and maybe the
next one as well. So we’re not following it through. It’s just like, are we on the
plan? And how many hours do you think you’re going to use forward? And
not that much? How many hours did you spend last week? So we don’t have
this resource management where we can see how many hours was spent on the
project? Or how many resources do we need in an experience. But the reason
we started on this resource management Excel was that we are two project
managers. And we keep booking the same resource of the same man. And of
==PAGE:166==
156
Appendix B: Interviews
course, he could not work for two in the same hour. So we made it so we could
make it more visible. When do I have the need for him? And how much can I
put in? And how much can I plan on his time. And I find it the very usable.
And I also started to say how much of my own time to spend on this project,
or the other project, but it is an Excel, I have some inputs and makeup people.
And then you have different views of what are we working on in this period?
And budget? It’s I spend very little time on budget when somebody say you
have to do this project, it’s often somebody else who say this is the prices and
when they have chosen is we’re going to do this just do it. And if I can do good
some external to work on it, then I will say yes, they have been working 10
hours that week. And I will not have evaluation that is should we using more?
Or should we have other people to do it? So it’s very little in my daily work,
the budget
Dorothea: What practices do you use to implement project schedul-
ing? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 4: Just the waterfall model will usually be.
Dorothea: How do you define the sequence?
Interviewee 4: Like every week I’ll have a look at so where are we and what
should be prioritized?
So if we are late on this, then we have to start this
instead. And then this must wait. And then it might wait for a month or two
before we can take it up again. So I’m going forward is more important and
what is the critical path and what should I start a on early and my experience
is that often what I need to prioritize is decisions. If there’s any decisions in
the project, I have to find the decisions and because it takes a lot of time to
get through the decision making panels cause some might go to this group of
people in the meeting once a month and it is only that meeting that can take
this decision and they say ohh you have to go back and then it will take three
months before I have a decision.
That is 1 thing. The other thing I tried to do early is to warn my colleagues like
I have a task that’s coming to you. And it’s not critical yet, but the more times
I’ve said I need you to do this at some point, then when I come and it is critical.
Then they will do it for me if I come in the last minute and say I didn’t know,
but really need you to do this and it is so critical and everything is stopped. It
will be like, yeah, but they have no network and the date. So get about it. Yes,
but your colleague also said I should do something very important.
And sometimes I’m a bit lazy with the actually connecting the different task
and making this critical path, so sometimes it’s just in here. But you know,
it’s not always that the tool that makes it easy, and I think some of the reason
==PAGE:167==
157
is we’re not good enough to resource allocate. If I knew that my colleague is
gonna spend 7 hours on Tuesday on this project, then it would be more worth
for me because then I could actually say, OK, this task is gonna take it 10 hours
and then you have two weeks of occasion. So this task will be done the 12th
of July. But when we have so little resource management then it don’t give me
enough to actually put in all the dates and to connect all the tasks. So I’ll put
spend a lot of time actually doing it in Ms project. We go in and say ohh is this
still the plan? No. Now there wasn’t incident in eight days. So we are not on
the plan then have to change the dates on a lot of things or some of the what is
first and last and what is the most important.
So I think there’s too much I don’t do it because it takes too much time compared
to what is ending up being the truth and maybe there’s too much uncertainty
or maybe I just haven’t found the right level of making my tasks and doing my
connections between them. I think it takes a lot of time to actually set up a
nice working Ms Project and it’s nice when you then change. Ohh. We didn’t
do this within the last two weeks. Then it’ll just end the rest of them. But it
is not gonna be the truth is gonna end it too. Because then we’ll run into old.
But this resources on vacation now. So you have to put in too much information
before it does it automatically and then it’s not worth the time for me. And
maybe also because it is very hard for me to. They pick your buddies all the
delivery in the project, I cannot list all the things we’re gonna do, cause I’m
not half of them. I don’t get to know before we away into the project or before
I’ll ask my colleague. OK, so you’re gonna make this VPN connection to the
delivery of this software and then you’ll say yes, it’ll take me 5 hours and say,
OK, but what about the? And I’ll guess, should anybody be involved? Should
we have some external in, should we have a connection to the company that
delivered, should we and say yeah, but they can just be the same thing and it
ends up when we this day occurs. That we should have ordered something from
our phone company and they have 12 weeks of delivery time. And of course, it
would be easier for me to put that into a project model. If a new we’re gonna
order this part. But what ends up happening is that they of course, we’re not
gonna be done the day, he said. Where we put five hours. Then we might make
some phone calls and 12 week is not only gonna be 4 weeks, but I’ll start testing
without this connection, so I’ll. Change how we are gonna do a lot of other
things cause this is the late move much because my colleague didn’t mention
this little part that is so important.
Dorothea: How do you decide whether you should make or buy a
product or a service? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 4: That would be in this beginning of the project where I will
make this analysis so they want to be able to do this and then we’ll go to the
market and say who can do this how much of it, for us it’s often should they
==PAGE:168==
158
Appendix B: Interviews
have the service in our data center or should it be a cloud based version? That
would be for software. And then we can see if it’s gonna be in our data center.
Then the connections can be this and therefore you can use it for that.
Dorothea: Do you think that this could be part of the business case?
Interviewee 4: It’s always a first if we have 10 projects and they all involve the
same resources in my company, so it’s the same man who’s gonna be involved
in some projects those two solutions, either they’re gonna spend or be executed
over a long time period or we are gonna hire some people to help him do it.
And that is a decision and project and will actually often will take that decision
with them in the palette will say either we can do this for you after in the fall.
And then you don’t have to pay extra, but if you wanted to be done during the
summer, then we have to hire an external to implement and you’ll have to pay
for it.
So it could both be that will hire something in the period, but it could also be
which project we end up buying. Should we make this service for the munic-
ipality or should we buy somebody to do it for us and it also depends on the
resources we have. We have what is the knowledge within the organization can
be. Can we give this to the municipality to anybody knows about and do they
have time to also take in this new project?
Dorothea: What methodology and practice is do you have for identi-
fying, assessing risk and opportunities?
Interviewee 4: You know this matrix where I say it’s a very like that’s gonna
happen is we’re unlikely, but the consequence is gonna be crazy or the conse-
quence is gonna be mine. Minimal. So we’ll put in. Which risk do we have in
the problem project and where are they now? And then if we put them into
the model then will follow them until they’re out of the model. So in the be-
ginning of the bottom project will say which risk to behave like. There’s ten
other projects, and this resource is allocated to all of them, so it might delay
the project. What is the consequence? Well, if it’s a new dental system, then
it’s going to be a bit sad for the dentist. But they can wait. But if it’s for MIDI,
will they immediately. We have to be ready so we have to buy more resources
if time is running against us.
Dorothea: How do you collect data?
Interviewee 4: Brainstorm.
Dorothea: How do you analyse the data?
==PAGE:169==
159
Interviewee 4: The It’s not that structured. We’ll just have this risk matrix
and we’ll say what could happen and what would the result be and then we’ll
talk about if this risk occurs, what should we do? So we will, when we put in a
risk will also say what should we do to minimize the risk or to prevent the risk
from happening.
Dorothea: Do you use any online tool for that?
Interviewee 4: This is the template. Just the the risk square so it’s just to
put this up and say, do we have anything or just talking maybe not even put
it in just say would wish to behave and sometimes it’s just a small part of the
the project group that we’ll see. Now we have this board meeting so I think
it would be nice to just went through to be have anything we should put up
and maybe it’s not even their project complete or entire project could put it
up. And sometimes it will be one person who makes the risk. Presented for the
else, do we have any input or comments?
The brainstorm is more on what should we do to prevent the risk or to handle
the risk if it occur. I think that is where more people come in and give their
input to what can we do about it. And then when there is a risk up and people
say should we put this, this is on the board, then we’ll say it’s not gonna happen.
Put it away. Ohh, then there’s also this and that. If you think this is important.
Dorothea: So would you say that the risk analysis in is mainly quali-
tative and not so quantitative.
Interviewee 4: Yes indeed.
Dorothea: Do you use a risks register?
Interviewee 4: And sometimes I actually we look at the cause, we do of course
we’re working with IT. So we have a lot of locks and we have the. Also, our
service desk and a lot of statistic about how many incidents of this and that
occurs. So if you have something we think is important, then we’ll make sure
what is the likelihood. Come on, our experience and what time and we might
look into.
What happened earlier in something that is the same, and we’ll also that’s why
to talk to other project managers that have handled the similar situations. Like
we have this new a multi factor then XXX that we give to the end user and the
knowledge coming from actually giving them this is used when we do something
that is similar cause the impact for the user is way beyond our imagination. We
thought it was very simple but they don’t have the experience of it being simple
and then we will have a back flow on that.
==PAGE:170==
160
Appendix B: Interviews
Dorothea: Do you use a risks register?
Interviewee 4: No. I Will usually only visit the basic analysis when I have
an export meeting to see you have anything changed? Is there anything that I
think is so big that they should be warned that this might occur? So it is mainly
used when exporting. Meeting is coming up. And I only visited preparing for
the board meeting, so it is not structured as it could be and maybe should be.
Dorothea: How do you improve (optimize) your project plan? What
online tools are you using?
Interviewee 4: The first I’ll do is go back to my Gantt chart and see what
should I change now? This have occurred because? So that’ll be my first thing.
Then I’ll talk to my project members to see if there’s anything they can see that
I cannot see so I’ll go and say now this has happened. Is there anything I should
be aware of that you know or you identify when this stuff happened? Because
sometimes it’ll be like a, so we’re not gonna do this till then. Mid October and
then one of my what do you mean will say don’t do it in the middle of school
holiday. They’ll be ok we are very nice.
Dorothea: What is your process for decision making?
Interviewee 4: First, we have to follow the structure and the organization,
so there’s groups of people that have the capacity to make different decisions,
so it depends on the kind of decision. If I’m a in the area of a security, I’ll go
to one group and they’ll look at what I’ve produced and they’ll went through
there and then I’ll have to take it further onto the managers, because they have
the capacity to actually accept what they produce, and so depending on the
decision, some decisions can be made inside my organizational. Just go to my
manager and he’ll do it and. Some things have to go way up to the the next
level we have this shoots model of who can decide what and some things I’ll just
decide.
Dorothea: How do you formulate a team?
Interviewee 4: I think it’s a hot job because of now have members that some
are not that interested in being in the project are working in another way and
the some I’ll probably they called people into meeting and say now we’re gonna
do this and then half of them will say I’m not part of this project or and the
other half will say, why didn’t you invite this and this and this. So it is I do
something and then I get some feedback and then I navigate and they do it a
bit different and and often I’ll have a the message for my manager says you’ll
be in this problem in the beginning you can just go to a few meetings within
the municipality and I have the experience that when I go to this meeting they
==PAGE:171==
161
want some technical advice from the beginning and I’m like i will be only take
resources, say within next month. So now you only have me, who’s just gonna
have a bit of information getting. And I think of what we’re gonna build. Uh, so
we are. We’re fumbling in the involving people who should be part of it. Then
it is going on throughout the project.
Also, with small pots of the project,
who should we involve? When should we involve in and also see that in the
municipalities, if we have a project that is one in four municipalities, they’ll
do it in different ways, will involve different people. Party because they are
organized differently, but partly because it’s different. People who’s doing it, so
some will go to the inducers in the 1st place and some will see go to the security
management in the 1st place and there are different ways to go to information
and decisions and knowledge that they’ll use in the project. So I think it’s very
much depending on the person who was project manager.
Dorothea: How do you communicate?
Interviewee 4: Communication is that meetings, it’s in PowerPoints at meet-
ings and it’s word documents like official documents that this is that they can
say yes, we agree on this and that and then it will be in uploaded to a shared
document folder. And then it is by e-mail to a lot of people who are involved.
What is your role in this say? What am I expecting you’re gonna do? Do you
have any information I should have? And then we have this ticket system service
desk where I might put some of the jobs in another because it is not important
it is this colleague does. It is just important. It’s been done so I’ll just put in a
ticket, but they’ll know it’s me, so they’ll call me instead of just following the
procedures.
Dorothea: And what’s your practice for leading a project?
Interviewee 4: It is very much talking to the people around me.
Make a
Project plan. I’ll make some PowerPoint slides so different meetings. I’ll set up
a meetings at once will list at the time schedule, so we’ll get back to things so it
won’t budget. Time will just pass by. Some project members were close because
otherwise they won’t produce too my project but be working on other subjects.
And I think, how does part as the people who’s not involved in a project but
still have something to do with the project. Like they have a small delivery, but
are they now part of the product is still so small that they’re not part of the
project and how should they be connected to the project. Because sometimes
it is that I need you to do this. It might just take your five hours. So you’re
not a real problem member, but that’s not so structured when this these things
comes in.
Dorothea:
Based on your experience and role what are the main
challenges related to project management an SME might face?
==PAGE:172==
162
Appendix B: Interviews
Interviewee 4: What chances we are facing compared to larger organizations
it’s just the line is a bit. And not that good, I think for us, it can be hard
because it’s not structured well, as no model, no real things that we should use
as it’s just the person who have a project who decide how they do it and it
can be nice to have this freedom to do as you like, but it also means that it is
a quite random how we do this and that. So there’s nothing to go back and
follow it doesn’t keep us to form and I think if you work with the projects and
bigger the organizations you need to have more structure cause you will have
so many colleagues, you cannot always just go to the colleagues next to you So
most structure is needed, I think for bigger organizations, but the. It’s hard
for us. Because we don’t have the size to actually decide. What should we do
and to get. Also cause we are only two project manager, I can always ask my
colleague because we’re not bigger than we can share the knowledge we have.
But the I only have one person to ask my specialized colleagues, so I don’t have
this way I can learn from different people with different types of talents.
Dorothea: After going through the model what do you believe people
tend to overlook in terms of project management practices?
Interviewee 4: Yes. They don’t do I think I do very little use of the method-
ology that could be useful for me because I’m not forced to do any of it. So
it’s just and if you are in a busy everyday work, you’ll just do what is next
and you’ll don’t spend the time making a risk analysis. Then you’ll just handle
the problems when they come. But if you made a wish analyze then you might
have prevented the problem from coming. So I think it could be good for us to
work more organized and use more methodology, but it’s not done and it’s hard
to prioritize the time when it’s just you’re feeling of what is important enough
that I should spend my time on it now, because it will save me time later. And
then in the beginning of program you have a very big focus on this cause. You
think now I have to make an agreement, a document that says this is what
we’re gonna do and why we’re gonna do it. And what we’re not gonna do in
the project. And then one month later you forgot about that. But document
and they project have changed since times cause now you have more knowledge
about the project. And so we don’t have the routine to go back to the document
and to use the tools that is survivable. But my feeling is also that for me it is
more given to have like this model compared to an online tool and it is often
because online tools too complex. You have to get to know the tool you have to
figure out where am I gonna do this? I know it should be possible to connect
to this to dots to each other in a way and then it’s not possible for me to do it
in the tool because I don’t know how I’m going to spend 5 minutes till I find
this is how I do it and so often just print it. Model is worth more because it
I’ll be able to make a risk analysis or stakeholder analysis and it’s simple. It’s
what I need the technique about projects is not always giving, it’s more time
consuming.
==PAGE:173==
163
Interview 5
Dorothea: Could you tell me a little about yourself and your role in
your organization?
Interviewee 5: Well, we do a lot of task activities, projects, and portfolios as
well. So it all depends on where we are in. If we are in operational mode, we’re in
tactical mode, or we’re in strategic mode. The more we’re in operational mode, it
will be a unique identify activities that maybe more fits into some kind of backlog
for each consultant developers, that they actually prioritize themselves. With
a little help from the department manager, I have four department managers
for the four different areas of expertise that are handled. So on a day to day
basis, the consultants and the technicians have their own backlog which they
prioritize, and they work together with the manager to deal with. When we talk
about strategic initiative, which is typical task of both much more complexity,
political interests or some kind of highlights in a political way, or time length.
Typical tactical projects will have a range of three to six months. It’s about
bringing us from one stage to another stage, where we want to be, it might
not be that this is where we’re going to end but this is the step that we need
to take before we can actually maybe in the next step, go to where we want
to be in a more strategic way. The strategic perspective is more of a portfolio
or view of the tactical projects that we were on, meaning that do we want to
implement for instance, The ransomware protected back up before we have a
global policies for backup and general, which also should be coordinated with
our target infrastructure, strategy and stuff like that. That’s more on portfolio
management new level. So that’s the three things in my mind, I work with
strategic portfolio, tactical projects and operational activities.
So that’s in
general how we operate stuff.
Dorothea: Based on your experience and role how important do you
think the use of project management methodologies for the execution
of a project? Are they a key factor for projects success?
Interviewee 5: If I had to rank the capabilities of my project manager, I
probably wouldn’t say that the methodology is the most important. I think
the most important aspect of my project manager is the way and their ability
and their hunger to succeed.
Because what I’ve experienced throughout 25
years in the IT industry is that no matter what kind of methodology that we
use, it all boils down to if the project manager wants to be successful with his
project or not.
And then he can do waterfall, he can do Scrum, he can do
iterative development, it doesn’t matter if he wants to succeed.
This is the
most important thing. Of course, there’s better methodologies for situations
==PAGE:174==
164
Appendix B: Interviews
and technologies. No doubt about it, I would definitely be very interested in
choosing the right methodology. But at the end, I think it’s more important that
the mindset and the ability of the project manager and his or hers ambitions to
actually succeed, that’s the most important thing.
Dorothea: Do you believe that the use of online project management
tools is important for you work?
If yes, are you using many tools
when it comes to project management in your organization?
Interviewee 5: Yeah, definitely. They structure and organize a lot of things
that is more difficult. In old days, we would do it by post it and stuff like that.
But today, we have all sorts of tools that are actually much more enabling,
getting much more transparency and enhancing collaboration and primary on-
line collaboration as well. So it’s definitely a positive enabler to the project
management.
Dorothea: At what level do you think you are at your organization?
Interviewee 5: On a scale of one to five, we have five we all in and one we
don’t like I think we leave three and a half four. We are looking towards and
we like to experiment. Okay, but we’re not on Bleeding Edge. Okay.
Dorothea: How do you run projects life cycle? (Do you have a model
for doing life cycle assessment?)
Interviewee 5: We do have a lot of products and stuff on lifecycle and we do
have a change and we have a change process for that. That’s typical, the things
that aren’t changes here we do an ITIL change process for that and we use our
ITSM tool for making sure that we have control of also the service window and
the downtime that will mean when we upgrade and make sure that the lifecycle
products are being updated. So we do use online tools. But online tools is also
on premise tools, meaning we have tools that are installed on our own servers,
not cloud or tools that are actually just installed on our own servers. We do use
a lot of online tools. We do use Excel spreadsheets, we use project, Microsoft,
Project Manager for stuff like that. And we use our ITSM system. So we do
use online tools for Lifecycle Management.
Dorothea: What is your practice for assessing projects success? Are
you using online tools to run this process?
Interviewee 5: For lifecycle, it’s, very much the change, where we implemented
an upgrade of the tool, was it successful, the business continuity continue the
business go on unharmed, as well and the number of incidents that comes in
after a change or a service window is something we measure. We do it from
==PAGE:175==
165
an incident perspective through our ITSM system. That’s one of the way we
measure the lifecycle management of our products.
The whole project is typical then I don’t think its lifecycle, then it’s more
new projects, new implementation of new tools or new capabilities, then, of
course, there’s a business case, and there’s an expected business case, and there’s
a realized business case as well.
We’re not that good of actually looking at
the realized business case, we should do that.
For instance, one year after
implementation, looking back and saying, did we actually gain the business case
that we expected? We don’t have tables? Who says we should do that, but
we’re not doing that.
In other areas of our business, we have, we have governance that looks into this,
we have a technology governance board that actually have beginning through
the last nine months to look at this and having several stages of when it comes
from ideal for phase to prototype and stuff like that. So we have a governance
process and board for that, but not in my area. Okay, I’m more in the hardcore
IT area where the rest of the organization is more development organization.
Dorothea:
How are you doing the assessment of the investment?
What tools are you using to support these practices?
Interviewee 5: We have business analysts that knows about the market. They
are SMEs, as you wrote before, who knows about the market, who knows about
if the is market growing, is it shrinking, do we have larger competitors coming
into the market, is it a blue ocean or red ocean and stuff like that, and through
this stages of different prototypes, they are evaluating the business potential of
the product and thereby also supplementing the business case of what do we
think will happen in this case? I don’t think they use a specific tool. I don’t
know where they get their information from if they think they know a lot about
their company, our competitors, and I think somehow they managed to figure
out how their shares and part of the market is.
Dorothea: What are your practices to assess the vision and impact
of the project? What online tools support this practice?
Interviewee 5: The value of the project is value and thereby the purpose of the
project can be multitude, it can be multi phase as well. It could be, for instance,
a security project. There we want to elaborate and elevate our security level,
security maturity as well. And it’s a negative business case. It might even cost
us a lot of money, both in investment in tools, but also in efficiency. But for
instance now we have a big project of getting ISO 20,001 certified. And the only
real reason for why we’re doing is because it’s part of us being on the market,
it actually it’s a black or white, because we believe that with the request that
==PAGE:176==
166
Appendix B: Interviews
comes from the customers, if we are not ISO certified, we will not be able to sell
to them. So it’s difficult to say, what does it mean? I don’t think there’s very
much positive in an ISO 20,000, I don’t think you’ll get much more efficient or
people will be happier working by the audit of the ISO certified, but we have
to do it to stay on the market to stay competitive. So this is the typical case
where yeah, we’re doing that for this reason, and we’re not actually measuring
the benefits of it because it’s it’s black or white. Other other times when we
for instance, change certain ways of working, we are looking into where we gain
more efficient or working staff here and trying to figure out how much can we
optimize then this actually Numbers included from both the positive and the
from the cost side as well. So it really much depends on the actual problem we’re
trying to solve and the technology involved. And finally, how do you scope a
project?
Dorothea: How do you scope the project? What online tools are you
using?
Interviewee 5: It depends on whether or not the technology is scalable, so to
speak, can you break it down into phases where you can start with some part
of the company and make a trial and get some feedback, we’d love to do that
we love to just make a small, incremental implementation to start with some of
the people that normally don’t like our products to start with them, because
then we get the best feedback. If we chose the one who’s always positive towards
these changes, we would get the wrong picture. So we’re trying to figure out who
doesn’t want this and make them committed to the project. But sometimes,
it’s also a question of is there a way that we can divide the technology so that
we can make it step wise, not only implementation wise, but also in using the
product, the project product, or the technology by itself? So always trying to
scope it into small steps? I hate waterfalls, projects for 6, 9, 12, 18 months,
because they never never reached the goal.
So we’re always trying to make
small, incremental and with a good solid case.
Dorothea: So you have any tools for supporting with scope manage-
ment?
Interviewee 5: No, we just knew just uses the ordinary tools in Microsoft
Project Manager and DevOps and those kinds when we’re talking about backlogs
for for development.
Dorothea: How are you estimating the time, the resources and bud-
get? Are you using a common technique? What online tools are you
using to support you with this?
Interviewee 5: No, there’s no common across the company. It’s very depart-
==PAGE:177==
167
mentalized. And it’s very much in the head of the project managers and the
project owners to know this guy or this girl that can do this task in 20 hours,
if we choose the junior, it will be 40 hours. So it’s very much knowledge about
the efficiency of the each individual
Dorothea: What practices do you use to implement project schedul-
ing? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 5: Well, we tried using what’s called estimate Poker as a method-
ology to do that, but we didn’t do that.
So it’s really about knowing your
domain, knowing the task, knowing the complexity of the task, and then get-
ting the right people for the right task. And sometimes, of course, you cannot
get the resources you want because they are being allocated to other projects,
then you have to do with the second best or third best resources, but then you
have to add time to make sure that they have time enough to do the quantity of
the work and hopefully they will do the quality as well. Sorry, I can’t say more
precise because that’s one of our key issues right now.
In terms of tool we use DevOps backlog for clarifying and to discuss for the
Agile processes to determine what to do in the next sprint.
Dorothea: How do you allocate your resources and budget? What
online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 5: The project owner is responsible for breaking down the use
of storage and, and the overall projects into tangible, actionable task in the
backlog. So that’s the project owner and the project manager who does that
together. At least when we talk about development projects, for technology
projects, it’s a bit more a lot of technology projects, real runners, small water-
falls, but for development, that’s the way we do it.
Dorothea: Is this one within the DevOps environment?
Interviewee 5: Yes
Dorothea: In terms of allegation, because you also before mentioned
about allocation of resources, how do you do that, to ensure that you
will have the resources?
Interviewee 5: If you have the resources within your own scrum team, you use
the resources there just by prioritizing if you we need a specific expert that’s
not available for the project or the project needs additional? One PO will go to
another PO to ask if they can lend resources from another agile team. Or we
can bring in external consultancy or collaborations with external partners to do
==PAGE:178==
168
Appendix B: Interviews
that.
Dorothea: How do you decide whether you should make or buy a
product or a service? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: It’s really a good question, because the organization that I
represent, has been doing software development for 55 years and in engineering
company that wants to do everything by itself. But during the recent orga-
nizational changes, we’ve got a new management in that are looking towards,
maybe we can buy certain kinds of standard application standard frames from
other windows, or we can maybe outsource, let’s say some of the front end de-
velopment because it’s not by heart. Most important areas, the most important
areas is the back end from us. So it’s right now it’s case by case that we de-
cide whether we want to buy it in buy it from others, or we do it ourselves
this right now, there’s not a clear strategy of where we’re going. But it the
tendency is that we, we buy more and more from other windows, as long as it’s
not something to do with our pure IP.
Dorothea: Is something that has to do with a business case?
Interviewee 5: It could have and sometimes it can also be time constraints,
that makes us decide that we want to hire our development team for front end
vendor. So, it has it has a lot to do with the time to market and the business
case, we see an opening in the market that we can fill, then of course, the
business case, can in most cases, carry forward an external hiring of external
consultancy.
Dorothea: Are you using DevOps for that?
Interviewee 5: No, that’s a management decision.
So it would be on the
governance board, where we have our own portfolio management, tooling to look
at that. Also, where we do the financial forecasts in our governance, portfolio
management it’s a tool we made in Power BI by ourselves,
Dorothea: How do you improve (optimize) your project plan? What
online tools are you using?
Interviewee 5: Well, we have to, from our main products, portfolio, our core
IP, we have two yearly releases of this. So when we find out that we have on box
or we have important major improvements to do this. They come down to the
backlog for development purposes. And then every six months, there’ll be part
of yearly release of our products. So that’s the way to do it. And it’s a product
portfolio manager, and it’s the product owner that decide which improvement
will make the make the cut, and which one will have to wait for six months, or
==PAGE:179==
169
maybe never be developed.
Dorothea: What is your practice to risk and opportunities identifica-
tion? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: Our business analysts are looking at the market and and figur-
ing out whether or not this is a chance we should invest in all. We should stay
out of certain improvement areas applications so. I think it’s from a business
side. You mean risk, right? It’s not from an internal side, right?
Dorothea:Both sides.
Interviewee 5: Well it all depends on where we are in this nine step devel-
opment process that we have because if we are in the phases where we get an
idea, then we actually have a small department and that incubates from idea
to prototype with the user experience team trying to make a mash up and and
look at it and make some market analysis go out, speak to customers and stuff
like that. So this is the I4S is the innovation for sustainability is the name right
now, but it is an innovation lab that tried to incubate these ideas. But this is
only when the idea is brand new or very small. Maybe there’s a prototype right
now that the product owner don’t know what to do with, maybe it’s running by
one or two customers, but we don’t know. Can it be commercialized, can it be
expanded, can be elevated? Then they come into play. If we’re having the other
end where we are in life cycle and then it’s much more a business perspective,
where our biggest competitors have moving to this market now it is probable
that we cannot earn more money cause our education needs to be lifted towards
multiple things to be competitive, even step out of this market.
Dorothea: Are you using any tools for that?
Interviewee 5: Our own tool, this API portal tool, BI portfolio management
tool.
Dorothea:
How are you assessing risks and opportunities?
What
online tools are you using to support that?
Interviewee 5: No, no we don’t. It’s very much the different business analysis
to work. In different ways, they have different backgrounds, so we don’t have a
framework for that.
Dorothea: So there is nothing about qualitative and quantitative risk
assessment?
Interviewee 5: No, not now, but there will be in 6, 12 months because we are
==PAGE:180==
170
Appendix B: Interviews
on this journey and it’s only been nine months since we did this organizational
changes. So a lot will come a lot of maturity will come.
Dorothea: What is your practice to respond to risks? What online
tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 5: Yeah.
When we talk about cyber security, we have a risk
framework. We have a major incident process that we know what to do. So as
long as we’re in my areas, I can tell you we have definitely, we have frameworks,
we have an IT security organization, we have a major incident process, we have
business continuity plan and and stuff like that. So in that area, yes, we do.
When we talk about it in the development side. I don’t think the risk is that
high in that area. So I don’t think we have anything there
Dorothea: How do you monitor risks?
What online tools are you
using for that?
Interviewee 5: Yeah. We wanted to have through a lot of different systems
and tools and external uh, parameters of course, we look at the daily cyber se-
curity, what’s it called defense seeing? What are they saying about the different
parameters? Uh, we have a lot of tools that actually do penetration test and we
have active proactive tools and our firewall doing pattern analysis to figure out
malicious activities and stuff like that. I guess all in all I have between 5 and
7 different tools doing monitoring of risk when we talk about cybersecurity and
malicious activities. So there’s a lot of tools there. And we use them all every
day.
Dorothea: Do you mean online tools or PM tools?
Interviewee 5: Mostly, uh.
Ordinary tools.
Not project management, we
don’t do this kind of risk assessment directly in to project unless it’s a cyber
security project.
Dorothea: What is your practice to adapt to changes? What online
tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: We have a risk framework for for changes where we look at
the severity and and. The impact, if it goes wrong and stuff like that and we
document it and we follow up and we do evaluation of that. And it’s odd our
the tool that support is is our IT SM tool, but in general it’s just word and
Excel spreadsheets and. Couple of people sitting together every week to discuss
it.
Dorothea: How do you make decisions in projects? What online tools
==PAGE:181==
171
are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: When we talk about change management, we have a CAP
and E CAP board to take this decision. So that’s. That’s part of our daily
routine, or at least a weekly routine that the CAP board meets to to to discuss
what kind of changes do they approve or don’t approve? Which typically is the
consequence of the output of the projects.
Dorothea: What are your practices for the learning you have gained
from the projects? What online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: No, I’ll say we don’t do it. It’s something from my perspective
in other companies where I’ve been before, we we have a department of method-
ology that will go out interview the projects after they completed to figure out
what went, what went wrong and what went good. And we we don’t have that
kind of department. It’s scattered all over the organization that everyone has
to kind of make their own conclusions and improve their own methodology.
Dorothea: How do you create a team?
What online tools are you
using to support that?
Interviewee 5: Yeah. We have a a an application called people plan on where
everyone is registered with their capacities and the qualities and they are avail-
abilities. So when you start off a project, you can see who’s available and who’s
not available. When we’re talking about the more pure development in regards
to the agile team, of course there are members. And in every agile team, but
sometimes we mix it and bring in SME or people from from the real business
side to enrich the qualification of the requirements and stuff like that, and we
use people planner for that. This is definitely a good tool.
Dorothea: What are your communication practices when you run a
project? What online tools are you using to support you with this?
Interviewee 5: We used Yammer a lot. We use team sites a lot and we use
of course DevOps a lot primary inside the projects outside the projects. It’s
typical by community sites and specific practice sites where we communicate
to to the external part of the projects with the news headlines. If we got a
prototype or a version that would like to get some feedback, we invite people
to go in and test it so we can get some feedback and it will use, so to speak,
all the challenges that we have within the Microsoft portfolio. I guess we have
them all. We have SharePoint on top of that as well. So we both use web in
Internet, Yammer channels, team channels for that.
Normally we don’t communicate to external customers as long as we are in the
==PAGE:182==
172
Appendix B: Interviews
in project face, unless it’s a customer project where they actually are paying for
it, then it’s a typical through steering committees.
Dorothea: How do you engage with your stakeholders? What steps
do you follow in this process What online tools are you using for
that?
Interviewee 5: Identify stakeholders it’s very much by basic knowledge. We
know who’s the stakeholders it’s a long tradition of we know who’s responsible
for the different areas. We know our organization, so it’s typical identifications
typical just by knowledge.
Everyone knows who’s the stakeholder here and
we involve them through the steering committees. So still in communities and
through this technology governance board that’s steering committees, typically
at once a month, and steering and technology, but all the typical once every
quarter.
Dorothea: Are you using any tool?
Interviewee 5: Yeah, but sometimes we also using direct mail to stakeholders
because it’s not if if a project is not going well. Sometimes you don’t wanna
blast it all over the company saying, yeah, it’s because he was an idiot or her
didn’t perform. So you typically write that more indiscreet in a mail saying that
we we we had to change the the resources in the project and stuff like that. We
don’t blast that over Yammer or the external public channels.
Dorothea: What is your practice to Lead a team? What online tools
are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: When we’re talking about development side it’s very much the
agile methodology scrum that leads where the PO is responsible for breaking
down and the team They arranged themselves and make sure who does what
from which perspective. Yeah. Sorry I can’t find the right word for it, but there’s
self organized. I guess it’s a word and that’s the pure IT development. The code
development when we go bit out in outside of the project where analysis and and
where it’s not just coding then there’s a lot more traditional project management
in that perspective of engaging also with external customers and stuff like that.
But the pure heart of the code development that’s Agile, Scrum and the areas
around it is more with traditional project managers and and of course, there’s
still doing iterative cycles, but it’s much more traditional project management
in that case.
Dorothea: How do you manage conflicts? What online tools are you
using for that?
==PAGE:183==
173
Interviewee 5: The way that you handle conflicts don’t know what’s there. I
don’t have a specific tool for handling conflicts at this conflicts every day, so we
are adults, we sit together. We tried to analyze the situation from a logistic care
point of view as well. I guess it’s part of daily management to Handl conflicts.
Dorothea: What are your practices for motivating your teams? What
online tools are you using for that?
Interviewee 5: Yes, that’s a more general question because we have personal
development talks with people at least three to four times a year where we have
a a career plan for for every developer and of course we try to match the career
plan to to the real life in in case of someone wants to develop a new set of
skills. But then again, sometimes it’s just not possible because we need a guy or
girl who has this capacity and this is exactly what this developer has and this
debatable wants to handle another technology, but now we need to have this so
I think it’s very much when the line manager and and the resource to figure out
the career plan and hopefully the everyday life also supports the career plan but
it’s not easy.
Dorothea: After going through the model what do you believe people
tend to overlook in terms of project management practices?
Interviewee 5: If I should come with an opinion regarding the current situation
in the current company I’m working for I would very much say it’s purpose. We
do a lot of project that maybe it’s not fit for fight for the real purpose but in
all other organizations I’ve been with, I would say people have been the most
important thing. But in this organization it’s actually having the right purpose
because it doesn’t matter if you’re doing the right methodology and people
are happy if you’re producing something that’s not fit for fight and that’s my
problem in this corporation that we are actually doing a lot of stuff, brilliant
stuff that no one actually using. So that’s why I would say purpose in this
case, but In other companies, I would say people, it’s all about having the right
people because you can have all the right purpose. You can have all the right
mythology. But if people suck and they can do the stuff that you actually want
them to do, then it doesn’t matter but here it’s purpose.
Dorothea: Which perspective do you think is less structure in SMEs?
Interviewee 5: What I see is one of our main concern is that. We don’t hit the
time to market, we do development but development that are always delayed.
Development that should been finished in six months.
It takes 1 1/2 years.
That’s our main problem right now, besides doing the right purpose. It’s also
being more agile and making sure that we actually deliver on time and but we
tend to try to deliver 100% instead of trying to deliver the 80% that you can do
==PAGE:184==
174
Appendix B: Interviews
in 40% of the time and getting some feedback and then realizing is this for the
right purpose or not and that’s our problem. We’re trying to make a gold plated
versions of everything we do. And sometimes when we deliver it, the market
says yeah, it’s fine, but we don’t need it. So with with gold plating, things too
much.
Dorothea:
Based on your experience and role what are the main
challenges related to project management an SME might face?
Interviewee 5: I say portfolio is way too big. So which we’re trying to make
sure that all our applications, all our solutions are tipped in life we will end
up drowning. Right now we have 156 application and we probably shouldn’t
have more than 30.
We have to kill some of the buildings because they’re
not viable. Not everyone’s viable and we have to kill the ones that’s viable.
But the problem is that. Lot of our applications have been created and coded
decentralized around the whole world and some of the solutions have 3/4 clients
and when we go out, for instance in New Zealand, say yeah, you have to kill
your applications because it’s not worth it from a financial point of view but
they have obligations. They have feelings about the their customers and they
don’t wanna kill there. So they use a lot of money on this and everyone does
that around the world. So we we need to kill part of our portfolio to be more
viable financial sustainability and be more commercial.
Dorothea: What do you think is missing from the model?
Interviewee 5: Education. I think we can from from a management perspec-
tive we can talk about Agile methodology, we can talk about different online
tools, we talk about a lot of things, but if we don’t get under the skin of the
people who have to use it, then they won’t use it. So I think very much suc-
cessful tool needs a good human implementation that will make people use it
and sometimes it’s better to have tools that are too old or not up to date but
are being used the right way by everyone. So if your education is important
here, education in every in the broad sense of the word, education is not going
to school for two days and being educated, no education. They’re also learning
from your neighbor and film and next to you.
Dorothea: Is it about knowledge sharing?
Interviewee 5: Yeah, official and unofficial knowledge sharing formal and non-
formal knowledge sharing. Definitely. Yeah, you’re right
