==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.
Master of Science in Engineering
Player-Defined Achievement System to
Enhance Intrinsic Motivation for Mastery of Mobile Puzzle
Card Game
Nóra Gyopár Muraközy
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Md Saifuddin Khalid
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the scope of the present thesis, an autonomy-supportive feature, namely a
player-defined achievement system has been assessed in order to determine whether
the presence of the given feature has an effect on the player’s need satisfaction
for autonomy, enjoyment, motivation for future play, game recommendation to
others, rating of the game and thus on the enhancement of intrinsic motivation
to master the given mobile puzzle card game. The mobile version of the puzzle
card game SET, has been extended with the feature. The application has been
developed from scratch, including the original ruleset, the autonomy-supportive
feature and an in-game evaluation system. With the participation of 29 online
players, it has been discovered that the desired feature does not have an effect on
the above listed variables. The results might be hindered by the fact that there
has not been a manipulation check on the feature, meaning, the participants
might have never discovered the feature before submitting their response to the
experiment.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis started on the 24th of January
and finished on the 4th of September 2022.
Kongens Lyngby, 4th September 2022
Nóra Gyopár Muraközy
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
API
Application Programming Interface
AS
Achievement System
BPN
Basic Psychological Need
BPNSFS The Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction and Frustration Scale
CSDT
Center for Self-Determination Theory
IMI
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory
MVH
Minimum Viable Hypothesis
MVP
Minimum Viable Product
SDT
Self-Determination Theory
SDK
Software Development Kit
SUS
System Usability Scale
UI
User Interface
UX
User Experience
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Abbreviations
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goal of Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Structure of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Related Work
6
2.1
Intrinsic Motivation in Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Self-determination theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Autonomy-supportive features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2.1
Autonomy-supportive Features in Puzzle Games .
10
2.2
Achievements in Games
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Achievement vs Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Achievements in Puzzle Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.4
Intrinsic Motivation in Achievements . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.4.1
Player-defined Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Evaluation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Usability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1.1
System Usability Scale (SUS) . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.1.2
A/B Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1.3
Thinking Aloud
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.2
Autonomy Satisfaction and Frustration
. . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.2.1
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory
. . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
2.3.2.2
Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction, and Frustra-
tion Scales
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.2.3
The Player Experience of Need Satisfaction (PENS) 21
2.3.3
Game Enjoyment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.4
Motivation for Future Play
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.5
Game Recommendation and Game Rating . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.6
Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4
State-of-the-art Mobile Game Development Technologies . . . . . .
23
2.4.1
Unity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.2
Unreal Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4.3
Cross-platform Mobile Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5
SET card game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Methods
27
3.1
Ideation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.1
MVH Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.1.1
Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
MVP Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2.1
Iteration 1 - Application Design
. . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.2.2
Iteration 2 - Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Design & Execution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.1
Experiment Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.1.1
A/B testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.1.2
Survey design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.2
Experiment Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2.1
Selecting participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Analysis & Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1
Analysis of Results and Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2
Hypothesis testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
Institutionalizing Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results
39
4.1
Ideation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
MVH Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
MVP Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2.1
Iteration 1 - Application Design
. . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2.2
Iteration 2 - Game development
. . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Design and Execution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.2.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.2.2
Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.3
Analysis and Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.3.1
Analysis of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.3.2
Institutionalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5
Discussion ands conclusion
81
Appendices
83
Appendix A
Links
84
Appendix B
Figma screens and intial sketches
85
Appendix C
Think Aloud Evaluation of click-through prototype
87
Appendix D
Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
90
Appendix E
Competitor analysis results - SET
99
Appendix F
Think Aloud Evaluation of the implemented game
102
Appendix G
Experiment Instructions
109
Bibliography
113
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
According to recent statistics, there are 2.7 billion mobile games around the world
and 57.9% of the games played are puzzle games [1]. The main reason players
play games in this genre (and especially in the Word/Brain/Board puzzle sub-
genre) is to relieve stress, pass time, feel accomplished for completing something
challenging or learning something that they can benefit from outside of gaming [2].
The present thesis focuses on studying an additional feature, namely a player-
defined Achievement System (AS), added to a mobile version of a puzzle card
game, SET [3]. SET is a brain training, pattern finding puzzle card game and
the desired feature for the player-defined Achievement System is intended to
enhance the feeling of autonomy, thus increasing the intrinsic motivation to play,
therefore, creating a healthier player experience [4], compared to an experience
driven by patterns using extrinsic motivation: e.g. coins, in-game cosmetics etc.
The additional feature and dynamics will be an add-on to the original game
mechanics. The deck consists of 81 unique cards that vary in four features across
three possibilities for each kind of feature: number of shapes (one, two, or three),
shape (diamond, squiggle, oval), shading (solid, striped, or open), and color (red,
green, or purple).
Each possible combination of features (e.g. a card with three striped green
diamonds) appears as a card precisely once in the deck. In the game, certain
combinations of three cards are said to make up a SET. For each one of the four
categories of features — color, number, shape, and shading — the three cards
must display that feature as either all the same, or all different. In other words,
for each feature the three cards must avoid having two cards showing one version
of the feature and the remaining card showing a different version. For example,
3 solid red diamonds, 2 solid green squiggles, and 1 solid purple oval form a SET,
because the shadings of the three cards are all the same, while the numbers, the
colors, and the shapes among the three cards are all different. For any SET, the
number of features that are all the same and the number of features that are all
different may break down as 0 the same and 4 different; or 1 the same and 3
different; or 2 the same and 2 different; or 3 the same and 1 different. It cannot
break down as 4 features the same and 0 different as the cards would be identical,
and there are no identical cards in the SET deck. [5]. See Figure 1.1 for examples.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1.
Examples for valid SETs; a) All three cards have the same number of
symbols, but have different colors, shadings and shapes; b) All three cards have the
same color, but different number of symbols, different shading and different shapes
In order to increase game enjoyment and intrinsic motivation to play, an
additional feature - a player-defined Achievement System - is added to the base
game and assessed in the present thesis. The presence of an achievement system
in a game increases the need satisfaction for competence by definition [6], but
usually these achievements are not customizable. Although, according to recent
game studies [7, 8], supporting the basic psychological needs makes the game
more pleasing and increases the intrinsic motivation to play.
By adding the
customizable feature to the achievement system, it potentially supports both the
need for competence and autonomy, because a good way to increase autonomy is
to add customizable content in the game [9], therefore, giving the player control
over their decisions, strategy and goals in the game, creating a more personalized
experience.
1.1
Background
The present study attempts to create an experience which excludes extrinsic re-
wards as motivational factors. When designing games or performing tasks, relying
on extrinsic motivation too much can kill creativity and problem solving [10]. In
the case of in-game challenges, usually the system provides extrinsic rewards
(e.g. coins, cosmetic, features etc.), in addition to the intrinsic reward players
experience from completing the challenge [11], this study relies only on the latter
(intrinsic) rewards. Externally administered rewards can be perceived coercive
and controlling, hence hinder the basic need of autonomy. Deci and Ryan ar-
gue that offering a tangible reward (e.g., money) for an activity individuals were
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Background
3
already interested in performing can prompt them to experience an external per-
ceived locus of causality in their behaviour, hence producing the feeling of being
controlled [10]. Non-tangible rewards (e.g. the feeling of unlocked achievements),
however, when connected to experience gained while performing the target activ-
ity can support the basic psychological need of competence hence yield positive
benefits for the intrinsic motivation of the participants [12] and foster positive
emotions towards the target activity [13].
Adding a goal-setting type of feature to an existing application supports the
basic need of autonomy, thus, the additional achievement system is developed
to be customziable by the player. Gabriela Villalobos-Zúñiga and Mauro Cheru-
bini built a taxonomy of application features based on SDT [6] by analyzing
208 mobile apps. The 12 identified feature were classified according to the basic
psychological needs (BPNs) defined by SDT: autonomy, competence and related-
ness [14]. According to their research, the goal-setting feature supports the basic
psychological need of autonomy because it contributes to an internal perceived
locus of causality. Researchers also found that in a learning environment where
teachers gave students choices and options, the learning outcomes of the students
increased [15]. According to the SDT, a goal imposed by someone else (or by an
app) would undermine autonomy, which in turn would reduce the motivation
of the subject to perform the activity. Whereas, a self-imposed goal would con-
tribute to the basic need of autonomy and support autonomous motivation to
perform the specific activity [10,16].
Similarly to the aim of this thesis, Peng et. al [7] conducted a study, which
employed an in-house developed exergame and manipulated the game features in
a 2 (autonomy-supportive game features: on vs. off) x 2 (competence-supportive
game features: on vs. off) experiment to predict need satisfaction, game enjoy-
ment, motivation for future play, effort for gameplay, self-eﬀicacy for exercise
using the game, likelihood of game recommendation, and game rating.
The
present thesis aims to measure and evaluate these factors in the developed game,
except for self-eﬀicacy for exercise, because it is not relevant in the mobile puzzle
game topic. In Peng’s study, manipulated autonomy-supportive and competence-
supportive game features had main effects on most motivation and engagement
outcomes. Need satisfaction of autonomy and competence were both found to
be mediators for the relationships between the game features and the motivation
and engagement outcomes. The findings add evidence to support the underlying
mechanism postulated by SDT for media enjoyment and motivation.
There are existing games and design patterns, which allow the player to create
custom challenges, however, a challenge is not exactly can be interpreted the
same way as an achievement.
A challenge is the series of actions and events
with a suitable timing that has to be done by the player in order to unlock
the achievement, therefore, the achievement can be interpreted as the reward
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
for completing the challenge.
Games that allow the player to create custom
challenges are usually provide an interface to create such a game element. These
challenges then optionally can be shared through an in-game challenge sharing
system. Other players can test their abilities and try to complete these custom
challenges created by other players. Games with this particular feature available
are for instance: Test Drive Unlimited [17], Binding of Isaac [18], Chess.com [19],
Super Mario Maker [20], GTA [21].
Another approach is to share Self-Imposed Challenges [22] created by players
in online communities (also known as community challenges). A Self-Imposed
Challenge is a playthrough of a game wherein the player plays under a restriction
not required by the game itself in an attempt to increase the diﬀiculty, immersion
level, and replay value. These restrictions can range from the simple (a refusal to
make use of a Game-Breaker, for example) to the near-impossible: ”Can you beat
Super Mario Bros. without pressing the ”B” button?”. Gamers will occasionally
record these runs and post them on various archive sites. In order to qualify as a
Self-Imposed Challenge, the challenge has to be truly self-imposed: if the game
acknowledges the challenge in any way, such as offering an option to play with
such rules or rewarding players who fulfill these conditions, it instead falls under
the Challenge Run category [23]. A Self-Imposed Challenge is imposed only by
the players themselves, and the game does not provide an interface to share these
challenges in-game [22].
1.2
Goal of Thesis
Based on the competitor analysis conducted during the time of the present thesis,
there is no available mobile puzzle game on the market, which allows the player
to set personalized goals or customize existing ones.
In addition, despite the
popularity of custom challenges, there is no known literature on the impact of
this feature on player motivation at the timing of writing the present thesis
neither in video games nor in mobile puzzle games.
Therefore, based on the
above findings, and existing game design patterns, theoretically, a game which
contains or extended by a feature that both supports the need of competence
and autonomy, would foster intrinsic motivation due to the satisfaction of these
needs. It is proven that achievements and achievement systems are competence-
supportive features [24,25] and customization and the freedom of goal-setting are
considered autonomy-supportive features [6,7,9].
Hence, the aim of the Master’s Thesis is to conduct an empirical research on
how an autonomy-supportive, player-defined achievement system affects the mo-
tivational attitudes towards the overall gameplay in a mobile puzzle card game
compared to a pre-defined, static achievement system. Again, since customizable
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Structure of Thesis
5
content supports the need satisfaction for autonomy [7, 9], this additional fea-
ture is expected to increase intrinsic motivation for mastery of the game through
achievements compared to the version without the customizable content. Conse-
quently, the following hypothesis is proposed:
H0: The additional autonomy-supportive feature (player-defined achieve-
ment system) will increase players’ a) need satisfaction for autonomy,
b) enjoyment, c) motivation for future play d) game recommendation
to others, e) rating of the game.
1.3
Structure of Thesis
This thesis started with an introduction to the concept behind developing a player-
defined achievement system in a mobile puzzle game, which intended to increase
intrinsic motivation to master the game and play in the future. Chapter 2 de-
scribes the scientific background of the topic investigated in this study: how
intrinsic motivation is approached in game development; how achievements are
implemented in video games in general, and what solutions exist for customizable
achievements. This section further describes the commonly used evaluation meth-
ods to measure intrinsic motivation, enjoyment and recommendation/rating in
games. Lastly, the state-of-the-art game development technologies are introduced
and the main mechanics of the puzzle card game SET are described.
Chapter 3 gives an overview of the main phases of the project and describes
the methods and tools used in each phase. Chapter 4 describes the outcome of
each phase in this study, including the competitor analysis, prototyping and the
results of the hypothesis testing.
The thesis ends with Chapter 5 which outlines the limitations of this study,
discusses the results and introduces further directions of the study.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
This chapter elaborates the psychological and game-related background of Self-
determination theory, Achievements and Achievement Systems. The satisfaction
of basic psychological needs leads to enhanced intrinsic motivation, self-regulation
and well-being. In contrast, the thwart of these needs results in diminished moti-
vation and ill-being [26].
Research shows that games can enhance well-being
as well, e.g.
by supporting the satisfaction of the three basic psychological
needs [27–29]. The present thesis focuses on developing and evaluating an ad-
ditional feature - a customizable in-game Achievement System - which intended
to support the BPN of autonomy. Furthermore, this chapter provides an insight
into different player motivation scales and introduces briefly the SET puzzle card
game. Furthermore, it presents the technological investigation to explain the de-
cisions behind the chosen technologies to build the final game and the in-game
Achievement System.
2.1
Intrinsic Motivation in Games
This section describes Self-determination theory, which presents the fundamentals
of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Since the present thesis focuses on a player-
defined achievement system, which is an autonomy-supportive feature, the section
gives an overview on the common autonomy-supportive features implemented in
games as well.
2.1.1
Self-determination theory
SDT is a theory of human motivation. According to the theory, the reasons why
people choose to participate and exert effort in an activity can be categorized
along a continuum of self-determined regulation. The most self-determined form
of behavioral regulation is intrinsic motivation, which is defined as engaging in
an activity for the pleasure and satisfaction derived from the activity itself. On
the opposite end of the continuum is amotivation, that is the lack of motivation
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Intrinsic Motivation in Games
7
or intention. Extrinsic motivation is stated in-between, which refers to behaviors
that are carried out to attain outcomes unrelated to the activity itself [30].
Figure 2.1. Self-Determination Theory’s Taxonomy of Motivation (adapted from [31])
SDT further elaborates that humans have three fundamental needs: auton-
omy, competence, and relatedness. Satisfaction of the above three needs is es-
sential for an individual’s intrinsic motivation [32]. People experience more self-
determined (or internally controlled) types of motivation when the activities in
which they participate make them feel that they have autonomy (the power to
make their own choices), competence (the ability to effectively perform the be-
havior), and relatedness (authentic social connections with others). A sub-theory
within SDT, Basic Psychological Needs Theory (BPNT), proposes that satisfac-
tion of autonomy, competence, and relatedness needs results in better mood,
vitality, physical symptoms, and self-esteem [26]. On the contrary, activities or
contexts that thwart these needs would negatively impact wellness.
Autonomy
Autonomy concerns an individual’s ”sense of volition or willing-
ness when doing a task” [4]. Perceived autonomy is high when there are choices
provided to individuals or when individuals engage in activities for personal inter-
est and value. On the contrary, when choices are diminished, or when control or
freedom for the methods of action interferes with perceived autonomy, intrinsic
motivation can be thwarted [31]. In other words, when one has the freedom to
pursue an optimal outcome or engage in an activity without any external control,
one’s sense of autonomy is high and thus increases intrinsic motivation. Daily
need satisfaction of autonomy leads to increased well-being in domains such as
education [31], organizations [33], and behavioral health [34]. The present study
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Related Work
focuses on developing and evaluating a player-defined achievement system, which
is expected to be autonomy-supportive due to its customizable nature.
Competence
Competence reflects the need that people have to be able to effec-
tively produce their wanted outcomes and avoid undesired events. It is a ”need for
challenge and feelings of effectance”. Factors that enhance the experience of com-
petence, such as opportunities to acquire new skills or abilities, to be optimally
challenged, or to receive positive feedback enhance perceived competence, and
therefore, intrinsic motivation. Perceived competence would thus be enhanced in
gaming contexts where game controls are intuitive and tasks within the game pro-
vide ongoing optimal challenges and opportunities for positive feedback [4]. As
described in Section 2.2.4, achievements are competence-supportive by nature,
therefore, the present thesis is not intended to measure perceived competence
during the study.
Relatedness
The third psychological need within SDT is relatedness, which
enhances well-being and intrinsic motivation when this need is satisfied. Specifi-
cally, relatedness focuses on the need of being connected to others and the feeling
of being involved in a social environment [4,32]. In the video gaming context, a
lab experiment found that playing video games with another player rather than
playing alone contributed to need satisfaction of relatedness, which led to en-
joyment of gameplay [35]. A survey of massive multiplayer online game players
also showed that need satisfaction of relatedness was positively associated with
players’ game enjoyment and motivation for future play [4]. Based on the taxon-
omy defined by Villalobos et al. [6], features that enables players to share their
progress or play against each other seem to be the most relevant ones to support
the need satisfaction of relatedness in a mobile puzzle game. However, due to
the scope of the study and lack of resources, relatedness-supportive features are
not included in the final game.
2.1.2
Autonomy-supportive features
In the context of video game playing, autonomy refers to how much choice play-
ers are given within the game domain [4]. Ryan et al. argues that video game
play outside of the experimental setting is almost always voluntary, thus, need
satisfaction of autonomy among video game players should be high. Need satis-
faction of autonomy can also vary depending on autonomy-supportive features
afforded in the video gamed design, such as game features that provide flexibility
over game strategies and character development, movement, choice over tasks
and rewards [4]. Ryan et al. found that players who experienced higher level of
autonomy within the game itself had more positive experiences than those who
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Intrinsic Motivation in Games
9
played games that did not offer a great degree of autonomy within the game. Sev-
eral studies showed that need satisfaction of autonomy in video games resulted
in positive outcomes such as increased enjoyment [7, 8, 35] and desire for future
gameplay [7,36].
A motivation-supportive game feature taxonomy has been built by Villalabos
et al. based on SDT by analyzing 208 mobile apps [6]. The 12 identified feature
were classified according to the basic psychological needs (BPNs) defined by SDT:
autonomy, competence and relatedness [14]. According to the taxonomy, goal-
setting features supports the basic psychological need of autonomy because it
contributes to an internal perceived locus of causality. Researchers also found
that in a learning environment where teachers gave students choices and options,
the learning outcomes of the students increased [15,31]. According to SDT, a goal
imposed by someone else (or by an app) would undermine autonomy, which in
turn would reduce the motivation of the subject to perform the activity. Whereas,
a self-imposed goal would contribute to the basic need of autonomy and support
autonomous motivation to perform the specific activity [6,10,16].
Out of the three BPNs defined by SDT, autonomy is most relevant to cus-
tomization because the feeling is directly linked to the freedom to make choices in
play. The lack of choices and control over tasks diminish perceived autonomy [36],
whereas having options could enhance a sense of autonomy [4]. Kim et al. [9] ar-
gue that customization in the gaming context leads to greater enjoyment due to
the feeling of autonomy and control, regardless of customization type (functional
or aesthetic), although functional customization led to greater sense of autonomy.
Additionally, video game designers often add customizable features allowing the
player to adjust in-game characters, background music or diﬀiculty level [9]. By
offering a variety of settings, choices, and options, customizable interfaces allow
users to modify and transform their media consumption experiences into a highly
individualized set of functions and styles.
Peng et al. [7] investigated different customization features in a video game,
three game features were manipulated to correspond to the concept of autonomy.
First, character customization allowed players to personalize their characters in
the game. Second, in the ”autonomy-supportive features on” condition, players
could choose how to donate treasure to different Gods at the altar in exchange for
different types of rewards, including increase of strength, speed, or damage power
for character development. What skills the players chose to improve would be
critical, as this provided skill boost to their future game play and future character
performance would largely depends on this. In the ”autonomy-supportive features
off” condition the game automatically donated the treasure to increase speed,
strength, and damage power in a sequential way. Third, players could choose from
a range of different answers when conversing with other non-player characters in
the game if they were in the ”autonomy-supportive game features on” condition.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Related Work
Otherwise, there was only one option in the dialog and thus giving no choice for
the player. Need satisfaction of autonomy and need satisfaction of competence
were both found to be mediators for the relationships between the game features
and the motivation and engagement outcomes.
Based on the above studies and findings, the aim of the present thesis is to de-
velop a special achievement system, which considered competence-supportive by
nature, thus it might enhance the intrinsic motivation to play already. Although,
by allowing the players to customize the achievements (i.e.
define their own
goals), the feature becomes both competence- and autonomy-supportive, which
would enhance intrinsic motivation even more. Also, as described in the above
section, autonomy is the most essential basic psychological need to satisfy when
the goal is to increase intrinsic motivation to play.
2.1.2.1
Autonomy-supportive Features in Puzzle Games
Cognitively challenging video games (e.g. puzzle games) that are more likely to be
used in educational contexts should contain features that support autonomy and
relatedness as well as competence, in order to be motivating for as many players
as possible [37]. The research by Pusey et al. involved case studies with high
school and university students. The first case study investigated the perceived
autonomy in two commercial puzzle games: The Witness [38] and the Untitled
Goose Game [39]. The interviewee in the case study does not like puzzle games in
general, because they can cause frustration easily, especially ones where the player
does not have a lot of self-agency, and can’t affect things in a different way [37].
In his opinion, puzzles usually does not give enough freedom to the players, as
opposed to strategy games, that allow the player a lot of choice and autonomy
over the way he/she plays (e.g. through plan development and implementation
to achieve a goal). The interviewee does not mind dealing with failure when it
is caused by his own decisions around gameplay strategies. He prefers cognitive
challenges over skill-based challenges when it comes to video games, but cognitive
challenges that allow for autonomy over gameplay. The results suggest that in
order to increase motivation driven by autonomy, allowing players as much choice
as possible is recommended [37].
Another study [40] used a manipulated version of a digital tangram game
as the experimental manipulation against the autonomy-supportive videogame
Spore [41]. The tangram is a dissection puzzle consisting of seven flat polygons,
called tans, which are put together to form shapes. The objective is to replicate a
pattern (given only an outline) - generally found in a puzzle book - using all seven
pieces without overlap. Participants in the controlled condition were directed to
follow the hints provided by the game to complete the puzzles. Unauthorised
moves were rejected, in such an event, the game simply returned the offending
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Intrinsic Motivation in Games
11
shape to its original position outside the tangram. The tangram game played in
the supported condition did not feature the hint system, but they were otherwise
identical. As the results show, participants in the controlled condition experi-
enced comparatively lower autonomy satisfaction and higher autonomy frustra-
tion after playing the tangram game, relative to supported participants [40]. This
means that controlling game design elements can easily thwart the need of au-
tonomy, and giving the freedom of making choices to the player can support the
need. On the other hand, an interview in the study illustrates that, for instance,
Stardew Valley’s [42] open structure (which is a seemingly established autonomy-
supportive design pattern) can itself cause autonomy frustration. Based on these
results, it can be concluded that moving players towards the optimal play is
needed in order to avoid autonomy frustration, and at the same time, provid-
ing the player to have meaningful choices on this path is essential to support
autonomy needs.
Further evidence shows the positive relationship between autonomy-supportive
environments and increased intrinsic motivation. Iwasaki et al. [43] conducted
an experiment participating 105 undergraduate students playing a puzzle game
(Brick by Brick [44]) in autonomy-supportive and controlling condition. Brick
by Brick is a puzzle game containing 60 challenge cards and 5 shapes made of
bricks. The goal is to build a brick wall shown on the cards using the 5 shapes.
The player also has the freedom to create their own challenges (walls), following
the rules: 1. A complete wall must be symmetrical, with the same profile, left
and right. 2. Individual bricks must overlap between layers, like a real brick wall.
Participants in the autonomy-supportive condition had the freedom to choose any
card from the deck, therefore, completing the challenges they want. Additionally,
they had the freedom to give up a challenge any time and move to another one
and were allowed to look at the solution on the back of the card as well. In this
condition there were no time and performance restrictions either, other than the
length of the playing session, which was 7 minutes for both groups. In contrast,
in the controlling condition, the participants were obligated to follow the order
of challenges determined by the examiner and were not allowed to move on to
the next puzzle until the previous puzzle was not successfully completed. They
were not allowed to look at the solution on the back of the card either, and were
asked to complete as many challenges as they can in the test period (7 minutes).
Participants in the autonomy-supportive condition - in which participants were
able to exercise high levels of freedom of choice and experience a sense of control
- reported higher intrinsic motivation, higher levels of enjoyment and spent more
time playing the game after the test period [43].
To conclude, autonomy-supportive features, such as character customization,
free choice between missions or skills, goal-setting, settings to customize music
or diﬀiculty level are playing an important role in fostering the player’s intrin-
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Related Work
sic motivation driven by the satisfaction of the need of autonomy. Specifically
in puzzle games, the most common design element that supports the need of
autonomy seems to be allowing the players the choice over different challenges,
therefore, allowing them to exercise high levels of freedom of choice and experi-
ence a sense of control. The features to be developed in the present study follows
these guidelines and tries to build the player-defined achievement system in such
a way that is not too restrictive, but does not frustrates the players either due
to the possible high level of freedom.
2.2
Achievements in Games
This section presents the definition for achievement and challenge used through-
out this study. In addition, it introduces common features used both in video
games in general and puzzle games which enhances intrinsic motivation by sup-
porting the basic physiological needs. Finally, the currently existing solutions for
player-defined challenges are described.
2.2.1
Definition
Games can be considered as a series of challenges presented to a player [45–47].
In addition to the intrinsic reward players experience from completing challenges,
most games provide some form of additional reward for completion of key chal-
lenges or at semi-regular intervals throughout the gameplay [8]. These additional
rewards could either be extrinsic or intrinsic, for instance: new features becoming
available to the player, cosmetic, external to the gameplay (e.g. concept art) or
simply recognition that the challenge has been completed (i.e. like a tick on a
checklist) [11]. In addition, one further reward is usually given to the player is
the concept of Achievement (also known as trophies, badges or accomplishments).
Similarly to simple checklists, Achievements are awarded for the completion of
a specific in-game challenge. An Achievement System is usually a shared repos-
itory between games, storing possible obtainable Achievements for each game
and records of Achievements awarded to all players [11]. In the context of the
present thesis, an Achievement System simply means the collection of Achieve-
ments stored in the game.
The structure and required features of an Achievement is clearly defined by the
available literature [11, 48]. According to the framework for designing Achieve-
ments developed by J. Hamari [48] (see Figure 2.2), from the perspective of
a single game, an achievement appears as an optional challenge provided by a
meta-game (Achievement System) that is independent of a single game session
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Achievements in Games
13
and yields possible reward(s). The main and essential components of an Achieve-
ment are the Signifier, the Completion logic and the Reward. A Signifier consists
of the name, image and description of the Achievement, which is presented to the
player. The description should explain the operational rules of the Achievement
(i.e. what needs to be done by the player) rather than giving the exact details of
the completion logic. The Completion logic describes the rules that determine if
an Achievement should be awarded or not. It must contain a trigger, which can
be a player action or a system event that is required to happen in order to unlock
an Achievement. The last required element is the reward. Achievements always
have at least one reward which is the value of the Achievement (i.e. points earned
by unlocking the Achievement and accumulated in the Achievement System).
Figure 2.2. Framework for Designing and Evaluating Game Achievements (adapted
from [48])
In the present thesis, an Achievement is intended to have a Signifer element
and Completion logic as described in the framework. However, upon unlocking
the Achievement, the action would not yield any in-game reward (e.g. points
or unlocking new features) other than the visual representation of unlocking the
Achievement (usually changing the image in the Signifier element from grayscale
to colorized [48]), therefore, avoiding the influencing factor of extrinsic rewards
and instead providing the player the intrinsic reward of completing the challenge
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Related Work
[11].
Achievements can be awarded for many types of behaviour, for example, com-
pleting a learning task in the game (e.g. learnt how to use hints), completing
required task in a game (e.g. finish the third mission), exhibiting a particular
skill or playing in a consistently skillful manner (e.g. perform 50 headshots; fin-
ish the level on the hardest skill setting), completing a required task within a
given time frame (e.g. finish the lap within one minute), playing the game at
a specific time (e.g. play after 10pm on a Friday) or undertaking novel, unex-
pected actions throughout the game [11]. The specific types of Achievements to
be implemented, are defined based on a competitor analysis conducted before the
design phase. The results can be found in Section 4.1.2.1.
2.2.2
Achievement vs Challenge
According to the research made by J. Hamari et al. [48] to build a framework
for designing and evaluating achievements, achievements can be defined as the
following from the perspective of the achievement system:
An achievement appears as a challenge consisting of a signifying ele-
ment, rewards and completion logics whose fulfilment conditions are
defined through events in other systems (usually games).
Based on the above definition, an Achievement is the actual game element,
which usually has signifying element, rewards etc., and a Challenge for the player
is to fulfil the conditions defined by the Achievement through events in the game.
Following Hamari’s definition, in the present thesis, an Achievement is the
concrete game element which is displayed to the player and can be unlocked. A
Challenge is the definition of conditions and events the player has to fulfil to
unlock the Achievement.
2.2.3
Achievements in Puzzle Games
Due to the lack of related literature in this particular topic, a competitor analysis
is conducted examining and experimenting with puzzle games in the mobile game
genre. Great emphasis is put on the investigation of the available achievements
in these games and on the potential motivating factor, structure and features of
these game elements in specific games. The results of the competitor analysis are
described in Section 4.1.2.1.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Achievements in Games
15
2.2.4
Intrinsic Motivation in Achievements
Achievements can act as a measurement of to what extent the game is completed,
thus satisfying the need of competence, as it provides oﬀicial recognition of accom-
plishments [11]. This is supported by other studies as well, according to which,
design elements, such as badges (achievements), leaderboards and performance
graphs, positively affect the competence need satisfaction [24, 25]. Interestingly,
in the study performed by C. Groening et al. [25], the design of the achievement
system also affected the feel of autonomy. In the study, achievements formed sev-
eral categories, such as achievements for speed, quantity or meta-achievements
(collecting a certain amount of certain achievements), which might evoke a cer-
tain feel of autonomy or strategic decision making. Also, one achievement was
only available within the first five minutes of an experiment task, another one
was only available within the last minute of a task. This might have led to po-
tential deliberate decisions which fostered the feel of autonomy and psychological
freedom [25].
A study was conducted by G. Volkmar et al. [49] with intentions to increase
intrinsic motivation to play by providing personalized Achievements to the play-
ers based on their personality. Volkmar and his colleagues addressed the prob-
lem according to which, Achievements in games are not tailored to the different
player personalities, personal preferences and play style. To tackle the problem,
they proposed a design of adaptive Achievements based on specific archetypes
extracted from the BrainHex player typology [50]. Results show that adaptation
of Achievements leads to an increase of motivational aspects such as perceived
effort/importance and sense of reward and individualization. BrainHex describes
seven archetypes, but for the context of the present thesis, the player types of
Mastermind (solving puzzles, identifying eﬀicient decisions and strategies) and
Achievers (is focused on finishing objectives) are the most relevant to further in-
vestigate. For the Mastermind to be rewarded with the Achievement, a number
of word-based puzzles had to be completed. To solve a single puzzle, three letters
had to be entered in the correct order. Hints regarding which letters need to
be pressed on the keyboard at which time were distributed at the level edges.
The mechanics of these puzzles were not directly explained but had to be figured
out by the player hence providing a challenge for the Mastermind. As Achievers
are motivated to complete tasks simply for the sake of completing them, their
Achievements required hitting certain objects a couple of times or destroying
scene props such as vases scattered all over the game. These Achievements give
a good starting point for the base of the Achievement System. The more diverse
are the base Achievements in the game, the more likely that players with different
play styles will find suitable Achievements to customize.
Similarly to the present thesis, Aabom [51] attempted to create an Achieve-
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Related Work
ment System, which enhances the player’s intrinsic motivation. Aabom designed
and developed an Achievement System which provided the possibility to the
player to build their own ”Journeys” in the Achievement System by setting the
order of predefined Achievements. Although, the designed system did not reach
the expected goal - as there was no difference between intrinsic motivation mea-
sured before and after the game session - he concluded an interesting finding
during the research process.
One of the most important discoveries of this research is that, to
intrinsically motivate a player, he/she has to be setting his/her own
goals. As such,it was concluded that the best way to do so was to
make the player choose the achievements he/she wanted to pursue,
for themselves and not to develop a method that proposed the right
achievements for the player to pursue.
Such a method would rob
the player the autonomy he/she is feeling. However an Achievement
System that proposes the right achievements to players who are new
to achievements might show a of better use than the version developed
for this research [51].
According to that, depending on the situation and design choices, one of
the best ways to potentially foster intrinsic motivation to pursue goals during
gameplay is to let the player set their own goals. This particular discovery sup-
ports the set hypothesis of the present thesis, according to which, a customizable
Achievement System has the potential to increase intrinsic motivation to play.
2.2.4.1
Player-defined Challenges
There are existing solutions and features implemented in some video games, which
allows the player to create custom challenges from scratch using an in-game
interface. Also, players might define their own challenges and share them in online
communities without using the game itself to design or publish this challenge,
these are called Self-Imposed Challenges. These types of challenges are a good
inspiration to build the player-defined achievement system in the final game.
Custom Challenges
There are existing games which allow the player to create
custom challenges inside the game using a dedicated interface and an optional in-
game sharing system. The creators share the challenge with other players to test
the fellow gamers’ abilities and challenge them to complete these tasks. Games
with this particular feature available are for instance: Test Drive Unlimited [17],
Binding of Isaac [18], Chess.com [19], Super Mario Maker [20], GTA [21]. This
is a good design pattern and game feature if the designer wants to provide the
possibility to the player to challenge others or themselves. A downside of this
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Evaluation Methods
17
functionality can be that these challenges have to be created from scratch, which
might be overwhelming for a beginner player, therefore, the target audience of
this feature is rather the more experienced gamers than the novice ones.
Self-Imposed Challenges
Players found the way to challenge themselves by
defining and setting their own challenges outside the games as well and sharing
them in online communities. These challenges are called Self-Imposed Challenges
and are collected on game forums or dedicated websites. A Self-Imposed Chal-
lenge is a playthrough of a game wherein the player plays under a restriction not
required by the game itself in an attempt to increase the diﬀiculty, immersion
level, and replay value. These restrictions can range from the simple (a refusal to
make use of a Game-Breaker, for example) to the near-impossible: ”Can you beat
Super Mario Bros. without pressing the ”B” button?” [22]. In order to qualify as
a Self-Imposed Challenge, the challenge has to be truly self-imposed: if the game
acknowledges the challenge in any way, such as offering an option to play with
such rules or rewarding players who fulfill these conditions, it instead falls under
the Challenge Run category. A Self-Imposed Challenge is imposed only by the
players themselves, and the game does not provide an interface to share these
challenges in-game [22]. This behaviour shows that there are players who have
the desire to set custom goals, which are not present in the game by default.
To conclude, players’ intrinsic motivation to unlock an Achievement might
originate from their satisfaction of competence needs. Intrinsic motivation can
be further enhanced by allowing the player to customize a challenge and share it
with other players, thus, satisfying their need for autonomy. Therefore, combining
customization and challenge in games, intrinsic motivation to master the game
can be highly enhanced, which is the also the aim of the present study.
2.3
Evaluation Methods
This section describes the most common methods and scales to evaluate games,
achievements, and the impact of the player-defined achievement system on the
player’s intrinsic motivation and game enjoyment.
2.3.1
Usability
A common practice in the user experience design area to continuously assess the
usability of the product during the development period, ideally in each iteration.
There are different scales and methods to effectively evaluate the usability of a
prototype or the final product based on the specific aspect the designer wants to
further investigate and test.
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Related Work
2.3.1.1
System Usability Scale (SUS)
The System Usability Scale is one of the most commonly used questionnaires used
to assess the usability of a system or a game [52,53]. The original version of SUS
was developed by John Brooke [54]. This simple, ten-item, 5-point Likert scale
gives a global view of subjective assessments of usability, and includes statements,
like ”I think that I would like to use this system frequently” or ”I found the system
very cumbersome to use”. The scale is generally used after the respondent has
had an opportunity to use the system being evaluated, but before any debriefing
or discussion takes place. Respondents should be asked to record their immediate
response to each item, rather than thinking about items for a long time. SUS
score results in a range from 0 to 100 by considering normal and reversed questions
and following simple calculations described in the oﬀicial paper [54]. According
to evaluation guide by Adobe [55], the score is not a percentage but a total score
out of 100. The average SUS score is 68, and scoring above or below the average
will give an immediate insight into the overall usability of the design solution.
SUS scores will fall into a range of categories: best imaginable, excellent, good,
OK, poor and worst imaginable. The exact acceptability scores are shown on
Figure 2.3. It is up to the UX designer to determine a follow-up course of action.
This can include detailed testing to find the root of the problem and existing
pain points, or a rethink of the design solution entirely. On the other hand, SUS
only gives a score, but not a reason why the specific design failed or succeeded.
Therefore, it is recommended to measure usability with a complementary method
as well (e.g. Thinking Aloud) instead of relying on the system’s SUS score alone.
The present thesis uses SUS to evaluate usability in the implementation phase
of the project and complements the score with the results collected with the
Thinking Aloud method, which is described later in this section.
Figure 2.3. SUS Acceptability Score (adapted from [55])
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Evaluation Methods
19
2.3.1.2
A/B Testing
Controlled experiments (A/B tests) can utilize the scientific method to form a
hypothesis of the form “If a specific change is introduced, will it improve key
metrics?” and evaluate it with real users [56]. In a controlled experiment, users
are randomly split between the variants (e.g. two different ads layouts), while
the user receives the same experience in multiple visits. Their interactions with
the site are instrumented and key metrics computed. The simplest experimental
setup is to evaluate a factor with two levels, a control (version A) and a treatment
(version B). The control is normally the default version, and the treatment is the
change that is tested.
In player experience related studies, controlled tests are used with almost
no exception.
Following the above definition, these studies provide a control
condition - which usually the default setup of the tested game -, and a treatment
condition, which is intended to prove or fail the stated hypothesis of the study.
Usually, these A/B tests are conducted in person, due to the laboratory settings
used in the studies [7, 9, 49, 57], but using online controlled experiments is not
uncommon at all, and getting more popular, because of the simple setup and
significantly larger user base [25].
The present study aims to conduct the A/B test in an online setting, due to
the simple setup and large user base. Participants in the control condition interact
with a game version where the achievement system is static (A), and participants
in the treatment version (B) interact with a version where the achievement system
is customizable.
2.3.1.3
Thinking Aloud
The thinking aloud method is a widely-used instrument to study cognitive pro-
cesses, such as problem solving or human-computer interaction.
Participants
in a thinking-aloud study are asked to carry out a task, while verbalizing their
thoughts. The researchers record all verbalizations, write them down in a report,
and then analyze these in a way that depends on the research questions. Re-
searchers may for instance pay attention to assertion that reflect a certain state
of mind (annoyance, confusion), or to delays between utterances. Data can be
analyzed in either a qualitative or a quantitative way [58]. In the user experi-
ence domain, the thinking aloud method is used to test specific new applications
in order to trouble-shoot and revise (usability testing). The primary goal is to
gather user information to support the design of a specific product.
This method is used in multiple phases of the project, e.g. both in the proto-
typing phase and the implementation phase, and is used for qualitative assessment
of the current application.
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Related Work
2.3.2
Autonomy Satisfaction and Frustration
This section describes the commonly used scales to effectively measure autonomy
satisfaction and/or frustration in game design experimental settings.
2.3.2.1
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory
The Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) is a multidimensional measurement
device intended to assess participants’ subjective experience related to a tar-
get activity in laboratory experiments. It has been used in several experiments
related to intrinsic motivation in games [25, 49, 57].
The instrument assesses
participants’ interest/enjoyment, perceived competence, effort, value/usefulness,
felt pressure and tension, and perceived choice while performing a given activity.
The interest/enjoyment subscale is considered the self-report measure of intrinsic
motivation; thus, although the overall questionnaire is called the Intrinsic Motiva-
tion Inventory, it is only the one subscale that assesses intrinsic motivation. The
perceived choice and perceived competence concepts are theorized to be positive
predictors of both self-report and behavioral measures of intrinsic motivation,
and pressure/tension is theorized to be a negative predictor of intrinsic motiva-
tion. The IMI items have often been modified slightly to fit specific activities.
For example, an item such as “I tried very hard to do well at this activity” can be
changed to “I tried very hard to do well on these puzzles” or ”...in learning this
material” without effecting its reliability or validity, thus, can be used in various
settings and situations [59]. The following subscales are used in the present study:
perceived choice, interest/enjoyment.
2.3.2.2
Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction, and Frustration Scales
As introduced earlier, self-determination theory posits three universal psychologi-
cal needs: autonomy; competence; and relatedness, and suggests that these must
be continuously satisfied for people to maintain optimal performance and well-
being. To measure that, questionnaires assessing not only need satisfaction, but
also need frustration have been developed, namely, Basic Psychological Need Sat-
isfaction and Frustration Scales. There is a general form, as well as domain spe-
cific forms for: education and physical education; relationships; training; sport;
physical exercise; and work. These scales are important because need satisfaction
is associated with well-being whereas need frustration is associated with ill-being,
being able to predict both is often useful [60]. In the game design research area,
common practice to use the one of the scales, adjusted to the purpose and con-
ditions of the given experiment. Modified scales have been used by several game
related studies in the past [7], and are used in the present study as well.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Evaluation Methods
21
2.3.2.3
The Player Experience of Need Satisfaction (PENS)
The PENS is a 21-item instrument assessed using a 7-point scale (from do not
agree to strongly agree) and outlines three intrinsic psychological needs – those
of competence, autonomy, and relatedness – that numerous data demonstrate are
at the heart of the player’s fun, enjoyment, and valuing of games [61]. The scale
is designed with 5 subscales, which are presence/immersion, relatedness, intuitive
controls, competence and autonomy. As the use of PENS does not extend to free
academic use and publishing of individual scale items, it will not be used in the
present thesis. Although, several research papers present the effectiveness and
validation of the scale [7,9,62,63].
2.3.3
Game Enjoyment
Game enjoyment and player experience can be measured in many ways.
For
instance, the Game Experience Questionnaire covers a range of digital game
experiences that have been identified through reviewing theoretical accounts of
player experiences as well as focus group explorations with both hardcore and
casual gamers. A copy of the questionnaire made available by the authors reveals
that there are 33 items that are scored to obtain measures on seven different
components labeled: competence(e.g. ”I felt skillful”, ”I felt competent”), sensory
and imaginative immersion (e.g. ”I was interested in the game’s story”, ”I felt
imaginative”), flow (e.g. ”I was fully occupied with the game”, ”I lost track of
time”), tension/annoyance (e.g. ”I felt annoyed”, ”I felt irritable”), challenge (e.g.
”I thought it was hard”, ”I felt pressured”), negative affect (e.g. ”It gave me a
bad mood”, ”I found it tiresome”) and positive affect (e.g. ”I felt content”, ”I felt
happy”). The GexpQ is reasonable and applicable in studying player experiences
with video games, however, it needs to be tailored for different genres of video
games that do not involve a narrative or for which the story is intended to put
the player in a bad mood (e.g. survival horror) and noncompetitive games where
it is just fun to explore the game environment or play with the simulation [64,65].
Further studies used self-defined scales to evaluate game enjoyment after the
experimental session. A 10-point Likert-type scale was used by Peng et al. and
Song et al. in their exergame studies [7,66] ranging from 1 (describes very poor)
to 10 (describes very well) to rate how well these adjectives described the par-
ticipants’ game playing experience. 6 adjectives were measured: enjoyable, en-
tertaining, exciting, fun, interesting, and pleasant. Due to the simplicity of the
scale, it is versatile enough to use it in different games, regardless of their genre,
and therefore, it is used to measure game enjoyment in the present study.
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Related Work
2.3.4
Motivation for Future Play
Measuring motivation for future plays gives a good indication on the likeliness of
players playing the game in their leisure time in uncontrolled condition. A com-
mon way to determine the willingness of players to play at a later time is to build
a simple scale, as it was by Peng et al. and Burgers et al. [7,57]. Besides those
scales, a SERVQUAL questionnaire could be used as well to evaluate motivation
to play [67], but in order to simplify the evaluation process, this scale will not be
involved in this study.
In the former study participants were asked if they immediately wanted to
play the game again (immediate game behavior, yes or no) and if they were willing
to play the game again in the coming week (future game behavior, yes or no).
In the study conducted by Peng et al., motivation for future play included three
items that were revised based on [4], including ”Given the chance I would play
this game in my free time”, ”I would like to spend more time playing this game”,
and ”I would like to continue playing this game.” Participants rated the above
three items on a 7-point scale anchored by 1 (strongly disagree) and 7 (strongly
agree). These studies show that simple questionnaires give a good overview on
participants’ motivation for future play.
2.3.5
Game Recommendation and Game Rating
According to the study by Peng et al. [7], the likelihood that the participant
would recommend the game to others and game rating can be assessed simply by
a 1-question scale each. To evaluate game recommendation, participants used a
7-point scale anchored by 1 (extremely unlikely) and 7 (extremely likely) to rate
how likely it was that they would recommend this game to others.
On the other hand, game recommendation could be measured with NPS (Net
Promoter Score [68]) as well, asking the participants to answer the following
question: ”On a scale of 0 to 10, how likely is it that you would recommend this
game to a friend or colleague?”. The final score then calculated by extracting the
percentage of detractors (responded with 0-6) from the percentage of promoters
(responded with 9-10). This score falls into the range of -100-100, where 100 is
the best score. The present study uses this method to measure game recommen-
dation.
Game rating in Peng’s study was assessed using a statement, ”How would
you rate this game?”. Participants rated a 7-point scale anchored by 1 (highly
unsatisfactory) and 7 (highly satisfactory). Due to the simplicity and generality
of the scale, it can be used in any game genre, therefore, it is used in the developed
puzzle game as well.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 State-of-the-art Mobile Game Development Technologies
23
2.3.6
Hypothesis Testing
The idea behind a statistical hypothesis test is to decide if a data sample is typ-
ical or atypical compared to a population assuming a hypothesis we formulated
about the population is true. A data sample refers to a small portion of entities
taken from a population, for example, via an experiment, whereas the population
comprises all possible entities [69]. A key component in hypothesis testing is the
‘hypothesis’ itself. The hypothesis is a statement about the population value of
the test statistic, this formulated hypothesis is called the null hypothesis (H0).
It is important to note that the sample population is a hypothetical population
which obeys our null hypothesis. In other words, the null hypothesis specifies the
population completely. Having a numerical value of the test statistic, represent-
ing the data sample and the sampling distribution, representing the population,
these can be compared with each other in order to evaluate the null hypothesis
that has been formulated. From this comparison another numerical value is ob-
tained, called the p-values, which quantifies the typicality or atypicality of the
configuration assuming the null hypothesis is true. Finally, based on the p-values
a decision is made. Statistical hypothesis testing is useful across all application
domains, such as data science and artificial intelligence [69].
2.4
State-of-the-art Mobile Game Development
Technologies
As video and mobile games are getting more popular, new game engines and
game development technologies are released. This section provides an overview
of the most popular solutions for cross-platform mobile game development.
2.4.1
Unity
Unity is one of the most powerful game engines developed by Unity Technologies
[70].
According to 2021 statistics, 72% of the of the top 1,000 mobile games
were made with Unity and more than 50% of the games across mobile, PC, and
console were created using the engine [71]. From the year 2018, Unity is able
to support more than 25 platforms which include mobile, desktop, consoles, and
virtual reality. Unity is used to develop 2D, 3D, virtual reality, augmented reality
games, and simulations. As of now, Unity is the best mobile game development
tool [72]. Unity scripts for game development can be written by the developer
using C# language.
Due to the popularity and the great community behind
Unity, the final mobile puzzle games is developed using Unity.
==PAGE:32==
24
2 Related Work
2.4.2
Unreal Engine
Unreal Engine was developed by Epic Games for their FPS game ’Unreal’ initially.
It’s a game engine for mobiles, consoles, or PC, and widely accepted by developers
worldwide.
Unreal Engine is a complete suite of development tools for anyone
working with real-time technology. It gives creators across industries
the freedom and control to deliver cutting-edge entertainment, com-
pelling visualizations, and immersive virtual worlds [73].
Similarly to Unity, Unreal Engine is free to use below a specific amount of
revenue per year. It provides industry-leading graphics, multiplayer framework,
C++ source code and many other features. Despite its versatility, it is usually not
recommended for beginner game developers due to its complexity. On the other
hand, Unreal is a perfect choice for large-scale, high-quality graphical games.
2.4.3
Cross-platform Mobile Frameworks
Simple mobile games (such as a mobile puzzle card games, with only a few fea-
tures) can be build simply using mobile frameworks designed for developing cross-
platform applications. Using mobile frameworks can be a good alternative if the
game to be developed does not require heavy physics calculations or high-quality
rendering.
There are many solutions existing to build hybrid mobile applica-
tions [74], but the most popular ones are the following.
Flutter [75] is an excellent framework for developing cross-platform native
mobile applications in 2022. Like Golang [76], TensorFlow [77], and Angular [78],
Flutter is also from Google, which uses Dart (another programming language
from Google) and provides SDK for developing a cross-platform native mobile
application.
React Native [79] uses React [80] and JavaScript [81] for producing high-
quality native mobile apps. It is a good choice for web developers who want
to try mobile app development and are already familiar with technologies like
JavaScript and React.
Ionic [82] is another framework for developing hybrid mobile applications
using JavaScript. Ionic also allows the developer to build cross-platform mobile
apps, in other words, to create an application for any platform using one codebase.
Ionic Framework is free and open-source and provides a portable UI toolkit for
developing high-quality cross-platform apps for native iOS, Android, and the web-
all from the single codebase. It also has an Ionic React that leverages React for
building hybrid mobile apps.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 SET card game
25
2.5
SET card game
SET is a real-time card game designed by Marsha Falco in 1974 and published
by Set Enterprises in 1991 [83]. The idea for the SET game came when Marsha
was trying to understand whether epilepsy in German Shepherds was inherited.
To track the individual traits of the dogs, Marsha created file cards with blocks
of information for each dog. Because certain blocks of information were the same
for many dogs, she drew symbols to represent the information rather than writing
out the data each time. Different symbols with different properties represented
different traits. While explaining the mathematical properties behind the com-
binations on the file cards to the veterinarians, Marsha saw the fun in finding
the different combinations and SET was born. Over the years, Marsha refined
the game by playing with her family and friends and it was finally released in
1990 [84]. Set won American Mensa’s Mensa Select award in 1991 and placed 9th
in the 1995 Deutscher Spiele Preis [85].
Deck
The deck consists of 81 unique cards that vary in four features across
three possibilities for each kind of feature: number of shapes (one, two, or three),
shape (diamond, squiggle, oval), shading (solid, striped, or open), and color (red,
green, or purple). Each possible combination of features (e.g. a card with three
striped green diamonds) appears as a card precisely once in the deck.
Rules
In the game, certain combinations of three cards are said to make up a
SET. For each one of the four categories of features — color, number, shape, and
shading — the three cards must display that feature as either all the same, or
all different. In other words, for each feature the three cards must avoid having
two cards showing one version of the feature and the remaining card showing a
different version. For example, 3 solid red diamonds, 2 solid green squiggles, and
1 solid purple oval form a set, because the shadings of the three cards are all the
same, while the numbers, the colors, and the shapes among the three cards are
all different. See examples for valid and invalid SETs on Figure 2.4.
The game starts with 12 cards placed on the table, and the players start
searching for potential SETs. Whenever a player finds a SET, he/she has to say
”SET” out loud and pick up the three cards from the table if the spotted SET
was correct. The missing cards are replaced with new ones from the deck and
games continues until there’s no cards left in the deck. The number of players is
not restricted, it can be played alone, as well as with friends and family. When
SET is played by more than 1 person, the winner is determined based on the
number of SETs each player found. The player who found the most SETs wins
the game.
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Related Work
Figure 2.4. Examples for valid (a) and invalid (b) SETs; a) All three cards have the
same number of symbols, and have different colors, shadings and shapes; b) Although
all three cards have the same color, different number of symbols and different shading,
only 2 of them has the same shape. All cards should have the all the same or all different
shapes.
Online SET games
The original game inspired many developers so far to
create their own, online version of the popular card game.
For instance, the
publisher company provides daily SET puzzles to solve. A SET puzzle consists
of 12 cards on the screen, and includes 6 SETs in total. The goal of the player is
to find all the SETs in these 12 cards [86].
Besides the SET inspired games available on the web, many versions exist
to play with on mobile platforms. Most of the existing solutions are analyzed
and compared in the thesis’ competitor analysis stage, and their description and
features can be found in Section 4.1.2.1.
2.6
Summary
As introduced in the present chapter, there are many studies on the improvement
of game design strategies based on the aim for satisfying the needs for basic psy-
chological needs, such as autonomy, competence and relatedness. The mentioned
studies provide a good starting point and scientific background to design and de-
velopment of the subject experiment of the present thesis. In the next chapter,
the development process is introduced and each method applied in the phases are
introduced in detail.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter describes the methods used throughout the thesis project phase by
phase. The development process is shown on Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1. Phases of the project
The project follows a tailored development process, which is the combination
of the online controlled experiment lifecycle [87] and the iterative development
process [88].
The lifecycle consists of 3 main phases: Ideation, Design & Execution, Anal-
ysis & Learning. The iterative development process is implemented in the MVP
Development subphase of the Ideation.
Each phase and the related methods described in detail in the corresponding
sections. The methods in each phase are collected in tables as well (see from
Table 3.1), to introduce the methods in a summarized version and to give a
better overview.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Methods
3.1
Ideation
The Ideation phase involves the generation of the Minimum Viable Hypothesis
(MVH) and the Development of the Minimum Viable Product (MVP). The meth-
ods used in these subphases are introduced below.
3.1.1
MVH Generation
The aim of the MVH generation is to decide whether and how to form an MVH,
which consists of a treatment description (in this case, adding the autonomy sup-
porting feature - the player defined achievment system - to the game) and success
criteria (the treatment version of the application outperforms the baseline regard-
ing the users’ perceived autonomy satisfaction, game enjoyment, motivation for
future play, game recommendation and game rating).
In order to define the MVH, thorough research and analysis is needed on
related work. The used methods to define the MVH are shown in 3.1.
Name
Protocol
Purpose
Outcome
Tools
Research on Related Work
Search for literature in the topics:
- player autonomy
- game features supporting
need satisfaction
- motivation in video games
- effects of in-game customization
- achievements and
intrinsic motivation
- need satisfaction in puzzle
video games
- self-set goals
- custom challenges in games
- how to measure player
experience
- etc.
Extract information and document
in ’Related Work’ chapter
- Collect research data
on the topics listed in the
Protocol column
- Familiarizing with
related research projects
- Mendeley library including
player motivation and achievement
related papers and citations
- ’Related Work’ chapter
Mendeley
[89]
Framework for Designing
and Evaluating Game
Achievements [7]
Define requirements for a general
Achievement game element
by following the guidelines
defined by the framework
- Define design requirements
for Achievements in the game
- Have consistent Achievements
in the final game
- Ease the creation of multiple
Achievements during the
development process
List of requirements of a single
Achievement element in the game
Microsoft Word,
Figma
Table 3.1. Ideation - MVH Generation
3.1.1.1
Research
The project starts with a research phase, which is intended to discover the re-
lated literature on intrinsic motivation and basic psychological needs - especially
autonomy and competence - in the video/mobile game and multimedia context.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Ideation
29
Besides that, research is done on solutions to autonomy-supportive features and
achievement systems as well.
Reference management
The references and research data are stored, orga-
nized, analyzed and cited with the help of a reference management tool, Mendeley
(mendeley.com). Mendeley also generates bibliographies automatically and en-
ables access to the user’s reference library from anywhere online.
Resources
• DTU FindIt, ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, Semantic Scholar:
Reference libraries collecting data and papers in various topics. They are
useful to find references from state-of-the-art literature and search in a
narrowed down scope.
• Center for Self-Determination Theory: CSDT is a non-profit orga-
nization created to advance Self-Determination Theory by disseminating
the philosophy, research, and practices of SDT. Their website is a valuable
resource for SDT scales, research papers in the field and more.
• Game Developer Conference (GDC) talks: GDC brings the game
development community together to exchange ideas, solve problems, and
shape the future of the industry across five days of education, inspiration,
and networking. Attendees include programmers, artists, producers, game
designers, audio professionals, and business leaders. Many talks are avail-
able from pervious year in the topic of achievements, motivation, rewards
etc.
Framework for Designing and Evaluating Game Achievements
As dis-
cussed in Section 2.2.1, the Framework provides a great guideline for defining
Achievement elements in the game. Although, the definition of the Achievement
elements is not necessary to form the hypothesis, it is done in this phase as a
prerequisite for the MVP Development phase. As a result, a general guideline
for a game Achievement element is defined.
3.1.2
MVP Development
The MVP is the implementation of the hypothesis in the product by focusing
on the MVH “treatment description.” Since in the scope of the present thesis a
complete mobile puzzle game is developed from scratch, the iterative development
process is followed in this subphase including two iterations: Iteration 1 for the
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Methods
application design and Iteration 2 for the application development. The methods
used in this phase are shown in 3.2.
3.1.2.1
Iteration 1 - Application Design
The first step of the MVP Development phase is to design the game to be devel-
oped and define the ’Design criteria’ table listing the final list of features, which
acts as a guideline during the implementation. The desired elements of the game
based on the collected information in the Research phase and the competitor anal-
ysis are defined here, such as detailed design of the core game, the achievement
system and the integrated in-game evaluation system.
Requirements
Competitor analysis
The features for the core game are designed based on
competitor analysis. In general, competitor analysis in marketing and strategic
management is an assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of current and
potential competitors [90]. This analysis provides both an offensive and defensive
strategic context to identify opportunities and threats. Profiling combines all of
the relevant sources of competitor analysis into one framework in the support
of eﬀicient and effective strategy formulation, implementation, monitoring and
adjustment.
In the context of the present thesis, the goal of the competitor analysis is
to analyse competitors in the same field and topic (namely, published digital
versions of SET and other mobile puzzle games) and use the information to
proceed in the design and development process. The analysis involves research on
current solutions and detailed analysis on the implemented features from different
perspectives. The games are also analyzed from an autonomy-supportive point
of view, and features that succeeded in this category might be added to the
final game, other than the planned achievement system.
Furthermore, when
available, user feedback and rating on the existing solutions is also taken into
consideration. The collection of desired in-game features are decided based on
the collected information during the competitor analysis, these are described in
detail in Section 4.1.2.1.
Apply Framework for Designing and Evaluating Game Achievements
The achievement system is added to the game as additional feature, which does
not exist in the original card game. Great emphasis would be put on this part
of the game as this features gives the base to test the hypothesis. The design
process of the achievement system involves the application of the Framework for
Designing and Evaluating Game Achievements presented by Hamari et al. The
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Ideation
31
Name
Protocol
Purpose
Outcome
Tools
Iteration 1
Requirements
Competitor analysis
· Define the features/elements
of mobile puzzle games to
focus on during the analysis
· Identify competition
(mobile puzzle games)
· Collect data by
playing these games
· Analyze collected data
· Get an overview of
state-of-the-art solutions
among mobile puzzle games
· Analyze and collect
features and best practices
in mobile puzzle games
· A collection of competitors
· Collection of must-have,
nice-to-have and
won’t-have features
· Summary table of the above
Microsoft Word
Apply Framework for
Designing and
Evaluating Game
Achievements
· Define “Design criteria”
for all Achievement
types based on the
general Achievement
requirements built in
the “MVH Generation”
phase
· To have single source
of features to implement
in the final app
Design criteria table,
listing the type of Achievements
and their requirements to be
implemented in the
click-through Figma prototype
Microsoft Word
User stories
· Create user stories
for each feature listed
in the “Design criteria”
table
· To have a list scenarios
from the user’s point of view
· Show how a feature
will provide value for the user
· Written system features
from the user’s perspective
Microsoft Word
Implementation
Paper prototyping
(sketching)
· Sketch out the initial
layout of the screens
based on the ‘Design
criteria’ table
· Build guidelines which can
be used later to implement
the screens
· Paper, not interactive
prototypes
Pen and paper
Brainstorming
· Sketch different interface
designs for the same user
stories
· Outline alternatives for
the same screens/features
· Alternative paper sketches for
a user story
Pen and paper
Click-through
prototyping
· Design each screen
for the final application
on paper following
the previously defined
“Design criteria”
· Implement the drawings
in Figma and build an
interactive prototype
for the final mobile
puzzle game
· Prevent UX
design errors
· Get feedback early
on the planned features
· An interactive
Figma prototype of
the final mobile puzzle game
- A Figma template
for the Achievement
game element
Figma
Testing and
Evaluation
Thinking Aloud
· Prepare tasks for the
session to test the Figma
prototype of the
mobile puzzle game
· Prepare the setting,
make Figma prototype
available for the user
· Observe and collect
data real-time by taking notes
· Analyze the results
· Get insights into the
thinking process of the user
· Get real-time feedback
on the usability of
the mobile puzzle game
· Summary table
including the tasks given
to the users and the
observations of the tester
· Written conclusion
based on analyzing the results
Google Forms,
Microsoft Word,
Figma
Iteration 2
Requirements
Apply results of the
Thinking Aloud test
of the click-through
prototype
· Go through the results
of the Think Aloud testing
of the click-through prototype
· Categorize features in
the Design criteria table
(no change needed;
modification required;
remove from feature list)
· Update “Design criteria”
table and “User stories”
based on the results
(keep, delete or modify)
· Have an updated Design criteria
table considering the results
of the Thinking Aloud testing.
· Have the final User stories
· To have the final requirements
to develop the final app
· Updated “Design criteria”
table for the final
mobile puzzle game
including the final
features to implement
· Updated “User stories”
Microsoft Word
Implementation
Iterative Software
Development
· Choose feature from
“User stories” to work on
· Implement the feature
in the final
mobile puzzle game
· Test the feature
locally, remove bugs
· Repeat
· Achieve an optimal
mobile puzzle game
which includes the
user stories defined previously
· Ensure bug-free
application
· A working mobile puzzle game
implemented in Unity, including
all the features
listed in “User stories”
Unity, C#,
Firebase,
Microsoft Word
Testing and
Evaluation
Thinking Aloud
· Prepare tasks for
the session to test
the Unity
mobile puzzle game
· Prepare the setting,
make Unity application
accessible for the users
· Observe and collect
data real-time by
taking notes
· Analyze the results
and draw conclusion
· Get insights into the thinking
process of the user
· Get real-time feedback
on the usability of the
mobile puzzle game
· Summary table including
the tasks given to the users and
the observations of the tester
· Written conclusion
based on analyzing the results
Google Forms,
Microsoft Word,
Unity
System Usability
Scale (SUS)
· Prepare questionnaire
based on the oﬀicial
SUS scale
· Ask participants to
answer the questionnaire
after the Thinking Aloud
test session
· Analyze results
and draw conclusion
· Get feedback on the
final application’s usability
· Evaluate usability
on the SUS scale
· SUS survey results
in Google Forms
· A final SUS score
· Written conclusion
on the mobile puzzle
game’s usability
SUS survey,
Google Forms,
Unity
Apply results
of Thinking
Aloud and SUS
· Analyze the results
of the test session of
the mobile puzzle game
implemented in Unity
· Categorize features
based on their usability
in the app
(ok, modify, remove)
· Execute changes in
the app, based on
the categorized features
· Prepare the
mobile puzzle
game for deployment
· Evaluate the features
in the mobile puzzle game
considering their usability
· Update application based
on the users’ feedback, so
the final app provides a
great user experience
· Final, updated version
of the mobile puzzle
game built in Unity
Microsoft Word,
Unity
Table 3.2. Ideation - MVP Development
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Methods
paper presents a framework for evaluating and designing game design patterns
commonly called as ”achievements”. The results are based on empirical studies of
a variety of popular achievement systems. In addition to the framework, further
competitive competitor analysis is conducted in order to collect data on state-of-
the-art solutions.
User stories
A user story is the smallest unit of work in an agile framework.
It’s an end goal, not a feature, expressed from the software user’s perspective.
A user story is an informal, general explanation of a software feature written
from the perspective of the end user or customer. The purpose of a user story
is to articulate how a piece of work will deliver a particular value back to the
customer. User stories are a few sentences in simple language that outline the
desired outcome without going into detail [91].
Implementation
Paper prototyping (sketching)
Paper prototyping is a process where design
teams create paper representations of digital products to help them realize con-
cepts and test designs. They draw sketches or adapt printed materials and use
these low-fidelity screenshot samples to cheaply guide their designs and study
users’ reactions from early in projects [92]. This methodology is used to sketch
out the initial plans of the screens in the application.
Brainstorming
Brainstorming combines a relaxed, informal approach to prob-
lem solving with lateral thinking. It encourages people to come up with thoughts
and ideas that can, at first, seem a bit crazy. Some of these ideas can be crafted
into original, creative solutions to a problem, while others can spark even more
ideas [93]. Brainstorming is used in the present project to come up with unique
screen and feature arrangements.
Click-through prototyping
The purpose of the prototyping phase is to create
the initial clickable prototype of the core game and the achievement system.
High-fidelity prototypes are computer-based, and usually allow realistic (mouse-
keyboard) user interactions. These prototypes take the user and the designer as
close as possible to a true representation of the user interface. Using prototypes
in the early phase of the development process also helps to prevent critical UX
errors from implementation in the final product.
Testing and Evaluation
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Ideation
33
Thinking Aloud
The prototype(s) would be tested with the help of a quali-
tative method, namely the Thinking Aloud method [58], since that it has many
benefits, such as letting the designer discover what users really think about the
design and the features.
Their misconceptions can be noticed, which usually
turns into actionable redesign recommendations: when users misinterpret design
elements, the designer needs to change them before implementing the final appli-
cation. The tests would be conducted either in a physical or online setting with
the involvement of other DTU students, friend and family and the prototype is
built using the online UI prototyping framework, Figma.
3.1.2.2
Iteration 2 - Implementation
Requirements
Apply results of the Thinking Aloud test of the click-through proto-
type
After conducting a qualitative test on the click-through prototype of the
application, it is necessary to consider the learnings from the results of the eval-
uation and implement any crucial changes to the requirements of the application
before starting the development process.
Implementation
Iterative Development Process
In the implementation phase, the final ap-
plication is developed using the iterative development process [94] by following
the guidelines built by the high-fidelity prototype. Iterative development is a
software development approach that breaks the process of developing a large ap-
plication into smaller parts. Each part, called “iteration”, represents the whole
development process and contains planning, design, development, and testing
steps.
The final game would be built using the most popular game engine, Unity.
To test the application after each iteration, Thinking Aloud tests would be con-
ducted, which was introduced in Section 3.1.2.1.
Testing and Evaluation
Thinking Aloud and System Usability Scale(SUS)
Besides the qualita-
tive testing (Thinking Aloud), quantitative testing would be conducted, with the
help of the System Usability Scale (SUS) [54]. The System Usability Scale pro-
vides a quick, reliable tool for measuring the usability. It consists of a 10-item
questionnaire with five response options for respondents; from Strongly agree to
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Methods
Strongly disagree.
It allows the evaluation of a wide variety of products and
services, including hardware, software, mobile devices, websites and applications.
The tests would be conducted either in a physical or online setting with the
involvement of other DTU students, friend and family.
Apply results of Thinking Aloud and SUS
The Thinking Aloud evalua-
tion is a more thorough assessment than the one was made after implementing
the click-through prototype. Any concerns that could hinder execution of the ex-
periment (e.g. bug in the game) should be solved as soon as possible. The result
of the SUS assessment cannot be applied directly to the application, but can be
useful in the future, when the aim is to improve the usability of the application.
Although, the combination of the qualitative and the quantitative test gives a
good overview on the actual usability and on the possible reasons of bad usability
in the app.
3.2
Design & Execution
This phase is concerned with the creation and execution of the experiments.
Name
Protocol
Purpose
Outcome
Tools
Design
A/B testing
· Review Minimum Viable Hypothesis
which was defined in the beginning
of the project
· Make sure A and B versions of the
mobile puzzle game are separated and
are deployed individually
· Make sure participants are selected
randomly in both groups
· Decide duration of the A/B test
· Learn if there’s an impact on intrinsic
motivation of the players playing with
the version including an achievement
system which is customizable
· Player statistics on game
sessions (e.g. session length),
which provides additional data
for the hypothesis testing
Firebase, Unity
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory
(IMI)
· Select the “Perceived choice” and
“Interest/Enjoyment” subscales
from the inventory
· Prepare surveys including
the questions from the
“Perceived choice” and
“Interest/Enjoyment” subscales
· Get feedback on the extent of
the user’s feeling of free choice
and enjoyment in the
mobile puzzle game
· Measure the “Perceived choice”
variable used to test
the initial hypothesis
· Completed surveys about
perceived choice and
interest/enjoyment of the game
Google Forms,
Firebase
The Basic Psychological Need
Satisfaction and Frustration Scale
(BPNSFS)
· Select “Autonomy subscale”
from the scale
· Prepare survey including the
questions listed in the
“Autonomy subscale”
· Get an overview on users
’Autonomy satisfaction or
frustration in the mobile puzzle game
· Collect data for hypothesis testing
· Completed surveys about
perceived autonomy in the game
Google Forms,
Firebase
Likert-type scales
· Prepare surveys to assess
the player’s motivation for
future play and game rating
· Prepare questions as a
7-point Likert-type scale
· Get feedback on players’ motivation
for future play and game rating by
asking them to fill out a survey
including questions on a
7-point Likert-type scale
· Completed surveys about
players’ motivation for future
play and game rating
Google Forms,
Firebase
Net Promoter Score
· Create a survey including the question
“On a scale of 0 to 10 how likely is it
that you would recommend this game to a
friend or a colleague?”
· Get feedback on likeliness
of the players’ would recommend
this game to others
· Completed surveys about
game recommendation to
others including scores from 0 to 10
Google Forms
Execution
Online recruiting
· Write and share posts on DTU Inside,
social media platforms, and
online communities
· Describe the purpose
of the experiment
· Describe details of
experiment
· Provide contact information
Reach a broader audience,
therefore increasing the
volume of the collected data
· Participants contacting
the author to apply as a
tester of the game
Microsoft Word,
Social media
platforms,
Online
communities
Table 3.3. Experiment Design and Execution
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Design & Execution
35
3.2.1
Experiment Design
In the Experiment Design subphase the aim is to design the experiment by specify-
ing the customer segment in which the hypothesis will be evaluated and determine
the size and duration of the experiment. Typically, the targeted experiment start
date, number of variants, randomization units (for example users or devices), and
design (for example, A/B, multivariate, and so forth) are also defined.
3.2.1.1
A/B testing
A/B testing (also known as split testing or bucket testing) [56] is a method of
comparing two versions of a webpage or app against each other to determine
which one performs better. A/B testing is essentially an experiment where two
or more variants of an application are shown to users at random, and statistical
analysis is used to determine which variation performs better for a given conver-
sion goal. In the context of the present thesis, an A (control) and B (variant)
version of the game would be developed and released to test a version with static
achievement system (control) against the version with customizable achievement
system (variant).
The control version of the application could be a version containing no achieve-
ments, but that would involve the factor of the presence of the achievements,
therefore would not work as a benchmark for the hypothesis testing. Therefore,
the control (A) version is game including static achievements, and the variant (B)
version is expanded with the customizable feature. That way, the main factor
- achievements being customizable - can be tested more effectively, and reduces
the number of variables to one.
3.2.1.2
Survey design
In order to successfully test the stated hypothesis, scales defined by CSDT can
be used, several surveys are available on the oﬀicial website for academic use. To
test the hypothesis, the following dependent variables have to be measured with
the listed methods. The surveys would be presented to the users as a post-test
questionnaire.
• Autonomy satisfaction and frustration:
– Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) [59] - Perceived Choice subscale
– The Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction and Frustration Scale (BP-
NSFS) [60] - Autonomy subscale
• Game enjoyment: Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) - Interest/Enjoy-
ment subscale
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Methods
• Motivation for future play: 3-item survey revised based on [4], and
applied by [7] including ”Given the chance I would play this game in my
free time”, ”I would like to spend more time playing this game” and ”I
would like to continue playing this game”. Participants rated the above
three items on a 7-point scale anchored by 1 (strongly disagree) and 7
(strongly agree).
• Game recommendation to others: Calculating the Net Promoter Score
based on the responses given to the following question: ”On a scale of 0
to 10, how likely is it that you would recommend this game to a friend or
colleague?”.
• Game rating: 7-point scale anchored by 1 (describes the game poorly) and
7 (describes the game very well) on the following adjectives: boring (reverse-
coded), exciting, enjoyable, entertaining, fun, interesting and pleasant.
To equally evaluate the dependent variables, the same scales will be used in
both versions.
3.2.2
Experiment Execution
Once the experiment starts, the monitoring starts to detect any large degradation
and also the feedback coming from the users processed continuously.
3.2.2.1
Selecting participants
The selection process of participants for the hypothesis testing would include
recruitment through social media platforms, DTU Inside (university information-
sharing platform) and online communities in order to reach out to a broader
community.
3.2.2.2
Procedure
The experiment takes place in an online settings and it is not real-time. During
the recruitment process, the audience received the instructions that should be
followed when participating in the experiment.
First, the participants has to
own and Anroid device in order to contribute to the experiment. The developed
application must be downloaded from Google Play [95]. It is required to user the
application for at least 10 minutes, making sure the participant gets familiar with
the game and the features. After spending at least 10 minutes in the application,
the in-game evaluation system must be opened and the survey must be filled out
and submitted. Participating in the experiment is not mandatory, the required
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Analysis & Learning
37
10 minutes is not measured, and the participants always has the option to leave
the application and do not fill out the survey. The users participate anonymously.
3.3
Analysis & Learning
In the analysis and learning phase, experiments are evaluated, and the learnings
from them are institutionalized.
Name
Protocol
Purpose
Outcome
Tools
Analysis of Results
Hypothesis testing
· Step 1: State the research hypothesis (H0);
develop the hypothesis on the effect of a
player-defined achievement
system on the users’
intrinsic motivation
· Step 2: Collect data about
game enjoyment,
intrinsic motivation, game rating etc.
· Step 3: Perform a statistical test
to check whether
the difference between the application’s
A and B versions is statistically significant
· Step 4: Decide whether
to reject or fail to reject your null hypothesis.
· To investigate the idea of
player-defined
achievement system
in a mobile puzzle game
using statistics
· Results of the statistical test
· Written conclusion on the
rejection or
acceptance of the hypothesis
Microsoft Excel,
Microsoft Word
Institutionalization
Apply results of
Hypothesis testing
· Review results of the
hypothesis testing
· Decide whether to keep
the player-defined achievement system
in the game or not
· Keep the right version of the
final application
(with or without the player-defined
achievement system)
· Finalize the research on
whether a player-defined
achievement would
increase intrinsic
motivation of players
to play the game
· Final mobile puzzle game
in Unity including the
feature increased
motivation to play better
(static or player-defined
achievement system)
Unity,
Microsoft Word
Table 3.4. Methods in Analysis and Learning
3.3.1
Analysis of Results and Decision Making
When the statistical power of the MVH is fulfilled, the experiment is analyzed.
The metrics are computed and analyzed for statistically significant changes. Specif-
ically, success criteria of the MVH are compared to the actual experiment out-
come, and a decision is made whether the experiment was successful and which
variant won.
3.3.2
Hypothesis testing
To evaluate the results of the surveys the hypothesis testing procedure would be
used [69], the formulated hypothesis acting as the null hypothesis, and following
statement as the alternative hypothesis:
Ha: The additional autonomy-supportive feature (customizable achieve-
ment system) will not increase players’ a) need satisfaction for auton-
omy, b) enjoyment, c) motivation for future play d) game recommen-
dation to others, e) rating of the game.
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Methods
The results will be assessed with a two-sample, one-tailed statistical t-test,
because the assessed groups come from different population and the question is
whether the population mean is greater then or less than the other.
3.3.3
Institutionalizing Learning
The impact of experimentation should extend beyond the decision on which vari-
ant of the experiment to deploy. By learning which type of changes influence the
key success metrics and by how much, the prioritization in the Ideation phase is
reconsidered, and the cycle restarts with the next experiment in the queue based
on the learnings obtained. Due to the lack of time and resources, the present
thesis incorporates one cycle only, thus the project ends with decision making
and drawing the conclusion.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter gives an overview of the outcome of the experiments and the results
collected in each phase.
4.1
Ideation
The development process starts with the Ideation phase, which includes the gen-
eration of the minimum viable hypothesis and the development of the minimum
viable product, which is the mobile puzzle application, called SET Challenge in
the scope of the present thesis.
4.1.1
MVH Generation
The first step of the Ideation phase is to define the hypothesis. The hypothesis
is build based on the research conducted in the beginning of the project. The
relevant research findings are introduced in Chapter 2. With the support of the
scientific background introduced earlier, the following null hypothesis is formu-
lated:
H0: The additional autonomy-supportive feature (player-defined achieve-
ment system) will increase players’ a) need satisfaction for autonomy,
b) enjoyment, c) motivation for future play d) game recommendation
to others, e) rating of the game.
And the corresponding alternative hypothesis:
Ha: The additional autonomy-supportive feature (customizable achieve-
ment system) will not increase players’ a) need satisfaction for auton-
omy, b) enjoyment, c) motivation for future play d) game recommen-
dation to others, e) rating of the game.
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Results
4.1.2
MVP Development
The Minimum Viable Product Development phase consists of two main iterations.
By the end of the first iteration, a click-through, interactive prototype has been
developed, which is as a guideline for the second iteration, in which the main goal
is to develop the actual mobile game, the minimum viable product. The below
subsections describe the results of these iterations.
4.1.2.1
Iteration 1 - Application Design
The main goal of the first iteration was to define the requirements needed to
build the design criteria table, which can be used as a guideline later to design
and develop the application.
Requirements
In the first subphase of the first iteration, two methods were applied, the Competi-
tor analysis and the Application of the Framework for Designing and Evaluating
Game Achievements. Both are described in detail in Chapter 2. The results of
these methods are described below.
Competitor analysis
The competitor analysis included a great selection of
mobile puzzle games which can be categorized into two main groups: SET games,
that are - similarly to the game developed in this project - digital representations
of the original card game, following the original rule set. That does not mean
they do not show anything new, there’s a great variety of additional features
in these games, e.g.
multiplayer mode, hints, timer etc.
Other than mobile
SET games, further mobile puzzle games were examined. All of these games fall
into the puzzle game genre, meaning the player’s goal is to solve a set of logical
problems in order to advance in the game.
As these type of games have the
same player perspective as SET, a great selection of these games were considered
as potential competitors and were included in the analysis. Overall, 27 mobile
puzzle games, and 10 SET games were included in the analysis and were played
with in approximately 30 minutes long sessions.
Mobile Puzzle Games
In order to select the games to be analysed, the available games under the
’Puzzle’ category on Google Play [95] were explored. Popularity, theme and the
number of downloads were considered before adding a game to the list. The full
list of the mobile puzzle games analysed is shown in Table D.1 in Appendix D.
During the analysis, several parameters of a particular game were analyzed.
The parameters are the columns of the competitor analysis table.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Ideation
41
• Hints The fact that a game included hints or not was noted down, and if yes,
the nature and the effects of the hint is described too. Hints are common
features in puzzle games as they help to get through the frustration caused
by the diﬀicult tasks. According to the analysis, 12 games did not include
hints at all, 6 included, but the hints were not free, i.e. players have to
pay for it with either in-game or real currency. In the rest of the games,
either the player has the option to use hints or the hint is integrated in the
game-play, meaning, when the player is clearly stuck, the game suggests
the right solution for the particular puzzle.
Since most of analyzed the games contained hints as a feature, and the
presence of hints eases the solving process for the player, hints were added
to the final game as well.
• Tutorial The second aspect to examine was to check whether the game
contained an integrated tutorial or not, and if yes, what kind. 10 games
did not include a tutorial at all. Out of the remaining 17, 11 tutorials were
interactive and was mandatory to complete it when first opening the app.
These tutorials for example included instructions on game mechanics and
rules, these could be practiced by completing the predefined tasks in the
tutorial. The rest of the games also included a tutorial section, although it
was static text, describing the rules and mechanics. In almost all cases, the
tutorial section was accessible from the game-play area in the application,
so that the player had the option to check the rules again while playing.
Based on the analysis, a complete tutorial section has been added to the
game, which is accessible during game-play as well and is interactive, so it
eases the learning of the rules.
• Points/Stars The presence of points was analyzed, because points are
considered extrinsic rewards given to the player for completing a puzzle
for example. Interestingly, 18 of the games incorporated a reward system,
usually by rewarding the player with points/stars/trophies after finishing
the game. These rewards contribute to the overall performance of the player
and helps them to advance on a public leader board or leads them to further
rewards/collectibles after reaching certain number of points/stars. The rest
of the games did not implement any reward system, players just play the
game for the sake of playing and problem solving. Also, 1 game instead of
giving out points, rewarded the players with in-game currency, which then
can be spent in the in-game shop. Overall, the results show that including
a reward system in a puzzle game is quite common.
Since the aim of the present study is to analyse the effect of the lack of
an extrinsic reward system on the player’s motivation, no rewards were
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Results
implemented in the final game.
After completing a game, the player is
informed on their performance, but does not receive any reward at the end
of the game.
• Punishment Including punishment in games as a reaction to unwanted
behaviour is also a common practice (e.g. losing lives when making a mis-
take). According to the analysis, this is not true for the puzzle game genre.
Out of the 27 games, 23 did not use any punishment practices during their
game-play, and the rest of them implemented common practices, e.g. minus
lives/points.
Since it is not typical to punish players in puzzle games, the final game does
not include any punishment either.
• Positive feedback / Motivational message Motivational messages help
the player getting through their struggles during a diﬀicult puzzle. Also, re-
ceiving positive feedback after completing a level, it keeps them motivated
and felt appreciated for their hard work. Despite the benefits of provid-
ing positive feedback to the players, 20 games did not include any positive
feedback. 7 of the games included motivational messages, e.g. after com-
pleting an achievement, completing the tutorial or after finishing a level.
These messages included for example: ’Precisely!’, ’Good job, the tutorial
is done!’, ’Genius!’ etc.
Although this feature is not a popular addition to puzzle games, it was
added to the final game, as it won’t hinder the player’s motivation for sure,
and it might even to increase their motivation to play.
• Game modes Game modes are different varieties of the base game. Usually
they vary in diﬀiculty, layout, rules etc. 13 games only included one game
mode, 7 games included diﬀiculty or time-based modes (the player has to
solve the puzzle as fast as possible. The remaining games had their unique
games modes implemented. E.g. interestingly 2 of the games included a
creation mode, where players have the option to build their own puzzles
and share with others. That is a useful information for creating the player
defined achievement feature in the final game as that is a ’creation mode’
in a way as well, with the difference that it is for achievements, not puzzles.
Considering the fact that game modes are not necessary to execute the
experiment on the player-defined achievement system, there was no extra
game mode implemented in the final game.
• Autonomy Another aspect of the analysis was to collect the type of anatomy
supportive features of the different mobile puzzle games. The most com-
mon feature is the ’Settings’ which lets the user to customize the game-play
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Ideation
43
and in some cases, the user interface. Generally, the user has the option
to adjust the sound, color, language and has the option to reset the game.
Being able to switch between different game modes is also considered an
autonomy supportive feature, as well as the presence of a ’creation mode’ in
the game, because creating a puzzle from scratch, which is fully customized
is a highly autonomy supportive feature. 2 of the applications allowed the
user to define their own achievements (Level up life, Achievement Game),
but these applications were particularly focused on achievement creation
and completion and did not include any other game elements, therefore
helping the users complete their custom in-life goals.
As the present thesis is about examining an autonomy supportive feature,
naturally, the player-defined achievement system was implemented as an
autonomy-supportive feature. Furthermore, a ’Settings’ section was added
to the game, which gives the player the option to customize the game-play
area, e.g. hiding the timer, hiding the number of hints used etc.
• Achievements Another important feature to investigate in these games
was the presence of Achievements. It is a common practice in mobile game
development to have an external Achievement system implemented through
the Google Play API. That means, there’s no Achievement is present in
the actual game, but they are accessible through the player’s Google Play
account, which requires internet connection while playing (usually there’s
a link to the external Achievements from the game). Of course, most of
these can be played without internet access, but the Achievements are not
accessible in this case. 4 of the games included Achievements in Google
Play, and 9 games implemented their own Achievement System. The rest
of the games did not include Achievements at all.
We can also differentiate between dynamic and static Achievements.
A
static Achievement System includes Achievements that are pre-defined and
are visible for the player from the beginning (in some cases, not all of the
Achievements are visible, but can be unlocked after completing another
Achievement). In a dynamic system, new Achievements are generated by
the game periodically, e.g. each day/week etc. The option to create cus-
tom Achievements is only available in the achievement-base applications
(Level up life, Achievement Game). In Level up life there are predefined
Achievements as well, which gives an idea to the user about the type of
Achievements that can be created.
The Achievements are either progress related or ’feature discovery’ related.
The latter types are present in games to encourage players to discover dif-
ferent functions or components of the game (e.g. Purchase anything in the
shop, Complete the tutorial). The former ones are there to measure the
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Results
player’s progress and performance in the game. For example, ’Complete X
levels’, ’Rotate a block 10 times’, ’Score X points’.
The structure of these Achievements vary a lot. The more complex ones
have all the elements required by the Framework by [48], i.e. Name, Visual,
Description, Completion criteria and Reward. Although, most the Achieve-
ments only include the Name and the Reward, which is given to the player
after completing the Achievement.
Based on the above results, the final Achievement system has the following
functions/properties incorporated: Option to add new, custom Achieve-
ment; Achievements can be deleted; Pre-defined Achievements, so the user
has an idea how an Achievement can be possibly defined. An individual
Achievement element consist of: Name, Diﬀiculty and Progress. There’s no
extrinsic reward given to the player after completing an Achievement. Thus,
when an Achievement is being completed, the user is notified immediately
by a popup showing which Achievement has just been completed, also, the
particular Achievement is moved under the Completed Achievements from
the In progress category. This visual indication of the completion of the
Achievement gives the player the intrinsic reward, namely, that the Achieve-
ment has been completed by them. More details on the features of the final
Achievement system is described in Section 4.1.2.1.
• Player statistics Finally, the presence of player statistics in the game was
examined.
The reason why this feature was analyzed is to determine if
there’s a need for such a feature in a mobile puzzle game or not. 24 of
the games did not include player statistics, and the rest of the games listed
personal statistics, such as mistakes made per game, average completion
time etc.
Since it is important to be able to reflect on past performance to master
a skill - playing SET with regard to the present study - a player statistics
section was included in the final game, despite the lack of this function in
other puzzle games.
Table D.1 in Appendix D includes the data collected during the analysis
and gives an overview of the examined games and applications from the above
perspectives.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Ideation
45
SET Games
As SET Games is very specific in the mobile puzzle game category, only 10
games were analyzed in the scope of the competitor analysis. During the analysis,
the same features were considered as for the generic mobile puzzle games, with
one additional aspect: ’Additional features’.
• Hints Half of the games did not include hints at all. The other 5 games all
had the type of hint which highlights a valid SET (3 cards) on the table.
One of the games included the option to gradually highlight the SET (1
card at a time), so the player still have chance to experience the feeling of
success of finding a SET. In all cases the hints could be used up for free,
but in one case using a hint would cause a decrease in the overall points.
Seeing that using hints in SET games is a common practice, reinforced the
decision about including hints in the final game.
• Tutorial Two of the games did not include any instructions on how to play
the game. The remaining eight games all included the rules, six of them
in a static text format, and two games implemented an interactive tutorial
section in the application. In the case of SET, it is crucial to include at least
a static text explaining the rule set, otherwise players might get frustrated
by not knowing how to play and succeed in the game.
The interactive
tutorials were both implemented in a way that the player’s task was to find
the card which completes 2 card and thus forms a valid SET. By having
2 predefined cards and finding the missing one helps understanding the
patterns and rules of the game.
The above finding on the interactive tutorials in SET games helped to decide
on the exact features of the tutorial section in the final application. The
tutorial includes a static text describing the rules and demonstrating them
on valid and invalid examples, but the player also has the option to move
forward to the interactive tutorial where the task is to complete 2 cards
with the last one thus forming a valid SET. Further explanation is given
specific to that certain combination of cards, why or why not the given trio
forms a SET or not.
• Points/Stars Interestingly, almost all of the games had an incorporated
reward system (except for one game), giving points based on the number
of SETs found in a game. One of the games considered the speed of finding
a SET as a factor as well. These scores were used then to place a player on
a public (including external players) or a private leader board.
As the present study omits the implementation of an extrinsic reward sys-
tem - despite the tendency of including such a system in SET games - it is
not included in the final game.
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Results
• Punishment Seven games does not use any punishments in any form, the
other games punish the player by decreasing the score when making a mis-
take or using a hint.
Due to the reasons listed in Section 4.1.2.1 and the unpopularity of including
punishment in SET games, there no such feature is implemented in the final
game either.
• Positive feedback/motivational messages Only one game used positive
reinforcement, specifically when the player found all the SETs in a game:
’Found All SETs!’.
As positive feedback does not demotivate players to play with a game, thus
they act as a great addition, positive messages are added to the final game
as well. Players are confronted with these messages every time they finish a
game session, as well as when they guessed the correct card in the interactive
tutorial.
• Game modes Surprisingly, eight of the analysed SET games have multiple
game modes implemented. In four cases, the user has the option to choose
between single-player and multi-player mode.
This might be a popular
addition as the original card game is a multi-player family game, thus can be
enjoyed the best when playing with others. The rest of the games provides
choices between speed-based modes and modes where the player plays with
less cards than in the normal game.
All of these additions are great extensions to the main game, and can be
considered and potential additions in the future, but in the current scope of
the thesis it is not necessary to implement different game modes, therefore,
the final application only includes the base game with one mode, where the
goal is to find all SETs in the deck as fast as possible.
• Autonomy Five out of the ten games includes autonomy supportive fea-
tures and those are all Settings related features, such as changing the screen
orientation, customizing the theme, set sound or the color of the cards.
None of the settings found in these games are implemented in the final game
as they are not necessary features to add at the moment, but can be good
additions in the future. The autonomy supportive features included in the
final application are still the same, as described before in Section 4.1.2.1.
• Achievements Only one of the games included Achievements, and these
were defined in the game’s Achievement System defined in Google Play.
Achievements were listed such as Get a score of X within the first Y minutes
of the game in Z mode, Find X SETs in Y mode, Find X kinds of SETs in
a row etc.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Ideation
47
The above Achievements acted as inspiration for defining the type of Achieve-
ments to include in the final game. The list of Achievments are described
in Section 4.1.2.1.
• Player statistics Statistics is quite common to include in SET games, five
games included statistics either displaying it after finishing the game or
having a separate section for it in the application. Statistics include best
time, hints used, total games played, world record etc.
The statistics implemented in the final game is designed based on the player
statistics available in these games. Therefore, the final application keeps
track of the player’s best time, time played in total, number of SETs found
in total, average mistakes made per game, average hints used in a game etc.
Having statistics gives insight to the user on their performance and lets the
player to reflect on it in order to improve their skills in the future.
• Additional features The last aspect analysed of SET games was addi-
tional features, that are additions to the original game.
Some of these
features are included in the final game as well, such as showing the remain-
ing number of cards in the deck; the elapsed time; pause; deal new cards;
number of SETs on the table; shuffle etc.
Table E.1 in Appendix E summarizes the data and findings of the ten SET
mobile games analyzed.
To conclude, the competitor analysis was essential to assess the market solu-
tions in the mobile puzzle game genre. The analysis highly contributed to the
Application Design by helping to decide the final features to be included in the
application. Without the competitor analysis, important features, such as adding
an interactive tutorial, would have been skipped from the development process,
but the analysis highlighted the importance of such a features to be included in
a mobile puzzle game.
Apply Framework for Designing and Evaluating Game Achievements
As described earlier in Section 2.2.1, a Framework has been developed by Hamari
et al., which is used as a guideline to design and evaluate game achievements.
Defining the requirements for a single achievement, as well as defining the re-
quirements for the whole Achievement System in the game is essential before
starting the implementation phase. By following the rules of the Framework, a
single Achievement game in the final game element builds up as follows:
• Signifier: Name, Progress, Diﬀiculty
• Completion logic: Different for each type of achievements
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Results
• Reward: The reward is the completion of the Achievement itself, mean-
ing, the reward is the ’Achievement Game’ as described in the Framework.
There are no in-game or out-game rewards (e.g. points) are given to the
player after completing an Achievement.
In both versions of the game, there are predefined Achievements presented to
the player, and in Version B, the player has the option to add further Achieve-
ments to the list.
In order to ease the creation of a custom Achievement in
the game, the player is allowed to select from predefined Achievement templates.
These templates contain variables, that can be set by the user depending on the
specific goal they are aiming for. The following templates for custom Achieve-
ments are available in the game, where X, Y and Z represent the variables that
are defined by the player:
• Complete X game(s) using maximum Y hint(s)
• Complete X game(s) in Y minute(s) and Z second(s)
• Find X SET(s) within the first Y second(s) in Z game(s)
• Complete X game(s) without shuffling the cards
• Find X SET(s) with Y different properties in total
• Complete X game(s) with maximum Y mistake(s)
• Find X SET(s) in a row without making a mistake or using hints
• Complete X game(s) in a row using maximum Y hint(s)
The in-game Achievement system includes both the static Achievements and
the ones defined by the player. These elements are grouped into two categories:
In progress and Completed.
The finalized criteria to build Achievement elements in the game is listed in
Section 4.1.2.1.
Complete Design Criteria of SET Challenge
Combining the results of
the competitor analysis and the application of Hamari’s framework results in a
Design criteria table, that is used later as guideline to design and build the appli-
cation. The table indicates the must-have, nice-to-have and won’t have features
of the application. These features are listed for both the Core game and the
Achievements.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Ideation
49
Core game -
Must-have features
- interactive tutorial
- positive feedback/
motivational messages
- hint (free)
- optional timer during the game
- no punishment if a wrong
SET is selected
- player statistics
- timed and non-timed mode
- indicator how many cards are
left from the deck
- pause timed game
- shuffle cards on the table (free)
- restart game
- auto-deal cards when no
SET is left on the table
- game ends automatically
when no more SETs are available
Core game -
Nice-to-have features
- optional explanation on why the
selected three cards form or not
form a SET
- diﬀiculty levels (+ option to set them)
- share/publish the player-defined
achievements, to challenge
others (at the same time they
challenge themselves too, because
they have to “unlock/complete”
it before sharing.
- option to like the achievements
made by others
- option to browse achievements
made by others
- option to see how many people
completed your achievement
- add puzzles too (the player does
not have to play through a full
game), in different sizes? (12, 15, 18 etc)
- achievements in 2 categories: in
progress/completed
- info button on the achievement to
see more details
- option to instantly create an achievement,
when you “accidentally”
achieve something outstanding (e.g.
new best time)
- showing how many SETs are
available on the table (maybe only in
easy mode, if there are diﬀiculty levels)
- show world record (e.g. best time)
- terms and conditions (+accept)
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Results
Table 4.1 continued from previous page
Core game -
Must-have features
- interactive tutorial
- positive feedback/
motivational messages
- hint (free)
- optional timer during the game
- no punishment if a wrong
SET is selected
- player statistics
- timed and non-timed mode
- indicator how many cards are
left from the deck
- pause timed game
- shuffle cards on the table (free)
- restart game
- auto-deal cards when no
SET is left on the table
- game ends automatically
when no more SETs are available
Core game -
Won’t have features
- hint pops up automatically after a
couple of idle seconds (player might
feel pushed)
- daily puzzles/challenges (“forces”
them to come back each day)
- ranking/leaderboard
- fixed amount of achievements
- collectibles
- new goals daily
- characters (involves relatedness,
which might hinder the results)
- power-ups
- “star” rating after completing a
game (1, 2, 3 stars)
- gradually introduce functionalities
Core game –
Autonomy-supportive
features in the analyzed
games
- UI customization (background,
colors, avatar etc.)
- diﬀiculty setting
- option to add plus cards any time
- option to use the hint freely any time
- in-game creator mode to build your
own puzzles and share them
(could be a good inspiration for
achievements too)
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Ideation
51
Table 4.1 continued from previous page
Core game -
Must-have features
- interactive tutorial
- positive feedback/
motivational messages
- hint (free)
- optional timer during the game
- no punishment if a wrong
SET is selected
- player statistics
- timed and non-timed mode
- indicator how many cards are
left from the deck
- pause timed game
- shuffle cards on the table (free)
- restart game
- auto-deal cards when no
SET is left on the table
- game ends automatically
when no more SETs are available
Achievements -
Must-have features
- in-game Achievement System
- create custom Achievements
- achievement name, diﬀiculty, and
progress as signifier
- initial Achievements, so the player
already has some goals defined
Achievements -
Nice-to-have features
- choose achievements you want to
set as your current goal
- info button on the achievement to
see more details
Achievements -
Won’t have features
- rewards (e.g., in-game coins)
- the achievements published in
Google Play, not in the actual
game (similarly to PC games)
- Validation based on honor system
(the game logic determines
whether the Achievement really has
been completed or not)
Table 4.1.
Design criteria based on the results of the competitor analysis and the
Framework for Designing and Evaluating Game Achievements
The above table serves the purpose of acting as a guideline when building the user
stories for the application. The required features were determined by the results of the
competitor analysis and the application of the Framework for Designing and Evaluating
Game Achievements.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Results
User stories
The last step of the first iteration is to define the user stories based
on the previously defined Design criteria table. Having the user stories ready gives a
clear idea on how the application should work and how the users should experience the
interactions.
The user stories are defined in a table format (see Table 4.2), and follow the general
structure of user stories (As a..., I want to..., So that...).
Defining the user stories
provides an insight behind the required features, why are they beneficial from a user
point of view.
As...
I want to...
So that...
Gameplay related features
As a player
I want to start a new game
So that I can play SET
I want to use a hint
So that I can proceed in the
game when I am stuck
I want to shuffle the cards
So that I can see the
board from a fresh
perspective
I want to be able to navigate
directly to the settings
from the game
So that I can customize
the gameplay without
losing my progress
I want to pause the game
So that I can
take a break while playing
I want to see the number
of cards left in the deck
So that I can estimate
when the this game session
will end
I want to deal more cards
So that I have a bigger
selection of cards on the table
I want to be able to navigate
directly to the
rules during gameplay
So that I can understand
better the game mechanics
when I get confused during
the game
I want to be aware that
there’s no more SETs
left on the table
So that I do not search
for more unnecessarily
I want to be notified
when the game ends
So that I know that
I do not have to search
for more SETs and
finished the game
I want to be able to
exit the game
So that I do not
have to finish a
game to go back
to the main menu
Achievements related features
As a player
I want to see my
completed achievements
So that I can reflect on
my results in the game so far
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Ideation
53
Table 4.2 continued from previous page
As...
I want to...
So that...
I want to see my
achievements in progress
So that I can see what to
aim for while playing
I want to see a couple
of achievements when
I first open the app
So that I do not have
to create a custom
achievement
if I don’t want to
I want to add new
achievements to the game
So that I can set
my custom goals
in the game
I want to be able to select
from achievement templates
when creating a new
achievement
So that I do not have
to create one from scratch,
which would feel
overwhelming
I want to be able to customize
the values in the achievement
template
So that I can setup
my own personal goals
I want to see the estimated
diﬀiculty my custom achievement
So that I have an idea
how diﬀicult it will
be to complete the
particular custom achievment
I want to delete my
custom achievement
So that I can remove an
achievement if I don’t
want to accomplish it anymore
I want to be notified
immediately when I
complete an achievement
So that I know
immediately why I
succeeded in the game
Tutorial related features
As a player
I want to get information
about the rules
So that I learn the rules and
can play the game eﬀiciently
I want to practice finding
SETs before starting
a real game
So that I can practice the rules
before playing the real game
Statistics related features
As a player
I want to see my personal
statistics in the app
So that I know in which areas
should I improve my skills
Settings related features
As a player
I want to be able to hide
the timer during the game
So that I do not feel
pressured by the time
while playing
I want to be able see
the current number of
SETs on the table
So that I know for
sure that my search
for SETs is not pointless
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Results
Table 4.2 continued from previous page
As...
I want to...
So that...
General features
As a player
I want to get back to
the main menu regardless
where am I in the app
So that I do not get
confused during the
navigation in the app
Table 4.2. User stories
Implementation
In the implementation phase, the previously defined requirements
were put into effect and were used to design the user interface. User experience principles
(e.g. Gestalt principles) and mobile application layout best practices (e.g. placement
of the back button) were considered during the design process.
Firstly, sketches/paper prototypes of the possible screens were made. 8 components
were designed in total: Menu, Tutorial, Practice, Achievements overview, Add Achieve-
ment, Statistics, Settings, Gameplay.
Secondly, these paper prototypes were implemented in Figma resulting in a click-
through prototype of the application. The designed interfaces incorporated the main
features to be developed, so that it can act as a guideline during the coding in the
second iteration.
The comparison between the sketches and the implemented Figma wireframes are
shown on Figure B.1. There are slight differences between the implement UI elements on
the prototypes, but otherwise the Figma prototype is a great higher level representation
of the paper sketches. The link to the Figma prototype can be found in Appendix A.
Testing and Evaluation
In order to discover any bad UX patterns in the app
and to assess whether the overall idea and navigaion is clear to the user, a Thinking
Aloud test was conducted with 3 participants. The participants were introduced to the
application and were asked to complete specific tasks by interacting with the Figma
prototype. An individual session lasted for about 15 minutes and was conducted online
in all cases. The results of the Thinking Aloud test are shown in Appendix C.
To conclude the test results, the navigation was straightforward in the app for all
of the users and had no comments, other than questioning the presence of custom
achievements.
Not all the users found it as a good idea to include in the app.
Of
course, this feature cannot be emitted as it is the backbone of the study, thus the list
of features to be implemented remain the same. Table 4.3 shows the final feature list
to be implemented.
Core game
Screen
Feature
Type
Menu
Provide navigation
between different screens
Additional feature
to the original game
Information about
the game
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Ideation
55
Table 4.3 continued from previous page
Core game
Give general feedback
on the game
Report bug
Tutorial
Navigate back to
the Menu
Additional feature
to the original game
Text representation
of the rules
Original feature
Navigate to the
Practice screen
Additional feature
to the original game
Select card from
3 options
Additional feature
to the original game
Get another puzzle
to solve
Additional feature
to the original game
Navigate back to
the Rules
Additional feature
to the original game
Navigate to the
Game play screen
Additional feature
to the original game
Explanation text on
the reason why
or why not the selected
combination was correct
Additional feature
to the original game
Visual feedback on correct
and incorrect solutions
Additional feature
to the original game
Statistics
Clear statistics
Additional feature
to the original game
Table representation of
the player statistics
Back to the Menu
Settings
Switch ‘Show timer’
Additional feature
to the original game
Switch ‘Show number of
SETs on the table’
Switch ‘Show hints used’
Switch ‘Show shuffles used’
Switch ‘Auto deal when no
SETs are available’
Reset Game
Play
Table with 12 starting cards
Original feature
Timer is visible
Additional feature
to the original game
Show remaining cards
in the deck
Original feature
Show number of found SETs
Original feature
Show number of SETs present
on the table currently
Additional feature
to the original game
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Results
Table 4.3 continued from previous page
Core game
Show number of hints used
Additional feature
to the original game
Option to use hint
Additional feature
to the original game
Highlight cards marked by
the hint used
Additional feature
to the original game
Option to shuffle the cards
Original feature
Select a card
Original feature
Deselect a card
Original feature
Remove cards from the table
when they were correctly
marked as a SET by the player
Original feature
Deal 3 cards when there is
no SET on the table
Additional feature
to the original game
Option for the user to deal 3 cards
Original feature
Deal 3 cards when a SET has
been found by the player
Original feature
Visual feedback on incorrectly
selected SET
Additional feature
to the original game
Pause the game
Original feature
Pause overlay over the game
when it is paused
Additional feature
to the original game
Navigate to the Tutorial screen
Additional feature
to the original game
Navigate to the Settings screen
Additional feature
to the original game
Navigate to the Menu
Additional feature
to the original game
Confirmation before leaving
the game
Additional feature
to the original game
Save the progress if the user
leaves the game
Additional feature
to the original game
Option to continue the game
in progress later
Additional feature
to the original game
Achievements
See below
Achievement System
Screen
Feature
Type
Overview
Overview of Achievements In progress
Additional feature
to the original game
Overview of Unlocked Achievements
Back to the Menu
Navigate to ‘Add Achievement’ screen
Add
Achievement
Choose Achievement
Additional feature
to the original game
Move to next step
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Ideation
57
Table 4.3 continued from previous page
Core game
Define values of the Achievement
Accept and create Achievement with
the defined values and the assigned
diﬀiculty level
Navigate back to the previous step
Achievement game element
Achievement
System
- Overview
Show name
Additional feature
to the original game
Show diﬀiculty level
Show progress
Delete custom Achievement
Differentiate between
‘In progress’ and ‘Unlocked’
Achievements
Change color when changing state
Table 4.3. Final list of features to be included in the game
4.1.2.2
Iteration 2 - Game development
In the second iteration, the previously defined features were translated into a mobile
puzzle game using Unity and C#. Since the development process is not relevant from
the present thesis’ perspective, it will not be described in detail, but the main highlights
will be emphasised.
Requirements
Based on the results of the qualitative evaluation of the click-through prototype, there
was no need to change anything on the feature list (see Table 4.3). That means that the
development process followed the structure of the feature list and the main components
were implemented in Unity one by one.
Since the final application serves as the subject for the hypothesis testing and data
collection, an additional component is required to be added to the game: an in-game
evaluation system. The evaluation component must include the survey to be filled out
by the players during the evaluation phase.
Implementation
In order develop the game, the name of the application has to be defined. The name
should be explanatory and appropriate, and the app involves both the original game
SET and a unique feature - the player defined achievement system, therefore, the name
of the application became SET Challenge.
During the Implementation phase, the user stories, the final feature list and the
click-through prototype were used as visual and textual guidelines. The development
process followed a component-based structure under the methodology of the iterative
development process, which started with the main component of the app: Gameplay. It
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Results
is important to note, that the certain component of the application were not evaluated
individually, but the application was assessed as a whole at the end of the development
process.
Core game
The developed core game - the actual application without the Achieve-
ment System - is introduced below by listing the main building blocks / components of
the game and presenting their corresponding screens and summarized tables with the
list of features and their short descriptions.
• Menu The purpose of the Menu component is to provide an entry point to all
the other components in the applications.
This is the first screen the user is
navigated after entering the application. Below are the screens that belong to the
Menu component and the list of implemented features in the component.
Figure 4.1. Screenshots of the Menu component in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Navigate to the
Gameplay screen
Option to navigate to the Gameplay screen
and decide to start a new game or continue
the game in progress
Navigate to the
Achievements screen
Option to navigate to the Achievements
screen and get an overview
Navigate to the
Statistics screen
Option to navigate to the Statistics screen
and get an overview on
performance in the game
Navigate to the
Tutorial screen
Option to navigate to the Tutorial screen and
get information on the rules of the game
Navigate to the
Settings screen
Option to navigate to the Settings screen
and personalize the game
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Ideation
59
Table 4.4 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Open the In-game
evaluation system
Option to navigate to the integrated
experiment survey from the Menu.
A popup window opens before navigating
to the actual screen, explaining the aim of
the experiment and the prerequisites of filling
out the survey. The player has the option to
close the window and do the survey later or they
can choose the option to navigate forward to the
questionnaire.
Get information
on the application
Get a short description of the game in a popup
window and the authors of SET, also
there’s an option to navigate forward
onto other popup windows,
e.g. General Feedback and Report bug
Give general feedback
on the application
Popup window with free-text field, so
the player can send feedback
on the game and their
experience with the game to the developer
Report a bug
Popup window with free-text field, so the
player can send bug reports found in the
game, so they can be solved by the
developer as soon as possible
Table 4.4. Implemented features in Menu
• Tutorial The purpose of the Tutorial section is to provide an interactive platform
for the player to learn and practice the rules of the game. The screens and list of
features of this section are displayed below.
Figure 4.2. Screenshots of the Tutorial component in SET Challenge
==PAGE:68==
60
4 Results
Name of feature
Description
Navigate to the
Practice component
Option to navigate forward
to the Practice screen from the
Rules screen (that is the first screen
of the Tutorial section)
Get information
about the rules
Static text explaining the goal of
the game and the rules of the game.
Valid and invalid examples of SETs
are included next to the text.
Navigate back to
Rules
Option to navigate back to the Rules
from the Practice screen.
Guess the missing card
that completes the
2 cards to a valid SET
The interactive tutorial. The task is to
solve a puzzle of completing 2 cards
in a way, that the third card completes the
SET. The player has the option to choose
from 3 options, but there is only 1 correct
solution.
Get feedback whether the
guess was correct or not
After selecting a card from the 3 options, the
correct solution is highlighted with green
and the card moves to its place, next to the
other 2 cards to be completed. If the wrong
option is selected, the card is
highlighted with
red and a shaking animation is played,
indicating that the selected card is
not correct.
Short sounds
are also played for correct and
the wrong solutions.
Get explanation why the
solution was right
or wrong
In case of selecting the correct card,
a green text
with a positive, appreciating text
appears and an
explanation text underneath, why
that card was the
good selection. In case of selecting the
wrong card, a red text with a negative,
encouraging text is displayed to motivate
the player to
try to guess the card again.
An explanation text is also displayed
under the red
text, so the player understands why
their choice wasn’t correct.
==PAGE:69==
4.1 Ideation
61
Table 4.5 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Get another puzzle to
solve
Option to ask for another combination
of cards to solve.
Can be pressed at any time during the
interactive tutorial,
the player is not forced to solve a
puzzle before moving on to the next one.
Navigate to the
Gameplay component
directly
Option to navigate to a new game
directly from
the Practice section.
Table 4.5. Implemented features in Tutorial
• Statistics By visiting the Statistics screen, the player gets insights into their
performance in the game by viewing different statistics about their completion
time, average number of mistakes etc. A screenshot of the Statistics section and
the list of features is introduced below.
Figure 4.3. Screenshots of the Statistics component in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Clear statistics
Reset the statistics to the
default values. It does not
reset statistics about Achievements,
because that always represents the state
of the current list of Achievements.
Resetting the statistics about Achievements
would mean that the actual Achievements
should be deleted too, which is unexpected
and unwanted.
==PAGE:70==
62
4 Results
Table 4.6 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Navigate back to
the Menu
Option to navigate back to the Menu
from the Statistics.
Get information on
personal statistics
Player gets information on personal
performance and general statistics,
by seeing the following information
on screen:
- Games played in total
- Best time
- Time played in total
- Avg. time per SET
- Avg. time per game
- Avg. mistakes per game
- Avg. hints used per game
- Avg. shuffles used per game
- Number of SETs found with
1 different property
- Number of SETs found with
2 different properties
- Number of SETs found with
3 different properties
- Number of SETs found with
4 different properties
- Unlocked HARD achievements
- Unlocked MEDIUM achievements
- Unlocked EASY achievements
- Custom achievements created
- SETs found in total
- Unlocked achievements in total
Table 4.6. Implemented features in Statistics
• Settings In the settings component, different features (both visual and func-
tional) can be enabled or disabled. The corresponding screenshot and the list of
features are shown below.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 Ideation
63
Figure 4.4. Screenshots of the Settings component in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Turn on/off ’Show timer’
Displays / hides the timer
during Gameplay, but it does
not stop
Turn on/off ’Show number
of SETs on the table’
Displays / hides the text
showing how many SETs
are available to pick up
on the table
Turn on/off ’Show hints used’
Displays / hides the number
of hints used so far in the game
session.
Turn on/off ’Show shuffles used’
Displays / hides the number
of shuffles used so far in the game
session.
Turn on/off ’Auto deal when
no SETs are available’
Allow auto-dealing 3 cards
automatically and expand the
number of cards, when there is
no SET left among the cards on
the table
Reset game
Resets the application to the default
state. Resets statistics, settings, and
achievements progresses.
Navigate back to the Menu
Option to navigate back to the
Menu from the Settings.
Table 4.7. Implemented features in Settings
• In-game evaluation system By accessing the integrated evaluation system, the
player is able to fill out the survey built specifically for the present experiment.
The screenshots of the component and the list of available features are shown
below.
==PAGE:72==
64
4 Results
Figure 4.5. Screenshots of the In-game evaluation system in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Get a short introduction
to the experiment
The survey is introduced
with a short introduction to
the experiment and instructions
on how to fill out the survey.
Fill out multiple
choice questions
The players are asked and can
answer multiple choice questions
by selecting the radio button
corresponding to their answer
for a particular question.
Give feedback on
the game
Free-text field is provided at
the end of the survey, so the
player can share additional
thoughts on the game or the
experiment.
==PAGE:73==
4.1 Ideation
65
Table 4.8 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Submit the survey
If all the questions are answered
(except for the free-text feedback),
the player can submit the survey by
pressing the ‘Submit’ button at the
bottom of the survey. After submitting
the survey, a success page is displayed
to the user, and they can navigate back
to the Menu. If there’s an error during
the submission process (e.g. no internet
connection), an error page is displayed
to the user with the option to navigate
back to the Menu. If not all the questions
were answered, the ‘Submit’ button is
disabled and red warning text is
displayed, indicating that there are
some questions that still needs to
be answered.
Navigate back to
the Menu
Option to navigate back to the Menu
from the In-game evaluation system.
The player can quit without finishing
the survey, but the progress won’t be
saved. Before exiting, a confirmation
popup is displayed, informing the user
that the progress won’t be saved.
Reset game
Resets the application to the default
state. Resets statistics, settings, and
achievements progresses.
Table 4.8. Implemented features in the In-game evaluation system
• Gameplay When the player enters the Gameplay section, a new game session is
started. The actual playing of the card game happens in this component. The
available features and some screenshots are introduced below.
==PAGE:74==
66
4 Results
Figure 4.6. Screenshots of the Gameplay section in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Continue game
in progress
When navigating to the
Gameplay screen, in case
there is a game in progress,
a dialog window is displayed,
giving the player the option to
continue the game in progress or
to start a new game. In case of continuing
the game in progress, the timer, the number
of found SETs, the remaining cards,
hints, and shuffles used does not reset.
Start new game
In case of choosing the option to start
a new game, the saved values
of the game in progress are dropped
and are reset to the default values. The
player automatically starts a new game
when there is no game in progress and
enters the Gameplay screen.
Select cards
The player has the option to select a certain
card on the table by clicking on it. Selecting
a card indicates that it is marked as a part of a
SET. Selected cards are highlighted (border
of the card turns into yellow). Three cards can
be selected at most, if the player tries to select
the 4th card, it automatically deselects the
previous three.
==PAGE:75==
4.1 Ideation
67
Table 4.9 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Deselect cards
The player has the option to deselect a card
which is already selected by clicking on it
again. That removes the card from the selection
and removes the highlighted border too.
Mark a valid SET
A validation of a SET happens when 3 cards are
selected. If the 3 selected cards form a SET,
the cards are moved (with animation) to the bottom
left corner, the ‘number of SETs found’ counter
increases, and the ‘remaining cards’ counter
decreases by 3, because three new cards are delt
to the table replacing the old cards.
Mark an invalid SET
If three cards are selected but the SET validation
does not pass on them (they do not form a SET),
the cards are getting deselected, and a shaking
animation is played on the individual
cards indicating
that the selected combination did not form a SET.
Deal cards
The player has the option to deal another 3 cards
on the table, thus increasing the chance of finding
a SET on the table. Pressing the ‘Deal’ button on
the deck extends the grid of cards by pushing the
current cards to the left and placing the new cards
in the very right column. The new cards are moved
to their place with a smooth animation. Pressing the
button always deals 3 cards, but it is not possible to
deal cards if the number of cards on the table is 21,
because it is 100% that a SET can be found
in 21 cards
[96].
Use hint
If the player feels stuck, a good option is to use
a hint. By pressing the ‘Hint’ button, 3 cards are
highlighted (by putting green overlay on top
of the cards) that form a SET. The player has
the option to select the highlighted cards, but
it is not mandatory. When the hint
highlights the cards, the ‘Number of
hints used’ counter increases by one.
==PAGE:76==
68
4 Results
Table 4.9 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Shuffle cards
To refresh the arrangement of the cards on the table,
the player has the option to shuffle the cards by
pressing the ‘Shuffle’ button. Shuffling
the cards increases
the ‘Number of shuffles used’
counter by one. When a shuffle
is used, the cards remain the
same on the table, but their
arrangement in the grid changes.
The movement of the cards from
one grid cell to another is animated.
Pause the game
It is possible to pause the game by pressing the
‘Pause’ button next to the timer. The game
cannot be paused if the timer is hidden. After
pausing the game, an overlay screen is displayed
with the ‘Paused’ label and the option to resume
the game, so pausing the game does not give the
chance to the player to cheat while the timer is
stopped.
Display the number of
SETs on the table
A text is displayed (if enabled in the settings)
indicating the number of SETs present among
the cards on the table. These SETs can contain
overlapping cards.
Display the number of
remaining cards in the deck
A label is displayed above the deck UI element,
indicating the number of cards remaining in
the deck. Gets updated every time a SET is found.
Display the number of
SETs found so far
A label is displayed to the right of the ‘SETs
found’ UI element in the bottom left corner,
indicating how many SETs are found so far.
The number is increased every time a SET
is found.
Display the number
of hints used
A label is displayed above the ‘Hint’ button,
indicating how many hints were used by the
player so far in the game session.
Display the number
of shuffles used
A label is displayed above the ‘Shuffle’ button,
indicating how many shuffles were used by the
player so far in the game session.
Display the timer
The timer (if enabled in the settings) is displayed
in the top right corner with the option to pause
the game. It shows the elapsed time from the
beginning of the current game session in a
‘mm:ss’ format.
==PAGE:77==
4.1 Ideation
69
Table 4.9 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Navigate to the Tutorial
screen
Option to navigate to the Tutorial screen
directly from the current session. A confirmation
dialog is displayed before navigating to the Tutorial
screen, giving the choice of staying in the game or
exiting the game. If the player decides to exit, the
game progress is saved and can be restored when
the player next enters the Gameplay screen.
Navigate to the Settings
screen
Option to navigate to the Settings screen directly
from the current session. A confirmation dialog
is displayed before navigating to the Settings
screen, giving the choice of staying in the game
or exiting the game. If the player decides to exit,
the game progress is saved and can be restored
when the player next enters the Gameplay screen.
Navigate to the Menu
Option to navigate to the Menu directly from
the current session. A confirmation dialog is
displayed before navigating to the Menu, giving
the choice of staying in the game or exiting the
game. If the player decides to exit, the game
progress is saved and can be restored when the
player next enters the Gameplay screen.
Finish the game
If there is no card left in the deck and are no
remaining SETs on the table, the game
automatically
ends. A summary screen is displayed to the
player with a motivational phrase and an
optional text beneath in case of a new record in
time. The time of the session, the number of hints
used, shuffles used, and mistakes made are also
listed to the player. From here, the player has
the option to navigate to the Menu or
start a new game.
Table 4.9. Implemented features in Gameplay
Player-defined Achievement System
The additional feature to the core game
is the player-defined achievement system which is about to be evaluated in the Design
and Execution phase. This component of the application allows the player to create
custom Achievements based on specific templates, thus setting up their personal goals
in the game.
The Achievements sections consists of two main parts: Overview and
Create. The corresponding screenshots and the table of features are shown below.
• Overview On the overview screen, the player gets an overview of their custom
and static (predefined) achievements in two categories: in progress and unlocked.
==PAGE:78==
70
4 Results
A screenshot about this section and the list of available features are shown below.
Figure 4.7. Screenshots of the Achievements Overview section in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Switch between ‘In progress’
and ‘Unlocked’ Achievements
All the Achievements are organized
in a ‘tab’ arrangement, so two lists
are available containing Achievement
elements. When the player opens the
Achievements section, the active tab
is ‘In progress’ and the player can
switch to the ‘Unlocked’ tab by
clicking on the header of the tab.
Overview of ‘In progress’
Achievements
If the ‘In progress’ tab is selected,
the list of ‘In progress’ Achievements
are displayed on the screen. This list a
mix of the predefined and custom
Achievements created by the player.
Overview of ‘Unlocked’
Achievements
If the ‘Unlocked’ tab is selected,
the list of unlocked Achievements
is displayed to the player.
Delete custom
Achievements
Custom Achievements can be
deleted by the player while
these are in the ‘In progress’ list.
Unlocked custom Achievements
cannot be deleted.
Add new Achievement
Option to navigate to the
Achievement creation section
and define a new Achievement,
which will be added to the list
of Achievements ‘In progress’.
Navigate to the Menu
Option to navigate to the Menu
from the Achievements section.
Table 4.10. Implemented features in the Achievements Overview
• Create In the Achievement creation section of the application, the player is
guided through the custom achievement creation process which results in player-
==PAGE:79==
4.1 Ideation
71
defined achievements on the Overview screen. These achievements can be deleted
later if the player changes their mind regarding aiming for this goal in the game.
The screenshots and table of implemented features are shown below.
Figure 4.8. Screenshots of the Achievement Creation section in SET Challenge
Name of feature
Description
Choose Achievement template
A dropdown is presented to the player
including 8 predefined Achievement
templates to choose from.
Providing templates to the user
eases the assessment of the
completion logic and
gives a guideline to the user
while creating a new Achievement.
The variables in the template
are indicated with letters in
the text (X, Y, Z), these can
be set later by the user.
Cancel creating a new Achievement
After entering the Achievement
creation section, the user has the
option to cancel the process
and navigate back to the overview
page.
==PAGE:80==
72
4 Results
Table 4.11 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Move to the next step
If the player has selected the
template to be customized,
they can move to the next step,
which is defining the values in
the template. This feature is also available
when the player transitions
from defining the values to
reviewing the Achievement.
Define values in the selected template
The selected template is
displayed on the screen,
but the variables are replaced
with text fields accepting
positive numbers only.
The user must enter the
desired number manually,
but they can leave the
default numbers as well.
Change the template
There is an option to navigate
back to the previous screen
and change the template to
be filled out. In case of navigating back,
the player must select a template
from the dropdown again
and continue the process from that
step.
Display the assigned diﬀiculty
to the custom Achievement
The application assigns a
diﬀiculty to the Achievement
based on the entered values
(easy, medium, hard).
Display the name of the
Achievement
The application displays the name
of the Achievement in the
last step of the creation process.
The name is the text of the template
including the custom values defined
by the player.
Change values
The player has the option to
navigate back to the previous step
and change the values in the template.
==PAGE:81==
4.1 Ideation
73
Table 4.11 continued from previous page
Name of feature
Description
Accept and create the Achievement
The player can review the created
Achievement by checking the
name of the Achievement
and the assigned diﬀiculty.
If satisfied, clicking the ‘Accept and
Create Achievement’ button navigates
the player back to the Overview screen
where the ‘In progress’ list includes
the newly created Achievement.
Table 4.11. Implemented features in the Create Achievement section
• Static (predefined) achievements Both versions of the application contain
3 static Achievements (one for each diﬀiculty level), that are listed in the ’In
progress’ tab by default. The default Achievements are good starting point for
a player, who is not familiar with the game yet. Static Achievements cannot be
deleted by the user. The following three Achievements are defined by default in
the game:
– Complete 5 games in a row using maximum 10 hint(s) - Easy
– Complete 100 game(s) with maximum 1 mistake(s) - Hard
– Find 10 SET(s) within the first 60 second(s) in 25 game(s) - Medium
The implementation phase of the second iteration included other technical setups,
e.g. setting up Firebase, but the explanation of these setups is not necessary in the
scope of the present thesis. The application’s code is version controlled and stored on
GitHub [97], the link of the repository including the code is shown in Appendix A.
Publication of the final app
In order to advance further in the development
process and move to the testing phase, the application must be available for the pub-
lic. Since applications developed using Unity are cross-platform (can be installed on
different mobile operation systems), they could be published for both Android and iOS.
Although, after a thorough research, a few obstacles did not allow it for the application
to be published on iOS (e.g. lack of a Mac operating system to build the application).
Therefore, the final application is only available for Android systems through the Google
Play Store [95] under the name SET Challenge. The link to the Google Play Store list-
ing is shown in Appendix A. The participants of the experiment and the evaluation all
accessed the game through Google Play.
Testing and Evaluation
The developed application was evaluated with a qualitative test using the Thinking
Aloud methodology, also, the usability of the application was assessed using the System
==PAGE:82==
74
4 Results
Usability Scale. In both cases, the number of participants were 3 and the assessment
sessions were conducted in person. The users used their own mobile phones for the
testing.
The results of the Thinking Aloud evaluation show the following improvement
points:
• Not clear how to report a bug -> maybe move to the Settings? The red color of
the feedback text in the Practice area is too harsh -> Change it to a more subtle
red
• Confusing which card is interactive and which is not -> Grey out the ones that
are not interactive?
• Not clear how to navigate to a new game from the Practice area, might be because
of the bad placement of the button -> Move the button to a more noticeable
location?
• The label above the Hint button (indicating the number of Hints used so far) is
misleading, because a number close to Hints usually used to indicate the number
of Hints left. -> Emphasize somehow that this is a counter for the number of
hints used? Or users will learn it with time?
• Not clear for everyone why the max possible number of cards on the table is 21
-> Maybe pop up a snackbar from the bottom with the reason when the player
presses the Deal button when it is not possible to place more cards
• Not very clear that there’s a direct link to the Settings from the Gameplay
• The assigned diﬀiculty to the custom Achievement is not always clear to the users
-> Provide explanation why the specific Achievement falls into a certain diﬀiculty
category
On the other hand, the following functions in the applications were considered user-
friendly:
• Easy to find the Rules
• Easy to find the Practice area
• Easy to deal cards
• Easy to turn on and off the Settings options
• The confirmation dialog on exiting the game is clear for everyone
• Easy to navigate back to the menu
• Easy to find how to create a new Achievement
• Easy to navigate between the steps of the Achievement creation process
• Good to see the newly created Achievement immediately on top of the ‘In progress’
list
==PAGE:83==
4.2 Design and Execution
75
To conclude the qualitative test, the main function of the app were easy to use, but
there are some small elements in the game that needs improvement. The full report
can be found in Appendix F. Since these concerns are small and do not hinder the
usability of the app, they won’t be improved in the scope of the present thesis but will
be considered as improvement points in the future.
After the Thinking Aloud evaluation sessions, the users were asked to fill out the
SUS survey considering the subject as the current application. The final SUS score is 90,
which shows that the current usability level of the application is ’Acceptable’ according
to the oﬀicial scoring [55]. According to Adobe ”Scores below 68 point to issues with
the design that need to be researched and resolved, while scores higher than 68 indicate
the need for minor improvements to the design”. The current application scores above
68 and it is true that it needs minor changes, but its usability is high otherwise. The
link to the SUS survey and its results is located in Appendix A.
To conclude the Testing and Evaluation phase of the second iteration, the application
performed very well on both the qualitative and quantitative tests, although the results
of the Thinking Aloud test pointed out some minor usability issued in the application
which can be addressed in the future, but not in the scope of the present study, because
the above listed minor improvement points does not hinder the execution of the main
experiment and are not related to the Player-defined Achievement System.
4.2
Design and Execution
As discussed in Section 3.2, the objective of this phase of the Online Controlled Experi-
ment process is to define the requirements and the execution process of the experiment
to be conducted.
4.2.1
Design
In the Design subphase the details of the A/B tests were finalized and the main survey
for the experiment was constructed.
A/B test
The A/B test involves two versions of the SET Challenge application.
Version A (benchmark) is a version including the three predefined Achievements (see
Section 4.1.2.2) and three additional Achievements in the list of Achievements. There
are 2 easy, 2 medium and 2 hard Achievements in total. The button to add a new
Achievement to the list is also hidden.
Version B (treatment) is version including the three predefined Achievements, but
it also has the option to add a custom Achievement to the list. It also contains all the
features that comes with having custom Achievements in the game.
Figure 4.9 shows the visual difference between the two versions.
==PAGE:84==
76
4 Results
Figure 4.9. Screenshots of the Achievement section in Version A (left) and Version B
(right) in SET Challenge
In order to obtain data dynamically, the A/B test has been set up with Firebase by
integrating the Remote Config functionality into SET Challenge using Unity. Setting
up an A/B test with Firebase is simple and it consists of two parts: setting up the A/B
test on the online Firebase dashboard and setting up variables and events progmatically
in the application.
Setting up the A/B test with Firebase
Setting up an online experiment in
Firebase requires the following information to be defined:
• Name and description of the experiment:
Achievement experiment - This
is an experiment to test whether having an option to create custom achievements
in the game (therefore creating a player-defined achievement system) has an effect
on players’ engagement and autonomy sensation.
• Exposure (X% of the users will be exposed to the experiment):
100%
• Goals:
accept_and_create_achievement (frequency of this event), Retention (4–
7 days), Crash-free users, update_achievement_status (frequency of this event)
• Targeting and distribution:
App: SET-Mobile (name of SET-Challenge
during development); 100% of eligible users are in this experiment
• Variants:
Baseline (50%): customAchievements = false; Version B (50%):
customAchievements = true
By default, the experiment runs for 90 days, but can be stopped at any time man-
ually on the Firebase dashboard. The present experiment has been running between
14/06/2022 and 11/07/2022 (almost 4 weeks).
Firebase automatically takes care of
distributing Version A and B between the users, because the Google Play listing of the
application is linked to the Firebase dashboard and every time a user downloads the
application from Google Play, Firebase assigns an application version to the user in a
way the number of users participating in experiment remain equally distributed between
the two versions.
The application versions are Remote Config parameter-based.
A Remote Config
parameter is a variable that is used in the code to conditionally display data or UI
elements. This parameter can be remotely changed from the Firebase Dashboard. The
versions in the current A/B test for example, were dependent on the customAchieve-
ments boolean parameter. If the value of the parameter is true, the ’Add Achievements’
==PAGE:85==
4.2 Design and Execution
77
button is enabled, if the value is false, the button is hidden and the six initial Achieve-
ments are presented to the user. Figure 4.10 shows the visual representation of the
setup in Firebase.
Figure 4.10. Visual representation of the A/B set up in Firebase
The success or failure of the experiment in Firebase is determined by the events
defined under the Goal section during the initialization process of the online experiment.
Here, the following events were defined:
• accept_and_create_achievement (frequency of this event)
• Retention (4–7 days)
• Crash-free users
• update_achievement_status (frequency of this event)
Unfortunately, the first event (accept_and_create_achievements) is an unwanted
item among the goals, because obviously, only the users in Version B are able to accept
and create achievements, therefore, Version A will heavily fail on the frequency statistics
of this event. Favorably, Retention was also defined as one of the goals and can be used
as a valid reasonable parameter to determine the success or failure of the experiment.
Other than the customAchievements parameter, several events were set up in the
application as well in order to generate statistics and collect usage data (this is not
essential for A/B testing but useful to collect user generated data). Firebase events
are defined in code first at the place where the specific event is fired. The event is
setup through the Firebase API, this makes it possible to obtain usage data through
these events and use them for analysis purposes. An event has been defined for every
important moment during the gameplay, so the experience and the behaviour of the
users can be monitored. A few examples for such events:
• achievement_completed: Fires whenever an Achievement changes to its state to
’Completed’ in the app
• enter_survey_scene: Fires every time a user enters the in-game evaluation system
• hint_clicked: Fires every time the Hint button has been clicked
• etc.
After setting up the experiment with the help of Firebase, the next step is to design
the survey to be filled out by the players and to be included in the application under
the In-game Evaluation section.
==PAGE:86==
78
4 Results
Experiment survey
As described in detail in Section 3.2.1.2, the Experiment survey is a combination of
different subscales that collect data about the all the aspects of the hypothesis.
To assess the players autonomy satisfaction and frustration, the perceived choice
subscale was used from the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory, and the autonomy subscale
from the Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction and Frustration Scale.
In order to
measure game enjoyment, the Interest/Enjoyment subscale is included from the Intrinsic
Motivation Inventory. The players motivation for future play is assessed with the help
of three 7-point Linkert-scale questions adapted from [7]. Including the Net Promoter
Score in the survey provides data on the recommendation willingness of the players
to others. Lastly, data on game rating is collected by asking the players to evaluate
the game on the following adjectives on a 7-point scale: boring, exciting, enjoyable,
entertaining, fun, interesting and pleasant.
The same survey provided for all the participants, regardless their assigned appli-
cation version in the experiment. The complete survey is linked as a Google Form in
Appendix A.
Fortunately, it was possible to integrate the survey in the application by creating
custom UI components for each question included in the Google Form. The selected
values were then mapped to Google Forms answers and the collected answers were sent
to the original form through and API as a submission, therefore, the results of the
survey are still collected and managed in the Google Form, which eases the analysis
process.
4.2.2
Execution
The experiment has been executed in an online settings, therefore, the recruitment
process involved several methods for online recruiting. In order to recruit participants
online, a short introduction to the project has been made and instructions were defined
to take part in the experiment.
The experiment was advertised on multiple platforms, such as DTU Inside [98],
Instagram [99] (both in Hungarian and English), Facebook [100], WhatsApp [101],
LinkedIn [102] and Discord [103]. Offline (verbal) recruitment has been used to involve
close family and friends.
The generic introduction to the experiment before entering the survey has been
presented as the follows:
I would highly appreciate if you could fill out my survey by clicking the right
button below. You don’t have to leave the app, so it’s convenient and fast,
it takes max 3 minutes, I timed it :) Note: You can give the most valuable
feedback if you have used this app for at least 10 minutes already! If that’s
not true, please continue playing for a bit more :) Thank you for your help
again! I hope you had a great time playing :)
Furthermore, a disclaimer has been displayed at the beginning of the survey, stating
the subject of the experiment is the application, not the user.
==PAGE:87==
4.3 Analysis and Learning
79
By filling out this form, you help me to collect data for my Master’s Thesis
about Enhancing Intrinsic Motivation for Mastery of a Mobile Puzzle Card
Game. Here I’m testing the app, not you, so there are no wrong or right
answers. :) Please select the options that you think are the most accurate
based on your experience with the game and think about the questions for a
moment before entering your honest answers. Thank you for your help in
advance! - Nora
A longer, more oﬀicial version has been sent out to the social media platforms and
can be read in Appendix G.
These instructions include a requirement for the user to play at least 10 minutes
before filling out the survey, thus making sure that they are familiar with the application
to some extent before filling out the survey. The activity inside the application during
the 10 minutes was not restricted, the player could do anything they liked. That means,
that there was a chance that some of the users never discovered the Achievements section
of the application, this problem is discussed later in the study.
The experiment has been running for 28 days, in that timeframe 59 users downloaded
the app and has been assigned to a variant, but only 29 of the participants filled out
the survey. Therefore, the experiment is considered to be completed with 29 data entry
and results were analyzed from these entries. The experiment results are discussed in
Section 4.3.
4.3
Analysis and Learning
In the last phase of the project the collected data is analysed and the conclusion is
drawn whether the null hypothesis is rejected not failed to be rejected.
4.3.1
Analysis of Results
First of all, the analysis of the collected results is necessary to determine the effect on
the players’ motivation of the additional autonomy-supportive feature in the game.
The final number of participants in the online experiment is 29, 14 of the participants
have never played SET before, 14 played and 1 was not sure about the fact. Almost
half of the participants (14) rarely plays mobile games, 8 regularly, 5 often and 2 never.
These general statistics as well as perceived autonomy need satisfaction, game enjoy-
ment, motivation for future play, game recommendation and game rating are collected
with the help of an in-game evaluation system. The link to the complete survey is linked
in Appendix A.
Survey results (except for the demographic questions) are assessed by performing
two sample, one-tailed t-tests. T-tests are conducted on each dependent variable of the
experiment, except for the ’Net promoter score (Motivation for future play)’, because
it only included 1 entry, thus the t-test cannot be executed. The t-tests were calculated
using Excel with the significance level (α) of 0.05. The sheet with all results collected
==PAGE:88==
80
4 Results
from the survey and the calculations is linked in Appendix A. Table 4.12 shows the p-
values calculated for each dependent variable. 4 out of all the dependent variables in the
null hypothesis are failed to be rejected because the calculated p-values are all less than
the significance level. The hypothesis on one dependent variable, namely the Motivation
for future play, can be rejected because the p-value is less than the significance value.
Version A
Version B
Dependent variables
Mean
Mean
p-values
Autonomy satisfaction (1-5)
3,44
3,4
0,459268276
Autonomy frustration (1-5)
1,98
1,98
0,5
Game enjoyment (1-7)
5,22
5,02
0,320324064
Motivation for future play (1-7)
4,46
4,41
0,003745217
Game recommendation (0-10)
6,67
6,57
-
Game rating (1-7)
5,28
5,22
0,401306368
Table 4.12. t Test results for the components of the main experiment
Results show that the null hypothesis is failed to be rejected, meaning there is no
suﬀicient evidence to say that the alternative hypothesis is true, according to which,
the player-defined achievement system does not have effect on the a) need satisfaction
for autonomy, b) enjoyment, c) motivation for future play d) game recommendation to
others, e) rating of the game. The results might be hindered by the fact that there has
not been a manipulation check on the feature, meaning, the participants might have
never discovered the feature before submitting their response to the experiment.
On the other hand, based on the data collected in Firebase, the 4-7 day retention
rate was 16% with the players with Version B, while the rate was only 4.8% at the
users playing with Version A. This is an interesting insight, but since retention is not a
hypothesis criteria, it is not included in the hypothesis testing.
4.3.2
Institutionalization
In the final subphase of the online experiment process, the decision about the application
version to be kept is made and necessary actions are taken, so that the chosen version
is rolled out to the users.
Based on the previously concluded results, despite the fact that the player-defined
achievement system might not enhance the intrinsic motivation of users to master a
puzzle game, it is still a good addition to the game, thus it will be included in the
application in the future. The decision would be different if the feature would have had
a negative effect on the player’s motivation, but since that is not the case, it is safe to
include it in the final application.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER5
Discussion ands
conclusion
Overall, the goal of the Thesis has been achieved, namely, conducting an experiment
on an player-defined achievement system which is included in a traditional puzzle game.
As opposed to the expectation, the hypothesis could not be proven.
Still, the scientific background of the hypothesis is strong and is based on similar
successful examples from the past. That means, that the experiment might be repeated
in the future, but by providing more defined circumstances for the experiment execu-
tion. Unfortunately, a mistake has been made during the Experiment Design progress,
because the experiment plan did not have any assurance that the participants will actu-
ally discover the feature in question. It is definitely advised to do a manipulation check
on the feature to be tested to assess whether it is actually used by the users. The after-
math of this mistake came up during the analysis, when it turned out there’s almost no
difference between Version A and Version B regarding any of the dependent variables.
Of course, this assumption might be wrong and the participants might have noticed the
player-defined achievement system in the game, but in future, to make sure it is noticed,
the experiment design should focus on the emphasis of the treatment feature.
Regarding the usability of the application, the amount of discovered improvement
points were considerably less than expected.
Fortunately, no major UX issues and
bugs appeared during the evaluation sessions, and was not reported either during the
experiment execution phase. The testing end evaluation phases formed an essential part
of the development process, because some minor improvement points were discovered
regardless the high level of usability of the app.
Not only the evaluations, but the competitor analysis provided good ideas for fu-
ture development. For example, from the user’s perspective, a multiplayer mode could
be added to the game, because playing SET with another user is the closest to the
traditional card game. Another good addition could be a game mode where the player
can solve specific puzzles, e.g. there are 12 cards on the table, and 3 SETs are hidden
among them, the goal is to find them all.
To conclude, the present Thesis incorporates a complete development process, start-
ing from the research phase, through implementing a mobile puzzle game from scratch,
and ending with a experiment to evaluate the player-defined achievement system includ-
ing the assessment in the final game. Although, the hypothesis has not been proved,
==PAGE:90==
82
5 Discussion ands conclusion
the feature is still a good extension to the original card game for users who actually use
it, so it will be included in the published version of SET Challenge.
==PAGE:91==
Appendices
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIXA
Links
• Click-through prototype
• GitHub repository
• SET Challenge on Google Play
• SUS Survey - Google Forms
• SUS results - Google Sheets
• Experiment survey - Google Forms
• Hypothesis testing calculations - Google Sheets
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIXB
Figma screens and
intial sketches
==PAGE:94==
86
Appendix B Figma screens and intial sketches
Figure B.1. The final designs of the first iteration, top: paper sketch, bottom: cor-
responding Figma protoype component. The wireframes are representing the following
screens in order: Menu, Tutorial, Practice, Gameplay, Achievements, Statistics, Add
Achievement - Step 1, Add Achievement - Step 2, Add Achievement - Step 3, Settings
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIXC
Think Aloud
Evaluation of
click-through
prototype
See next page.
==PAGE:96==
Think Aloud Evaluation - Iteration 1
To evaluate the navigation and the overall experience of the designed game, a Think Aloud test is conducted.
It will be a moderated test where users will be asked some questions.
1 - WHAT DID I VALIDATE?
-
Is the navigation straightforward?
-
Is it clear how to create a custom achievement?
-
Is it clear where to find the rules when one is stuck during a game session?
-
Is it clear how to hide the timer?
2 - HOW DID I VALIDATE IT?
I ask some questions to the users. We observe the failures and complications the users had and also listen to their comments. Finally we make
conclusions on how to improve the app.
Below are the results obtained.
SET Challenge - Figma
User 1
User 2
User 3
Conclusion
Please start a new game
and pause the game
No problem with finding the
pause button.
She looked for it on the
right side first (among the
other functionalities), but
then she found it.
No problem with finding
the pause button.
Easy to pause the game
You realize that there’s a
timer on the top. It disturbs
you, so you would like to
hide it, how do you do it?
He started looking for an X first,
to ‘close’ the timer. Then he
realized there’s a Settings
button on the right side, and
clicked that.
She immediately found the
Settings on the right side
and clicked it.
No problem with
navigating to the
Settings.
Easy to navigate to the
Settings from the game
==PAGE:97==
You would like to learn more
about the rules, where do
you look for those?
He went back to the main
menu, then clicked the ‘How to’
button.
“It is great that there are
examples of valid and invalid
card combinations.”
Navigated to the main
menu, then clicked the How
To button.
No problem with finding
the rules.
Easy to find the rules,
good idea to include
examples
You would like to create a
custom Achievement in
order to define a specific
goal you want to achieve in
the future. How do you do
that?
Navigated back to the menu
and found the ‘Achievements’
button. He moved to the screen
and noticed the ‘New’ button.
He clicked through the
Achievement creation process,
but was a bit skeptical about the
concept, he thought it is not a
necessary feature, and he
would never spend time
creating custom achievements.
Found the Achievements
section fast, and could
create a custom
achievement at first try. She
was interested in how the
difficulty of the custom
achievement is determined.
Easy to find the
Achievements, not sure
he would create custom
achievements for
himself, but it is good to
have some predefined
ones.
Easy to find the
Achievements, but the
users were a bit
skeptical about the
concept.
3 - FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS SUMMARY
3.A - WHAT DID WE DO WELL?
-
Navigation within the app is smooth and straightforward.
-
Good that examples are included in the Tutorial section.
3.B - WHAT COULD BE IMPROVED AND HOW?
-
Achievements are good, but creating custom achievements might not be a popular addition to the game. This cannot be changed
unfortunately, as the hypothesis is built on this feature, but might be a useful note for the future.
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIXD
Competitor analysis
results - Mobile puzzle
games
See next page.
==PAGE:99==
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
91
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Chess light
Light up all
squares on the
level by
moving
the chess
pieces
to their right
place
Initially 3, +1
hint
after solving
5 puzzles;
Hint freezes a
piece to its
correct place;
Shows how
many hints
are left;
More can be
purchased in
the in-game
store with
real currency
No interactive
tutorial;
Instructions
menu option
with static text
-
-
-
Levels in
different
categories
(diﬀiculties:
beginner,
…,
grandmaster)
Settings:
sound,
color theme,
hint
confirmation,
reset progress
-
-
Hocus.
Move the ball
to the hole by
defining its
path on a 3D
object
No hints
Tutorial levels
at the
beginning
to practice
the mechanics
-
-
-
-
Player can
create custom
levels and
optionally
share
the generated
unique
code with
others
or send it to
the
developer
-
-
Patterns
Assemble
pieces
by rotating
them
No hints
initially,
can be
purchased
with in-game
currency;
Hint rotates
a piece to
its correct place;
A tooltip
appears
above the hint
button after
a period
of inactive
play-time;
Full solution
can be
unlocked for
in-game
currency
Game starts
with a tutorial;
On the level,
there’s an info
button which
shows the
goal on
the level
(e.g. to
create 3
connected
pieces and 1
single piece
Stars + points;
Reach ranks
by collecting
X points;
Points are
collected
separately
in the
2 play-modes
Mistake:
minus points
“Precisely!”,
when the
level is
correctly
done;
“Good job,
the
tutorial is
done!
Good work”
after finishing
the tutorial
Genius
(max nr
of moves
for each level)
or relax mode
(no move
limit,
different
shapes);
Choose
between
the game
modes
-
-
Threes
Merge tiles
with the same
numbers
until the board
fills up
-
Game starts
with a tutorial
Points
-
During the
tutorial:
positive
reinforcement
-
-
Achievements
in Google
Play,
all of them
are Secrets
(no info is
visible,
can be
unlocked
accidentally)
-
==PAGE:100==
92
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Two dots
Collect X
number of dots
in Y types of
colors
No hint button,
but the dots
which need to
be connected
start to pulse
after a period
of inactive
play-time
Starts with a
tutorial about
the possible
moves on the
level;
Tutorial in the
beginning of a
level every
time a new
functionality is
introduced;
Mini tutorials on
some levels
teaching
the strategy of
the game
(e.g. remove
these
2 dots to create
a square)
Stars + points;
Leaderboard;
“Star-meter”
during
gameplay
showing
how well
the player
performs;
Earn stars to
upgrade
the rank;
Rank unlock
collectibles;
When out of
moves,
player loses
a life
(has 5 lives
in total)
When the
level is
done well:
“Genius!”;
When
reaching
a new rank:
“Congrats on
the new rank!”
-
Choose level
to play;
Choose
power-up
during levels
Daily
quests
-
2048
Merge
tiles with the
same number,
they add up,
continue until
the player
creates
a tile with
2048
-
No tutorial
Score;
High scores
-
-
5 modes
(size of level
is different)
-
-
-
Turn it on!
Turn the
light on in
the room by
finding the right
combination of
buttons to press
Hint shows
after a few
seconds
of inactivity and
an info box
explains
how this level
works
-
Stars;
Record for
each level
-
-
-
Settings:
music,
sound,
language,
timer is
visible,
reset game
-
-
I love
hue too
Order the
shapes filled
with different
color hues to
create the
correct
color gradient
in the end
Hidden in
menu;
Cost: adds 3
more moves
to the total
moves on
the level;
Hint shows the
right place of
a piece
Game starts
with
tutorial about
how to move
the colored
pieces;
Tutorial when
introducing a
new
functionality
No points,
but moves are
shown after
completing the
level, also the
world average
and least
possible
moves
-
Different
messages,
when beating
the world
average and
finishing
the level
with the
fewest
possible
moves
-
Replay levels
any time;
Select any
level
to play
(not necessary
to go in order);
Restart level;
Settings: music,
sound
-
-
==PAGE:101==
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
93
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Bomb club
Connect
bombs to create
a chain reaction
and clear all the
bombs on
the level
-
Starts with a
tutorial level:
Shows the
tasks
to complete
(e.g. drag with
1 finger to
move
the camera);
Tutorial levels
are marked on
the level-map,
they introduce
a new type of
bomb and
its usage
Earn a
trophy after
completing a
level
(bronze, silver,
gold);
Requirements
are
described
for each
trophy before
starting
the level;
Levels are
colorized
based on
the earned
trophy on
the map
-
-
2 types of
levels:
normal level
(explode
bombs
with chain
reaction),
“test of speed”
level (no
bombs
to place,
just start
the chain
reaction
and clear
as many
levels as
possible
in 90s)
Select level to
play on;
Settings: sound,
language,
effects,
vibration,
dialogue
speed etc.)
-
-
Tetris
Stack
Tetris shapes
while it fits the
screen aiming
not to create
gaps between
the shapes
-
-
Points;
Best personal
score;
Rank in area
(e.g. in
Copenhagen)
-
-
2 modes:
Quick play
(get as many
points
as possible
in 3
minutes),
Marathon
(regular
Tetris, play
until
the blocks
reach the roof)
Select theme
(themes are
rewards);
Select between
the different
game modes
“Goals” is
an individual
menu option:
contains
daily and
seasonal
goals;
Reward:
in-game
currency;
Types of goals:
Score X
points in
Y mode;
Clear X lines in
Y mode;
Complete X
Daily goals;
Complete X
Seasonal goals;
Level up
X times
in 1 Y game;
Score
X points
-
==PAGE:102==
94
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Piffle
Clear the
boxes with balls
before the boxes
reach the ground
-
Starts with a
tutorial level
showing how
to play
X stars
and Y points
after finishing
a level;
Chest reward
after Z number
of levels
-
-
-
Create custom
piffles (balls)
based on
previously
earned
patterns;
Choose
power-ups
to start the
level with
In-game
achievements:
name, goal,
image, progress,
reward;
Fixed amount
of achievements;
All of them are
visible from the
beginning of
the game;
Types of
achievements:
Break X blocks;
Clear X rows;
Three star
X levels;
Use X <type
of power-up>;
Collect X
<type of
collectible>;
Destroy X
<type of block>;
Open X
<type of chest>;
Collect X
<type of
collectible
outside of level>
-
Bbtan
Clear the
boxes with
balls before
the boxes
reach the
ground
-
-
Points;
High scores in
Google Play
-
-
-
Buy custom
balls for
in-game
currency
-
-
0h h1
Complete
the level by
placing the
colored squares
to their right
places on the
board following
the rules
Always
available;
free;
Highlights
the tile to
continue with
Starts with an
interactive
tutorial,
when finished,
redirects to the
real game
Experience
points;
Leaderboard
in Google Play
-
When
completing
a level:
“Brilliant!”,
“Fabulous!”
Free play
or puzzles
Settings: show
hint button or
not, set theme
Achievements
in Google
Play:
Complete
AxA
board without
using a
hint/without
using undo;
Complete the
tutorial etc.
-
Achievement
Game
The player
creates their
own goals in
life and assigns
rewards to them
-
-
-
-
-
-
Player creates
their
own goals and
rewards
Only the
achievements
created by the
player
-
==PAGE:103==
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
95
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Card
match
Goal: collect
X number
of points
by merging
cards
with the same
pattern from a
standard
52-card
deck
Automatically
shows which
cards should be
merged after a
period of
inactive
time;
No direct
hint button
Starts with a
“How to play”
static text
description
X stars
after
completing
the level
-
-
-
Choose card
skin for
in-game
currency
-
-
Flick
Solitaire
Collection
of different
types
of solitaire
card games
Hint shows
which card to
move where;
auto-hint after
a period of
inactive time;
Free
Interactive
tutorial
showing
the options
the user have
in the game;
Restart tutorial
option in
each game
Points,
online
leaderboard
-
-
Different
types of games
in the same app
Choose a
deck to start
with
(different art);
Unique card
skins
and
backgrounds
can be
purchased
with in-game
or real currency;
Free selection
between
the games
-
-
here
Find the
word “here”
through
different
types of
logic
puzzles
Hint costs
watching an ad;
An info modal
describing what
to do in order
to finish the
level
-
-
-
-
Normal levels
or challenges
(these are levels
too but are
harder)
Settings:
music and
sound
-
-
KAMI 2
Turn the
whole level
into the same
color in the
given number
of moves
Hint costs
watching
an ad;
Shows which
color should
the player
use in which
area
-
-
-
Other
players
can like the
level you
created
4 modes:
Journey
(normal game,
make the whole
level the
same color),
Daily (Levels
made by
other players,
but they
disappear
after 5 days),
Challenge
(Complete
levels made
by others,
goal is to
have the
highest streak
possible),
Explore
(build and
share your
own level)
Build custom
puzzles
and share
-
-
==PAGE:104==
96
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Klondike
Solitaire
card game
Hints are free;
Button in the
bottom of
the screen;
Highlights cards
that are movable
“Help” menu
option with
explanation
of the rules
Points
-
-
1 mode, but
game diﬀiculty
can be set in
the settings
Settings:
appearance,
diﬀiculty
settings
10 predefined
achievements:
have only the
title and is
completed
or not, info
button
shows the
completion
criteria
Statistics
menu option:
for each settings
combination:
games played,
games won,
best time,
avg.time,
least moves,
avg.moves,
best score,
current winning
streak,
best winning
streak
Level up
life
Gamification
solution to
improve your
everyday life
through
completing
achievements
-
Help menu
option
explaining
how the
app works
Earning
experience
points by
completing
achievements
-
-
-
Custom
achievements
(define
experience
points,
skill points
and name)
Predefined
achievements
in different
categories;
Achievement:
name,
experience
point,
skill point
(charisma,
environment
etc.),
Custom
achievements
made by
the player;
No completion
logic,
based on
honor system
-
Mahjong
Match
tiles with the
same patter;
goal: clear
the level
Hint costs
in-game
currency;
Highlights
matching tiles
Game starts
with an
interactive
tutorial
Earn starts
by completing
a level
(1, 2, 3),
the faster the
player finishes
the level,
the more
starts earned
-
-
2 modes:
Normal
(match tiles
with
same patterns
as
fast as
possible),
Daily puzzle
(clear the level
and reveal
a section
of the picture
of the month)
Settings:
music,
sound,
notification,
fit remaining
tiles
to screen,
highlight
free tiles,
show time,
save progress)
Quests:
2 categories:
in progress,
completed;
Quest: has a
title but
not all have
description,
image revealed
after
unlock;
Types:
Complete XY
level;
Use <name
of the feature>
for the first time
(or X times);
-
==PAGE:105==
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
97
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
LogicLike
Platform to
improve
thinking,
logic, intellect
by solving
different types
of riddles
(text,
sorting etc.)
Hints are
free;
Hints are in
text format
describing a
good direction
to solve the
riddle on
the level
-
Points
(how many
puzzles
solved);
Stars after
completing
an achievement
Mistake: 1 life
minus;
mistakes are
counted and
will be shown
in the statistics
“Great” after
completing
an
achievement;
“Good job!”
after starting
a streak
Diﬀiculty:
basic,
advanced,
expert;
Free selection
between
different
puzzle topics
(e.g. text
puzzles,
ordering
objects etc.)
Free selection
between
diﬀiculty
and puzzle
topics
Quests: image,
title,
description,
progress,
reward, level;
When
completed,
it pops up
automatically;
Types: Solve
X puzzles
in Y topic;
Get X stars;
Solve X
puzzles
on 1st try;
Solve X
puzzles;
Complete X%
of Y topic;
Get your
first 5 likes
Summary after
each stage
(1 stage =
2 levels):
X mistakes,
Y stars;
Analytics menu
option: X% of the
course done –
X% of the
users came to
this far,
X puzzles solved
in total,
On 1st try:
you X%,
others Y%;
Daily goal
completed:
X puzzles with
mistakes, X stars
awarded, X puzzles
solved, X puzzles
given up;
Analytics also
shows the nr.
Of solved puzzles
in each category +
details
Make Hexa!
Place odd
shapes in a
hexagon shaped
level and to
create as many
small hexagon
as possible
-
Game started
with an
interactive
tutorial;
static
“how to play”
text
Points
-
-
2 modes:
Normal
(play until
no space left
on the level);
Timed mode
(shapes have 1
color, create as
many hexagon
as possible
in 100s,
rotation
of shapes
not allowed,
double
hexagon
adds 3 more
seconds)
Visual settings
during
gameplay
(pattern on the
shapes;
backround)
Achievements
in Google Play;
Types: Collect
X coins;
Make 3 same
colored
hexa with 1
piece;
Rotate a block
10 times;
Score over
X points;
Fill up X%
of the board
-
Merge Card
Puzzle
Merge cards
with the same
numbers so they
add up;
goal: reach
a specific
number,
e.g. 1024,
2048 etc.
Auto hint
after a period
of inactive
time;
Highlights
the cards
to merge
Game started
with an
interactive
tutorial
Points
Mistake: more
cards added
-
-
Unlock and
customize
unique
background,
material
(card back)
Daily goals:
Complete
X levels;
Watch X videos;
Reward is
experience
point and can be
used to
open chests
-
==PAGE:106==
98
Appendix D Competitor analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
Table D.1 continued from previous page
Name
Goal
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars
Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy
Achievements
Player statistics
Monument
valley 2
Spatial
puzzles, find
a way from a
starting point
to the end door
-
-
-
-
-
-
Select any
level to play;
Draw a unique
flower after
completing
the level
Achievements
in Google Play
(common/
uncommon);
Unlocked
achievements
are secrets;
Types: Complete
<name of
the level>
-
Okay?
Clear the
level by
drawing
a stroke and
hitting the all
the objects
at least once
Hint button
is shows after
a couple of
unsuccessful
trials;
Hint costs
watching
an ad;
Hint shows
where to start
the stroke
to draw
First level
is an
interactive
tutorial
-
-
-
Play mode
(complete
levels);
Create mode
(create and
share levels);
Daily puzzle
(complete
levels
created by
other players)
Create and
share your own
levels (player
has to play it
through before
publishing;
after finishing,
a unique code
is generated
and player can
send it to friends
or the developer)
-
-
Pairs
Find pairs
of cards
(memory
card game)
-
-
In-game
currency
after
completing
a level
-
-
-
-
In-game
achievements:
Share the app;
Collect X stars
up to Y level;
Purchase
anything
in the shop;
Reward:
in-game
currency
-
Table D.1. Competitor Analysis results - Mobile puzzle games
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIXE
Competitor analysis
results - SET
See next page.
==PAGE:108==
100
Appendix E Competitor analysis results - SET
Name
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy Achievements Player statistics Additional
features
Classic
(SET)
-
Static how
to play text
after pressing
the “Help”
button
-
-
-
2 game modes:
normal (find all
SETs)
and arcade
(find as many
SETs as possible
in 60s)
Settings:
screen
orientation
-
Time listed
for each game
Shows
remaining
cards;
Shows
elapsed time;
Pause;
Add 3 cards
when no
SETs left
on the table
Find a
SET!
“Show” SET
button highlights
3 cards
which form
a SET
-
Points;
High scores
-
”Found All SETs!”
Find All SETs
or
Find 10 SETs
-
-
After finishing
a game: shows
time (+ “New
best time!”
if applicable);
High scores
shows: time,
hints used,
total games,
best time
Shows
remaining
cards;
Shows
elapsed time;
Restart
Find the
SETs!
-
“How to play”
menu option
(text + examples)
X points after
finding a SET,
the faster the
player founds
the SET the
more points
they get
-
-
2 modes: Normal
(Find as many SETs
as possible in
2 minutes),
Endless
(no time limit)
-
-
After finishing
a game it shows:
SETs found,
personal best,
current points,
world record;
Scores menu
option: shows
the daily best
and the overall
best + world
record for both
Shows how
many SETs
are on the
table
Find
SETs!
Pressing the
“Hint” button:
shows 1 card
which is part
of the SET,
press again,
shows the next
card etc.;
Pressing the
“Auto-find SET”
button:
Highlights a
full SET
(3 cards)
Help menu
option with
interactive tutorial,
asking which
card completes
the 2 other
cards to form
a SET
Points
(how many
SETs found)
In “Blitz!”
mode: mistake:
game over
-
2 modes: Classic
(find all SETs),
Blitz! (Find as
many SETs as
possible before
the time runs out;
finding a SET
adds more time;
making a mistake
ends the game)
-
-
-
Shows
remaining
cards;
Redeal
cards:
replaces all
cards on the
table
patterns
-
Interactive tutorial
available in
the menu
(which card
completes the
SET)
Points
-
-
Singleplayer
(Find all SETs);
multiplayer
(play against
others online)
Customize
theme
(3 options);
Mute sound
-
Fastest time
(global);
Profile:
personal record,
avg.time,
games played,
place today
(global),
place all time
(global)
Shows
completeness
(X%);
Time elapsed;
Pause;
Add 3 cards
automatically
when there’s
no SET on
the table
==PAGE:109==
Appendix E Competitor analysis results - SET
101
Table E.1 continued from previous page
Name
Hints
Tutorial
Points/Stars Punishment
Positive
feedback/
motivational
message
Game modes
Autonomy Achievements Player statistics Additional
features
SET
(Csoma
Koleszár)
-
Static text
explaining the
rules
Points
(number of
SETs found)
-
-
-
-
-
Games played;
SETs found;
Time played;
Average time
(per game,
per SET);
Average game
time;
Nr. Of SETs
found with
different
properties
(one, two,
three, all four)
Time elapsed;
Cards left;
Reset statistics
Set Game
(1)
“Cheat!’ button
highlights a
SET for free
Static
“how to”
text
Points
(number of
SETs found)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Set Game
(2)
-
-
Points
Mistake:
minus
points
-
Multiplayer
(against another
player online);
Singleplayer
(against an
AI – easy,
moderate, hard)
Choose
between
the modes
-
-
“Check
for SET”
button tells
if there’s a
SET on the
table or not;
Add 3 cards
Sets
3 hints for
a session in
total;
Free to use;
Hint highlights
a SET
“How to play”
menu option
(text + examples)
Points
-
-
Singleplayer
(find all SETs);
Multiplayer
(play against
another player
online in a room)
Set sound
or vibration -
-
Reset level;
Time elapsed;
Cards left;
Pause
Trizz
Hints are free,
but player gets
minus points
after using it;
Hint highlights
a SET
“How to play”
menu option
(static text)
Points
Mistake:
no punishment;
Hint:
minus points
-
Singleplayer or
multiplayer (player
play on the same
screen, not online);
Easy or hard mode
(cards have 3 vs 5
features);
Set playing field
size or diﬀiculty
(easy, normal, hard)
Set colors
of the cards
Achievements
in Google Play;
Types: Get a
score of X
within the first
Y minutes of
the game in
Z mode;
Find X SETs
in Y mode;
Find X kinds of
SETs in a row;
Collect X
XP in Y mode
-
Pause
Table E.1. Competitor Analysis results - SET games
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIXF
Think Aloud
Evaluation of the
implemented game
See next page.
==PAGE:111==
Think Aloud Evaluation - Iteration 2
To evaluate the overall experience and the usability of the implemented game, a Think Aloud test is conducted.
It will be a moderated test where users will be asked some questions.
1 - WHAT DID I VALIDATE?
-
Is it clear how to report a bug?
-
Do users find the rules?
-
Do users find out how to practice?
-
Is it clear how to start a game from the Practice area?
-
Do users find SETs and know how to use hints?
-
Do users know how to deal cards from the deck?
-
Is it clear how to navigate to the Settings from the Gameplay?
-
Is it clear how to create a custom Achievement?
2 - HOW DID I VALIDATE IT?
I ask some questions to the users. I observe the failures and complications the users had and also listen to their comments. Finally I make
conclusions on how to improve the app.
Below are the results obtained.
SET Challenge - Figma
Expected
User 1
User 2
User 3
Conclusion
Please open the application
and try to report a bug.
User opens
the info
dialog and
clicks the
‘Report bug’
button
First goes to the Settings.
Did not find the bug report
form, comes to the menu.
Opens the info dialog and
clicks the Report bug
button.
Opens the info dialog and
clicks the Report bug
button.
Thinks a lot
where to click.
Tries the Settings
first, then comes
back and clicks
the info button,
and the Report
bug button.
Not straightforward
where to report a bug.
==PAGE:112==
This is your first time
playing SET. How do you
learn about the rules?
User closes
the info
dialog and
clicks the
‘Tutorial
button’
Goes back to the menu
and clicks the Tutorial.
Starts to read and says
‘Yes, here are the rules’
Back to main menu and
opens Tutorial.
Navigates back to
the menu and
clicks the Tutorial
button to read the
rules. Before that
he said: ‘It must
be at the Tutorial..
at least I hope it’s
there.’
Easy to find the Rules
You have carefully read the
rules, now it is time to
practice. You enter the
Practice area, what do you
do next to practice the
rules?
User
navigates to
the Practice
screen and
tries to
guess the
correct card.
Clicks the Practice button.
Then clicks every card
(even the static ones) to
check which ones are
interactive. After selecting
a wrong card: ‘The color
of the red text is a bit
harsh for me’
Moves to the Practice
screen and carefully
analyses what is on the
screen. ‘ It is great that
the main rule is displayed
here in one sentence, I
guess the task is to guess
which card completes the
SET’, she thinks about a
correct solution and clicks
the correct card.
Goes to the
Practice screen
and clicks the
static cards:
‘Oh..’, then he
realizes that only
the small cards
are interactive.
-
Easy to move to
the Practice
screen
-
The red color is
too saturated
-
More indication
is needed on
which card is
interactive and
which is not
You are confident now with
your knowledge about SET,
so you want to start a new
game, how do you do that?
User clicks
the ‘I am an
expert now,
let’s play’
button in the
top right
corner
He is looking for the
Home button, but there’s
no such a button on the
screen. Then he realized
the button in the top right
corner.
She clicked the top right
button immediately.
He was searching
for the exit button,
did not find it, so
clicked the Rules
button to navigate
back, then click
the Home button
and ended up in
the Menu and
started a new
game from there.
-
The purpose and
the presence of
the Play button
in the top right
corner might not
be clear for
every user. This
might be
because of bed
placement?
You just started a new
game. Find a SET on the
table. You can use hints too
if necessary.
User tries to
find it by
exploring the
cards on the
table. If they
‘Ah, this is hard..’
Stares at the screen for
quite a long time, select
an invalid SET, ‘Oh, but
why? No, I understand,
‘Okay, let’s see…’, looks
for a SET by herself first,
she finds one quite
quickly.
He is looking for a
SET for a very
long time.
Comment from
the moderator:
-
It is hard to find
a SET (but that
is the nature of
the game)
-
The label above
==PAGE:113==
stuck, they
press the
‘Hint’ button.
Then what about this?’,
now he selects a valid
SET. ‘The animation is
great by the way’
‘Remember you
can use hints’,
User: ‘But I don’t
have any’,
Moderator: ‘The
number indicates
the hints used,
not the hints left’,
User: ‘Oh, I
thought that is the
number of hints I
have left.’ Then
he used a hint
and found a SET.
the ‘Hint’ button
might be
misleading,
because usually
a number next to
the Hints
indicates the
number of hints
left, not the
number of hints
used.
You think it would be easier
to find a SET among more
cards than 12. What do you
do?
User clicks
the ‘Deal’
button
‘Okay that’s easy’, the
clicks the Deal button so
many times that it’s not
possible to deal anymore
cards. ‘Why I cannot deal
more?’ Moderator:
‘Because mathematically,
there’s a 100% chance
that there’s a SET in 21
cards.’
Clicks the ‘Deal’ button
and continues to look for
a SET.
Clicks the ‘Deal’
button 2 times
-
Easy to deal
cards from the
deck
-
It might not be
clear why the
max possible
number of cards
on the table is
21
It bothers you that you see
how many SETs are on the
table, so you want to hide it
somehow. What do you do?
User exits
the game by
clicking on
the Settings
button and
disables the
‘Show
number of
SETs on the
table’ option
Clicks the Home button,
reads the confirmation
dialog, confirms he wants
to exit and opens the
Settings from the Menu.
Then disables the ‘Show
the number of SETs on
the table’ option
Clicks the Settings button
on the right side, confirms
she wants to exit and
enters the Settings
screen. Asks to please
repeat the task, she did
not remember which
option should be turned
off. The task was
repeated again, so she
turned off the ‘Show the
number of SETs on the
table option.
Clicks the
Settings button
on the right side,
declines to exit
the game to
check what
happens. Clicks
the Settings
button again,
confirms he
wants to exit,
enters the
Settings screen
-
Might not be
clear at first that
there’s a direct
link to the
Settings screen
from the game
-
Easy to switch
the Settings
options
-
Confirmation
dialog is clear
==PAGE:114==
and turns off the
‘Show the
number of SETs
on the table’
option
Please go back to the main
menu.
User clicks
the ‘Home’
button
Clicks the Home button
Clicks the Home button
Clicks the Home
button
Easy to navigate to the
Menu from the Settings
You notice that there is an
‘Achievements’ button in
Menu. Out of curiosity you
click it and navigate to the
Achievements. You are
wondering whether it is
possible to create custom
Achievement. How do you
discover that?
User moves
to the
Achievement
s screen and
tells the
moderator
they would
click the ‘Add
Achievement
’ button
Clicks the ‘Achievements’
button. Reads the
Achievements out loud.
‘100 games? That is a lot..
anyways, I would click the
button in the bottom to
create a new
Achievement’
Clicks the ‘Achievements’
button. Switches between
the tabs, then switches
back. ‘Probably I would
click the ‘Add’ button.
Clicks the
‘Achievements’
button. Reads the
static
Achievements. I
would click the
‘Add
Achievement’
-
Easy to find how
to create a new
Achievement
You want to try out the
feature and create a
custom Achievement.
Create a custom
Achievement.
User clicks
the ‘Add
Achievement
’ button,
chooses a
template, fills
out the
values,
accepts the
Achievement
which then
will be
created.
Clicks ‘Add Achievement’.
Scrolls down in the
templates, but does not
select different one than
the default. Clicks Next.
Keeps the first value as 1
and changes to second to
100. ‘Because I can
whatever I want, right?’
Clicks Next. ‘Okay, so this
Achievement is easy,
good..’, clicks ‘Accept and
Create Achievement’.
‘Nice, it’s here’
Clicks ‘Add Achievement’.
Reads carefully the
template options. ‘I’m
going to select this one,
because this has the
most variables in it’.
(Note: Find X SETs within
the first Y seconds in Z
games). Clicks Next. Sets
the values to 10, 120 and
1. “That means, to find 10
SETs under 2 minutes in
1 game, right?”, Clicks
Next. “Oh, is this Medium
only? I thought it will be
Hard’. She clicks the
Clicks ‘Add
Achievement’.
Brows through
the templates.
Chooses the last
one. ‘I’m just
gonna keep it like
that’, so the
values remain 1
and 1. ‘Ooor,
maybe I want a
different one’, he
goes back to the
templates and
chooses the
second one in the
-
Easy to navigate
between the
steps of the
creation process
-
The users
carefully
assemble their
Achievements
-
Sometimes the
assigned
difficulty level is
unexpected
-
They were
happy to see
their custom
achievement in
==PAGE:115==
Accept and Create
Achievement button.
‘Great, done’
list. ‘Okay,
Complete 1 game
in 1 minute and 1
second, that is
not good, let’s say
1 game in 5
minutes and 0
seconds’. Clicks
Next, ‘Uhh, it
seems like it is a
Hard
Achievement,
nice’. Clicks
Accept and
Create
Achievement.
the list on the
Overview page
3 - FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS SUMMARY
3.A - WHAT DID I DO WELL?
-
Easy to find the Rules
-
Easy to find the Practice area
-
Easy to deal cards
-
Easy to turn on and off the Settings options
-
The confirmation dialog on exiting the game is clear for everyone
-
Easy to navigate back to the menu
-
Easy to find how to create a new Achievement
-
Easy to navigate between the steps of the Achievement creation process
-
Good to see the newly created Achievement immediately on top of the ‘In progress’ list
3.B - WHAT COULD BE IMPROVED AND HOW?
-
Not clear how to report a bug -> maybe move to the Settings?
-
The red color of the feedback text in the Practice area is too harsh -> Change it to a more subtle red
==PAGE:116==
-
Confusing which card is interactive and which is not -> Grey out the ones that are not interactive?
-
Not clear how to navigate to a new game from the Practice area, might be because of the bad placement of the button -> Move the
button to a more noticeable location?
-
The label above the Hint button (indicating the number of Hints used so far) is misleading, because a number close to Hints usually
used to indicate the number of Hints left. -> Emphasize somehow that this is a counter for the number of hints used? Or users will learn
it with time?
-
Not clear for everyone why the max possible number of cards on the table is 21 -> Maybe pop up a snackbar from the bottom with the
reason when the player presses the Deal button when it is not possible to place more cards
-
Not very clear that there’s a direct link to the Settings from the Gameplay
-
The assigned difficulty to the custom Achievement is not always clear to the users -> Provide explanation why the specific Achievement
falls into a certain difficulty category
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIXG
Experiment
Instructions
See next page.
==PAGE:118==
Experiment on Enhancing Intrinsic Motivation for Mastery of Mobile 
Puzzle Card Game   
 
Dear Participant,  
Thank you for helping me advance on my Master’s thesis journey and for producing data for 
my experiment.  
My goal is to investigate an autonomy-supportive feature in a mobile puzzle game that 
might increase intrinsic motivation to play. To discover the effect of this feature on the 
player experience, I am conducting an A/B test. The variants are randomly assigned to the 
participants. 
In order to get significant amout of data and succssfully evaluate my hypothesis, I need your 
help! All you have to do is play with my game and fill out a short survey afterwards. 
I’m testing the game, not you, so there are no wrong or right answers in this experiment! :) 
 
Instructions to participate 
• Step 1 - Install the app (only available for Android) LINK 
• Step 2 - Play! 
o After installing the app, play with the game for at least 10 minutes! 
▪ Of course you can play more or play with it through multiple days, just 
remember to play for at least 10 minutes in total, so you can give 
valuable feedback in the survey! 
▪ Discover the features and experiment! Try out as many things as 
possible! 
• Step 3 - Fill out the survey 
o In the main menu of the app, there is a link to the questionnaire I need you to 
fill out. (You don’t have to leave the app to fill out the survey!) 
 
o Click on th “Go to the survey” button and fill out the questionnaire! It only has linear 
scale questions, so it’s really fast to fill it out! 
 
==PAGE:119==
• 
Step 4 – You're done! 
 
Contact info 
In case you have any questions regarding the study or need any help, please reach out to me 
on this email address: s202222@student.dtu.dk. 
 
Thank you very much for your help again! 
Nóra Muraközy 
MSc Student in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, User Experience studyline 
 
Screenshots 
Here are some screenshots from the game that might motivate you to participate in the 
experiment.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1]
“23+ mobile gaming statistics for 2022,” 2022.
[2]
“Puzzle games report: Players, monetization, and advertising - udonis | udonis
mobile marketing agency,” 2022.
[3]
“Set,” 2020.
[4]
R. M. Ryan, ￿. C. S. Rigby, A. Przybylski, and C. S. Rigby, “Motiv emot the
motivational pull of video games: A self-determination theory approach,” 2006.
[5]
“The family game of visual perception - instructions,” 2019.
[6]
G. Villalobos-Zúñiga and M. Cherubini, “Apps that motivate: a taxonomy of app
features based on self-determination theory,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 140, p. 102449, 8 2020.
[7]
W.
Peng,
J.
H.
Lin,
K.
A.
Pfeiffer,
and
B.
Winn,
“Need
satisfac-
tion
supportive
game
features
as
motivational
determinants:
An
ex-
perimental
study
of
a
self-determination
theory
guided
exergame,”
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2012.673850,
vol.
15,
pp.
175–196,
5
2012.
[8]
A. K. Przybylski, C. S. Rigby, and R. M. Ryan, “A motivational model of video
game engagement motivation and video games,” 2010.
[9]
K. Kim, M. G. Schmierbach, S. Bellur, M. Y. Chung, J. D. Fraustino, F. Dardis,
and L. Ahern, “Is it a sense of autonomy, control, or attachment?
exploring
the effects of in-game customization on game enjoyment,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 48, pp. 695–705, 7 2015.
[10]
E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human
behavior. Plenum Press, 1985.
[11]
I. Lewis, K. D. Salas, and L. Wells, “Features of achievement systems,” Proceedings
of CGAMES 2013 USA - 18th International Conference on Computer Games:
AI, Animation, Mobile, Interactive Multimedia, Educational and Serious Games,
pp. 66–73, 2013.
==PAGE:122==
114
Bibliography
[12]
R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, When rewards compete with nature: The undermining
of intrinsic motivation and self-regulation. 2000.
[13]
S. Deterding, “Gamification:
designing for motivation,” Interactions, vol. 19,
2012.
[14]
R. M. Ryan and E. D. L, “Self-determination theory: basic psychological needs in
motivation,” Self-determination theory: Basic psychological needs in motivation,
development, and wellness., 2017.
[15]
E. L. Deci, R. M. Ryan, and G. C. Williams, “Need satisfaction and the self-
regulation of learning,” Learning and Individual Differences, vol. 8, 1996.
[16]
E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, “The empirical exploration of intrinsic motivational
processes,” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 13, 1980.
[17]
“Test drive® unlimited.,” 2006.
[18]
“The binding of isaac,” 2013.
[19]
“Chess.com - play chess online - free games.”
[20]
“Super mario maker.,” 2015.
[21]
“Grand theft auto v.,” 2019.
[22]
“Self-imposed challenge - tv tropes,” 2019.
[23]
“Challenge run - tv tropes,” 2019.
[24]
M. Sailer, J. U. Hense, S. K. Mayr, and H. Mandl, “How gamification motivates:
An experimental study of the effects of specific game design elements on psycho-
logical need satisfaction,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 69, pp. 371–380, 4
2017.
[25]
C. Groening and C. Binnewies, ““achievement unlocked!” - the impact of digital
achievements as a gamification element on motivation and performance,” Com-
puters in Human Behavior, vol. 97, pp. 151–166, 8 2019.
[26]
R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Self-determination theory and the facilitation of
intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being.,” American Psychologist,
vol. 55, 2000.
[27]
D. Peters, R. A. Calvo, and R. M. Ryan, “Designing for motivation, engagement
and wellbeing in digital experience,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 9, 5 2018.
[28]
N. Johannes, M. Vuorre, and A. K. Przybylski, “Video game play is positively
correlated with well-being,” Royal Society Open Science, vol. 8, 2 2021.
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
115
[29]
M. Barr and A. Copeland-Stewart, “Playing video games during the covid-19
pandemic and effects on players’ well-being,” Games and Culture, vol. 17, pp. 122–
139, 1 2022.
[30]
R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic defini-
tions and new directions,” Contemporary Educational Psychology, vol. 25, 2000.
[31]
R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation from a self-
determination theory perspective: Definitions, theory, practices, and future di-
rections,” Contemporary Educational Psychology, vol. 61, 4 2020.
[32]
R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “The darker and brighter sides of human existence:
Basic psychological needs as a unifying concept,” Psychological Inquiry, vol. 11,
2000.
[33]
E. L. Deci, R. M. Ryan, M. Gagné, D. R. Leone, J. Usunov, and B. P. Kor-
nazheva, “Need satisfaction, motivation, and well-being in the work organizations
of a former eastern bloc country: A cross-cultural study of self-determination,” /
SATISFACTION AND WELL-BEING ACROSS CULTURES, 2001.
[34]
R. A. Turner, C. E. Irwin, J. M. Tschann, and S. G. Millstein, “Autonomy, relat-
edness, and the initiation of health risk behaviors in early adolescence,” Health
Psychology, vol. 12, pp. 200–208, 1993.
[35]
R. Tamborini, N. D. Bowman, A. Eden, M. Grizzard, and A. Organ, “Defining
media enjoyment as the satisfaction of intrinsic needs,” 2010.
[36]
A. K. Przybylski, R. M. Ryan, and C. S. Rigby, “The motivating role of violence
in video games,” 2009.
[37]
M.
Pusey,
K.
W.
Wong,
and
N.
A.
Rappa,
“Using
case
studies
to
explore
need
satisfaction
and
frustration
in
puzzle
video
games:,”
https://doi.org/10.1177/15554120211056126, vol. 0, pp. 1–21, 12 2021.
[38]
“The witness.”
[39]
N. of America Inc., S. LLC, and H. H. (Firm), “Untitled goose game,” 2020.
[40]
A. Tyack and P. Wyeth, “”the small decisions are what makes it interesting”,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 5, 10 2021.
[41]
E. A. (Firm), “Spore.,” 2008.
[42]
“Stardew valley.,” 2020.
[43]
Y. Iwasaki and R. C. Mannell, “Leisure sciences situational and personality influ-
ences on intrinsically motivated leisure behavior: Interaction effects and cognitive
processes,” 2010.
==PAGE:124==
116
Bibliography
[44]
“Brick by brick.,” 1998.
[45]
A. Rollings and E. E. W. Adams, “Andrew rollings and ernest adams on game
design,” p. 621, 2003.
[46]
E. E. W. Adams and A. Rollings, “Fundamentals of game design,” p. 675, 2010.
[47]
C. Crawford, “Chris crawford on game design,” p. 476, 2003.
[48]
J. Hamari and V. Eranti, “Framework for designing and evaluating game achieve-
ments,” 2011.
[49]
G. Volkmar, J. Pfau, R. Teise, and R. Malaka, “Player types and achievements-
using adaptive game design to foster intrinsic motivation,” Extended Abstracts
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Companion
Extended Abstracts, vol. 19.
[50]
L. E. Nacke, C. Bateman, and R. L. Mandryk, “Brainhex: A neurobiological
gamer typology survey,” Entertainment Computing, vol. 5, pp. 55–62, 2014.
[51]
H. Aabom, “Exploring the intrinsic nature of video game achievements,” 2014.
[52]
A. G. Money, A. Atwal, E. Boyce, S. Gaber, S. Windeatt, and K. Alexandrou,
“Falls sensei: A serious 3d exploration game to enable the detection of extrin-
sic home fall hazards for older adults,” BMC Medical Informatics and Decision
Making, vol. 19, 2019.
[53]
D. A. Mawsally and E. Sudarmilah, “A virtual-reality edu-game: Save the en-
vironment from the dangers of pollution,” Khazanah Informatika: Jurnal Ilmu
Komputer dan Informatika, vol. 5, 2019.
[54]
J. Brooke, “Sus - a quick and dirty usability scale,” 1995.
[55]
“The system usability scale & how it’s used in ux | adobe xd ideas,” 2020.
[56]
R. Kohavi and R. Longbotham, “Online controlled experiments and a/b testing,”
Encyclopedia of Machine Learning and Data Mining, pp. 922–929, 2017.
[57]
C. Burgers, A. Eden, M. D. V. Engelenburg, and S. Buningh, “How feedback
boosts motivation and play in a brain-training game,” Computers in Human Be-
havior, vol. 48, pp. 94–103, 7 2015.
[58]
E. Krahmer and N. Ummelen, “Thinking about thinking aloud: A comparison
of two verbal protocols for usability testing,” IEEE Transactions on Professional
Communication, vol. 47, pp. 105–117, 6 2004.
[59]
“Intrinsic motivation inventory (imi) – selfdeterminationtheory.org,” 1982.
[60]
“Basic psychological need satisfaction, and frustration scales – selfdetermination-
theory.org,” 2015.
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
117
[61]
S. Rigby and R. Ryan, “The player experience of need satisfaction (pens) an
applied model and methodology for understanding key components of the player
experience,” 2004.
[62]
D. Johnson and J. Gardner, “Personality, motivation and video games,” 2010.
[63]
D. Johnson, M. J. Gardner, and R. Perry, “Validation of two game experience
scales: The player experience of need satisfaction (pens) and game experience
questionnaire (geq),” International Journal of Human Computer Studies, vol. 118,
pp. 38–46, 10 2018.
[64]
W. IJsselsteijn, Y. D. Kort, K. Poels, A. Jurgelionis, and F. Bellotti, “Character-
ising and measuring user experiences in digital games,” International Conference
on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology, vol. 620, 2007.
[65]
K. L. Norman, “Geq (game engagement/experience questionnaire): A review of
two papers,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 25, pp. 278–283, 2013.
[66]
H. Song, W. Peng, and K. M. Lee, “Promoting exercise self-eﬀicacy with an
exergame,” Journal of Health Communication, vol. 16, 2011.
[67]
J. Hamari, N. Hanner, and J. Koivisto, “Service quality explains why people use
freemium services but not if they go premium: An empirical study in free-to-play
games,” International Journal of Information Management, vol. 37, pp. 1449–
1459, 2 2017.
[68]
“Measure calculate net promoter score (nps) | qualtrics.”
[69]
F. Emmert-Streib and M. Dehmer, “Understanding statistical hypothesis testing:
The logic of statistical inference,” Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction
2019, Vol. 1, Pages 945-961, vol. 1, pp. 945–961, 8 2019.
[70]
“Unity technologies,” 2022.
[71]
“Our company | unity,” 2021.
[72]
“Top 5 mobile game development technologies in 2021,” 2021.
[73]
“Unreal engine,” 2022.
[74]
“7 best frameworks & libraries for cross-platform android and ios apps in 2022,”
2022.
[75]
“Flutter - build apps for any screen.”
[76]
“The go programming language.”
[77]
“Tensorflow.”
[78]
“Angular.”
==PAGE:126==
118
Bibliography
[79]
“React native · learn once, write anywhere.”
[80]
“React – a javascript library for building user interfaces.”
[81]
“Javascript.com.”
[82]
“Cross-platform mobile app development: Ionic framework.”
[83]
“Set® – playmonster,” 2022.
[84]
“Founder & inventor: Marsha j. falco | america’s favorite card games®,” 1974.
[85]
“Set (card game),” 2022.
[86]
“The daily set puzzle | america’s favorite card games®,” 2022.
[87]
A. Fabijan, P. Dmitriev, H. H. Olsson, and J. Bosch, “The online controlled
experiment lifecycle,” IEEE Software, vol. 37, pp. 60–67, 3 2020.
[88]
T. M. Kister, “Improving the information development process: A refined iterative
development model,” Technical Communication, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 186–211, 2016.
[89]
Mendeley, “Mendeley - reference management software,” 2008.
[90]
C. S. Fleisher and B. E. Bensoussan, “Business and competitive analysis : effective
application of new and classic methods,” FT Press, 2007.
[91]
A. Ananjeva, J. S. Persson, and A. Bruun, “Integrating ux work with agile de-
velopment through user stories: An action research study in a small software
company,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 170, 2020.
[92]
E. S. Duh, J. Guna, M. Pogačnik, and J. Sodnik, “Applications of paper and
interactive prototypes in designing telecare services for older adults,” Journal of
Medical Systems, vol. 40, 2016.
[93]
H. Al-Samarraie and S. Hurmuzan, “A review of brainstorming techniques in
higher education,” Thinking Skills and Creativity, vol. 27, 2018.
[94]
A. Tomer, B. Shani, and E. B. Rafael, “Amir tomer iterative software development-
from theory to practice,” 2001.
[95]
“Android apps on google play.”
[96]
“Set (card game) - wikipedia.”
[97]
“Github.”
[98]
“Teaching - dtu inside.”
[99]
“Instagram.”
[100] “Facebook.”
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
119
[101] “Whatsapp.”
[102] “Feed | linkedin.”
[103] “Discord | your place to talk and hang out.”
==PAGE:128==
