==PAGE:1==
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Con­
sumption
for Use in Therapy and Self­reflection
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
for Use in Therapy and Self­reflection
Master Thesis
April, 2022
By
Bartłomiej Józef Otto
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mobile development.
Bartłomiej Józef Otto ­ s203042
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
According to a report published by Kepios Pte. Ltd. social media usage has gone up
by another 10.1% [1] in 2022. At this stage the rise of this number does not come as a
surprise to anyone, however it still solidifies the idea that our social media content con­
sumption is on a steady rise. A recent study performed on adolescents discovered that
there is some form of correlation between mental illness and the use of social media how­
ever they state the a causative relation is yet to be confirmed [2]. This creates the space
to perform research which would allow me to create a tool to help people understand their
social media behaviour.
To begin with, I performed extensive research on three instrumental topics of self­tracking,
mHealth apps and social media interactions. The last two topics are very broad, but I
picked few articles that I think best fit this report and showcased them in this report.
After performing the research I designed an app based on the information from the re­
search phase and official Android guidelines. I chose a range of features and used Figma
to create prototypes centered around them. These features were chosen based on my
understanding of self­tracking.
I then moved to turn the ideas into code and reality. During the implementation phase I
worked on creating a mobile app that would best fit the design prototype I had created
earlier. I managed to implement most of the features I had wanted the app to have.
Afterwards I decided to carry out evaluations with the use of my app. I had chosen a sce­
nario approach and conducted a range of interviews to determine a range of key factors
as well as receive feedback from the participants.
The result of all this work is an app that allows the user to track his social media consump­
tion in a way that apps have not allowed before.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Jakob Eg Larsen, Associate Professor, Dept. of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science
For the patience and careful guidance which can be felt through every step of the report.
iv
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Self­tracking explained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Interacting with social media
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Mobile applications in context of health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Initial concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Design
13
3.1
Home screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Displaying logs for specific app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Edit Button Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Analysis screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Averages screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Implementation
24
4.1
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Pop­up Button
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Logs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Home Fragment & bar chart functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5
Analysis fragment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.6
Settings fragment and tags
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.7
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Evaluation
39
5.1
Researching means of evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Designing the evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Process of evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Course of the evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.5
Results of evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.6
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.3
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.5
Interpretation & Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.6
Future works & recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7
Conclusions
51
Bibliography
52
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
v
==PAGE:8==
A Title
55
vi
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With this project I want to explore the intersection between self­tracking, social media and
mHealth apps. I want to research whether there is a potential to create a tool which would
allow users to better understand how they interact with their social media. To do this I will
first introduce my research on the three aforementioned topics. I will describe some of
the research I performed in the next chapter.
I naturally turned to designing and implementing a mobile (Android) app which would
facilitate such use. This is warranted by the fact that phones are the place we mostly
browse social media on[3]. What’s more phones are something we are able to carry with
each other as a tracking tool and as I mentioned that is one of the collection barriers users
mentioned.
I envisioned the app as a helpful tool for people who would like to understand better how
they interact with social media. I imagined users would use this universal tool for self­
tracking as well as self­improvement.
1.1
Structure
With the second chapter focusing on background knowledge in the form of an analysis
I will introduce the reader to a few crucial experiments which shine some much needed
light on how the topics in this project are relevant.
Chapter three will talk about the process of designing that this app went through, accom­
panied by fragments of the Figma layout which the app was later based on. This is the
part which will introduce the reasoning behind the look and feel of the app.
Chapter four will explain choices associated with the tools I used and how I implemented
the app. Paired up with some of the key code snippets, I show how the app works in the
background and why some things do not look like in the design prototypes.
In chapter five I will go over the evaluation of the app. I’ll explain how I designed it, how
I planned out to carry it and how the process finally went. Afterwards I will present some
results as well as mention the limitations,
Chapters six will consist of me discussing the whole project, its limitations and implications
as well. The project will end with me performing a summary in the conclusions chapter.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:11==
2
Analysis
On a daily basis we produce an abundance of data. Almost every our interaction with
any device is processed by some chip­set or is sent to a server, some of it is instantly
destroyed, lost forever, however some of it becomes stored for later usage. Through the
sheer amount and apparent insignificance of this data we often pay little to no attention
to it. After all, why would one feel the need to record the fact that he missed the ”Q” key
on his keyboard? However if we stacked all these miss­typed words we could come up
with a heat map of how and when a certain person misses a key, a valuable information
if someone wants to perfect their typing.
2.1
Self­tracking explained
In this section I perform a deep dive on the current state of self­tracking, why and how do
people perform it, what are the available tools, what potential does the concept offer and
what are it’s limitations. This will set a background for a later explanation of the potential
usability of ”SoTrack”.
Stages of self­tracking
During a recent survey conducted on 68 participants, who actively engage in self­tracking,
the researchers proposed a model divided into five different stages [4] (Figure 2.1). The
participants were asked to list the different types of personal information which they collect
and later reflect on. From their list, they were later supposed to pick one specific subject
which they deemed most relevant and interesting. With the chosen subject in focus, the
participants were later asked questions related to the tools they use, what motivates them
and what problems they ran into during their self­tracking.
Figure 2.1: The Stage­Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems [4]
Preparation
During this stage the tracker decides what date they are going to collect
and how they are going to do so (which tools they will use).
Collection
Here people collect their data, whether its performed automatically or manually.
Integration
This is where the data is being prepared, combined and transformed for reflection.
Reflection
During this stage the data is being analyzed and reflected upon.
Action
In this stage people decide what they are going to use their reflection for
and how they are going to make this a part of their lives.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1.1
Why do people self­track?
The need for self­tracking stems from the desire to learn something from seemingly ob­
scure information. Many people perform some form of self­tracking without even realizing
it, be it keeping a diary or a dream journal, or maybe using some sports tracker or count­
ing their calories. It would seem that the two driving factors are curiosity and the need for
self­improvement [5]. We engage in the act of recording our activities or events for better
understanding of ourselves, our habits and how we engage with them. With a proper visu­
alization of something seemingly complex we can derive useful information from it which
we can later use to influence the very action or habit we are recording.
For example, improving your sleep schedule could start with analyzing the activities one
performs before and during sleep. When combining the data over a longer period of
time you can derive certain correlation and causation. If we turn to the Quantified Self,
a website intended for the sharing of different self­tracking techniques, results and tips,
we can find people who are interested in tracking their different bodily symptoms, location
when an event occurs or their level of oxygen or cholesterol.
Tracking sneezes
Thomas Blomseth Christiansen had been plagued by allergy induced sneezing, he de­
cided to try and discover which grasses or plants were most guilty of driving his allergic
reaction [6]. As he describes during a show­and­tell his solution was to combine a self­
written ”running app” to track his location, a GoPro camera and the one button tracker
(more on the one button tracker will be explained in further sections). Whenever he felt
the need to sneeze he would press the button, which saved the exact time of the event.
He later combined the time of the sneeze with the data from his location tracking app
which allowed him to produce this heat map (Figure 2.2)
Figure 2.2: Thomas Blomseth Christiansen’s sneeze heat map [6]
After checking the heat map against the recorded videos from his GoPro he was able to
find the plants which where causing him to sneeze. While performing the show and tell of
his project he stated that ”I’m in so much control of those sneezes that I’m not sneezing
that much anymore”, which seems to be a pretty clear indicator of the results of his work.
4
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
How do people collect data?
Depending on the nature of the event that people want to track, they will employ differ­
ent tools to best fit their goal. Despite the pen and paper still being a viable option, we
can observe a general increase in the use of wearable devices and the availability of
self­tracking apps [7].Turning once again towards Quantified Self we can see that body
sensors play a big part in data collection. People gather measurements on the level of
different substances in their body and then often look at it in a certain context.
For example Whitney Erin Boesel used a CardioCheck ®device to measure her choles­
terol level [8] an then compared it against the period during which she was nursing her
new­born child. It does however seem that due to the different questions which people
are considering there is no one universal tool that people turn to. Most articles and show­
and­tells convey a similar idea that people create or combine different existing tools (like
location trackers or wearable devices).
2.1.3
Modes of Self­Tracking
Deborah Lupton, Professor of Sociology who has written many books and articles on Self­
Tracking proposed a distinction of five modes of Self­tracking. These are private, pushed,
communal, imposed and exploited [9]. The classification mostly adheres to the motivation
behind the self­tracking, however it also goes to speak about how the data is later utilized.
These modes are described in this table Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: 5 Modes of Self­Tracking [9]
Private
Driven by the desire to self­improve and self­optimize, this
Pushed
Similar to private but the initial ’push’ towards the tracking is external (eg. an ad)
Communal
With self­tracking being a community (for example Quantified Self),
many users influence each other with ideas and solutions.
Imposed
This is considered the foisting of the use of self­tracking devices
upon users by a third­party primarily for the third­party’s benefit.
Exploited
The case when ones data is being repurposed for someone else’s use
2.1.4
Struggles and limitations
Self­tracking is not an easy task and people run into all sorts of problem when trying to
complete all stages of the process. As described by Li et al. different stages pose a
different set of struggles and the most popular will be described here [4].
Preparation barriers
During this stage people struggle with determining what question they want answers to
as well finding the correct tools to do so. Some participants also named the problem of
transporting data collected from one device to another.
Collection barriers
There are three most popular barriers during the collection. Topping the list is the tool,
problems with accessibility or reliability make it hard to consistently record the data. Next
we have remembering, often times people forgot to log the event they were tracking. Last
there is the lack of time, since self­tracking is a time consuming process.
Integration barriers
During this stage the biggest problems seem to be transcribing and organizing the data.
Since there is no universal tool for self­tracking, users must often find a way to display or
analyze their data by themselves.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
5
==PAGE:14==
Reflection barriers
Here the lack of time is once again named, going through and analyzing the data seems
to be too time consuming. Additionally people complain about the visualization and that
it does not offer a good view of the data.
2.2
Interacting with social media
Social media and its current influence on society is a very broad topic covering a whole
spectrum of different sciences. Due to how relatively new this concept is and how quickly
it still expands there is a plethora of different studies being performed on the matter. This
section is committed to giving a glimpse into how we currently perceive the impact that
social media content has on us.
2.2.1
Likes
A 2017 study was performed on people with various levels of purposefulness and self
esteem [10]. Participants where picked from a group of 300 based on their Facebook
presence. They later analyzed the total number of followers and the amount of likes their
profile picture received.
The researchers found that people who had high purposefulness scores were largely
unaffected by a lower amounts of likes or were quick to brush it off and move forward.
However users who struggled with their purpose in life were noted to be affected by re­
ceiving less likes. This shows that we can be influenced by something so simple as a
reaction under our post. The authors also suggested to perform similar studies for other
forms of online feedback.
Likes and perception
A study performed on adolescents in 2013 was set to find how they are influenced by a
number of likes underneath posts with risky behaviour (smoking, drugs or nudity). The
test group consisted of 34 participants aged 13­18 showing no abnormal behaviour. All
participants were later strapped into an MRI scanner and presented with a screen mimick­
ing an Instagram feed. The participants were then presented with 148 images (66 risky
images), each attached with a different amount of likes. The screen also featured two
buttons, ”next” and ”like” (Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Screen presented to the adolescents [10]
In the case of risky images the neural activity remained unchanged in spite of differing
amounts of likes. However for normal content the neural regions associated with with
social cognition, reward processing, attention, and imitation were observed to be more
6
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:15==
active. What the authors called ”quantifiable social endorsement” seems to have an in­
fluence on how adolescents perceive content. The authors also argued that this could be
a notion that expands beyond social media.
2.2.2
Influence on subjective well­being
In 2013, researchers set out to discover whether the amount of time spent browsing Face­
book had an influence on subjective well­being among young adults (be it how one feels
in the moment and how they perceive their lives in general). For this a group of 82 people
with a median age of 19.52 was assembled. They were later asked daily to fill out a survey
where they would answer questions regarding time spent browsing Facebook and their
well­being.
Three phases of the experiment were conducted, the first being an assessment of the
current well­being of the participants as well as their motivation to use Facebook. The
second phase was where the researchers sent out the aforementioned surveys. In phase
three the participants were invited back to the lab for a final assessment of the state of
their well­being. The variables that were being measured were loneliness, affect, worry,
Facebook use, direct contact as well as pre and post life satisfaction.
After rejecting two alternative causes for the results of the experiment the authors came
to a conclusion that Facebook use does influence both affective and cognitive well­being.
They even went as far as to state ”[...]Facebook use may constitute a unique form of
social network interaction that predicts impoverished wellbeing”. These results prove that
we must pay closer attention to how often and in what fashion we interact with our social
media.
2.3
Mobile applications in context of health
In a 2014 Green Paper published by the European Commission, mHealth (mobile health)
is defined as “medical and public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as
mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and other
wireless devices” [11]. It is also expanded on apps (applications) that connect to medical
devices or sensors. This shines a new light on societies struggle for a better mental quality
of life. In the same paper they express the potential that they see in this particular sector
of healthcare accenting the ability to collect medical, physiological, lifestyle, daily activity
and environmental data.
2.3.1
Current state of the art
According to a report prepared by PWC on mHealth, we have seen an increase in demand
for such solutions [12]. With accessibility to internet and mobile phones with more and
more processing power, the sector is able to meat this increase in demand [13]. These
metrics allowed for the supply of more and more apps that target numerous aspect of
healthcare.
A recent scope review took on trying to evaluate the current state of mHealth apps [14]. 13
articles targeting different were analyzed in terms of population, intervention, comparison,
outcome and study design. Despite some apps that focused on meditation showing some
promising results (e.g. the popular app Headspace was reported to reduce perceived
stress and increase in well­being and sustainment) the authors came to the conclusion
that many lacked proper research. It was also pointed out that many of the apps were
developed based on therapy and not evidence­based content. Towards the end it was
also stated that these apps could be improved with more focus on user demand during
development.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Screens from the app Headspace
2.3.2
Future of mHealth apps
A global survey was published by WHO which aimed to assess the level of adoption, types
of initiatives, status of monitoring and evaluation as well as barriers to implementation of
mHealth apps [15] It stated that at the time (2011) of the survey 83% of member states
offered an mHealth service. This shows not only the potential for these apps to be con­
sidered as products but they could also be a part of the ongoing process of digitization of
modern healthcare.
Medical sensors
Alongside the evolution of software that supports this rapid growth of mHealth over the
last decade comes the evolution of hardware that can supply the necessary data. In a
2018 article it is explained how the introduction and popularizing of 5G networking opened
new possibilities for medical sensors. Since the connection allows more devices to have a
stable connection, the authors stated that the current advancements in both smartphone
usage as well as wearable sensors provide an easy way to control the health status in
patients.
2.3.3
Potential challenges
Like in any other field, this rapid advancement in mHealth carries its problems and obsta­
cles. In this case however they are especially important since health is at stake. Some of
these apps are clearly nothing more than supplements to a better well­being, however the
line between a helpful app and a medical product is one that must be thoroughly watched,
since these apps have the potential to be as harmful as they are helpful.
Data protection
In the same Green Paper mentioned earlier, the report lists out potential issues that require
additional attention during the development of mHealth. The first and most generously
addressed problem is the protection of the data used in mHealth apps, citing an article
which stated that 9 of the 20 biggest health related apps had been sharing their data with
third parties [16].
A 2019 study showed that 45% of patients showed concern over the privacy of their data
in the context of mHealth [17]. The Green Paper later states that all data should be treated
with an appropriate measure of security, bringing up Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamen­
tal Rights of the European Union as a grounds on which this should be implemented.
Transparency
In the European Commissions 2012­2020 action plan it is mentioned that ”[mHealth Apps]
are blurring the distinction between the traditional provision of clinical care by physicians,
and the self­administration of care and wellbeing”[18]. This speaks to the problem of
8
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:17==
determining clearly what these apps are able to do and what they are not. When creat­
ing mHealth apps it must be explained to the user that they cannot be used instead of
professional help. This problem is best solved by official guidelines and regulations.
Scaling
There also seems to be a struggle with transforming all the current projects into larger
solutions. Designing an app with a concept in mind is not much of a struggle. Transforming
the app into a market product which has to be safe for the users in a medical context is
where the trouble comes in. According to the authors of ”mHealth Services: Examples
and Future Perspectives” it is instrumental to read necessary literature in order to prepare
for such a deployment [19].
2.4
Initial concepts
When envisioning this project I had two key aspects in mind, mobile application for Android
OS as that is the system I am most proficient in, and mental well­being as its a subject
close to heart on which I have worked before. These two key qualities accompanied me
when I set out to form some initial concepts for this work.
(a) Without mapping
(b) With mapping
Figure 2.5: Part of the Figma layout of the prototype
The first concept I had in mind (this was before my first consultation with my supervisor)
was an app that would serve as a online service for patients attending therapy. I wanted
to interview patients and therapists to create a tool which would help connect patients with
their therapists. Some of the ideas I had for this app were file exchange, messaging and
a calendar for meetings. I was aware that such solutions already exist, however none of
them seem to be perfect as none of them dominate the market.
I was however made aware that such a program would require serious knowledge about
the process and work of therapy which I was not prepared to obtain. What is more, I would
be inclined to follow the guidance of other people too a large extent, limiting the amount
of creativity and thinking I would be able to perform.
Another concept which I considered was to expand upon my Bachelor thesis which fea­
tured an app which helped people who suffered from panic attacks. However this seemed
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
9
==PAGE:18==
like a tough task to build upon mainly because the topic seemed exhausted by my previous
work.
2.4.1
One­Button tracker
After consulting my supervisor, I was directed towards the idea of self­tracking and I
started doing my research on the topic. I was also advised to look into the work that
my supervisor had done featuring the One Button tracker Figure 2.6. The concept for the
mentioned tracker is a button that simply saves the time of the click.
In its simplicity it seemed that the device is nothing groundbreaking and yet the size com­
bined with its lightweight design enables the user to carry it around without it being a
burden. In the case study, Larsen et al. gave the tracker to a patient suffering from PTSD
(post traumatic stress disorder) instructing him to click the button whenever he would
suffer from an attack (peak of arousal).
Figure 2.6: The one button tracker device [20]
After compiling and looking at the results of the time­series data the patient together with
his therapist had a new perspective on the timing of the attacks but being rid of memory
bias. They were able to establish new connections on certain emotions being present at
different moments of the patients day.
This does not conclude that the tracker completely cured the patient, however it gave both
the patient and the psychologist a tool to gain new insight into the his attacks.
This project showed me that if I will be pursuing the subject of self­tracking, that I should
not be envisioning my app as a final solution, but rather as a tool for other people to
establish a use for. With this in mind I set out to design an app that would serve more as
a simple tracker which would allow the user to set his own goals and uses for it.
2.4.2
The on screen buttons
Figure 2.7: The on screen button initial design
The on screen buttons were the idea I arrived at early on in the stages of designing the
app and I decided to make them the focal point of the whole app, with the rest of the
features delegated to supplementing their functions Figure 2.7.
10
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:19==
Inspired by the simplicity of the One­button, I decided that if I merely double the amount
of buttons I can add another twist to the app, a concept of a like and a dislike. The idea
was simple, if while browsing social media, be it Facebook posts, TikToks or photos on
Instagram, the user would be able to click one of the two floating buttons that indicate
how they feel about what is currently on their screen. I modeled an example use for the
buttons in Figmafig. 3.1.
Figure 2.8: An example use for the on screen buttons (top right corner)
This interaction would be saved for later use and display. The advantage of these buttons
was that they could be used for anything, even if their intended use was for social media.
Despite my intended purpose being social media I had in mind that these buttons could
be used for conversations, emails, videos or anything that happens on the screen of a
mobile phone.
Whats more, the usability of these buttons would not have to be limited to mobile activity.
As much as a mobile phone cannot compete with the One­Button, it certainly is a portable
device that we carry with us on all times and in contrast, nearly everyone owns one and
can use it. Yet again the intention behind the button would be at the users discretion.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:21==
3
Design
This chapter will be committed to how I designed the app. I will explain why I chose certain
approaches and why the app looks the way it does. I will explain the reasoning behind
the features as well as why I did not commit to some of them and why I did to others.
Later I will go into how I designed certain screens of the app and how this compliments
the features that they contain. Last I will explain why some features did not make the final
cut into the implementation phase.
As for the specific design, I initially considered to keep the buttons in a horizontal order,
on a dark background so they would be easy to spot on the screen. I wanted to later
implement them so they could be moved around on the screen to be displayed where
ever the user saw fit.
For the buttons themselves I opted into two identical icons of a thumb gesture, one green
and one red, this would be a very common and obvious indication of what the purpose for
both these buttons was. I would later redesign the app to better reflect official iconography
guidelines [21].
3.1
Home screen
Figure 3.1: Figma model of the home screen
The first part of the actual application screens that I modeled was the home (main) screen.
I wanted it to contain some of the core features of the app itself, the primary of which would
be the bar chart in the upper half of the screen.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
13
==PAGE:22==
3.1.1
Bar chart
Figure 3.2: Close up of the bar chart
The design of the bar chart was centered around the phrase ”at a glance” because I
wanted it to be really simple to look at and understand what is going on. This was mo­
tivated by one of the reflection barriers described in section 2.1.4, that displaying and
interpreting the data was a challenge.
A bar chart was the obvious choice for displaying my data as it is the best way to compare
metric values across a time range. I decided to show the last ten days, this way the user
would be able to compare three days of the previous week with the current week, but the
chart would not be overcrowded and still very easy to read.
The stacked bars of red and green are a simple way of conveying two different sets of
information. The first being the overall activity, at a glance the user would be able to tell
which day he used the button more. The second would be the ratio of likes and dislikes,
displayed in red and green the user would be instantly able to discern which day he used
which button more.
The colors of the bars were specifically given a pastel shade so they would be nicer to
look at, as opposed to a more vibrant shade. As this is a mental well­being app, I wanted
it to have a nice feel to it, which is why the simple design, accompanied by a two labels
with a thin font. The Y­axis label being informative as to what the user is seeing, the X­axis
label indicating which day of the week each bar represents.
3.1.2
View logs
The rest of the screen is dedicated to displaying the apps that the user had been browsing
when they pressed the button. This would be a great way to sort the logs (that’s what I
decided to call every piece of data connected to a single click).
As a concept I wanted to display each category in a grid layout with 2 apps aligned hori­
zontally with the name and the logo signifying which app it was. I was however in doubt
whether displaying the logo of the app would be a good choice and if it would even be
legal to use them in my own context.
3.1.3
Bottom navigation bar
Figure 3.3: Bottom navigation bar
14
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:23==
The bottom navigation bar is the most commonly used navigation scheme in Android apps,
it’s easy to use, shows what other screens are available and its position at the bottom of
the screen makes it easily accessible for one­handed use. It is also the recommended
solution by the android design guide for 3­5 top­level destinations [22].
I decided it would contain two other screens, the button screen (meant for editing the
button) and the analysis screen (containing more in depth knowledge on the data). The
icons I chose to represent each of the screens were taken from free online sources, many
of which I did not use in the final implementation.
3.1.4
Other features
The top of the home screen would contain the logo of the app as well as a hamburger menu
which could potentially hold navigation to screens like settings or additional information.
In the upper right cornet I wanted to position the export button. It would be used for
exporting the logs to the memory of the phone. This would be used to share the data with
a therapist, or for the user to use in his own fashion, in case he had a different idea on
how to display it.
3.2
Displaying logs for specific app
(a) Without filtering drop­down
(b) With filtering drop­down
Figure 3.4: Figma model of displaying logs for a specific app
Clicking on one of the app icons in the home screen would take the user to the screen
which displays logs for a specific application. As an additional function for the buttons, I
wanted them to take a screenshot and save it to the apps internal storage. This would
allow the user to also look at what it was that made him chose a specific interaction,
giving him even more insight into how social media content makes him feel. They would
be primarily displayed in a scrolling screen, with two screenshots positioned next to each
other.
Each screenshot would be accompanied by its associated button, and the date it was
saved. This would give some details about what the user is looking at.
3.2.1
Filtering
As shown in fig. 3.4b the button next to the search bar would unfurl a menu with a couple
of options to filter the logs. The first being a time range which would allow the user to
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
15
==PAGE:24==
choose a specific time slot. Android suggests this method when performing searches
which are not the primary focus of the app [23]. Additionally the user would have the
option to select which logs he would like to see depending on the button he pressed by
selecting a checkbox next to the desired button.
This would give the user more control over displaying the specifics of what data he would
want to see. Clicking on a screenshot would take the user to a screen which displays
details of that specific log. This is also how android suggests you design navigating di­
rections between hierarchical screens [22].
3.2.2
Displaying specific log
(a) With thumbs up
(b) With thumbs down
Figure 3.5: Figma model of displaying a specific log
This screen would show the user the details about a selected log. At the top the date would
be displayed. Below the screenshot the user would see the application name, time, and
the associated button. At the end a list of all associated tags would be shown.
16
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Edit Button Screen
Figure 3.6: Edit Button Screen
This screen was intended for the possibility to adjust the buttons. With the idea of creating
a universal tool for the user, I wanted to give them the ability of editing the buttons which
the pop­up would contain.
To do this I designed the screen which allowed the user to add or remove buttons from
the layout. The user would be able to choose the icon and the text that accompanied it.
This screen however, did not make it into the implementation phase. I decided that this
would complicate a lot of other functionalities, like the bar chart or the filtering. This would
add a lot of problems to a design which was centered around simplicity.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
17
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Analysis screen
Figure 3.7: Analysis screen
The last of the three main screens was the analysis screen which is focused around giving
more information about the data. The concept was to parse and cut the data in ways that
would allow the user to gain different insight on his activity. In the top part we have the
same bar chart as in the home screen. This is the main form of displaying the data and I
wanted to emphasize that.
3.4.1
Discoveries
Bellow the bar chart I wanted to implement a list of notifications that would show the user
different patterns discovered in his activity
Trend
Trend would be a notable increase or decrease of activity,
likes or dislikes across a space of time
Pattern
A pattern would be a pattern noticeable across a period of time
Surge
A surge would be a sudden increase of activity across a relatively short time period
Each discovery would be accompanied by the appropriate icon, a timestamp and a mes­
sage. I also planned to notify the user whenever such a discovery was made through the
notification function.
18
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:27==
3.4.2
Filtering
(a) With filtering apps
(b) With out filtering apps
Figure 3.8: Figma model of filtering the analysis bar chart
This screen was also meant to have filtering. I wanted to give the user the option to adjust
certain parameters of what the bar chart would show. This way I would create another
tool to display the data.
Firstly the amount of likes and dislikes that a bar would represent would be adjusted by
a dual­point slider for each respective button. After that the user would be able to decide
which app would only be taken into account fig. 3.8a. Below that, the time interval and
the time range would be adjustable. At the very bottom the user would be able to select
the tags he wants displayed. All this would be followed by an ”Apply” button which would
call for the chart to update its data.
This function did not make it into the final implementation. I decided that once the bar
chart would start displaying data in something other than a day­by­day fashion it would
become hard to read and this went against my aims.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
19
==PAGE:28==
3.4.3
Calendar
(a) With bars
(b) with a numeral
Figure 3.9: Figma model for calendars containing data
The calendar icon in the top­right corner in fig. 3.7 would take the user to the calendar
screen. Here in the form of a five by seven grid the data would be displayed to the user in
the form of a calendar. At the bottom the user would be able to toggle between months.
The default screen would show a calendar with days displaying bars for the respective
amount of likes and dislikes. With so much data to display in so little space I knew I had
to chose carefully what I would want each day to contain. I settled on just the bars to not
limit readability.
Flipping the toggle at the top would switch the data to just a numeral of the amount of
button presses per specific day.
3.4.4
Other features
(a) Selecting a specific day
(b) Selecting a specific discovery
Figure 3.10: Other features from the Analysis screen
20
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:29==
Specific day
This screen would be displayed after one of the bars on the main bar chart is pressed.
The screen would display two bars, one for each respective interaction. Below the bars
the user would see a list of screenshots just like in screen fig. 3.8a. Likewise clicking on
one of the screenshots would open screen fig. 3.5. This screen would give the user the
option to look in to a specific day.
Specific discovery
When pressing one of the discoveries at the bottom of the analysis screen the user would
be taken to a detailed screen on the selected discovery. The screen would contain a
message at the top, any bars associated with the particular discovery and a text with
additional information on it.
Below that the user would have the option to save the discovery for future use or to share
it (export it).
3.5
Averages screen
(a) average per hour
(b) average per day
(c) average per month
Figure 3.11: All average screens with filtering
In the analysis screen fig. 3.7, pressing the left button below the bar chart would open the
screen containing averages. At the top of the average screen we can see an identically
looking bar chart to the previous ones, however this one would contain the averages for
the respective time frame that each bar represents.
Above the bar chart the user could toggle between three different options regarding which
average they want to see. Choosing between hours, weeks and the whole year, would
give the user the possibility of understanding his activity better. Looking at what his aver­
age usage is in specific time period would be a new insight into the data, while preserving
the display standard set in previous screens.
Selecting a specific time frame was meant to display its details, in this particular screen­
shot fig. 4.14b it showed the different apps which were open while the button was pressed.
I did not implement this feature, since the app functionality was largely merged with the
tags functionality, rendering some features obsolete. The same goes for the filtering func­
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
21
==PAGE:30==
tion in fig. 4.14c, which would have allowed the user to look at more specific data by
selecting which apps interest them.
22
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:31==
1
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
23
==PAGE:32==
4
Implementation
This chapter will describe in detail on how I transformed my design into a functional app.
I will start by introducing the tools and decisions which set the tone for the rest of the
implementation. Later I will show screenshots from the application, paired with snippets
of code to present how the app works underneath.
Figure 4.1: Left half of the class diagram of the whole SoTrack project
.
24
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.2: Right half of the class diagram of the whole SoTrack project
.
4.1
Tools
When planning the app I made a range of decisions on which direction I want the app to
take. Part of this was choosing the correct tools to use for the app.
4.1.1
Android
After making the decision that the project will involve a mobile app, I had two mobile
operating systems to choose between, Apple iOS and Android OS. Despite iOS having
the advantage of being more popular among my peers, which would make evaluating
easier as I could share the app with more people, I decided to stick to Android for a few
reasons.
First of all, iOS does not allow for implementing any hovering buttons on the screen, this
renders my idea of displaying the buttons on top of the screen impossible. The second
argument is my proficiency in developing for Android. For these reasons I chose to stick
with Android.
4.1.2
Android Studio
There are a number of IDEs available for programming with Android, however Android
Studio being the official, Google backed software seemed to be the obvious choice. Ad­
ditionally my proficiency with JetBrains Studios tools meant that I would have an easier
time using it over any other IDE.
4.1.3
Language
Android supports a number of different programming languages. One option was Dart,
a programming language that utilizes the Flutter framework. It is officially supported by
Google and offers multi­platform development with a simple UI approach. However I
discarded it due to it’s limitations as well as my low proficiency in it.
The next and also the most popular language by far is Java, which is probably the second
best choice in this project. Javas’ popularity is one of it’s biggest strengths, as it means
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
25
==PAGE:34==
that most tutorials and guides would be in this language, as backed by this plot fig. 4.3
from an online article [24].
Figure 4.3: Stack Overflow Questions Java vs Kotlin [24]
.
However
The final option was Kotlin, developed in 2011 by JetBrains. It compiles to Java while
having an arbitrarily simpler syntax. In 2019 Google announced that it switched from
Java to Kotlin as it’s preferred language for Android development. As problematic as the
small amount of online material may be, I preferred to use a newer language which might
offer more looking into the future.
4.2
Pop­up Button
The floating buttons had a long way to go from the design phase all the way to fully
functional implementations. Here I will describe how I made them into their final form.
4.2.1
design
Figure 4.4: Layout for the floating button
26
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:35==
The initial design for the floating button assumed a horizontal positioning of two buttons
on a grey background (fig. 2.7). After modeling that in the app I decided that it was too
small to comfortable use. It was too small and having it float around the screen made it
get in the way constantly. I decided to order the buttons vertically (fig. 4.4) and fix the
position to the right side of the screen(fig. 4.5. This way they would take up less space
and would not keep getting in the way.
Figure 4.5: Floating buttons as seen on a display
The vertical ordering of the buttons also allowed me to add a third button that closed the
pop­up. This way I added an intuitive method of removing the buttons when they are not
needed.
4.2.2
Implementation
Displaying the buttons starts in MainActivity.kt, I first check for the necessary permis­
sion (android.permission.FOREGROUND_SERVICE) and whether it is granted. If it is
not, the app will instantly ask for said permission by opening the permissions tab in set­
tings.
Once it has the permissions it needs, I open the class ForegroundService.kt where all of
the displaying functionality is handled by three functions, onCreate(), onStartCommand()
and startForeground().
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
27
==PAGE:36==
Notification
Figure 4.6: Notification
The startForeground() function also handles the notification, which has to be displayed in
order to inform the user of the over­screen display (fig. 4.6).
4.2.3
Handling
The buttons’ features are handled in ButtonHandler.kt class. The core function is as­
signClickListener(), it is responsible for calling the addLog() function, which saves logs
when the button is clicked (more on that in section TODO). The class also contains the
the close() function which handles the close button and part of the tags functionality, which
I will explain later.
4.3
Logs
Everything in the app orbits around this set of classes and functions. A log is what I called
a single instance of saved data whenever one of the floating buttons is pressed.
4.3.1
Log data class
The basic log is defined in a data class. Kotlin offers data classes, which offer a simple
way for handling simple entities of data, the perfect tool for this use.
1
data class Log(
2
val id: UUID,
3
val date: Int,
4
val exactTime: Calendar ,
5
val tags: String ,
6
val buttonValue: Int
7
)
Listing 4.1: Snippet of code from the Logs.kt class, containing the constructor
The parameters for the Log.kt class went through many different iterations, but I finally
settled for the five seen in Listing 4.1. All the parameters are described in table 4.1.
Name
Type
Description
id
UUID
Responsible for distinguishing specific logs.
date
Int
For simplifying the later use of logs for the main bar chart.
exactTime
Calendar
For keeping track of the exact time
used mostly for the averages functionality.
tags
String
A string holding the tag assigned to the log.
buttonValue
Int
The Int that holds the value of which button was clicked
Table 4.1: Description of log parameters.
4.3.2
LogList and LogListHolder
To create a globally accessible list of logs, I use the LogListHolder.kt class, which ex­
tends the Application class. This allows me to create a global instance of this class,
28
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:37==
which has two parameters, one of which is the LogList.kt which is nothing more than a
list of Logs. This solution lets me access the logs from any point in the code by simply
calling LogListHolder.logList.list. This solution does however require that I add the class
to the AndroidManifest.xml.
1
<application
2
android:name=".log.LogListHolder"
3
android:allowBackup="true"
4
android:icon="@mipmap/ic_launcher"
5
android:label="@string/app_name"
6
android:roundIcon="@mipmap/ic_launcher_round"
7
android:supportsRtl="true"
8
android:theme="@style/Theme.SoTrack">
Listing 4.2: LogListHolder mentioned in AndroidManifest.xml
When a button is pressed, the addLog() function, creates a random UUID, takes the day
of the year, current Date, the selected tag (or lack there of) and the specific button pressed
and creates an instance of Log.kt, this is then appended to the LogListHolder.logList.
1
private fun addLog(cal: Calendar , pressedButton: Int, tag: String = "") {
2
cal.time = Date(System.currentTimeMillis())
3
val newLog = Log(
4
UUID.randomUUID(),
5
Calendar.DAY_OF_YEAR ,
6
cal,
7
tag,
8
pressedButton
9
10
)
11
LogListHolder.logList.list += newLog
12
val sharedPreference =
13
context.getSharedPreferences("PREFERENCE_NAME", Context.
MODE_PRIVATE)
14
val prefsEditor = sharedPreference.edit()
15
val gson = Gson()
16
val json = gson.toJson(LogListHolder.logList)
17
prefsEditor.putString("MyObject", json)
18
prefsEditor.apply()
19
}
Listing 4.3: Creating and saving a log
4.3.3
Persisting the data
In order to ensure that the logs are sustained between different runs of the application I
decided to use the Shared Preferences solution. The logs are being saved every time a
log is being added, to ensure that none of them are lost. This is done by transforming
the list of logs into a JSON and then saving it in shared preferences. I also added to the
onResume() function in the MainActivity.kt the functionality to retrieve the logs from
the shared preferences.
1
private fun readLogListFromStorage(): List<Log> {
2
val sharedPreference = getSharedPreferences("PREFERENCE_NAME", Context
.MODE_PRIVATE)
3
val gson = Gson()
4
var json: String = sharedPreference.getString("MyObject", "")!!
5
if (json.isNotEmpty())
6
LogListHolder.logList.list = gson.fromJson(json, LogList::class.
java).list
7
json = sharedPreference.getString("taglist", "")!!
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
29
==PAGE:38==
8
if (json.isNotEmpty())
9
LogListHolder.tagList = gson.fromJson(json, List::class.java) as
List<String >
10
return LogListHolder.logList.list
11
}
Listing 4.4: Reading the data from shared preferences
4.4
Home Fragment & bar chart functionality
Figure 4.7: Main fragment
The bottom navigation bar (fig. 4.8) is handled in the MainActivity.kt class, it allows
the user to choose which of the fragments is being displayed. The default of the three
fragments is MainFragment.kt and it contains the main bar chart as well as the tags
recycler view, which displays a list of all existing tags attached to logs.
Figure 4.8: Bottom navigation bar
30
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:39==
4.4.1
Bar chart functionality
Figure 4.9: Log bar chart
For the bar chart (fig. 4.10) I decided to use the MPAndroidChart Library by Philipp Jahoda.
It is a very powerful library, allowing a massive amount of modifications to the charts and
a range of guides and tutorials, which allowed me to adjust the bar chart to my exact
preference.
The bulk of the bar chart functionality is handled in VerticalBarChartHandler.kt class.
The class has a range of functions that allow it to accept the data from the LogListHolder
and transform it into the bar chart seen on the main screen. I will briefly explain how all
of these functions work, as they enable one of the most core features to work.
configureChartAppearence function
This function is responsible for shaping the bar chart. I disable both the legend and the
description by accessing the correct properties of the bar chart, as that fits better with
my minimalist design of the bar chart. I know that keeping the quantity number on the
bars goes against that very same rule, but I deemed displaying the number a necessary
feature, which doesn’t obstruct the readability of the chart.
I also use this function to position the axes in their respective positions and add some
finishing touches on the look. This allows me to achieve the intended look of the bar chart
without editing anything in the .XML layout.
prepareChartData function
Here the data from VerticalBarChartHandler.kt is transformed into bar data sets which
are objects that the bar chart can display. First the function tallies the likes and dislikes for
the last ten days and collects it into an array of floats which is then fed into the bar data
sets with correct labels and colors. By using an array of floats I am able to stack the two
bars on top of each other.
1
private fun prepareChartData(
2
labels: List<String >,
3
chart: BarChart ,
4
logList: LogList
5
): BarChart {
6
val values: ArrayList <BarEntry > = ArrayList()
7
for (i in labels.indices) {
8
val thumbsUp: Float = logList.list.filter { it.date == Calendar.
DAY_OF_YEAR - i }
9
.filter { it.buttonValue == 1 }.size.toFloat()
10
val thumbsDown: Float = logList.list.filter { it.date == Calendar.
DAY_OF_YEAR - i }
11
.filter { it.buttonValue == 0 }.size.toFloat()
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
31
==PAGE:40==
12
values.add(BarEntry(i.toFloat(), floatArrayOf(thumbsUp , thumbsDown
)))
13
}
14
Collections.rotate(labels , Calendar.DAY_OF_WEEK)
15
val barDataSet = BarDataSet(values , "")
16
val dataSets: ArrayList <IBarDataSet > = ArrayList()
17
finalizeDataSets(dataSets , barDataSet , labels , chart)
18
return chart
19
}
Listing 4.5: Preparing the chart data in VerticalBarChartHandler.kt
prepareChartDataAverage function
As the same chart is reused for the averages functionality, the handler also contains a
function to prepare the data for it. In this context, making the date parameter of the log
class a Calendar object comes in very handy. When calculating the averages I am able to
compare the logs by the property of the Calendar object which are Calendar.DAY_OF_WEEK
, Calendar.HOUR_OF_DAY and Calendar.MONTH.
populateLogList function
This function doesn’t have any use for the final product, its use was purely for testing.
Using random data it fills LogListHolder.kt with simulated logs.
prepareBarChart function
The final function combines all of the previous in one spot also redirecting the preparation
of data to the correct function.
4.4.2
Tags recycler view
Figure 4.10: Tag recycler view
The lower half of the home screen is taken up by the recycler view which displays all
the available tags. In early versions of the app I iterated through all the logs finding each
distinct tag that was assigned to a log to be able to display them. However after I expanded
the tags functionality I decided to add an editable list of tags to the LogListHolder.kt to
make it accessible globally and ensure that it is not different between instances.
The tags recycler view is operated by the TagRecyclerViewAdapter.kt class. The adapter
takes the text_row_item.xml layout, combines it with the correct data (giving the layout
the correct tag) and also a click listener which redirects to the right intent, which in this
case is the SelectedTagActivity.kt.
32
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:41==
4.4.3
Display selected tag
(a) without filter drop­down
(b) with filter drop­down
Figure 4.11: Displaying logs for a selected tag
Clicking on one of the tags from the tags recycler view, opens a selected_tag_display.xml
view operated by the SelectedTagActivity.kt class (fig. 4.11a). The view contains a
text view at the top which informs the user about which tag he is currently viewing. Most
of the screen is covered by a recycler view which shows all the associated logs, with in­
formation about each specific log. The recycler view is handled by another adapter called
SelectedTagAdapter.kt.
Filtering
Clicking the arrow button in the top right corner, expands the filter drop­down. To collapse
and expand the drop­down I use a TransitionManager with a delayed transition effect.
This makes the transition smooth and gives the functionality a nicer feel.
1
private fun arrowOnClickListener(hiddenView: View) {
2
if (hiddenView.visibility == View.GONE) {
3
TransitionManager.beginDelayedTransition(
4
findViewById(R.id.selected_tag_layout),
5
AutoTransition()
6
)
7
hiddenView.visibility = View.VISIBLE
8
arrow.rotation = 180.0f
9
} else {
10
hiddenView.visibility = View.GONE
11
arrow.rotation = 0.0f
12
TransitionManager.beginDelayedTransition(
13
findViewById(R.id.selected_tag_layout),
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
33
==PAGE:42==
14
AutoTransition()
15
)
16
}
17
}
Listing 4.6: Function responsible for expanding the filtering drop­down
The filtering allows the user to select either of the buttons as well as select a time range
of interest. The filter button has a click listener assigned which takes the data from the
check­boxes as well as the two text fields and refreshes the data that is being fed to the
SelectedTagAdapter.kt.
Selected log display
Figure 4.12: Selected log display
The selected log display is operated by the SelectedLogActivity.kt class, using the
selected_log_display.xml layout. It uses the id parameter of the log to fetch the correct
log and display it’s details.
34
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:43==
4.5
Analysis fragment
Figure 4.13: Analysis screen
The analysis screen is populated partially by the same bar chart which appears in the
home fragment. However below that you can see a recycler view which displays informa­
tion about the different patterns recognized in the logs. The recycler view currently has
hard­coded data as the functionality is not implemented at this time.
Between the bar chart and the recycler view, we can see two buttons. The filter button
leads to the filtering functionality which isn’t currently implemented, but it’s intended shape
can be seen in the design section. The Average button opens the averages feature.
4.5.1
Averages
(a) average per hour
(b) average per day
(c) average per month
Figure 4.14: All average screens
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
35
==PAGE:44==
The averages screen presents a similar bar chart to the previous ones seen, however
this one shows the average usage for a specific time­frame. Through pressing one of the
three text views on the top of the screen, the user may navigate between three different
screens, each with its own bar chart. The bar charts contain twenty four, ten and twelve
bars, representing the average amount per hour, day of the week and month respectively.
Programmatically, I yet again create an instance of VerticalBarChartHandler.kt, but
this time I call prepareBarChart() with a parameter which tells it which time­frame I want
displayed.
1
private fun populateBarChart() {
2
val verticalBarChart: BarChart = findViewById(R.id.
fragment_vertical_barchart)
3
val verticalBarChartHandler = VerticalBarChartHandler()
4
verticalBarChartHandler.prepareBarChart(verticalBarChart , 0)
5
}
Listing 4.7: Calling prepareBarChart() with an additional parameter
4.6
Settings fragment and tags
Figure 4.15: Settings screen
The settings screen is the last of the three fragments. It is operated by the SettingsFragment.kt
class and it serves two main purposes. The first is exporting the logs to internal storage
and the second is tags management, as it allows the addition and removal of tags.
4.6.1
Tags
The tags functionality encompassed two of the design ideas I initially had for the app,
which was the tags and saving the app that is on the screen when the button is pressed.
Due to certain limitations in Android development, I merged the two features into an ex­
panded version of tags.
This required me to implement the possibility of editing the list of tags. As there could have
been more elegant solutions for this, I decided to once again go with simplicity. To add
36
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:45==
a tag the user must simply type the name of the tag in the field and press the ”Add tag” but­
ton. This triggers the addTag() function which adds the tag to the LogListHolder.tagList.
Both addTag() and removeTag() call the updateSharedPref() function, which saves the
tag list to shared preferences so it is stays constant in between app life­cycles.
As for assigning the tag to the log itself, that is done with performing a long click on one of
the buttons. Doing so expands a drop­down containing all of the available tags as seen
in fig. 5.1. After that selecting one of the tags creates and saves a log with the associated
tag.
Figure 4.16: Floating buttons with expanded tags drop­down
4.6.2
Exporting data
For exporting I chose to transform the data into a JSON object, write it into a file and at the
end save it to internal files. As a back up solution, in case the save did not work correctly,
I also chose to write the whole JSON object into the clipboard. This way the user would
be able to paste the data into a place of his choosing.
1
private fun writeTextToFile(jsonResponse: String?) {
2
if (jsonResponse != "") {
3
val clipboard: ClipboardManager? =
4
activity?.getSystemService(CLIPBOARD_SERVICE) as
ClipboardManager?
5
val clip = ClipData.newPlainText("sth", jsonResponse)
6
clipboard?.setPrimaryClip(clip)
7
8
val dir = File("//sdcard//Download//")
9
val myExternalFile = File(dir, getRandomFileName())
10
var fos: FileOutputStream? = null
11
try {
12
fos = FileOutputStream(myExternalFile)
13
fos.write(jsonResponse?.toByteArray())
14
fos.close()
15
} catch (e: IOException) {
16
e.printStackTrace()
17
}
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
37
==PAGE:46==
18
Toast.makeText(
19
context ,
20
"Information saved to SD card. $myExternalFile",
21
Toast.LENGTH_SHORT
22
).show()
23
}
24
}
Listing 4.8: Saving the data to files and to clipboard
4.7
Limitations
When it came time to transform design and ideas into code and solutions I started running
into limitations caused by different obstacles. I will explain some of them in this section.
4.7.1
Screenshots
At the beginning I wanted the app to offer even more insight into the users activity. With
that in mind, as one of the functionalities I pictured the app would be able to perform a
screenshot of the currently used app (whenever the button was pressed).
This would however prove to be unattainable with the version of Android which I had
chosen to use for this project. With social interest in protecting their data, privacy changes
keep rolling out continuously for Android, patch after patch, this was rendered impossible.
Due to privacy concerns Android only allows the app to screenshot itself, thus making this
idea impossible to execute without workarounds.
Some of the solutions I found online suggested using MediaProjection, however I was
unable to bend it to my will without committing too much time to it. There were also
possibilities with registering the app as a system app but that seemed like a hack which
would not be feasible had I wanted to actually develop this app and place it on the market.
This forced me to rethink how I wanted the app to work and I had to pivot towards a more
display­focused direction.
4.7.2
Detecting foreground app
This once again was my will to provide more insight with further segregation of the logs.
Reading the current foreground app would allow the user to get more data on which spe­
cific apps he was using currently.
There seemed to be many solutions available online to obtaining this information however
none of them worked, I was only given access to information about my own app even if it
wasn’t the one in the foreground.
The way I dealt with this was expanding the tags functionality so that it would be easier
to use and allow for more personalization than I initially planned.
38
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:47==
5
Evaluation
This chapter is dedicated to the process of evaluating the app. I will explain what I was
looking for with the evaluation process and why I set out for these parameters. Later I will
go over how I carried out these evaluations. I was set on performing an evaluation for this
app from the very beginning as I believe in perfecting this concept through feedback.
5.1
Researching means of evaluation
When designing the evaluation I first needed to understand what I should be evaluating
for. I understood that the standard aim for testing the app should be usability. However
this being a mHealth app I knew that I couldn’t have a typical approach when designing
tests or questionnaires for this particular project.
In one systemic review I found, the research team composed a diagram for what seemed
to be the focus of different mHealth evaluations [25]. According to their results it would
seem like the most popular criteria by far are usability and functionality. However ethical
issues were also a big point of focus for many teams.
Figure 5.1: . Outline of developed classification of mHealth apps evaluation criteria [25]
I decided to use this research as a guideline towards which topics I should be investigating.
But that still did not instruct me on what questions I should be asking or how to carry out
the tests. I decided to seek help from a study which aimed for preparing a questionnaire
[26]. The study aimed to analyze current mHealth questionnaires and combine them into
a new and updated list of questions.
However this would not be a one­fits­all solution, so I knew I had to adapt it to my needs.
One of the topics the questionnaire does not seem to encompass is understanding what
the use of the app is. With this in mind I wanted to add a section to the questionnaire
which would aim to investigate whether the subject understands self­tracking and why it
could be useful.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
39
==PAGE:48==
Another aspect I wanted covered is privacy and security concerns. I wanted to understand
where users would draw the line regarding data privacy and how they would want the topic
approached when proceeding with expanding the apps functionalities.
5.2
Designing the evaluation
For the purpose of this process I decided to create two scenarios that the subject would
be instructed to walk through. The whole walk through would be recorded to see where
the intuition leads the subjects. The subject would be encouraged to vocalize his thought
process which would also be recorded for future purposes.
5.2.1
Scenario 1
The first scenario consists of four steps. It is aimed to determine whether the tags func­
tionality is intuitive and whether the user is able to add a log with the use of a tag. The
steps are as follow:
1. Open the app and navigate to tags functionality.
2. Add one tag.
3. Navigate outside of the app and add a log with previously created tag.
4. Re­open the app and navigate to view logs with added tag.
This scenario allows me to obtain a big amount of the information about the usability of
the app. First of all it shows whether the user is able to navigate to the tags without prior
knowledge as to where they are placed. Secondly it tests if the floating buttons are as
intuitive as I expect them to be. Third of all, to add a log with a tag, the user must perform
a long­click. It is instrumental that the test subject doesn’t know about this, to find out
whether this must be added to a set of instructions to the product.
5.2.2
Scenario 2
This scenario does not involve steps, as it is supposed to test whether the navigation
is intuitive in the app. The instruction presented to the test subject will read as follows:
Navigate to yearly averages screen. As the bottom navigation bar does not allow for
details, I want to check whether the icons and titles are indicative of what they contain.
5.2.3
Questionnaire
In the study I mentioned earlier the research team came up with a set of questions which
they named the mHealth App Usability Questionnaire (MAUQ). This specific MAUQ de­
signed for standalone mHealth apps which fits my case.
However I decided to not use the questionnaire without adapting it to my specific app.
I decided to extend it with a questions regarding privacy and security. I also removed
questions which addressed health services issues, as my app does not include and health
service features. The questions will be given as statements with the possibility of choosing
five levels of agreement, ranging from ”strongly disagree”, to ”strongly agree”. The final
list of questions, sorted into categories is as follows.
1. Ease of use
(a) The app was easy to use.
(b) It was easy for me to learn to use the app.
(c) The navigation was consistent when moving between screens
40
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:49==
(d) The interface of the app allowed me to use all the functions (such as entering
information, responding to reminders, viewing information) offered by the app.
(e) Whenever I made a mistake using the app, I could recover easily and quickly.
2. Interface and satisfaction
(a) I like the interface of the app.
(b) The information in the app was well organized, so I could easily find the infor­
mation I needed.
(c) The app adequately acknowledged and provided information to let me know
the progress of my action.
(d) I feel comfortable using this app in social settings.
(e) The amount of time involved in using this app has been fitting for me.
(f) I would use this app again.
(g) Overall, I am satisfied with this app.
3. Usefulness
(a) The app would be useful for my health and well­being.
(b) The app helped me manage my health effectively.
(c) This app has all the functions and capabilities I expected it to have.
4. Privacy
(a) I feel comfortable with the data being collected by the app.
(b) I would not mind sharing the data with a health professional.
The questionnaire will be served to the user after the scenarios, in the form of a Google
form, with all responses taken anonymously.
5.3
Process of evaluation
In this section I will describe the process which the test subjects will undergo in order to
obtain evaluation of the app.
5.3.1
Introducing the app and the topic to the subject
First step is to introduce the process and what will be expected of the subject. To start I will
explain the concept of mHealth and self­tracking by reciting pieces of prepared informa­
tion. This is an instrumental step because I believe that self­tracking is not widely spread
subject, therefore the apps aim could be unclear without certain background knowledge.
5.3.2
Introducing the scenarios
Afterwards, I will present the subject with a phone with SoTrack pre­installed on it with
dummy­data for presentation purposes. I will then turn on screen and voice recording,
and proceed to explain the steps to the first scenario, while encouraging the evaluator to
speak his mind freely.
After completing the first scenario I will ask for brief feedback on the experience and
proceed with introducing the second scenario. Once the second scenario is complete I
will end screen recording and ask for extensive feedback. Once that is finished I will end
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
41
==PAGE:50==
voice recording and present a PC to the user and ask him to complete the aforementioned
questionnaire. Once the questionnaire is complete the process of evaluation will be over.
5.4
Course of the evaluation
5.4.1
Participants
Participants were 6 males aged 23­25 all recruited from my close group friends. As homo­
geneous as this group seems, it was important for me to obtain feedback from people with
an engineering background. As I was aware that collecting a diverse group for this evalua­
tion would require a far greater amount of time and resources that I allocated towards this
section of the project. The advantage of having a participant group with technical back­
ground was that they knew what to pay attention to and how to formulate the feedback in
a coherent way which would allow for quick and effective fixes or updates.
5.4.2
Obstacles and alterations
Just after the first participant I realized that I had greatly mistook how much the participants
would be able to figure out. First update I had to do was explaining what a log is and how
to add one. Second, I had to explain that in order to add a tag a long­press must be
performed on one of the buttons, without this instruction no participant could add the tag.
At certain points I had to guide the participants in the correct direction as they were unsure
of where to proceed, I asked them to reflect this in their answers to the questionnaire.
5.5
Results of evaluation
The direct result of the evaluation are six completed google forms with feedback as well
as six screen and voice recordings. In this section I will combine both of these results in
order to explain which aspects of the app had performed as I expected and intended, and
which still require performance.
I will not go over all of the questions and how they were answered, as some of them do
not present that much standalone value for discussion. All the answers will be attached
in a .csv file together with all the recordings.
5.5.1
Ease of use
Figure 5.2: Responses to the statement ”The app was easy to use.”
The general consensus between participants was that the app was easy to use, it was
not more complicated than any other app that they had just began to use. Quoting partic­
ipant number 4 ”[...]I guess, with every app at first you’re confused. After going through
the first functionalities you remember them immediately”, which speaks to the idea that
the app does not stand out with any complicated placement of its functionalities. Some
42
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:51==
participants, after completing scenario 2, even commented on the fact that placing the
averages in the analysis tab was the correct and intuitive placement.
The average answer for all the questions from section ”ease of use” combined was 4.0.
As the scenario was rather simple I don’t consider this a surprising result.
However the navigation may seem to be working as intended, two of the participants
commented that the toggle atop the averages screen was too small and that it was hard
to use because of that. One participant specifically said that he would imagine using the
app in tougher conditions and being unable to switch between the averages charts.
To sum up, the ease of use is not perfect and does require some attention. Most notably
the app could use some type of introduction when the user first opens it. A guide which
points to where each functionality and feature is located.
5.5.2
Interface and satisfaction
Figure 5.3: Responses to the statement ”I like the interface of the app.”
With the first section showing some good results it would seem like the second one offers
some space for improvement. In just the first question, 5 out of 6 participants chose the
neutral option. One participant drew attention to the fact that the buttons are not standing
out enough and that the color accents could be more visible.
Figure 5.4: Responses to the statement ”The app adequately acknowledged and provided
information to let me know the progress of my action.”
As illustrated by the answers in fig. 5.4, there was some uncertainty regarding feedback
for certain interactions in the app. Many participants specifically pointed out the lack of
any feedback when a tag is being added. Some participants even pressed the ”add tag”
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
43
==PAGE:52==
button repeatedly, being unsure whether it had worked. In this case I am quite positive
that adding some simple pop­up confirming the successful addition would suffice.
In general it would seem like the rough and minimalist look that I was aiming for during
my design phase had not been a big hit. In the next iteration, this app could probably use
a visual overhaul.
5.5.3
Usefulness
Figure 5.5: Responses to the statement ”The app would be useful for my health and
well­being.”
The third section seems to be one which caused the biggest divide amongst the partici­
pants. As illustrated in fig. 5.5 by the answers to the statement ”The app would be useful
for my health and well­being”. It would seem like some of the participants considered the
app to be of high usefulness while some did not see its merits. I guess this speaks to the
fact that the app is targeted towards a specific group of people with interest in self­tracking.
Another explanation is that I did not introduce the topic in a enticing manner.
5.5.4
Privacy
The last section asked users how they felt about the data collected by the app.
Figure 5.6: Responses to the statement ”I feel comfortable with the data being collected
by the app.”
Privacy and ethics was one of my concerns when envisioning this app during the initial
stages of this project. I knew this the concept for this app has potential for abuse if it
wasn’t secure and private. The responses in the ”privacy” section of the questionnaire
prove that the app had not worried any of the participants in terms of their sensitive data
being exposed.
44
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.7: Responses to the statement ”I would not mind sharing the data with a health
professional.”
Additionally, as highlighted by the responses to the last question (fig. 5.7), participants
also would not have much problem sharing their data with health professionals. This
opens for the possibility to use the app in the context of therapy.
5.5.5
Bugs
In previous sections I focused on the feedback that I received towards functionality where
I had failed or succeeded in delivering the correct features. However the participants also
pointed out a series of bugs which they had spotted during their interaction with the app.
Here is a list of what did not work correctly:
1. The toggle on top of the averages screen did not indicate properly which tab the
user was in.
2. The wrong icon was highlighted in the bottom navigation bar at app launch.
3. In one instance the floating buttons bugged and did not allow the user to add the
correct tag to the log.
These are all implementation problems that can be easily fixed, and not design faults
which require a new approach.
5.6
Limitations
As this is a brief, two­scenario evaluation, a lot of the functionality was not tested and I
consider this app not evaluated to a satisfying extent. Ideally I would have someone use
the app for an extended period of time. This would allow me to properly test how well the
bar chart can be read and how I could potentially tweak it to better display the data.
A more extensive evaluation would also allow for some more in depth analysis of the
usefulness of the app. When the participants spoke about the app they didn’t address
how they envisioned potential uses for the app. This is a big drawback of this evaluation,
as I wanted this to be a universal tool and hearing people explain what uses they would
come up for with this app would greatly improve the potential for future iterations of the
app.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:55==
6
Discussion
In this chapter I want to backtrack the steps I have taken in this project. I’m gonna discuss
the results, the stages of creating the app and research.
6.1
Evaluation
I will begin this section by going over the results of the evaluation process. The results for
this evaluation process are twofold, on one hand I have the very much one­dimensional
questionnaire with the raw responses to the statements which need additional interpreta­
tion to read from. On the other hand I have the recordings of the participants who gave me
verbal feedback on their experience with the app in the context of the scenarios I asked
them to complete.
I will start off by discussing the results of of the questionnaire. Overall I must admit I
am satisfied with how these results ended up looking. As I ensured that the participants
understood the severity of these tests so they wouldn’t be biased towards giving me better
responses. The first section boasted mostly fours (agree), with the average response
being exactly that. I think this speaks to how well I followed Androids guidelines on how
to design the app so it is navigable. With a few exceptions I can deem the ease­of­use of
this app a success.
However, if we continue to the second section, we will see that the responses are not
so generous anymore. Criticism starts to arise when the participants are asked questions
regarding the feel and interface of the app. Perhaps the lack of animations and transitions
is to blame here. Unfortunately the questions were not asked in a specific enough fashion
to help me discern what it is that caused the responses to drop significantly as compared
to the first section. I can also hypothesize that it is the layout which I chose, with a very
minimalist feel to it that caused these responses to not match the previous section
Section three seemed to be the least thought provoking of all four sections as without
more detailed feedback it doesn’t give us too much information to work with. I can all
but read from it that the subject seems to be interesting to the participants and they’d be
willing to explore the use of this tool in their day to day life.
The fourth section of the form yet again had garnered positive responses. The participants
did not seem too concerned about what data the app had been collecting or how the data
was handled. This could be partially due to the lack of networking capabilities of the
app, this would make it seemingly impossible for the data to leak. This is precisely why I
posed another question regarding sharing the data with health professionals, as it helps
determine just how sensitive do the participants consider the data to be. It would seem
like the participants would not mind sharing their data with the correct authorities.
The spoken feedback which I had recorded during and after the trials gives me a different
perspective on the evaluation. Many participants voiced their opinion on the app being
navigable and easy to use, however they had their remarks which I had described in the
previous chapter. In general they seemed to understand the concept and even had certain
ideas for how they could use it. In terms of privacy participants did however state that the
nature of what the logs would be representing would decide on whether or not they would
be open to sharing it with others.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
47
==PAGE:56==
6.1.1
Process of evaluation
The process of the evaluation itself was carried out in a fashion which I’m satisfied with. All
the participants approached the process with adequate care and professionalism. Thanks
to this I was able to collect such valuable responses.
That being said, if I could conduct this evaluation once more I would make a series of
adjustments. For one I would shift some of the questions from the questionnaire to the
interview part. This would make the sessions longer, however this would garner more
precise feedback regarding more areas of the project. I would also leave the participants
with a copy of the app for them to use over an extended period of time. This would allow
me to collect actual data and more precise feedback on crucial parts of the app.
6.2
Implementation
The code for the app is nothing groundbreaking but this project was not aimed towards
technical advancement. The code for the app was written over a number of iterations,
steadily adding consecutive features and functionalities. I am particularly happy with how
the logs functionality works, the data class gets it’s job done and it allows the logs to be
easily used across the whole app.
Thanks to giving the code a clear structure I’m convinced that I made the app scalable
for any future expansions and updates. The app has a tree like structure to it, with the
MainActivity.kt class being the center from which the rest of the code branches off.
The next set of branches are the fragments and so on. This ensures that the code is
readable and that future classes are easy to add.
The code in the app is written with a clean fashion and it is readable. The snippets in
the implementation chapter show the naming and responsibilities handled correctly. The
classes and functions are named in a way that allows others to recognize what role they
play. I also managed to reuse parts of the code which makes the app more compact and
not bloated with unnecessary classes and code.
The app loses a lot of potential unfortunately with the limitations imposed with the privacy
concerns of Android. The potential to have more data in the logs just seems to open
much more possibilities for the app. I must however state that despite the initial designs
assumed collecting the screenshots would work, I managed to quickly pivot the app in a
direction which allowed the lack of that capability to not inhibit the work of the app. The
same goes with the app recognizing which other app is being currently used when one of
the floating buttons is pressed. Shifting and expanding the tags functionality allowed me
to compensate for the lack of the app recognition.
There were however obstacles which I was not able to overcome. One particular feature
I tried and failed to implement is to make the floating buttons move around on screen in
order to give the user more freedom in terms of the button placement.
6.3
Design
The design phase was one of the lengthiest phases of the entire project. I had gone into
it with a series of assumptions, however it was advised to me that I shouldn’t go into it
with too many prerequisites as that might inhibit me from evolving the app into something
that has more potential than my initial idea. This caused me to reiterate over the design
a few times and engage in a back and forth with my supervisor, where I would present
the current state of the design and he would give me feedback to look upon. This let me
keep my mind open for new ideas and probably saved me from tragedy later down the
road when I could not implement the screenshoting feature.
48
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:57==
Using Figma to create prototypes was a very good move which greatly helped me from
easing the transition from design to implementation. The prototypes allowed me to envi­
sion the app and already picture how it would be used even without the app existing in
the first place.
I’m particularly satisfied with the design of the bar chart. Judging by the amount of people
who rated that it was the displaying of the data that caused them struggle during their
self­tracking progress I think that designing something like this was one of the most in­
strumental parts of the app. Evaluation of the bar chart could have been more specific,
but the participants seemed to instinctively know what it is. Judging by the feedback it
would seem however that the floating buttons were not optimally designed.
This leads me to believe that something I could have done better during the design phase
was to conduct some brief evaluation before moving to the implementation phase. This
would allow me to catch out problems with the design early on and makes sure they don’t
make it into the final product.
6.4
Analysis
The research and analysis phase was greatly influenced by the concept of the one track
button. It showed me the possibility of collecting something so simple yet with the correct
approach being able to turn it into realistic results. This sort of set the direction of my
research to encompass less of what the app should be doing but more what the data that
the app collects could.
This led me to start researching the influence that social media has on us and how we view
the whole concept of likes. The experiments and research I brought up in the analysis
chapter are some of the papers that convinced me I was headed in the right direction with
the ideas for the app. Finding research on these topics reinforced the belief that there
was a need for such an app.
This left me with the need to understand self­tracking better. I wanted to know why people
do it, what tools they use and what struggles they encounter the most. Reading articles off
of QuantifiedSelf really helped me gain a good idea of what self­tracking is really about.
Reading the stories of people inspired me to continue down this road in order to define
something I could track that really made a difference.
The last topic that I felt obligated to research was mHealth apps. This was important to
me because despite my initial ideas not really revolving around major health issues I still
pictured this app as a tool meant for mental health or general mind well­being. This idea
compelled me to perform research about mHealth apps and what their potential pitfalls
are.
If I could go back and focus my research on something else, maybe I would have put
more attention to the public’s approach to self­tracking. Since self­tracking is still a pretty
niche topic, a lot of people might be uninterested in the idea of this app. Researching how
the general public views self­tracking could have better prepared me for the evaluation
process further down the line.
6.5
Interpretation & Implications
The resulting app was merely a proof of concept however it garnered positive responses
from a number of participants, not only in terms of its usability but also how they felt
it could be used to improve some aspects of their lives. I firmly believe that the apps
functionalities were put on positive display during the evaluation process. With just a few
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
49
==PAGE:58==
features, designed around the idea of tracking what’s on your screen, I was able to create
an app that proves there is an intersection between the three topics I mentioned earlier.
When discussing the topic of this project with my supervisor, I was already hypothesizing
that such an app could find its way into the market one day. Perhaps this was only a first
step performed towards something like that happening, but I see it as a successful step.
I assumed that with a correct design and approach, one could develop an app to give
people a better grip on their use of social media consumption.
With research showing that social media has a big influence on our mood and perception
of the world around us, I think I showed that there is the potential for having an app as a
tool to self­improve in this context. This had all been done with respect towards the ethics
and privacy concerns outlined in the first chapter.
The potential this app has presented fits into a grander scheme that has been slowly
developing over the years. Apps that are based on self­tracking have long been used, be
it sports apps or system settings that allow you to see screen time you spent on specific
apps. This app however takes the concept a step further, exploring data in a more raw
form and testing if it is presentable to people.
The app also builds upon the barriers which I talked about in section 2.1.4. For one, it
simplifies the collection process which seemed to be a problem to many people. Having
buttons on your screen at any given time maintains a simple method for collecting data.
It also addressed the integration barriers which people struggle with when preparing to
display their data. With the bar chart display I am convinced I was able to present the
data in a coherent way.
6.6
Future works & recommendations
The app has potential to help people handle their social media consumption or at the very
least gain some better understanding of it. The feedback from the evaluation process
suggested that partially this aim has been achieved, however this is still far from the final
product. There is a range of improvements and steps that could help this app really
become what I had envisioned in the beginning.
6.6.1
Features & functionalities
Some potential features this app could benefit from are already outlined in the design
chapter. For one, a feature applying machine learning to the logs in order to analyze
them and present the user even more about what’s going on in his use. The option for the
app to show the user trends in his data or patterns would be a big leap forward. Nothing
is as creative as the mind, however reading and analysing raw data could be done better
by a computer.
Furthermore giving the app more personalizing possibilities would truly make it a universal
tool. In the initial designs I wanted the button to be an editable entity, not two thumbs set
in stone. I know that giving the user the option to modify the buttons as they see fit, maybe
even give them the option to describe the parameters the buttons are recording, would
greatly improve the apps feel and usability.
6.6.2
Consulting specialists
As this app seems to have the potential for use in the context of therapy, consulting spe­
cialists with psychology backgrounds could offer valuable insight and feedback. As was
the case with the one track button, this app could also be used with tracking something
specifically pointed out by a therapist. Just like in the case of the One track button, a
psychologist has the idea of what is going on with the actual interpretation of the data.
50
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:59==
7
Conclusions
This project aimed to research just how much can a mHealth app offer in the context of
self­tracking your social media consumption. I begun by introducing what mHealth apps
are and how they have shaped up over the past few years. Then I moved to explaining
why my interest in social media was justified and why the need for such an app exists in
the first place.
In the analysis I presented the idea of self­tracking and showed just how much can be
done with such a simple concept if it’s carried out correctly. I showed where my inspiration
came from with the simple design by explaining the phenomenon of the one track button,
which was a great segue into the presentation of the floating buttons. This then led me
to paint the whole concept of the design in the following chapter. I showed off all the
prototype elements, explained why they look the way they look and what potential idea
I had for them. The designs had to be later implemented which is what I described in
chapter number four. I explained why I chose the tools that I used and how I implemented
my solutions. I also showed what wasn’t possible to implement or where I fell short. With
the finished product explained I moved to show how I evaluated the app. I explained
the process and how I came up with it. I presented the result of the evaluation and the
questionnaire. Finally I tied up and discussed the whole report in the previous chapter.
Giving my interpretation and view on the process of this project.
The end product is an app that I believe has the potential to help people handle a key
aspect of their life. It’s accompanied by a report that goes in depth on explaining why and
how the app works.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
51
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
Digital 2022 – Global overview report. 2022. URL: https://kepios.com/reports.
[2]
Betul Keles, Niall McCrae, and Annmarie Grealish. “A systematic review: the influ­
ence of social media on depression, anxiety and psychological distress in adoles­
cents”. In: International Journal of Adolescence and Youth 25.1 (2020), pp. 79–93.
DOI: 10.1080/02673843.2019.1590851. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/02673843.
2019.1590851. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/02673843.2019.1590851.
[3]
Kristen Herhold. usage. Oct. 2018. URL: https://themanifest.com/social- media/
blog/how-people-use-social-media.
[4]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. A Stage­Based Model of Personal Informatics
Systems. 2010.
[5]
Mark Whooley, Bernd Ploderer, and Kathleen Gray. “”On the Integration of Self­
tracking Data amongst Quantified Self Members””. In: Sept. 2014, pp. 151–160.
DOI: 10.14236/ewic/hci2014.16.
[6]
Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. “Which Grasses Aggravate My Allergies?” In: Quan­
tified Self (2018). URL: http://media.quantifiedself.com/slides/1122_TChristiansen_
WhichGrassesAggravateAllergies.pdf.
[7]
Young­Ho Kim et al. “OmniTrack: A Flexible Self­Tracking Approach Leveraging
Semi­Automated Tracking”. In: Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Tech­
nol. 1.3 (Sept. 2017). DOI: 10.1145/3130930. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3130930.
[8]
Whitney Erin Boesel. “Cholesterol Levels While Nursing”. In: Quantified Self (2018).
URL: https://quantifiedself.com/show-and-tell/?project=1119.
[9]
Deborah Lupton. Self­tracking modes: Reflexive self­monitoring and data practices.
Aug. 2014. URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2483549.
[10]
Anthony L. Burrow and Nicolette Rainone. “How many likes did I get?: Purpose mod­
erates links between positive social media feedback and self­esteem.” In: Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 69 (2017), pp. 232–236. ISSN: 0022­1031. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2016.09.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0022103116303377.
[11]
Green Paper on Mobile Health (”mhealth”). URL: https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.
eu/en/library/green-paper-mobile-health-mhealth.
[12]
URL: https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/healthcare/mhealth/assets/pwc- emerging-
mhealth-full.pdf?dLDf=false.
[13]
Marlene Lynette East and Byron C Havard. “Mental Health Mobile Apps: From In­
fusion to Diffusion in the Mental Health Social System”. In: JMIR Mental Health
2.1 (Mar. 2015), e10. ISSN: 2368­7959. DOI: 10.2196/mental.3954. URL: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26543907.
[14]
Won Ju Hwang, Ji Sun Ha, and Mi Jeong Kim. “Research Trends on Mobile Men­
tal Health Application for General Population: A Scoping Review”. In: International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18.5 (2021). ISSN: 1660­
4601. DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18052459. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/18/5/
2459.
[15]
WHO Global Observatory for eHealth. mHealth: new horizons for health through
mobile technologies: second global survey on eHealth. 2011.
[16]
Emily Steel. Health apps run into privacy snags. Sept. 2013. URL: https://www.ft.
com/content/b709cf4a-12dd-11e3-a05e-00144feabdc0.
52
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:61==
[17]
Virginia LeBaron et al. “Leveraging Smart Health Technology to Empower Patients
and Family Caregivers in Managing Cancer Pain: Protocol for a Feasibility Study”.
In: JMIR Res Protoc 8.12 (Dec. 2019), e16178. ISSN: 1929­0748. DOI: 10.2196/
16178. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31815679.
[18]
EHealth Action Plan 2012­2020: Innovative Healthcare for the 21st Century. Mar.
2017. URL: https://wayback.archive- it.org/12090/20170402221325/https://ec.
europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ehealth-action-plan-2012-2020-innovative-
healthcare-21st-century.
[19]
Gabriella Borghi, Loredana Luzzi, and Cristina Masella. “mHealth Services: Exam­
ples and Future Perspectives”. In: m_Health Current and Future Applications. Ed. by
Giuseppe Andreoni, Paolo Perego, and Enrico Frumento. Cham: Springer Interna­
tional Publishing, 2019, pp. 115–125. ISBN: 978­3­030­02182­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-030-02182-5_8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02182-5_8.
[20]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. Active
Self­Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One­Button Wearable: A Case Study
in Military PTSD. 2017. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1703.03437. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1703.03437.
[21]
URL: https://material.io/design/iconography/system-icons.html#design-principles.
[22]
URL: https://material.io/design/navigation/understanding-navigation.html#lateral-
navigation.
[23]
URL: https://material.io/design/navigation/search.html#expandable-search.
[24]
James Hartman. Kotlin vs Java: What’s the difference? June 2022. URL: https :
//www.guru99.com/kotlin-vs-java-difference.html.
[25]
Rasool Nouri et al. “Criteria for assessing the quality of mHealth apps: a system­
atic review”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25.8 (May
2018), pp. 1089–1098. ISSN: 1527­974X. DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocy050. eprint: https:
//academic.oup.com/jamia/article- pdf/25/8/1089/34150933/ocy050.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocy050.
[26]
Leming Zhou et al. “The mHealth App Usability Questionnaire (MAUQ): Develop­
ment and Validation Study”. In: JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 7.4 (Apr. 2019), e11500.
ISSN: 2291­5222. DOI: 10.2196/11500. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
30973342.
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
==PAGE:63==
A
Title
Exploring Self­tracking of Social Media Consumption
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
