==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Development of a biaxial test rig to investigate
face/core disbond damages in sandwich structures
exposed to cyclic loading
MSc Thesis
Marc Morbelli-Zinck s164333
Nicolai Stig Boertmann s164325
DTU Mechanical Engineering
September 2022
==PAGE:2==
Development of a bi-axial test rig to investigate face/core disbond damages in sand-
wich structures exposed to cyclic loading
Master’s Thesis
2022 September 1st
By
Marc Morbelli-Zinck - s164333
Nicolai Stig Boertmann - s164325
Advisor
Christian Berggreen - cber@dtu.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé, Bygning
404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Lightweight Structures Group, De-
partment of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of strength of materials and
composite sandwiches.
Marc Morbelli-Zinck s164333
Date
Nicolai Stig Boertmann s164325
Date
01-09-2022
01-09-2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Sandwich composites is a commonly used high performance material today in many dif-
ferent industries such as aerospace, wind and offshore. With growing utility, follows a ever
increasing need to understand the failure modes of this material and anticipate when they occur.
Loss of adhesion between face and core, know as Disbond, is one particular failure mode among
the many, an sandwich composite can experience. Previous work at the Technical University
of Denmark have focused on utilising uniaxial fatigue loading to investigate the fatigue crack
growth of disbonds.
The purpose of this thesis is to design, manufacture and verify a mechanical machine in-
terface for the 250 kN planar biaxial test machine from MTS in building 119 at DTU Lyngby.
The new machine design can accommodate sandwich panels of large size (500 × 500 mm) and
thickness (50 mm) in order to investigate face/core disbond behaviour during biaxial compres-
sive and tensile load.
Firstly, it was attempted to create a digital twin of the sandwich panel, in order to bench-
mark different designs before testing. However, as time ran out, it ended up not being possible.
Secondly, an investigation into user needs and design specifications for the new test ma-
chine, started the product development process. This process investigated connection methods
for interfacing with the machine as well as the test panels. The process culminated in a final
product concept with core functionality. This concept was then further refined through iterative
processing until a final design was put forward. Materials were procured and manufacturing
began. The manufacturing was done in large part by the authors with the help and funding from
the workshop in DTU Skylab and funding from the main supervisor - Christian Berggreen.
After a manufacturing period of 4 weeks, the machine was assembled and ready to start testing.
Lastly, the machine performed initial tests, in order to verify the performance of the newly
assembled test rig. The tests were aimed at testing the friction based panel gripping method,
as well the alignment, calibration, and general behaviour of the machine under load. Mea-
surements during this series of tests were done through Digital Image Correlation system and
loadcells. It was observed that rigid body motion occurs under load. One of the reasons it might
happen, is due to misalignment, partly from the tolerance stack up of the machined components.
Another cause might be an inherent misalignment from the load cell, since each loadcell can be
adjusted in four degrees of freedom
Within the time constraints of the thesis, it was not possible to tune the machine to a
satisfactory level. The authors are confident that with time and effort, the machine will function
as intended.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to extend a heartfelt thank you to our advisor Christian Berggreen, for giving
us the opportunity to try leading the development of such a big project.
A very big thank you to the metal workshop of DTU Skylab whom have been very help-
ful during both the design and manufacturing period. A thank you also to the DTU Ballerup
workshop for providing us with parts from their Metal Laser Cutter.
A big thank you to the the technicians in Building 119 for their never ending good spirit,
input and patience.
Lastly, a huge thanks to Jacob Paamand Waldbjørn for all your good input, hype, and help
guiding us both the DIC and MTS suite.
Marc Morbelli-Zinck s164333, Co-Author
Dedicated to my family and friends.
Nicolai Stig Boertmann s164325, Co-Author
Dedicated to my family, friends, and kæreste.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Summary of previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Product Development
5
2.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Identification of stakeholder needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Outline specification/ Target specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Investigation of Test Panels Design
8
3.1
Parameter Study of Panel Shape and Boundary Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Buckling analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Boundary condition investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Partial Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Design and Manufacturing of Arms and Grip System
15
4.1
Machine Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Test panel interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Experimental determination of friction coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Use of swivels and kinematic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Concept selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Final Design Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6.1
Design topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6.2
Design for manufacture and assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.7
Final Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.7.1
Interchangeable spacer design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7.2
Bolted joint analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7.3
Tolerance chain analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.7.4
FEA study of the final design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
Conclusoion on design and manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Experimental Setup
41
5.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Test rig setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.2
Novel method of inducing controlled face-core disbond . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.3
Sandwich panel setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Results From Experiments
48
v
==PAGE:7==
6.1
Test 01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Test 02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Test 03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.4
Test 04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.5
Test 05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.6
Discussion/Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
58
References
60
Appendix
62
A
Detailed DIC measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B
Calibration overview from DIC system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C
Technical Drawings from SolidWorks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Sandwich composites is a technology that takes advantage of the combined mechanical
properties of multiple materials. A sandwich composite consists of three components; Two
relatively thin faces with lightweight core sandwiched in between. Sandwich composites first
saw large scale use in England during the Second World War. Because of material shortages,
the aeroplane De Havilland Mosquito was constructed using veneer faces and balsa wood core.
The aeroplane proved very successful and ushered in a new age of sandwich composites.
Today sandwich composites are used in many industries such as; wind energy, aerospace,
civil engineering, automotive, Offshore etc. Sandwich composites can be made from a combi-
nation of almost all materials. The faces are most often made from laminate composite materials
such as glass fiber reinforced polymers (GFRP) or carbon fiber reinforced polymers (CFRP).
The cores are either made from low density hard plastic foams, balsa wood, or from corrugated
aluminium or aramid fibers. Generally the faces can be classified as relatively strong but heavy,
while the cores are relatively weak and lightweight. See fig. 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Example of a sandwich composite showing its face, core, and adhesive interface.
From [1].
Sandwich composites take advantage of the relatively low density and strength of the core,
to separate the two faces resulting in very high flexural rigidity. Thus, the faces carry the in
plane stresses, whilst the core carries the shear stresses and prevents global buckling. It is only
possible for the sandwich composite to perform in this way as long as the interface between
face and core can transfer stresses. Thus if this interface fails, the sandwich loses significant
strength and stiffness and might fail outright. This interface between face and core is often a
structural adhesive.
Loss of cohesion in the face/core interface is known as a Disbond in aerospace and debond
in wind and naval industries. These debonds can introduced during manufacturing, during
service by tool drops, blunt body impacts or overloads during operation.[2] These disbonds
can propagate under fatigue loading governed by fracture mechanics.[3] If these debonds grow
too large, they can lead to total loss of the load carrying capacity of the sandwich composite.
Not only are sandwich composites in aviation loaded by in plane forces, they also experience
an internal pressure every time the aeroplane is airborne. When the sandwich composite is
manufactured, air in the core is trapped. Thus, when the aeroplane flies at cruising altitude there
Page 1 of 76
==PAGE:9==
is a relative over-pressure in the core pushing against the faces. This is known as vacuum cycling
loads[4] or ground-air-ground cycling (GAG)[2]. Such a failure mode led to the complete
loss of the vertical tail rudder on an Airbus A310-300 in March 2005[4], see fig. 1.2. For
this reason, better understanding of debond damage is necessary to create safer and higher
performing sandwich composite structures.
Figure 1.2: Complete loss of vertical tail rudder on Airbus A310 due to face/core debond.
1.2
Problem description
The structural lab at the Technical University of Denmark - DTU has performed debond
tests of sandwich structures, as part of the Disbond of Sandwich Structures – DoSS funded by
the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). Until now, only uniaxial in-plane loading of
sandwich structures has been possible. A desire to perform similar tests in a biaxial stress state,
requires using biaxial test machine. The structural lab at DTU currently has a 250 kN planar
biaxial testing machine.
Modifying this biaxial testing machine such that it can accommodate and test sandwich
composites, would open up capabilities for an entirely new structural testing type at DTU.
Biaxial loading is not as simple to perform as uniaxial loading, regarding experimen-
tal setup. The mutually orthogonal actuators can interfere with one-another. In addition, the
Lightweight Structures Group requested that the setup was capable of loading both in tension
and compression. In other words the fatigue loading should be able to cross from tension, to
no load, to compression and back. The test rig needs to be designed in such a way, that only
disbond propagation occurs and no other failure modes occurs. Once again, this raises the
requirements for how the testing machine should be modified.
Manufacturing might prove challenging, since there is a limited amount of resources, staff,
and machines at DTU. A great deal of communication between the authors and the staff from
the workshops is required when constructing new equipment.
The task of modifying the planar biaxial testing machine, requires many different pro-
cesses. These are often dependant on previous processes. Because of this, if one process gets
Page 2 of 76
==PAGE:10==
delayed, it directly affects all downstream processes. Among these processes are; design itera-
tions, procurement of materials, manufacturing, assembly, testing etc.
1.3
Objectives
This thesis aims to develop a new fixture for the 250 kN planar biaxial testing machine
in the DTU Structural lab, allowing for testing of rectangular sandwich composites in both
compression and tension. This will be done in three distinct phases.
In the first phase, the behaviour of biaxially loaded sandwich composites will be investi-
gated by use of FEA. This is done in order to find an appropriate panel geometry and develop a
digital twin.
The second phase deals with the development and manufacturing of a chosen concept.
For the final phase, the concept is mounted onto the machine in order to perform an proof
of concept.
1.4
Summary of previous work
Experimental uniaxial compressive testing has been performed in relation to two previous
masters theses at the DTU Structural Lab.
Mulay[5] did some development work in 2019 in regards to mounting methods of panels
similar to the panels used in this thesis. Mulay used these panels in uniaxial compression GAG
testing. Notable conclusions from Mulay’s thesis are:
• Misalignment can exist in the load path.
• Digital image correlation (DIC) can track disbonds on sandwich composites.
In 2020 Bundgaard[6] picked up where Mulay left off and experimented with uniaxial
loading of similar composite sandwich panels, using GAG-cycling and internal pressurisation
methods. Notable conclusions from Bundgaard’s thesis are:
• The internal pressurisation module is functional
• Attempts to manually creating face/core disbonds proved unsuccessful.
• Numerical and experimental results are in disagreement
Note that both theses only tested uniaxial compressive loading. Thus, the load case is quite
different than what is presented in this thesis, and as such the requirements for holding onto the
test panel.
Page 3 of 76
==PAGE:11==
In 2021, Moncy[7] finished his PhD investigating tunnelling cracks in composite laminates
under planar biaxial strain. As part of this PhD, Moncy used the same planar test machine as
this thesis. Thus, the machine is was set up for their experiments as shown in fig. 1.3. An
important takeaway from Moncy[7] is the control scheme for the machine in order to avoid load
sharing and rigid body movements of the test specimen.
Figure 1.3: Biaxial test rig configuration at the beginning of thesis.
Page 4 of 76
==PAGE:12==
2
Product Development
This chapter presents the tools used throughout the project in order to systematically de-
velop the biaxial test rig. These tools are used to ensure both obvious and hidden user needs are
met with the final product.
2.1
Method
The method used throughout the project the Front-End process of Ulrich & Eppinger [8].
The Front-end process is adopted with the purpose of creating a "Customised Product" which
modifies the Front-End process. The processes are focused on gathering specific and detailed
information for each step in the Front-End process. The method is illustrated in fig. 2.1. By
focusing on the end users needs, and collecting them in a systematic manner, those same needs
can be used to evaluate the design at any step in the development process.
Figure 2.1: Front-end process from [8]. Relevant processes are marked inside the red dashed
box.
In this report, the product development is presented in somewhat linear way to aid the
reader. It is important to note that the product development in reality was much more iterative,
with many changes affecting upstream design decisions. The product development has been
divided into two parts: Development of the test panel design, and design of the attachment
mechanism in-between the test panel and the preexisting testing machine.
2.2
Identification of stakeholder needs
The purpose of this section is to identify the stakeholders and their needs using the method
from [8]. The stakeholders in relation to this project are identified below with the following
order of priority with a description of their needs. The stakeholders’ needs are identified by
interview/physical conversation and role playing utilising De Bono’s Six Thinking Hats[9].
Professor Christian Berggreen (Ultimate external customer)
• The final product should give good and repeatable test results
• The final product should be cheap
Page 5 of 76
==PAGE:13==
Future students for future project
• The final product should be safe i.e low risk of harm and injury
• The final product should be easy to use
• The final product should be easy to adjust if necessary
Technicians at DTU Building 119
• The final product should be easy to install
• The final product should be easy to maintain
Fabricators making the product
• The final product should be easy to manufacture
2.3
Outline specification/ Target specifications
With the stakeholders identified, the specifications or requirements are collected in the
target specification for the final product, see table 2.1. Specifications, either quantitative or
qualitative, are separated into three types:
• Duty properties: Properties necessary for legal or safety reasons
• Expectation properties: These properties are primarily dictated from already existing
products.
• Position properties: These properties are those who makes our product stand out com-
pared to others solution.
Page 6 of 76
==PAGE:14==
Subject
Requirement
Criteria
Notes
Duty properties
Safety
The product must be
safe according to Risk
assessment from B119
Verified by technicians
in building 119
Expectation properties
Loading type
Test rig has to apply
biaxial load on test plate
Needs to be able to operate in R=-1
Has to be able to operate
in compression-compression,
compression-tension, tension-tension
In plane loads
Apply in plane loads only
FEM vs real test
Must be able to replicate
FEM behavior
User friendly
The test rig and design is user friendly
weight
The product has to be as light as possible
Cost
Cost of design should be low
Position properties
Size of test panel
Test rig has to be
able to handle composite
plate of certain scale
(500mm x 500mm)
Plate failure
The plate failure during
fatigue testing should only
happen in the debonded zone.
What about static test?
Ref. corner stresses
Variation in panel size
Must be adjustable for
multiple panel sizes
(1000x1000 ->500x500)
Out of plane loads
Must accommodate
out of plane loads
Lifetime
To be designed for infinite lifetime
What is the expected life
time if not infinite?
Manufacturability
Easy to manufacture
Future work and upgrades
Potential upgraded or modified easily
e.g. Environment chamber
Table 2.1: Target specification for the product.
Page 7 of 76
==PAGE:15==
3
Investigation of Test Panels Design
This chapter aims to show the efforts of developing a digital twin of the panels to be used in
the test machine. The target specification specify that the test machine is intended to test many
different panel designs, both in terms of layup and geometric shape and size. Creating a digital
twin, gives the user the ability to quickly iterate over many different designs and benchmark
these before any physical testing. Having a reliable digital twin, gives the user knowledge
about the panels behaviour such as critical buckling load, first ply failure etc. Thus, the user
can perform experiments safer and faster. By testing one panel design as part of the thesis, the
digital twin could thus be validated, and future users of the machine could rapidly tailor their
panel designs to different test scenarios.
It is crucial that behaviour of the panel is predictable. As the panels are used for fatigue
crack testing, stresses far from the debonded zone, such as corners, fillets, etc. should be lower
than in the area of interest, in order not to influence testing results. In addition, the stress state
in around the debonded zone should be near-homogeneous.
3.1
Parameter Study of Panel Shape and Boundary Conditions
Multiple finite element models were developed using Ansys APLD in order to compute
stresses, strains, and different face- and core failure.
The stress and strain field is determined from the FEA model below. A good geometry
design should have a near homogeneous strain/stress field close to the debonded zone and no
areas exceeding the failure stress for the panel. A selection of geometries are shown in fig. 3.1
The parameter study of the panel shape and BC is modelled with an shell element of a
single layer in order to represent thin plate theory with no transverse shear deformation. The
shell is modelled with isotropic material properties and a fully clamped BC representing an
fixture at the edges. To simulate an extra stiffness on the edges of the panel, multi point constrain
is used on all four edges. The load simulated are tension in x- and y-direction to replicate biaxial
loading.
By changing geometric parameters, an optimal design is found.
Page 8 of 76
==PAGE:16==
(a) Boundary contact 10% of side
length
(b) Boundary contact 50% of side
length
(c) Boundary contact 90% of side
length
(d) σx stress field for 10%
(e) σx stress field for 50%
(f) σx stress field for 90%
(g) σxy stress field for 10%
(h) σxy stress field for 50%
(i) σxy stress field for 90%
(j) Von Mises stress field for 90% (k) Von Mises stress field for 90% (l) Von Mises stress field for 90%
Figure 3.1: Stress fields for a square panel loaded in biaxial compression supported at 10%,
50%, and 90% of its side length respectively.
Page 9 of 76
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Stress field for a square panel loaded in biaxial compression, with rounded edge and
MultiPointConstrain
Figure 3.3: Notch study with two different notch radius.
From figure 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3, it can be concluded that by holding onto a longer length
on the edge i.e having a BC supporting 90% of the edge, the stress and strains becomes more
homogeneous at the middle of the plate. Hence, it would be wise to have an fixture that holds
as much as possible onto the sides.
From figure 3.2, it can be seen the benefit of the fillet at the edges of the panel where the
stress intensity decrease. Nevertheless, for this study, some displacement are observed that is
not ordinary which could related to the Multi Point Constraint definition.
Page 10 of 76
==PAGE:18==
From figure 3.3, it can be concluded that an bigger notch leads to lower stress intensity in
the corner but a larger stress in the middle of the panel.
From this parameter study, it can be concluded that an non-modified panel is the best
solution. The process of cutting a notch or fillet into the sandwich panel have also been taken
into consideration when choosing the best solution.
3.2
Buckling analysis
In addition to the first FEA models, a second pair of models were developed to determine
the biaxial buckling load of a panel containing a debonded area. The computed buckling load
would then be used as the maximum loading during panel testing in. To verify the models,
analytical solutions for buckling loads of intact sandwich panels were used from [10]. Once the
FEA model was in agreement with the analytical solutions, the model could include debonded
areas with a high degree of confidence in the results.
The model was created following guidelines presented in [11] and [12].
In an attempt to make the FEA model as light as possible, the eigenvlaue buckling is used
to simulate buckling rather then post buckling behaviour.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) Mesh design used for both shell and solid model. (b) Solid element eigenvalue
buckling model.
For the shell model, it was observed that an increase in thickness of a the plate slightly
overestimates the eigenvalue buckling load as shown in fig. 3.4a. Keeping the thickness of
the sandwich fixed, and varying the relative core stiffness, a large deviation from analytical
solutions[10] was found at a E face/Ecore > 100 as shown in fig. 3.4b. Lastly for the linear
model model, different boundary conditions were investigated. The models showed that for
Page 11 of 76
==PAGE:19==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Plate thickness [mm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Deviation from analytical solution [%]
(a) Shell plate model buckling load for an
isotropic 1000 × 1000 mm plate for different
thicknesses, compared to solutions from [10]
100
101
102
103
104
Eface/Ecore [ ]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Deviation from analytical solution [%]
face=5mm, core=10mm
face=1mm, core=40mm
(b) Shell model buckling load for two isotropic
sandwich plates with different face-core stiffness
ratios, compared to solutions from [10]
100
101
102
Eface/Ecore [ ]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Buckling load normalised [ ]
Uniaxial CCCC
Uniaxial SSSS
Biaxial CCCC
Biaxial SSSS
(c) Normalised buckling load comparison for
different boundary conditions, shell model.
100
101
102
103
104
Eface/Ecore [ ]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Deviation from analytical solution [%]
Eigenvalue buckling
224 elements
2744 elements
(d) Comparison of linear and nonlinear shell model.
Figure 3.4: Benchmark results for the shell element buckling model.
a square sandwich panel, uniaxial loading with a Clamped, Clamped, Clamped, Clamped -
CCCC boundary condition, showed the highest buckling load, while biaxial loading with simply
supported edges - SSSS showed the lowest buckling load. See fig. 3.4c In attempt to get better
agreement with analytical solutions, a nonlinear shell model was developed. However, this
model however showed no increase in performance, as shown in fig. 3.4d, at the cost of far
greater computational time.
Since the results from the shell model were unimpressive, a solid model was developed.
Using a solid model gives the user more freedom in terms of how loads and constraints are
connected to the faces and core of the panel, at the cost of far more elements used, thus more
CPU time.
In the same manner as the shell model, the solid model was first compared to plate solu-
tions from [14]. This model showed good adherence until a strong divergence from analytical
solutions above 10000 elements per layer, independently of the amount of out of plane layers
as shown in fig. 3.5a. The solid element model was tested with different core stiffnesses. In
this instance, material parameters from [13] was used, since these closely match the actual test
Page 12 of 76
==PAGE:20==
102
103
104
105
Number of elements per out-of-plane layer
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Deviation from analytical solution [%]
1 element layer
2 element layers
5 element layers
(a) Mesh convergence for different out of
plane mesh divisions per face and core.
x-axis shows elements per out of plane layer.
100
101
102
103
104
Core stiffness multiplier [ ]
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Buckling load [kN]
Numerical model
Analytical (Energy method)
(b) Comparative buckling load with material pa-
rameters from [13].
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Debond diameter [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pcr [kN]
Coarse mesh
Fine mesh
Very fine mesh
(c) Buckling load for GFRP H100 sandwich with
circular disbond as described in [12].
(d) Buckling load for GFRP H100 sandwich
with circular disbond. Figure borrowed from [12].
Figure 3.5: Benchmark results for the solid element buckling model.
panels used in section 6. Shown in fig. 3.5b, The model drastically underestimates buckling
stiffness when the core stiffness is low. The solid model containing a debond was benchmarked
using the parameters from [12], with very similar results as shown in fig. 3.5c. The material
parameters from [13] have a face-core stiffness ratio of 645348 : 1 and 53 : 1 for the in plane
and out of plane directions respectively.
Ultimately it was concluded that the numerical models developed did not present reliable
results at stiffness ratios above 100 : 1, thus the numerical models are not able to predict the
buckling loads for the material parameters of interest in this thesis. It is suspected that the
method of inserting boundary conditions to the panels is flawed. This flaw only becomes appar-
ent with such extreme stiffness ratios and is therefore not described in literature.
Page 13 of 76
==PAGE:21==
3.2.1
Boundary condition investigation
A deeper dive into the boundary condition of the solid model is investigated for the solid
model. The constraints that have been applied are the following: all nodes on the edges are
constrained in UZ, then, to avoid rigid body motion, nodes are constrained in the center of
the model and at one single point on a edge in UX and UY. This should represent an simply
supported sandwich panel. Below is an figure illustrating the constraints:
Figure 3.7: Boundary condition for solid models (figure from [11])
This method might not be the correct method when dealing with solid elements. Methods
such as the Multi Point Constraint or Master node with slaves nodes would maybe be more
appropriate and interesting to try out. These method could change the overall stiffness of the
model and perhaps be the key to have reliable results when the stiffness ratio goes above 100 : 1.
But due to limited time frame, it was chosen not to do.
3.3
Partial Conclusion
Since the buckling analysis never performed acceptably, the stress fields from section 3.1
were used to decided on the test panel design.
With some of the considerations from the gripping conclusions from section 4, it was
decided to have a long and stiff clamping surface. Thus it was decided to simply use a square
test specimen, with reinforced edges. The argumentation for reinforcing the edge is presented
in section 4.
Frustratingly it was not possible to create a digital twin using Ansys. Problems that could
be related to the boundary condition setup is thought to be the main problem. It is anticipated
that the shear locking of the core boundary conditions are not properly modelled but this has a
negligible effect at smaller face core stiffness ratios.
Page 14 of 76
==PAGE:22==
4
Design and Manufacturing of Arms and Grip System
With the customers needs and target specification established, the next step in the Front-
End process is to generate product concepts. The purpose is to find the best solution to meet the
target specification by an systematic approach. The following chapter describes the processes
associated with concept development, concept selection, finalisation, and manufacturing of all
components in-between the planar testing machine and the test panel. In this chapter and on-
ward, the collection of components connecting the planar testing machine to the test panel will
be referred to as arm.
Figure 4.1: Five-step method from Ulrich and Eppinger[8]
The methodology used to generate products concepts, is the recommended method from
Ulrich and Eppinger[8] known as the Five-step method. This methods helps to decompose
the product concepts part into smaller more manageable parts. The first step is to clarify the
problem by use of the section 2.2 and section 2.3 i.e the stakeholders’ needs and the target
specification. The second step is to search for existing concepts, literature, expert users, patents
and benchmarking that can contribute to the information gathering process. The third step is
to internally generate new concepts either as an individual or group. During this step, there
are multiple sub-methods such as brainstormning, brainwritting, lateral thinking ect. one can
Page 15 of 76
==PAGE:23==
use. The fourth step is the explore the concepts that arises from step 2 and 3 in a systematical
approach in order to group and/or combine different concepts together. The fifth and last step
is to reflect on the solution.
4.1
Machine Interface
The first step in generating product concepts, is to determine how the product will interface
with the machine and test panel. The grips, shown in fig. 4.2, were installed in the machine at
the beginning of this thesis. It was therefore considered, if part of these grips could be used
as the machine interface. The grips in the machine are built uniquely to interface with an
environmental chamber one can insert in the machine.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a) speciality MTS series 647 hydraulic gripper the consists of five parts: 1 - Load-
cell/accelerator 2 - Hydraulic grip actuator 3 - Long spacer with flange 4 - Short spacer with
flange 5 - Grip system (b) General MTS series 647 hydraulic gripper arm cross section[?].
The stroke length of each piston is 101.6 mm. One should remember to leave room in the
stroke for compression and extension of the test specimen and room for mounting and removing
test pieces.The grips in their unmodified form can only fit test specimens of around 300 mm in
length[7]. In addition, the wedge chamber (see fig. 4.2), has a maximum opening of 48 mm, and
the larges specimen thickness accepted is 25.9 mm[15]. Thus it would not be possible to directly
mount the test panel in the grips. In addition, since the wedges are not positively constrained in
out of plane direction relative to fig. 4.2(b). Thus, in case of off axis reaction forces the wedge
risk sliding out of the wedge chamber. For these reasons it was decided not to use any hydraulic
wedges, even though hydraulic grips a likely the easiest method of mounting the test panels.
Page 16 of 76
==PAGE:24==
With the wedge assembly out of contention, two overall solutions are identified as possible
machine interfaces, shown in fig. 4.20.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) Machine interface concept 1 (b) Machine interface concept 2.
The first concept consists of removing part 4 and 5 (see figure 4.2) and designing a com-
ponent to bolt directly to the flange of the long spacer (part 3), which then is to be connected
to the test specimen on the other end. The red part in the figure shows the area available for
the test specimen. Depending on the component that is to be fixed to the flange, the estimated
working area is 900x900mm:
The second concept removes all parts except the loadcell/accelerator (part 1) and designing
a completely new arm. The area with a starting point at the loadcell would give a working area of
1600x1600. Although, components would be needed to make the connection from the loadcell
to the specimen, which will reduce the working area.
Page 17 of 76
==PAGE:25==
Solution 1
Solution 2
Pro
Con
Pro
Con
Few components
to manufacture
Existing system
limits design
Most freedom
for the design phase
Expensive since many
components are needed
The creative design
difficulty is medium
With spacers, all size
of panel is possible
to accommodate
Time consuming
Table 4.1: Pros and cons comparison for machine interface concepts.
Based on the pros and cons the solution that is chosen to be the starting point for the
idea generation is solution 2. This solution gives most freedom to fulfil the target specification.
Hence, the parts 2-5 are to be removed.
4.2
Test panel interface
This section deals with the principles ideas of connection/fixture to the specimen/testing
sandwich panel. The different ideas are inspired by the process of the Five-Step method (figure
4.1. These ideas gives the general concept for the connection/fixture to the sandwich panel. At
the end of this process, one idea will be selected by use of a concept screening method. A total
of three ideas are presented.
Idea 1
The first idea for a fixture of the specimen is a fusible alloy that works as an adhesive:
Figure 4.4: Fusible alloy as an adhesive (Picture from [16]).
This ideas comes from R.Clif Moody and Anthony J.Vizzini where two molds made of
aluminium is filled with an low melting point alloy, which then acts as an adhesive instead of e.g
Page 18 of 76
==PAGE:26==
epoxy. Some pros of using an fusible alloy is primarily the tensile strength compared to epoxy
and that is does not damage the specimen because of its low melting temperature. For example,
Bismuth melts at temperatures around 70-80 degree. This ideas can then be extended to have
a mold on all four side of the specimen in order to accommodate to the biaxial testrig. The
downside of this idea is the level of toxicity from the melted alloy that needs to be considered
as well as the complexity of designing a mold for all four side of the specimen.
Idea 2
The second idea is the use of friction as an fixture method:
Figure 4.5: Idea based on friction
With inspiration from Søren Bundgaard [6], an U-clamp shape component that can be
compressed with use of bolts/threads could work as an fixture of the specimen. The preliminary
idea from figure 4.5 is to drill a hole through the sandwich panel with clearance for a bolt, that
will compress the U-clamp component onto the sandwich panel. The normal force from the
bolt will contribute to the friction force when the specimen is loaded in tension or compres-
sion. Advantages of this idea are known calculation methods to determine the friction force,
less complex idea compared to idea 1, possibility to have a variation of sandwich thickness if
the design allows it. Some disadvantages that needs to be investigated is the cores ability to
withstand an flat-wise compression surface load of certain size.
As part of the Five-step process (figure 4.1), a reflection on the chosen idea is needed.
Below is a free body diagram representing the normal force, friction force and tensile force:
Figure 4.6: Free body diagram of idea 2
Page 19 of 76
==PAGE:27==
By assuming a friction coefficient of µ = 0.5, and a desired friction force of 250kN in order
to withstand the maximum loads the biaxial rig can induce, the surface load can be calculated
for different area size. The area size is at this stage not yet defined, but an overview of the load
magnitude can be calculated:
Area the U-clamp
is clamping on [mm]
Flate-wise
compression load [MPa]
400 x 30
41.5
600 x 30
27.7
800 x 30
20.8
1000 x 30
16.6
400 x 40
31.3
600 x 40
20.8
800 x 40
15.6
1000 x 40
12.5
Table 4.2: Flat-wise compression strength for different area
From data sheets of the Nomex Honeycomb, the flat-wise compression strength is around
1.05 MPa. This is less much less than the values calculated above. The solution to this problem
is to remove some of the Honeycomb where the U-clamp will be present, and replace that part
with a steel frame or block. The steel is assumed to withstand high loads in the flate-wise
compression direction. Below is a figure of the revised idea:
Figure 4.7: Revised idea 2
The friction based idea is now revised, although a final design with working drawing with
definitive measurements is yet to be found.
Page 20 of 76
==PAGE:28==
Idea 3
The third idea is based on gluing an fiber-sheet around the specimen.
Figure 4.8: Fiber-sheet around the sandwich panel
This idea is based on using more effectively the epoxy adhesive by gluing between fiber to
fiber rather then fiber to steel. Higher loads can be achieved before the adhesive fails. An piece
of component can be inserted in the fiber sheet to transfer the loads from the test rig. While
the loads can be higher, the disadvantages of this idea is the complicated process of gluing fiber
sheets.
4.3
Experimental determination of friction coefficient
Based on idea 2, the friction force is scaled with the friction coefficient which can be
influenced depending on the surface roughness and type of material. In order to get an estimate
of the friction coefficient and whether it can be increased by simply grinding the surface with
sand paper, an experiment is done. From another source, it was know coefficient of friction was
around 0.55 [17].
The experiment consists of using a digital newton meter to pull a known mass that is
placed on sandwich panel. The mass is a steel block where the mass can be increased by adding
additional steel block on top of each other. The mass is then measured and the normal force
calculated.
Then, via the digital newton meter, an string is linked to an eye bolt at the mass in order
to pull. By hand, the steel block(s) is then pulled until it/they start to glide on the surface. At
the moment they glide, the digital newton meter is read-off. From the following equation, the
friction coefficient can be determined by linear regression and looking at the slope:
Fµ = FN · µ
(1)
Different surface combination are presented below:
• Unchanged surface from the carbon side of the sandwich panel
• Painted surface from the sandwich panel
Page 21 of 76
==PAGE:29==
• Fine-grind with sandpaper on sandwich panel and steel block
• Coarse-grind with sandpaper on sandwich panel and steel block (repeated twice)
• Milled surface of the steel block
The overview of the tests are presented below:
0
50
100
150
200
250
Normal force [N]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Friction force [N]
Friction force experiment
 y = 0.52657x + 1.9525
 y = 0.43367x + 5.8183
 y = 0.37151x + 1.5703
  y = 0.30395x + 1.3468
  y = 0.24484x + 1.0718
  y = 0.23104x + -1.1184
Coarse sanded surface
Coarse sanded surface NM
Sanded surface
Unchanged surface
Milled surface
Painted surface
Figure 4.9: Overview of the different test to determine the friction factor for different type of
surface. OBS: NM stands for New Measurement
From figure 4.9, it can be seen that the highest friction factor occurs for the surface that
have been coarse-grind with sandpaper. The values from the coarse grind surface is significant
larger then the unchanged surface. This indicates that its worth the time to grind the surface with
a coarse sandpaper since it increases the friction factor. The value for the friction coefficient
that can be extracted from this test is set to be µ = 0.4 in order to be conservative.
The take out from this experiment is to grind with sandpaper the components that have
contact surface with the sandwich panel, if an friction based idea is used
4.4
Use of swivels and kinematic analysis
The projects advisor Christian Berggreen advocated strongly for implementing so called
swivel heads as part of the arm design, mostly as a safety measure against damaging the del-
icate load cells and pistons against off-axis loading. Of axis loading can potentially occur if
the test panel was to kink violently as a result of buckling or fracturing of the skin. A very
different potential cause for sudden kinking of the panel is; whether the mechanism, i.e. the
pistons, arms, and panel, is adequately constrained. This can be investigated using multibody
Page 22 of 76
==PAGE:30==
kinematics. Specifically the The Kutzbach and Grübler criterion[18, 19] These can determine
if a mechanism is over-, under-, or statically determined using the following formulae:
B = 3(n−1)−∑Ui −∑Fid
(2)
B = 6(n−1)−∑Ui −∑Fid
(3)
where B is mobility, or how many inputs are needed to control the mechanism, n is number
of bodies including the ground, Ui is the number of unconstraints and Fid is the number of
identical DoFs. Equation (2) refers to 2D DoF and eq. (3) refers to 3D DoF. Using eq. (3) with
fig. 4.10 and table 4.3 finds the design is overconstrained by two DoF:
6(6−1)−28−4 = −2
Using the same method with eq. (2) gives an overconstraint by one DoF in 2D.
Removing all swivels, thus rigidly mounting the panel to the load cell, gives a −14 and −5
DoF in 2D and 3D respectively. The calculations show that the swivel mounted panel in fig. 4.10
is slightly overconstrained, thus load coupling between arms to some degree is expected.
Figure 4.10: Panel (blue) mounted with four swivels (black), the rest of the arms (red) interface
with the MTS test machine with a sliding connection.
Often when discussing the usage of swivels, the fallacy of imagining two spherical bearings
per arm takes hold, see fig. 4.11. In this instance, the middle link functions as a truss, thus
lowering bending moments at the cantilevered load cell. This design gives an under constrained
design at 3 and 6 DoF in 2D and 3D respectively. It was found that with three arms, having only
one swivel, and one arm having two swivels, the system will be statically determined. In theory
this out to alleviate some of the unwanted coupling between arms.
Page 23 of 76
==PAGE:31==
Joint
x
y
z
Rx
Ry
Rz
U
Panel-arm 1
1
1
1
0
0
0
3
Panel-arm 2
1
1
1
0
0
0
3
Panel-arm 3
1
1
1
0
0
0
3
Panel-arm 4
1
1
1
0
0
0
3
Arm 1 - machine
0
1
1
0
1
1
4
Arm 2 - machine
0
1
1
0
1
1
4
Arm 2 - machine
0
1
1
0
1
1
4
Arm 2 - machine
0
1
1
0
1
1
4
28
Table 4.3: Degrees of unconstraints for fig. 4.10 in 3D.
Figure 4.11: fig. 4.10 with an extra swivel mounted in each arm.
It should be noted, that this method of analysing kinematics is generally used to analyse
non-elastic mechanisms where controlled rigid body is desired, as opposed to this thesis’ goal
of no rigid body motion, only strain.
The arms mounted are aligned using rotational and translational adjustment screws at the
loadcell.
Page 24 of 76
==PAGE:32==
4.5
Concept selection
With the ideas from above, a concept screening can be used to select the concept that will
most likely be a success based on the target specification. If a more detail analysis is needed,
an concept scoring could also be relevant. Although, a concept screening will be sufficient for
this case. Below shows the current stage of the Front-End process:
Figure 4.12: Current stage in the Front-End process
The concept screening method is based on giving each criteria a simple grade as plus,
minus or zero. The ideas are compared to a reference concept which in this case will be the
current setup from Moncy. The selection criteria are based on the target specification. Below is
the matrix table with the scores:
Ideas
Selection criteria
Idea 1
Idea 2
Idea 3
Manufacturability
0
+
-
Cost
0
-
-
Future upgrades
0
+
-
Weight
-
-
+
Safety
-
+
-
Loading type
+
+
+
User friendly
0
+
0
Sum +’s
1
5
2
Sum 0’s
4
0
1
Sum -’s
2
2
4
Net score
-2
3
-2
Continue?
no
yes
no
Table 4.4: Concept screening
From table 4.4, the idea that will be the principle idea to continue with is number 2 - the
Page 25 of 76
==PAGE:33==
friction based idea.
4.6
Final Design Development
- Snak om mulighed for materialer, fremstilling. Forventet præcision
4.6.1
Design topology
This section presents all the required connections and their effect on the final design.
As concluded in section 4.1, the machine interface is the load cell. Connection to the load
cell is per the manufacturers design, a bolt circle with eight M16 bolts. The component that
interfaces with the load cell, is named part 1. Part 1 must also interface with the out-of-plane
support bushings. Thus part 1’s outer diameter is locked by this precision fit.
The three swivel sizes discussed in section 4.4, are all equipped with clearance holes for
bolts. Thus the interfaces on both ends of the swivel have to be bolted connections too.
Since the bolt pattern on the two largest swivels, are greater than the outer diameter part 1,
some form of adapter or enlargement between part 1 and the swivel. The design and partition
of this is mostly dictated by design for manufacture, see section 4.6.2.
At the other end of the swivel, the swivel somehow has to interface with the test panel in a
way that makes it possible to remove the test panel, and insert a new panel.
As described in the target specification, table 2.1, one of the targets is to be able to test the
largest panel possible in the machine. One solution, is being able to remove components in the
arms, thus shortening them.
Figure 4.13 from Schaeffler Technical Pocket Guide[20], gives an overview of some of the
most common temporary and permanent connecting elements.
In conversations with the supervisor Christian Berggreen, it was made clear that no back-
lash was permitted anywhere in the load path of the machine.
From the figure, there are multiple ways of achieving a temporary zero-backlash. However,
from a design for manufacture perspective, none are simple as screw connections. Is the bolted
connection paired with a couple of precision pins, the connection can even become positively
locating.
4.6.2
Design for manufacture and assembly
This section presents some of the considerations put into the final design. Most of these
concepts aid the design by either shortening its production time or lowering its cost.
With the relatively short timeline for this project, combined with the (at the time) short
Page 26 of 76
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.13: Overview of mechanical connecting methods, from [20].
supply of steels as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, material procurement and man-
ufacturing was a critical issue. Often, a large majority of the cost of a product is tied to the
manufacturing processes rather than the raw material price. For this reason, the final design
used the fewest manufacturing processes necessary and the fewest setups1 per part. In addition,
the four arms were designed to be almost identical, with only one part having one feature vary
in length, namely part 5.
The design was also strongly guided by what materials and sizes were available. It was
decided to buy most of the steel from Uddeholm pre-ground. This had a price penalty, compared
to buying regular steel with mill scale. However, using to-size pre-ground material means only
the features need to be machined, as opposed to first having to remove mill scale from minimum
4 sides. First then, could features be machined in the part.
1Setup refers to the process of mounting a part in a manufacturing machine
Page 27 of 76
==PAGE:35==
It was also decided to only use standard metric coarse threaded bolts, because of their
availability and price, even thought their fine threaded counterpart are stronger. In addition,
bolts larger than M20 were not used since tapping large threads is rather difficult.
Another important concept, is standardisation. If the manufacturing processes are similar
or identical across all components, improving or optimizing that single process has a direct
impact all components.
4.7
Final Design
With the solution 3 as the defining starting point and idea 2 for the principle of fixture for
the test specimen, the stage toward the final design can begin. This section only covers the final
design and not the entire process. During this process, multiple iteration was done in order to
end with the final design. Throughout the iterations, some design aspect had to be revised due
to unforeseen circumstances and other changes had to be made because of lack of resources
such has workshop machinery, time delivery ect. These will be covered in section 4.9.
Figure 4.14 shows a 3D CAD drawing of the final design where the arms are mounted with
the test specimen:
Page 28 of 76
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.14: MTS Planar Biaxial 250 kN test machine with the final design installed.
Figure 4.15 shows a close up picture of a single arm mounted:
Page 29 of 76
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.15: Arm design view
Figure 4.16: Arm design view
Below is a 3D drawing in exploded view of the different components of the arm and grip
Page 30 of 76
==PAGE:38==
system for the test specimen. The component are given numbers which are shown in the red
circles:
Figure 4.17: Exploded view of the arm
Figure 4.18: Exploded view of the grip for the panel
In Appendix C the technical drawing of each components can be seen in details with di-
mensions.
Explanation of the different component in figure 4.17 and 4.18:
Page 31 of 76
==PAGE:39==
• Part 1 - Loadcell adapater circular plate: This component needed to fit the already exist-
ing loadcell geometry given from MTS, which needed to be circular shape with 8 x M16
counterbored bolt connection to the loadcell. The thickness of this component needed
to be thick enough so part 2 would not collide with the structure when the pistons are
retracted all the way back. This part is critical in dimensions since it needs to glide into
the teflon pads as the piston goes back and forth.
• Part 2 - Swivel plate adapter: This rectangular plate acts as an adapter between Part 1 and
the Swivel. The swivel bolts hole diameter pattern were larger then the diameter of Part
1, and therefor an larger component was needed which could be bolted into. This part
have been manufactured so it can accommodate the smaller swivel version of 160kN.
• Part 3 - 340kN MTS Swivel: An detail explanation to the use of the swivel in this design
is given in section 4.4. Two different size of swivel can be used in the final design to
increase the flexibility of the design.
• Part 4 - Swivel to spacer plate adapter: Because the bolts on the other side of the swivel
is not practical to connect a spacer directly, an rectangular plate adapter is needed. Just
like part 2, this part is designed to also have the smaller swivel version.
• Part 5 - Spacer: This part acts as an "fil-the-gap" component. Two different design have
been made for this specific part. The original design consists of splitting the spacer into
several interchangeable spacers with counterbored holes in order to increase/decrease the
size of the test-specimen. Because lack of time, an alternative design which consists of
making a single piece with no interchangeable parts. This limits the ability of varying the
size of the test-specimen.
• Part 6 - U-shape grip connection to arm: This U-shape plate acts as the connecting part
between part 8 and part 5 with a total of 8 x M14 bolt. Counterbored hole are designed
such that the spacer (part 5) can have any rotation to ease the assembly process.
• Part 7 - Washer for bolts: For the series of bolts used for part 8 into part 9 and 10, washers
are used in order to enhance the pressure cone of the bolt.
• Part 8 - Steel plate with slots: This part contains slots hole in order to give part 9 and 10
the ability to move independently of each other to accommodate varying size of thickness
for the specimen. This part also acts as the connection part with part 6.
• Part 9 - Top plate for clamping the specimen: This component acts as the clamping part
of the specimen which have holes through the plate with clearance, and with holes on the
side of the component to fix it to part 8.
• Part 10 - Bottom plate for clamping the specimen: Just as part 9 with the difference that
the holes are thread holes for the bolt to screw in.
How are the parts assembled/joined together?:
The chosen joining method between the individual component is the use of bolts. With bolts, it
gives the final design some flexibility e.g replacing a new part with something relatively cheap
and easy. Additionally, known method for design and analysis of bolts are known with respect
to ISO-standards that gives the final product reliability.
Page 32 of 76
==PAGE:40==
Below is an general overview of the number and size of the bolts used in the design:
Connecting
part numbers
Length
[mm]
M-size
Total pcs
Part 1 - Loadcell
65
M16
32
Part 2 - Part 1
70
M20
16
Part 3 - Part 2
100
M20
16
Part 3 - Part 4
65
M16
16
Part 6 - Part 5 - Part 4
140/240/260
M20
16
Part 6 - Part 8
75
M14
32
Part 7 - Part 8 - Part 9/10
70
M16
72
Part 9 - Part 10
110
M14
32
Total bolts:
232
Table 4.5: Bolt overview
The type of bolts that are used are the following: DIN 912 - 12.9 grade steel
Material choice for the parts: Cold-work tool steel - UHB11. The majority of the raw
material is ordered from Uddeholm, which is a medium-carbon base steel that is delivered fined
machined in order to directly start the manufacturing process. This particular steel have been
chosen because of its mechanical properties and as well as it price compared to other steel
manufacturers of same quality. The mechanical properties are listed in [21, 22]. The round
steel is of type S355J2 from Sanistål.
The pros and cons of the final design is explained below in relation with the target specifi-
cation from section 2.3:
Pros:
• The design allows to load both in tension and compression (operate in R=-1).
• With the interchangeable spacer design, the design can accommodate specimen size from
400x400 to 600x600 - and more if parts are removed.
• The grip system can take test specimen from 0-50mm in thickness.
• Two different size of swivel can be used respectively 160kn and 340kN swivel size.
• Design to withstand loads up to ±250kN.
• The design has the potential for future upgrades and modification.
• Design after infinite lifetime
Cons:
• Many components which increases the manufacturing time considerably.
Page 33 of 76
==PAGE:41==
• As an result of many component, the assembly time is considerable when mounting into
the test rig.
• Weight. The weight of the different component makes it hard to handle.
4.7.1
Interchangeable spacer design
From the description of the different parts in section 4.7 it is mentioned for part 5, that
two different design for this part have been made. The original design for this part was multiple
interchangeable spacers which was bolted together. Below is a working drawing with an section
view of the spacer:
Figure 4.19: Final design with the interchangeable spacer
The main feature of this design is to give more flexibility to the size of test specimen.
However, an unexpected situation occurred when late during the idea generation phase, that the
test rig is asymmetrically in the x-direction. Due to this finding, the spacer lengths had to be
adjusted. Therefor this idea needs to be revised to match the new dimension and determine the
maximum and minimum size of test specimen the design can accommodate.
4.7.2
Bolted joint analysis
With the use of bolts as joining method, an bolted joint analysis have been made to design
the arm to be able to withstand 250kN load. The only case where the bolts would take load is
when applying tension. The following safety factor have been calculated for each assembly:
Page 34 of 76
==PAGE:42==
• Safety against separation
• Safety against tensile failure of the bolt
• Safety for infinite life as per ASME
• Safety for external thread shear
• Safety for internal thread shear
The method and theory behind the calculation of above values are inspired from [23] and
[24], and are primarily based on the following input:
• External load
• Bolt grade
• Number of bolt
• Nominal diameter of bolt (and pitch)
• Chosen preload
For each assembly of part listed in table 4.5, the safety factor are calculated by multiple
iteration between the above mentioned inputs with the preload as variable, in order to determine
the best combination of safety factor.
The joints analysis is based on a external load of 250kN - which is the maximum output of
the biaxial machine.
Below is a graph of the safety factor as a function of the pre-load for the first assembly
which is Part 1 to loadcell:
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Applied tensile load [kN]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Tensile load in bolt [kN]
Preload +25%
Tensile load in bolt
Preload -25%
1-1 line
Proof load
Trendline
(a)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
mean [MPa]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
amplitude [MPa]
ASME fatigue line
Proof strength line
Goodman
Bolt load
e
proof
(b)
Figure 4.20: Bolted joint analysis for 8 M16 bolts joining Part 1 and loadcell.
Page 35 of 76
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.21: Safety factors for the joining between part 1 and the loadcell
The pre-load that gives overall highest safety factors is then chosen. If none of the them are
satisfactory, another combination of the mentioned input will be tried e.g changing the nominal
bolt size. This sequence is then repeated for all different joining assembly.
From the joint analysis, the value that needs to be extracted is the Preload [kN] which
easily can be converted to Torque [Nm] because of its linearity relationship assuming a friction
factor. Below is an overview of the required torque to fasten the bolts for different joining parts:
Reference
Joining parts
Torque [Nm]
1
Part 1 - Loadcell
208
2
Part 2 - Part 1
360
3
Part 3 - Part 2
400
4
Part 3 - Part 4
210
5
Part 6 - Part 5 - Part 4
360
6
Part 6 - Part 8
150
7
Part 7 - Part 8 - Part 9/10
150
8
Part 9 - Part 10
175
Table 4.6: Needed torque
Based on the calculations method from [23] and [24], the safety factors for the applied
torque from table 4.6 are shown below:
Page 36 of 76
==PAGE:44==
Reference
SF against
separation
SF against
tensile failure
of bolt
SF for
infinite life
SF for external
thread shear
SF for internal
thread shear
1
2.5
2.8
5.1
3.7
1.4
2
1.9
2.2
3.9
3.7
1.5
3
2.2
2.2
3.2
3.3
1.4
4
1.4
1.3
2.5
3.1
1.3
5
1.7
2.2
7.7
3.9
1.4
6
2.2
1.7
3.8
3.0
1.3
7
5.1
6.6
11.4
4.2
1.8
8
-
-
-
3.3
1.4
Table 4.7: Overview of the safety factors
All joining parts have an safety factor above 1 with some margin. The limiting factor for
all bolts is the internal thread shear - which is a the thread of the bolts that fails.
For reference 8 - the joining part between part 9 and part 10 - no safety factor are calculated
against separation, tensile failure and infinite life because these bolts do no experience any
tensile load from the biaxial machine, only the applied pre-load.
With the known pre-load torque between part 9 and part 10 that gives a satisfactory safety
factor, the maximum tensile load can be calculated through the friction factor determined in
fig. 4.9. Below is a free body diagram of the relevant loads:
FNcarbon
Fµsteel
FNsteel
Fµcarvon
Figure 4.22: Free body diagram to determine the maximum tensile load based on the friction
coefficient
The frictional factor for steel is assumed to be 0.5. Firstly, the normal force to the sandwich
is determined with the preload (in kN) from table 4.6:
Fbolt = 70kN
2
·8 = 280kN
,
FNcarbon = Fbolt
2
= 140kN
(4)
Page 37 of 76
==PAGE:45==
Then the frictional force can be calculated:
Fµc = FNcarbon · µc = 140·0.4 = 56kN
(5)
The frictional force of the steel must be the same as the normal force of the carbon:
FNsteel = Fµsteel
µsteel
= 280kN
(6)
This is the maximum tensile force the frictional force can withstand.
4.7.3
Tolerance chain analysis
Every component interface need some clearance on order to make components fit. The
price for dividing the topological design into so many pieces, in the name of design for man-
ufacture, is the large number of interfaces that drive misalignment. In order to understand the
extent of misalignment, a worst case method is used.[24].
Arms opposite each other, can potentially the worst case shift in opposite directions, thus
doubling the global misalignment.
Firstly, it is assumed, that the load cells are perfectly aligned towards the imaginary center
of the testing machine. The load cells are equipped with fine adjust screws, capable of adjusting
4 of the load cell’s 6 DoF.
The analysis only looks at the bolt clearance holes for translational shifting, since they are
the largest contributor. Flatness and parallelism call outs according to ISO 1101[25] for angular
shifting. See appendix C. Although perpendicularity variation has an effect on misalignment,
the fine tolerances make the effect negligible.
Hole size and placement for all components are called out according to ISO 2768-f[26],
this allows a maximum deviation from nominal size of ±0.1 mm. This is added to all clearance
hole diameters, except the holes in the swivels. All bolt diameters are assumed to be nominal
as well.
The bolted connection between Part 8 to Part 9 and Part 10 is not included, since its max-
imum shit theoretically the entire length of the slots. The maximum translation misalignment
per arm is thus:
Load cell to Part 1: Firstly the Part 1 is mounted to the load cell with a with precision slip
fit. Thus there is no transitional shift. ∆1 = 0
Part 1 to Part 2: A M20 bolt clearance hole has the maximum possible shift of:
∆2 = (Dhole +ISOtolerance)−Dbolt
2
= 22.1mm−20mm
2
= 1.05mm
(7)
Part 2 to Part 3:
∆3 = 20.8mm−20mm
2
= 0.45mm
(8)
Page 38 of 76
==PAGE:46==
Part 3 to Part 4:
∆4 = 16.87mm−16mm
2
= 0.435mm
(9)
Part 4 to Part 5 to Part 6:
∆5 = 22.1mm−20mm
2
= 1.05mm
(10)
Part 6 to Part 8:
∆6 = 15.1mm−14mm
2
= 0.55mm
(11)
Thus the maximum lateral misalignment for one arm is:
∑∆= 3.535mm
(12)
4.7.4
FEA study of the final design
An Finite Element Analysis would be appropriate to perform with the known design before
manufacturing commence. The purpose of such analysis would be to investigate first of all if
any material part fails. Followed by an analysis of investigating the reaction forces the load
cell experiences for different increments of load in order to asses the integrity of the test-rig.
For example, if an offset force is present at the end of the arm, how much would the load cell
experience as a bending moment. This type of information would be relevant during the testing
phase and would act as an limiting factor.
Such study could work as an optimisation process, if there are some material parts that are
way too over-designed and there can be saved some material - for instance if the stresses are not
a problem in critical parts.
Although it would have been an important and interesting study, it will not be performed
due to the time-frame of the project.
4.8
Manufacturing
With the final design in place and the working drawing ready, the next step is to start man-
ufacturing each component. This is a long process because many parts are to be manufacture.
Almost all parts are manufactured at DTU Skylab workshop with the use of an CNC
milling, CNC lathe and some steps by hand. Part number 7 have been manufacture at DTU
Ballerup Prototype lab with the use of an Metal-Laser-Cutter.
Page 39 of 76
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.23: Manufacturing process
4.9
Conclusoion on design and manufacturing
The Five-step method from Ulrich and Eppinger is used for the idea generation part. The
first step was to determine the starting point to start generating concepts. Based on pro and
cons, the choice ends with the third solution that regards with removing all part of the current
setup from Moncy but the loadcell.
The next step is the determine which principle ideas is best suited for the fixture of the
specimen. Three different idea are introduced which are rated through an concept screening
matrix with different selection criteria. Idea 2 turned out as the best idea to continue on and
underwent a reflection process in order to come up with a better revised idea. Idea 2 is based
on clamping the specimen and holding it based on friction with bolts that can be pre-loaded and
hence apply friction force. Some modification needs to be done to the specimen by inserting a
steel block on the edges in order to increase the flat-wise compression strength.
The final design (single arm and grip) is shown in section 4.7 which consists of 10 part
where one of them is a swivel from MTS. All the rectangular shape parts are made from UHB11
steel, and the circular part are S355J2 steel from Sanistål. To assemble all the parts together,
DIN-912 12.9 grade steel bolt are used. A total of 232 bolt are used in the final design which
are designed after a joint analysis to ensure an safety margin regarding separation, failure of the
bolt and infinite lifespan. The features of the design are listed in the same section.
With working drawing ready and approved, an inquiry to two supplier of steel were made
in order to get the best offer to stay inside the given budget. This process took more time then
expected because of unforeseen reasons which ultimately impacted some aspect of the final de-
sign. Because some material could not be delivered, the design had to be revised multiple times
with available material which triggered an consequent delay to the project. The manufacturing
process of the components took also more time then expected since the delay from the inquiry
have pushed this process into the vacation of the workshop.
Overall, many challenges were met during this phase which affected the design and it was
necessary to compromise on some aspects of the final design.
Page 40 of 76
==PAGE:48==
5
Experimental Setup
With the design manufactured and mounted, a proof of concept can be performed in order
to validate the design and its functionality. This section covers the basis of the experiment and
setup setup. The purpose of the experiments are to investigate in the following:
• Rigid body motion occurs.
• The functionality of the design.
• Overall assessment of handling and operating the MTS biaxial with the design
• The pressure valve behind the test specimen
• The disbond in the middle of the specimen
5.1
Test setup
In order check and achieve the purposes, a total of five test are performed. All the test will
only be loading the specimen in tensile and at an low load. The reasons for that are due to safety
concerns which will be covered in detail in section 5.2.
The tests will be a static test where the load is ramped up to 2kN, then dwells for a given
time at 2 kN, and followed by a ramping down to 0 kN. Below is a figure of the signal input:
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force [kN]
Static test - Ramp-Dwell-Ramp down
Command
Figure 5.1: Sequence of an static test
Below is a description of the each individual tests:
• Test 01: Static test, where the specimen is only loaded in x-direction
• Test 02: Static test, where the specimen is only loaded in y-direction
• Test 03: Static test, where the specimen is loaded in x- and y-direction in the same order
of magnitude
Page 41 of 76
==PAGE:49==
• Test 04: Use of PPV system to give the specimen a pressure.
• Test 05: Static test, where the specimen is loaded in x- and y-direction and use of PPV
To extract data from these tests, an Digital Image Correlation system is needed. DIC has the
advantages of being a non-contact optical technique where it utilises two camera to capture a
3D full field by correlating the images. The specimen is sprayed with an pattern of small dot in
order to create a grey scale for the DIC to recognise the pattern through a facet-matrix. These
facet-matrix are used to calculate 3D values from the surface of the specimen by capturing a
series of images. Below is a figure of the principles of the DIC system:
DIC computer
x
z
specimen
y
Figure 5.2: DIC system setup - the red boxes indicates the cameras
An calibration process is required for the DIC to be tailored for the specific needs of the
experimental tests. Before calibration, an overview of the data to be extracted is needed. The
followings is required:
• Point measurements on the arms
• 3D full-field of the specimen
With the known data to extract, an overview of the range the cameras needs to capture the image
is known, and subsequently the calibration can be performed. An overview of the calibration
setup can be seen in Appendix B. Below is an image showing the pattern quality as a results of
the calibration:
Page 42 of 76
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.3: Pattern quality generated from GOM
The quality is very good with very few minor areas that are bad quality.
The point measurement on the arms are measured with the use of point markers sticker.
The appropriate size of sticker is used to stick onto part 9 (cf. figure 4.17). Below is a figure
showing the placement and numbering of each point:
Page 43 of 76
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.4: Point markers placement and numbering
With the DIC calibration setup performed, an reference picture is taken before each tests.
Once the test commence, a picture can be taken approximately every second by manually press-
ing on a trigger that initiates an signal to capture an image. These images are then stored in a
program called ARAMIS/GOM where the post-processing takes place.
5.1.1
Test rig setup
With the test procedure and DIC system setup, the next stage is to setup the test-rig itself,
i.e programming the static test through the MTS, tuning the PID gains and setting up Mode A
(Offset) and Mode B (Matrix).
Mode A and Mode B, also referred respectively as "Offset" and "Matrix" are operating
modes the biaxial machine operates in either "displacement" or "force" control. The offset
mode controls the two opposite load cell to displace in the same direction. The matrix mode
controls the two opposite load cell to displace in the opposite direction. In short, the offset
controls that no rigid body motion (in-plane) occurs, and the matrix controls the amount of load
applied in tensile and/or compression. The offset and matrix mode can be controled either in
forced or displacement. Below is a figure showing the principle of the offset and matrix mode:
Page 44 of 76
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.5: Illustration of direction of offset and matrix commands. Figure from [7].
These modes are important to operate in order to avoid large bending moment and ulti-
mately damaging the test-rig. It is possible to manually control these modes in order to calibrate
the test-rig.
Calibration of the test-rig: Calibrating the test-rig is a process take takes time in order
to be precise and have a good calibration. Before mounting the specimen, all forces are reset
in order to not consider gravity as force. Once the specimen is bolted together with the first
arm (Y1) leaving it hanging on a single load cell, the opposite load cell (Y2) is then manually
displaced with use of the Matrix control (in displacement mode). Carefully, the Y2 arm is
displaced until it is touching the specimen. An reaction force can be observed manually and it
needs to be as close as possible to zero, while ensuring there is still contact between the surfaces
of the arm and the specimen. Then it is possible to bolt the arm from Y2 to the specimen. This
process is repeated for the horizontal arms.
With the specimen in place and calibrated with respect to the offset and matrix force, the
next step is to tune the PID gains. The PID gains controls the correction and responsiveness of
an control signal. The optimal values for the PID gains depends on the stiffness of the specimen
and on the type of loading.
With the specimen mounted and calibrated, the PID gains adjusted for the mentioned tests
in section 5.1, the DIC system running and calibrated, the experiment can now begin.
5.1.2
Novel method of inducing controlled face-core disbond
The panels used for the tests in this report, were cut from a larger intact panel. Thus, an
initial debonded area had to be created. Recreating Bundgaard’s[6] experiments yielded the
same results; A controlled disbond cannot be induced (or increased in size) by locally heating
the face above its glass transition temperature, or by manual pressurisation of the core. It was
discovered, that only when combining local heating with pressurisation a successful disbond
Page 45 of 76
==PAGE:53==
happens. This novel approach is described in detail for future use.
A 6 mm hole is drilled on the opposite side of the desired disbond side. An 6 mm Festo
compatible air hose is super glued onto to the surface at the hole using a flat flange made of
aluminium, insuring air tightness and ease of removal. The air hose is then connected to two
50 ml syringes, used as pressure supply, and a pressure gauge. The panel is placed on a hotplate
with a diameter 10 mm smaller than the desired disbond. The panel is rested on three small
pieces of bent sheet metal, lifting the panel 2-4 mm above the hotplate, insuring adequate space
for the necessary bulging of the face away from the core. The Hotplate is heated to 300 °C,
whilst syringes are compressed until the internal pressure reads 1 bar. The panel remains this
was, where after the panel is removed from the hotplate, and a nonuniform debonded area should
have appeared. It was discovered that using a hot air soldering station at 200 °C with 0.7 bar
of pressure, one could very precisely enlarge the disbond by slowly "painting" the tip of the
debond. Once satisfied with the debond, the air hose can be knocked off using a small hammer.
The authors speculate that the initial debond might not be necessary, thus the entire debond
could be made using the hot air soldering station. This method allows for far more shapes
of debonds as well. During hot air soldering, it can be difficult to determine the exact edge
of the debond, thus achieving geometrically perfect debonds using this method might prove
challenging. A proposed workaround, is to perform the initial debond in the biaxial testing
machine, using the PPV[6] for pressurisation and DIC[6] for debond size measuring.
5.1.3
Sandwich panel setup
From section 4.2, the sandwich panels needs to have its edge reinforced with a steel block
in order to increase the flat-wise compression strength. From Skylab, an hollow square steel
profile with dimension 40x40mm was available to use. Four pieces were cut out with an angle
at the edges.
Next step is the remove the Honeycomb core carefully from the sandwich panel 40mm into
the panel on all four edges. With an saw, the edges could be cut out roughly. However, some
Honeycomb was still present close to the face surface which could be grind off with sandpaper.
The result is shown below:
Figure 5.6: Honeycomb removed from the edges
Page 46 of 76
==PAGE:54==
The hollow square steel profile can then be inserted and glued with an epoxy to secure it.
Epoxy 3M scotch weld 460 was used. After 24 hour, the epoxy is cured and free from toxicity.
The panel is now ready to be mounted into the grip system.
5.2
Discussion
During the experiment setup, some complication and challenges occurred along the way
that forced to revise the experiment.
Firstly, the complexity of calibrating the test-rig (Offset and Matrix force) have been a
complicated process that has caused numerous interlock of the system, and thus it was neces-
sary to start over again. If an simple test such as an compression-tension load in x-direction,
followed by an imprecise calibration from the beginning, the load cell would experience big
reaction forces as an result of the specimen "drifting" away causing an interlock. The fact that
all load cell are coupled together made it complicated to calibrate an offset-force since it also
affects the adjacent load cell.
When the system goes into interlock, the hydraulic power is no longer activated, and the spec-
imen would from gravity settle downwards until the horizontal load cell carries all the weight
and exercising an compression on the specimen. The load cell would be experiencing an bend-
ing moment. This meant, that it was impossible to unscrew the bolts and free the specimen.
This is seen as an design flaw. In order to free the specimen, the limits of the interlock had to
be increased at levels that could cause damage to the load cells, and active the oil flow. Once
activated, and no interlock occurred, the specimen is moved back to its "neutral" position where
the force readings are lowest.
With consultancy from Waldbjørn and Berggreen, it was decided to only load the specimen
in tension at low force for the integrity of the biaxial test machine.
The setup of the PID gain value also turned out to be complicated because its difficult to
find the sweetspot that does not cause the system to overshoot the signal, and hence triggering
an interlock. For every different type of loading, an tailored PID gain value should be found in
order to decrease the risk of the specimen to drift away or the signal overshoots the command
target.
Page 47 of 76
==PAGE:55==
6
Results From Experiments
This section presents the results of the five tests that are described in section 5.1 followed
by a discussion and reflection in relation to the purpose of the tests.
6.1
Test 01
The figure below represent the data output from the load cell and calculated value (Mode
A and Mode B) with the given command signal from the biaxial testrig:
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force [kN]
Matrix/Offset Force
Xmatrix
Xoffset
Ymatrix
Yoffset
Command
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Force [kN]
Forces
X1
X2
Y1
Y2
Command
(b)
Figure 6.1: (a) Measured Matrix and Offset forces from MTS. (b) Measured force from the load
cells. (b) The black line is the "command" which is the given input from the user
An overview of the measurements from the DIC system of the point markers is shown
below:
Page 48 of 76
==PAGE:56==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
-0.4
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in X-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Y-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Z-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(c)
Figure 6.2: (a) Displacement in X-direction for all point markers. (b) Displacement in Y-
direction for all point markers. (c) Displacement in Z-direction for all point markers.
6.2
Test 02
The figure below represent the data output from the load cell and calculated value (Mode
A and Mode B) with the given command signal from the biaxial testrig:
Page 49 of 76
==PAGE:57==
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force [kN]
Matrix/Offset Force
Xmatrix
Xoffset
Ymatrix
Yoffset
Command
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Force [kN]
Forces
X1
X2
Y1
Y2
Command
(b)
Figure 6.3: (a) Measured Matrix and Offset forces from MTS. (b) Measured force from the load
cells. (b) The black line is the "command" which is the given input from the user
An overview of the measurements from the DIC system of the point markers is shown
below:
Page 50 of 76
==PAGE:58==
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in X-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Y-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Z-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(c)
Figure 6.4: (a) Displacement in X-direction for all point markers. (b) Displacement in Y-
direction for all point markers. (c) Displacement in Z-direction for all point markers.
6.3
Test 03
The figure below represent the data output from the load cell and calculated value (Mode
A and Mode B) with the given command signal from the biaxial testrig:
Page 51 of 76
==PAGE:59==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force [kN]
Matrix/Offset Force
Xmatrix
Xoffset
Ymatrix
Yoffset
Command
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force [kN]
Forces
X1
X2
Y1
Y2
Command
(b)
Figure 6.5: (a) Measured Matrix and Offset forces from MTS. (b) Measured force from the load
cells. (b) The black line is the "command" which is the given input from the user
An overview of the measurements from the DIC system of the point markers is shown
below:
Page 52 of 76
==PAGE:60==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in X-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Y-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Z-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(c)
Figure 6.6: (a) Displacement in X-direction for all point markers. (b) Displacement in Y-
direction for all point markers. (c) Displacement in Z-direction for all point markers.
6.4
Test 04
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.7: (a) Index 12/13 showing z-displacement. (b) Index 13/13 showing z-displacement
Page 53 of 76
==PAGE:61==
6.5
Test 05
The figure below represent the data output from the load cell and calculated value (Mode
A and Mode B) with the given command signal from the biaxial testrig:
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time [s]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Force [kN]
Matrix/Offset Force
Xmatrix
Xoffset
Ymatrix
Yoffset
Command
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Force [kN]
Forces
X1
X2
Y1
Y2
Command
(b)
Figure 6.8: (a) Measured Matrix and Offset forces from MTS. (b) Measured force from the load
cells. (b) The black line is the "command" which is the given input from the user
An overview of the measurements from the DIC system of the point markers is shown
below:
Page 54 of 76
==PAGE:62==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in X-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Y-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Displacement [mm]
Displacement in Z-direction
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(c)
Figure 6.9: (a) Displacement in X-direction for all point markers. (b) Displacement in Y-
direction for all point markers. (c) Displacement in Z-direction for all point markers.
6.6
Discussion/Reflection
Regarding Test 01:
From figure 6.1 (a), X-matrix follows roughly the command line with some delay, while
X-offset is not constant around zero which can be seen in the difference of measured forces
of X1 and X2 in figure 6.1 (b). The displacements of the point markers in figure 6.2 shows
that for the X-direction, all arms moves follows the same movement in minus x-direction as
a results of the X-offset not being constant at zero. Displacement in Y-direction shows that
the arms moves in positive Y-direction, while in the z-direction shows movements in positive
Z-direction. Generally, in-plane movement are observed. It can be seen from figure 6.2 (c)
measuring the displacement in z-direction, that the Y-group points markers measures higher
displacement (around 0.22mm) then X-group (around 0.17mm) indicating the specimen is ex-
periencing a rotational moment around the X-axis or Y-axis.
Regarding Test 02:
Page 55 of 76
==PAGE:63==
From figure 6.3 (a), the curve of Y-matrix fails to follows the command input line. It
reaches an maximum measured Y-matrix force of 1.6kN compared to the desired 2kN. The
Y-offset force is not constant around zero but negative througout the whole test, indicating
unwanted reaction forces. The measured forces from the load cells (cf. figure 6.3 (b) ) shows
unequal absolute values between Y1 and Y2.
The points markers for this test follows the same trend as Test 01. Figure 6.4 (a) shows
an expected behaviour where groups markers X1 and X2 displace toward each other while Y1-
and Y2-groups stay as the same level but with some fluctuation. Figure 6.3 (b) shows measured
displacement in negative y-direction for all point markers with some difference between each
group markers, indicating an rotational moment around Z-axis causing in-plane motions. Figure
6.3 (c) shows some displacement out-of-plane (maximum measured is point 12 at 0.9mm) for
all point markers but generally twice as less as Test 01.
Regarding Test 03:
From figure 6.5 (a) and (b), X- and Y-matrix tends to follow the command line but not
perfectly while X-and Y-offset does not stay constant zero. The forces measured in (b) are all
+1kN during the dwell period but not all are close to the applied force of 2kN. Comparing X1
with X2 and Y1 with Y2, it can be observed a considerable mismatch between the measured
forces.
From figure 6.6 (a), it can be observed an sudden change at around index 15 from all
markers to measure negative displacement to positive displacement. By looking at the measured
forces from figure 6.5 (a) and (b), an small spike in load can be observed at 5s for the X- and
Y-matrix. This causes an spikes in measured displacements. Additionally, it can be seen that
all group markers are moving toward negative x-direction hence in-plane-movement. From (b),
all group markers displace towards positive y-direction while out-of-plane displacement (figure
(c)) can also be observed from 0.05mm (point12) up to 0.15mm (point 5), indicating some
rotational movement around the x- and/or y-axis.
Regarding Test 04:
This test shows clearly the disbond in the middle of the specimen with a maximum peak of
1.57mm in the middle of it (figure 6.7 (a) ) , while the rest of the panel shows no displacement
- indicating no disbond. At this stage, the pressure was constant at 1bar but suddenly, some
cracking could be heard from the specimen. An last picture was taken after these noisem and
the pressure was then turned off. Figure 6.7 (b) shows the last picture with the pressure still
on. It can be observed two lines below the disbond, that shows an negative value, indicating the
panel have been under suction.
One explanation for that phenomenon could be cracks that have been developed from the dis-
bond to the bottom of the specimen. Thus, the air can escape through these small cracks, causing
an vacuum pressure at which the core have failed. Another explanation relates to the face sheet
has to be in geometrical balance, and thus if some area are buckling out, some area must buckles
inwards.
At this point, it has to be noted that damage have occurred to the specimen which needs to
be taken into consideration for the next test (Test 05).
Regarding Test 05:
Page 56 of 76
==PAGE:64==
From figure 6.8 (a) and (b), it can be seen that the X- and Y-matrix have trouble to follow
the command line at the beginning (from 0s to 25s), then a sudden jump in loads occurs for
all signals but the command. This sudden jump could be caused from an improper PID setup
which overshoots the signal.
From figure 6.9 (a), the point markers for all group moves slightly in the positive x-
direction, but suddenly spikes down in the negative direction. This change occurs has the loads
from figure 6.8 (a) and (b) spikes up causing a imbalance in the system. This is visible in (b)
and (c) also. After index 20, the displacement are more constant with an observed relative
displacement gap between X1 and X2, while Y1 and Y2 are very close together. From figure
6.9 (c), the maximum displacement is point 9 with 0.24mm, and generally the figure indicates
out-of-plane rigid body motion.
In general:
First of all, it can be concluded that PID setup have not been adjusted probably because
none of the measured forces follows the command line input, while the offset forces deviates
from 0 without attempting to get back to the original input value. Setting up the PID (also called
tunning) have proven to be a complicated process in order to find the right balance between a
strong response but not too strong that it overshoots. Ultimately, when the off-set forces deviates
from 0, it causes a reaction forces in the adjacent arms, and hence contributing an load as well
as endangering the load cells.
Both in-plane and out-of-plane displacement are present and seen via the DIC measure-
ments. Reasons for this rigid body motion could be the following:
• Misalignment of the arms: The tolerance chain analysis shows that an misalignment is
likely to occur between the arms in all three direction.
• Tuning of the PID is not good enough to correct the offset-force when there is a mismatch
between input and output resulting in the specimen "drifting" in-plane.
From Test 04, it can be concluded that the PPV system is working perfectly as it shows
clearly the disbond when activated. The disbond itself look good which indicates the method
from section 5.1.2 is a good method to create disbonds.
Page 57 of 76
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to develop a new fixture for the biaxial testing machine
in order to investigate face/core disbond. Along the path of this development, a digital twin of
the panel was initially intended to aid development but failed because of problems regarding
the boundary conditions resulting dubious results. Because of the limited time frame, further
development was halted.
With the interface between the machine, test panel, and a swivel decided, design concepts
were generated. Through a concept selection, a design was chosen to continue with and develop
further. The final design can be seen in section 4.7 with its features that satisfies the target
specification. A thoroughly bolt calculation have been performed to determine the optimal pre-
load of the bolts for each assembly in order to maximise the safety factors. The design is then
manufactured primarily by the author of this thesis at DTU Skylab.
Simultaneously, the test specimen is also to be prepared. The first step of setting up the test
specimen is to induce a controlled face-core disbond with the method described in section 5.1.2
which is a combination of heating the panel and giving a pressure through a hole. This method
seems to work nicely. Additionally, the core at the edges of the sandwich panel is removed and
replaced with a hollow steel profile in order to increase the flat-wise compression strength. This
relates to the normal force that is being applied between part 9 and part 10 in order to increase
the friction force. The steel profile is glued into the sandwich panels and cured for 24 hours.
The grips that consists of 7,8,9,10 are mounted with the panel and hence the test specimen is
ready to be mounted.
With the design manufactured, the proof of concept could begin. To begin with, the arms
need to be mounted into the test rig one at a time. Once all arms are mounted, the test specimen
is mounted where one arm at a time is bolted together while the calibration process is ongoing.
The calibration of the test-rig deals with the offset and matrix force/displacement controls which
needs to be calibrated as the specimen is mounted. This process takes a long time since all arms
are coupled together and by moving one load cell, it will affect all other arms. When the arms
and test specimen is mounted and calibrated, the test setup can begin. On the MTS computer,
the test setup is programmed while also tunning the PID gains in order to have an responsive
signal. To perform data acquisition, an DIC system is used to measure the full 3D view and on
specifics point markers that are sticked onto the grip system. When the DIC system is calibrated,
test sequences can begin.
A total of 5 test have been performed in order to validate the design and its functionality.
These test are only performed in tension due to safety reasons, although it have been proven that
the design can withstand compression loads. The purpose of the test was to investigate whether
rigid body motion occurs and if the disbond can be seen.
From the tests, it can be concluded that rigid body motions occurs. An explanation for
that are due to the misalignment of the arms that causes out-of-plane displacement. Another
reason was the tuning of the PID gains that have not been properly setup, which could cause the
specimen to "drift", resulting in large reaction forces at the load cells.
The solution to resolve the rigid body motion problem, would be to fine tune the PID gain
so the offset forces in X and Y direction stays at zero without any fluctuation. To solve the
Page 58 of 76
==PAGE:66==
misalignment issue would be to adjust the fine-screws at the load cells.
The controlled face/core disbond that was done during the setup of the specimen, can
clearly be seen in Test 04. This shows the disbond method is a success.
Page 59 of 76
==PAGE:67==
References
[1] hw-honeycombpanels.en.made-in-china.com, “China Aluminum Honeycomb Composite
Panel for Home Decoration - China Sandwich Panel, Building Material,” 2022.
[2] European Union Aviation Safety Agency, “Disbond of Sandwich Structures - DoSS -
EASA_REP_RESEA_2016_2 | EASA,” 2016.
[3] D. Zenkert, The Handbook of Sandwich Construction. 1997.
[4] The Transportation Safety Board of Canada, “AVIATION INVESTIGATION REPORT
A05F0047 LOSS OF RUDDER IN FLIGHT AIR TRANSAT AIRBUS A310-308 C-
GPAT MIAMI, FLORIDA, 90 nm S 06 MARCH 2005,” tech. rep., 2007.
[5] A. A. Mulay, “GAG-testing of honeycomb sandwich panels in aircraft structures,” tech.
rep., Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[6] S. Bundgaard, Sandwich Disbond Damage Thresholds in Aircraft Components Søren
Bundgaard Master’s Thesis. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[7] A. Moncy, Tunnelling cracks in composite laminates under planar biaxial strain con-
trolled fatigue loading. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[8] K. T. Ulrich and S. D. Eppinger, Product design and development. McGraw-Hill/Irwin,
2012.
[9] “Six Thinking Hats – De Bono Group.”
[10] D. Zenkert, An introduction to sandwich structures. 1995.
[11] A. Hassan Ahmed Hassan and N. Kurgan, “Modeling and Buckling Analysis of Rectangu-
lar Plates in ANSYS,” International Journal Of Engineering & Applied Sciences, vol. 11,
pp. 310–329, 5 2019.
[12] F. Avilés and L. A. Carlsson, “Three-dimensional finite element buckling analysis of
debonded sandwich panels,” Journal of Composite Materials, vol. 40, pp. 993–1008, 6
2006.
[13] A. Farshidi, Disbond Damage in Aircraft Sandwich Structures. PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2019.
[14] J. J. Jensen and M. Lützen, Introduction to Analysis and Design of Plate Panels. Poly-
teknisk Kompendie, 1 2014.
[15] MTS, “MTS Services, Maintenance Parts and Accessories Catalog for 2022,” 2022.
[16] R. C. Moody and A. J. Vizzini, “Test and Analysis of Composite Sandwich Panels With
Impact Damage,” tech. rep., Defense Technical Information Center, 3 2002.
[17] H. Dhieb, J. G. Buijnsters, F. Eddoumy, and J. P. Celis, “Surface damage of unidirec-
tional carbon fiber reinforced epoxy composites under reciprocating sliding in ambient
air,” Composites Science and Technology, vol. 71, pp. 1769–1776, 10 2011.
Page 60 of 76
==PAGE:68==
[18] T. Eifler, “Ch4.1-1 Design & Robustness of Mechanisms - 41635 Robust design of prod-
ucts and mechanisms Spring 20,” 2020.
[19] T. Eifler, “Ch4.1-2 Mechanism Mobility (2D/3D) - 41635 Robust design of products and
mechanisms Spring 20,” 2020.
[20] SCHAEFFLER, Technical Pocket Guide. Schaeffler Technologies GmbH & Co. KG, 1 ed.,
2014.
[21] “Uddeholm UHB 11 ® Data sheet,” 2009.
[22] “UDDEHOLM UHB 11,” Alloy Digest, vol. 70, no. 6, 2021.
[23] “Bolted Joint Analysis | MechaniCalc.”
[24] P. Klit and N. L. Pedersen, “Machine Elements: Analysis and Design,” p. 295, 2014.
[25] “ISO 1101:2007,” 2007.
[26] “DS/ISO 2768-1,” 1993.
Page 61 of 76
==PAGE:69==
Appendix
A
Detailed DIC measurements
Test 01
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
-0.4
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(c)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(d)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(e)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index [-]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(f)
Figure .1: (a) X1 and X2 group point markers in x-direction. (b) Y1 and Y2 group point markers
in x-direction. (c) X1 and X2 group point markers in y-direction. (d) Y1 and Y2 group point
markers in y-direction. (e) X1 and X2 group point markers in z-direction. (f) Y1 and Y2 group
point markers in z-direction.
Test 02:
Page 62 of 77
Page 62 of 76
==PAGE:70==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(d)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(e)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(f)
Figure .2: (a) X1 and X2 group point markers in x-direction. (b) Y1 and Y2 group point markers
in x-direction. (c) X1 and X2 group point markers in y-direction. (d) Y1 and Y2 group point
markers in y-direction. (e) X1 and X2 group point markers in z-direction. (f) Y1 and Y2 group
point markers in z-direction.
Page 63 of 77
Page 63 of 76
==PAGE:71==
Test 03
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(d)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
(e)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
(f)
Figure .3: (a) X1 and X2 group point markers in x-direction. (b) Y1 and Y2 group point markers
in x-direction. (c) X1 and X2 group point markers in y-direction. (d) Y1 and Y2 group point
markers in y-direction. (e) X1 and X2 group point markers in z-direction. (f) Y1 and Y2 group
point markers in z-direction.
Page 64 of 77
Page 64 of 76
==PAGE:72==
Test 05
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Displacement [mm]
Displacements X1 and X2
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Index [-]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Displacement [mm]
Displacements Y1 and Y2
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
Figure .4: (a) X1 and X2 group point markers in x-direction. (b) Y1 and Y2 group point markers
in x-direction. (c) X1 and X2 group point markers in y-direction. (d) Y1 and Y2 group point
markers in y-direction. (e) X1 and X2 group point markers in z-direction. (f) Y1 and Y2 group
point markers in z-direction.
B
Calibration overview from DIC system
Page 65 of 77
Page 65 of 76
==PAGE:73==
Current Calibration Info
General
Calibration date
  
Fri Aug 26 10:50:10 2022
Calibrated sensor
Sensor name
  
ARAMIS Adjustable Base
Measuring volume
  
Adjustable measuring volume
Camera support
  
Adjustable base 800
Working distance
  
528 mm
Camera angle
  
25°
Camera distance
  
195 mm
Serial number
  
no identifier
Calibration object
Object type
  
Panel (coded)
Name
  
CP20/350/D12311
Calibration scale
  
Distance 1: 312.362 mm
  
Distance 2: 312.311 mm
Certification temperature
  
20.0 °C
Expansion coefficient
  
22.90 x 10-6 K-1
Measurement temperature
  
20.0 °C
Calibration settings
Camera lenses
  
12.50 mm
Snap mode
  
Single snap
Ellipse quality
  
0.4
Calibration Result
Calibration deviation
  
0.045 Pixels
Calibration deviation (check)
  
OK (limit value: 0.050 Pixels)
Scale deviation
  
0.002 mm
Scale deviation (check)
  
OK (limit value: 0.031 mm)
Camera angle
  
24.9°
Height variance
  
237 mm
Measuring volume
  
450 / 390 / 390 mm
1
==PAGE:74==
C
Technical Drawings from SolidWorks
Below is a overview of the file name and the reference number that are related in the report.
File Name
Reference nb
250BAX-A-1-LCP_rev1-0
1
250BAX-A-2-LCPA_rev0-9
2
Swivel
3
250BAX-A-4-SWLPL_rev0-9
4
250BAX-A-5-SPSR_rev0-8
5
250BAX-A-6-UCLMP_rev0-9
6
250BAX-B-1-SPINE_rev1-0
8
250BAX-B-2-1-CLTHD_rev0-9
10
250BAX-B-2-2-CLHOLE_rev0-8
9
250BAX-B-3-WSHP_rev0-8
7
Table .1
Page 67 of 77
Page 67 of 76
==PAGE:75==
 45° 
 
215,9 
 22,5° 
 4,5 
 
206,6 
DEBURR AND 
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
EDGES
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
PRINT DATE
REVISION
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
3D filename:
QUANTITY
WEIGHT
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
BREAK SHARP 
Description:
Institution name:
A3
SHEET 1 OF 1
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
MATERIAL
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
Technical University of Denmark
17,5 THRU
16,6
 67,5° 
M20
14,0 THRU
M16
17,0 THRU
26,0
 16,0 
A
A
S355
4
Adapter plate for accelerometer
250BAX-A-1-LCP
16 kg
Nicolai Boertmann  s164325@student.dtu.dk  29283044
1.0
26-06-22
0.01 A
B
SECTION 
0.01
0.05
A-A
A
B
 
109,600 
H9
  
+
 
0,087
0,000 
 15,0 
Flat surfaces are optional.
Purely for ease of manufacture
 
0,210
19,8
 
-
0,000
 50,0 ±0,5 
6,8
 106,2 ±2,0 
 
254,0 h10 
M8
 25,0 ±2,0 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:76==
M20
17,5 THRU
M20
17,5 THRU
22,0 THRU
33,0
20,6
 250,0 ±2,0 
 250,0 ±2,0 
 
261,7 
 
206,6 
 
100,0 
 125,0 
 125,0 
 45° 
 40,0 ±2,0 
0.01
0.01 A
A
250BAX-A-2-LCPA
Adapter plate 250kN swivel
Nicolai Boertmann s164325@student.dtu.dk 29283944
4
UHB11
0.9
05-07-22
20 kg
Plade saves: 257mm
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
MATERIAL
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Description:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Institution name:
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
WEIGHT
QUANTITY
3D filename:
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
REVISION
PRINT DATE
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
Technical University of Denmark
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:77==
M20
17,5 THRU
M16
14,0 THRU
M16
14,0 THRU
 200,0 ±2,0 
 200,0 ±2,0 
 45° 
 100,0 
 100,0 
 
186,3 
 
127,2 
 
90,0 
A
A
 40,0 ±1,0 
 
40,0 
 5,0 
SECTION A-A
0.01
0.01 A
A
250BAX-A-4-SWLPL
Adapter plate 250kN swivel #2
Nicolai Boertmann  s164325@student.dtu.dk   29283944
4
UHB11
0.9
06-07-22
12 kg
Pladen saves 207mm i længde
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
MATERIAL
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Description:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Institution name:
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
WEIGHT
QUANTITY
3D filename:
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
REVISION
PRINT DATE
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
Technical University of Denmark
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:78==
A
A
0.01
0.05 A
A
 
140,0 
4 x 
 22,00 THRU ALL
 
90,00 
 210,0 ±1,0 
SECTION A-A
250BAX-A-5-SPSR
Spacer interchangeable
Nicolai Boertmann s164325@student.dtu.dk 29283044
0.8
16-06-2022
S355
20 kg
(4)
Make spacers with different 
lenghts!:
2x 180mm
1x 210mm
1x 88.2mm
The part is symmetric
(a)
(a)
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
MATERIAL
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Description:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Institution name:
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
WEIGHT
QUANTITY
3D filename:
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
REVISION
PRINT DATE
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
Technical University of Denmark
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:79==
 53,3 
 53,3 
 53,3 
 
90,0 
22,0 THRU
33,0
20,6
 90,0 
 26,7 
 200,0 
A
A
B
B
 220,0 
 63,0 
8 x
22,5 THRU
15,0
48,0
 28,0 
 140,0 
 180,0 
 40,0 
 35,0 
SECTION A-A
0.01
0.01 A
A
 200,0 
SECTION B-B
S355
4
Clamp between test panel and machine
250BAX-A-6-UCLMP
Nicolai Boertmann s164325@student.dtu.dk 29283044
13 KG
0.9
06-07-22
Pladen saves 227mm
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
PRINT DATE
REVISION
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
3D filename:
QUANTITY
WEIGHT
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
Institution name:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Description:
A3
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:2
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
Technical University of Denmark
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:80==
M14
12,0 THRU
 53,3 
 53,3 
 53,3 
 180,0 
 85,0 
 35,0 
 20,0 
 36,3 
 36,3 
 36,3 
 140,0 
 R9,0 
 55,0 
A
A
 250,0 
  
sandblast or grind with 120 grit sandpaper
 32,0 
 330,0 
SECTION A-A
UHB 11
13 kg
4
Spine plate
250BAX-B-1-SPINE
Nicolai Boertmann  s164325@student.dtu.dk  29283044
1.0
06-07-22
Pladen saves 337mm
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
PRINT DATE
REVISION
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
3D filename:
QUANTITY
WEIGHT
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
Institution name:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Description:
A3
SHEET 1 OF 1
SCALE:1:2
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
Technical University of Denmark
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:81==
Clamp threaded panel
 36,3 
 36,3 
12,0 THRU
 45° 
 25,0 
 38,1 
 36,6 
 32,0 
 20,0 
 16,0 
 36,3 
 36,3 
 36,3 
 330,0 
M16
14,0
38,0
2,0 X 45°
 80,0 
 32,0 
  
sandblast or grind with 120 grit sandpaper
UBH11
6 kg
4
0.9
06-07-22
Nicolai Boertmann s164325@student.dtu.dk292823044
250BAX-B-2-1-CLTHD
Pladen saves 337mm
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
MATERIAL
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Description:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Institution name:
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
WEIGHT
QUANTITY
3D filename:
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
REVISION
PRINT DATE
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
Technical University of Denmark
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:82==
REVISION
PRINT DATE
SHEET 1 OF 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
3D filename:
QUANTITY
1
1
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
MATERIAL
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
A4
Description:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Institution name:
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
WEIGHT
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
Technical University of Denmark
4
6 kg
Nicolai Boertmann s164325@student.dtu.dk292823044
250BAX-B-2-2-CLHOLE
16-06-22
0.8
UHB 11
 36,3 
 36,3 
 36,3 
 15,0 
 20,0 
 330,0 
M16
14,0
38,0
 80,0 
2,0 X 45°
 28,0 
 30,0 
  
sandblast or grind with 120 grit sandpaper
 38,1 
 25,0 
 45° 
 36,3 
15,5 THRU
 36,3 
 36,6 
 32,0 
Clamp thru hole panel
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:83==
PRINT DATE
SHEET 1 OF 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
REVISION
ISO 1st ANGLE PROJECTION
3D filename:
1
GPS TOLERANCE: ISO 1101 & ISO 8015
GENERAL TOLERANCE: ISO 2768-f
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
MATERIAL
Christian Berggreen cbe@mek.dtu.dk 
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
A4
Description:
Name:                                               Student email:                              Phone nr:          
Institution name:
Advisor:                                              Advisor email:
WEIGHT
QUANTITY
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
Technical University of Denmark
 20,0 
 36,3 
17,0 THRU
 36,3 
 36,3 
 15,0 
 30,0 
8
1 kg
Nicolai Boertmann s164325@student.dtu.dk 292823044
250BAX-B-3-WSHP
Steel
0.8
16-06-22
Washer plate
 330,0 
 6,0 ±1,0 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:84==
Technical University of Denmark
