==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Aquatic Food Production - Safety & Quality Master
Programme
The limitations of carrageenan edible
film in salmon filet packaging: a quality
evaluation
Mariana Jundurian Corá
Supervisors from DTU:
Susan Løvstad Holdt (Associate professor)
Cecilie Bay Wirenfeldt (PhD student)
Supervisor from NMBU:
Turid Mørkøre (Professor)
September 12, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Aims, hypotheses and objectives
3
3
Theoretical background
5
3.1
Food Packaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Edible packaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.1
Edible films made from carrageenan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1
Safety parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Quality parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Experiment design
19
5
Materials and Methods
22
5.1
Characterization of the edible film . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Film materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2
Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.3
Sealing property
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.4
Water content and Moisture absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.1
Material and Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.2
Microbiological analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.3
Colour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.4
Dry matter and water content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.5
Lipid oxidation: primary and secondary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.1
Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.2
Colour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.3
Cooking yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.4
Texture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Results and discussion
33
6.1
Characterization of the edible film . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.1
Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.2
Sealing property
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.3
Water content and Moisture absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
i
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis
Contents
6.2.1
Microbiological analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.2
Colour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.3
Dry matter and water content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2.4
Lipid oxidation: primary and secondary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3.1
Colour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3.2
Cooking yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3.3
Texture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Conclusion
55
8
Considerations and recommendations
58
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Nomenclature
IV
References
V
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Contents
Acknowledgements
This thesis concludes my two years of studying in the Nordic M.Sc.
Aquatic Food
Production - Safety & Quality programme at the Norwegian University of Life Science
(NMBU) and Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The experience of studying at
high-quality universities has been a great pleasure for me. The research project covered 30
ECTS and was conducted during five months period.
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my supervisors for their patience
and guidance. Thanks to Cecilie for all your insightful comments and suggestions. And
a special thanks to Susan for your kindness and assurance during the process.
I could
not have undertaken this journey without that. I would like to thank all members of the
Research Group for Bioactives for all the general support and conversation. I am deeply
grateful to Inge for her patience and kindness in guiding me through lab life. I am very
thankful to my friends and colleagues for all thoughts, concerns and small talks shared.
Jorge, Emanuele, Laura and Laura, Valentina, Claudia, Davide, Lucas and many others:
you made my time at DTU more enjoyable.
I owe my deepest gratitude to Ruth for always being by my side for the past 20
years. Finally, I would like to thank my life partner, Aslak, who has always believed in me
throughout this process.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
Contents
Abstract
Plastics are currently incorporated into our society as a significant source of material for
packaging. However, its low recycling rates, poor waste management, maritime use, and high
durability in the environment lead to a leakage of a significant portion of the plastics into
nature, ending up mainly in the oceans. This major environmental matter drives demands
for recyclability or other environmental considerations aligned with Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG) 12 and 14. The literature review gives an overview of the requirements of
good packaging material. It also brings new perspectives on new renewable, biodegradable
and edible materials. Finally, the importance of safety and quality in seafood products,
focusing on fresh salmon, is also covered.
The experimental study aimed to test a new
usage of a commercial edible film made from carrageenan, intending to create a safe zero-
waste packaging alternative for the easy-to-bake salmon fillet. The salmon used was from
an aquaculture farm in the Faroe Islands (DK). The fresh salmon fillets were stored at
+2 degrees C for 15 days for the storage trial or six days for the baking trial. Analyses
were performed on days 0, 5, 10 and 15 for the storage trial and days 1 and 6 for the
baking trial. The analyses compared the edible film (EF) with a non-treated control group
(CONT) and plastic wrap film (PW ) as business-as-usual treatment. The edible film was
also characterized.
Results showed that the edible film has a high level of hydrophilia,
increasing its weight by 175% when in contact with the fish for three days. The edible film
has a poor vapour barrier, losing 5% of the water content after 15 days, while the fish wrapped
in plastic wrap did not alter its moisture. There was no significant difference between EF
and CONT. The PW group had its microbial shelf life on day 10, whereas the EF gained five
days, meeting the shelf life on day 15. There were no significant differences between any of
these treatments and the control group. The oxidation process was inconclusive. Moreover,
under oven treatment, the edible film changes its physical characteristic, turning into a hard
and chewable layer. There was no significant difference in the cooking yield compared with
the control group. In conclusion, considering the results found, we assume that the edible
film from carrageenan is not designed to be a safe zero-waste packaging (eat-all) alternative
for the easy-to-bake salmon fillet to be used by retailers. We also recommend improvements
in different fields to further develop the film for this new application.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
1
Introduction
Plastics are currently incorporated into our society as a significant source of material for
packaging, building, transport, health, and technology industries. Although the invention
and use of plastic are older, it was only in the 1930s and 1940s that plastics started to be
produced on an industrial scale [1]. It is estimated that between 1950 and 2015, 8.9 billion
tonnes of plastics were manufactured (including both new and recycled ones). Of those,
one-third are still incorporated and in use, but two-thirds (6.3 billion tonnes) have become
waste [2].
The plastic’s low recycling rates, poor waste management, maritime use, and high
durability in the environment lead to a leakage of a significant portion of the plastics into
nature, ending up mainly in the oceans [3]. That harms animals, threatens biodiversity,
and directly and indirectly affects the world economy.
In 2016, 12% of the worldwide
municipal solid waste accounted for plastic waste, summing about 240 thousand tonnes
[4]. Furthermore, projections show that solid waste will increase in the following decades,
mainly driven by rapid urbanization and population growth. The more income a country
has, the more plastic it produces; consequently, the projection also predicts an increase in
plastic waste and ocean pollution [4].
In response to this emergency, the Agenda 2030, also known as Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDGs), includes two goals devoted to the plastic subject, dealing with plastic
production, usage, and impacts. Goal 12 addresses sustainable consumption and production
patterns; as a result, among other aims, it targets sustainable management and efficient
use of natural resources, food waste, and overall waste management [5]. On the other hand,
to adress the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine resources,
Goal 14 has as one of its targets to reduce marine pollution, particularly from land-based
activities, which include tackling marine debris [5].
The presence of plastic in the oceans started to be scientifically reported in the early
70s. However, even after more than 40 years, it is still impossible to quantify the actual
size of the problem [1]. The latest SDG annual report estimates that over 17 million met-
ric tonnes of plastic entered the world’s ocean in 2020, accounting for 85% of marine litter [6].
Furthermore, Jambeck et al. (2015) reported that global plastic resin production has
increased by over 620% since 1975, and the largest market sector for that is packaging [1].
Packaging accounts for about 26% of the total plastic volume used in the world [7]. However,
only 14% of all plastic package produced is collected for recycling. When finally recycled,
they end up with much lower-value applications with low rates to become recyclable again
after use [7].
Consequently, considering the high usage, the low recyclability, and the
mismanaged waste rates worldwide, plastic packages, in volume, are the primary type of
plastic leak into oceans.
Page 1 of 58
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
Nevertheless, plastics are not only evil. On the contrary, the benefits of plastics led our
society towards the "Age of Plastics" [8]. The name plastic comes from the Greek plastikós,
meaning to mould and form; as the name suggests, as a material, plastics are versatile.
Plastics are easily processed, a light material, which facilitates transport, providing a
reduction in costs in gas, for example, but the more significant advantage of plastics is the
combination of its low cost and the high level of diversity and range of properties [9].
Especially in the food industry, plastics, as packaging material, are essential in food
conservation, increasing quality and shelf life and reducing food waste [10]. Considering
that the food system is distributed worldwide, guaranteeing a long shelf life is crucial to
avoid losses and waste. According to the latest SDG annual report, in 2020, the world’s
food loss reached 13.3%, and food waste equalled 17% of the food available to consumers
[6]. Even knowing that this amount is not generated only during storage and distribution,
packaging can still be considered an essential part of the solution for reducing food waste
[4].
Despite packaging fulfilling the industry and customer needs cost-effectively, there
is a significant dilemma around the solutions it brings (food safety, food waste, quality,
and convenience) and its environmental impact. Hence, solving this dilemma has become
one of modern society’s most challenging tasks.
For this reason, innovation in the food
industry is needed, and it requires a multi-scale, multi-disciplinary, and multi-factorial
approach [11, 4].
Accordingly, new renewable, biodegradable, edible materials that ful-
fil food packaging demands may offer opportunities for both the food industry and customers.
Page 2 of 58
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
2
Aims, hypotheses and objectives
The blue economy is increasing the development of films and coating based on proteins,
polysaccharides (chitosan, carrageenan, among others), and lipids from seafood and seaweed.
Studies have shown the potential of these materials as edible films in contact with food,
extending shelf life and reducing food losses. Furthermore, considering that seaweed is a
sustainable natural resource, and its industry is seeking ways to be uplifted to become part
of the solution proposed by the green and blue economy, developing a varied portfolio of
products is an opportunity.
Inspired by that, the current research aims to test a new usage of a commercial
edible film (EF), made from carrageenan, intending to create a safe zero-waste packaging
alternative for the easy-to-bake salmon fillet. For this purpose, several physical and chemical
analyses are performed to evaluate if the chosen EF can ensure the safety and quality
of salmon fillets during shelf life, at the same time that it guarantees the quality of the
final oven-baked product. Thickness, sealing property and moisture content was used to
characterize the EF. The parameters used for assessing the fish safety and quality are the
microorganism growth, oxidation process, and changes in the water content and in the
surface colour. For the evaluation of the possible use as eat-all packaging (zero-waste), the
physical parameters assessed are how oven treatment affects the texture, colour and cooking
yield. Based on that the research objectives are presented as:
• Review the literature concerning different packaging needs to ensure the safety and
quality of seafood products and compare them to the results of this study
• Analyze the EF towards to some physical and chemical parameters
• Perform a storage trial to assess which are the limitations of the use of the edible film
as seafood packaging, comparing it with a non-treated control group and plastic wrap
film as business-as-usual treatment
• Analyze the microbial growth and oxidation process to determine whether the car-
rageenan’s antimicrobial and antioxidant properties result in an increased shelf life
• Perform a baking trial to evaluate to what extent the carrageenan edible film can
contribute to zero-waste seafood production by using it as an eat-all packaging
• Build an overall recommendation about using the product to keep safety and quality
in salmon fillets
To answer whether the EF is a good primary packaging material, delivering safety
and quality for easy-to-bake salmon fillets, five hypotheses and predictions are being
considered as starting points.
Page 3 of 58
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
1. The edible film’s intrinsic characteristics are suitable for protecting the salmon fillets
by functioning as a physicochemical barrier
2. The edible film made from carrageenan increases the microbial shelf life of salmon
fillets compared to non-treated or plastic wrap applied alternatives
3. The edible film made from carrageenan decreases the oxidation of salmon fillets com-
pared to non-treated or plastic wrap applied alternatives
4. The edible film from carrageenan melts during heat treatment (↑60 °C). It will also
reduce the water loss during the oven treatment, increasing the fish’s oven-cooked
texture quality (juiciness) compared to uncovered fish
5. The edible film will resist storage during the supply chain without being ruined or
changing the oven-baked quality due to the storage. This was mimicked by refrigeration
(+2 °C) of the fish wrapped in the EF for six days.
Page 4 of 58
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
3
Theoretical background
3.1
Food Packaging
Foods are perishable by nature.
Therefore, safeguarding its primary characteristics
is essential for retaining the quality and ensuring safety.
Food characteristics undergo
numerous changes during processing and storage; thus, the conditions in which foods are
processed, stored, and distributed can adversely affect the overall quality. As a result, a
food product can lose one or more quality attributes after a certain storage period, which is
deemed unfit for consumption and is said to have reached its shelf life. The leading causes
of food deterioration and shelf life decrease are chemical, physical, and microbiological
changes [12]. According to Tsinori and Taoukis (2018), food packaging protects products
from those changes during distribution and storage; hence, it contributes to maintaining
food quality and safety [10].
Although food packaging is not a new invention, it is in contemporary society that it
has gained more relevance. Initially, the central role of food packaging has traditionally
been to protect and contain the product. However, its function has become more complex
and articulated over time, especially in light of the globalized postmodern food system
and the new consumption model based on practicality, access and user comfort [13, 9].
Food travels worldwide, making packaging an essential component for preserving quality
and safeguarding a longer shelf life of foods along the whole food supply chain. At the
same time, consumption drivers such as convenience, lifestyle and sustainable choices
are increasing [14].
Consequently, packaging’s role is expanding to deliver these needs
[11, 13]. In general terms, the functions of food packaging can be summarised into four
categories: containment, protection, communication & information, and convenience, as
shown in Table 1 based on Tsinori and Taoukis (2018) and Cammarelle et al. (2021) [10, 13].
Page 5 of 58
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
3.1
Food Packaging
Table 1: Main functions of food packaging.
Function
Description
Containment
Food packaging is versatile, enabling it to contain food
products of different sizes and shapes, and making it
easier to distribute/sell them
Protection
Food packaging protects against physical damage by
natural and external factors. The main goal of the
protection is to extend shelf life and guarantee food
safety and quality; thus, it is linked to the possible
reduction of food loss and waste
Communication / Information
Food packaging is a source of information for consumers
as it provides the ingredient list, type of storage,
preparation, and serving guidelines. It is also a marketing tool
for the companies to print selling points, like certification
labels, and health claims, among other things
Convenience
Food packaging is a way to save time and minimise effort
during food preparation products. There is a large
variety of convenience solutions, such as "ready-to-go"
products and single portions
Considering that food is a general term composed of an infinite variety of products,
there are countless different demands for packaging. In some cases, foods are more sensitive
to oxygen; in others, to light, pH, moisture, temperature, or even microbial growth. In
that sense, knowing that packaging material functions as a barrier between the product and
the external environment, to minimise the compositional changes, the choice of primary
packaging design and the material will be determined individually and must consider the
needs of each product [13, 14, 9].
As the name suggests, primary packaging is the type of packaging that encloses the
product and thus is the one that is directly related to protection and preservation. To physi-
cally protect the product, the primary packaging must be resistant to handling, or secondary
packaging is required. The most common materials used for primary food packaging are a
large variety of plastic polymers, metals (such as aluminium), glass, paper and cardboard.
It is possible to use these materials separately or in combinations, depending on what offers
the best cost-benefit ratio. [9, 15]. Broadly, a good food packaging material should have the
following characteristics [9]:
• Having heat sealing properties
• Being chemically inert, thus being safe to be in contact with food
• Having low or moderate permeability to water vapour
Page 6 of 58
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
3.2
Edible packaging
• Having a low permeability to gases, working as a barrier for odours, for instance
• Suitable physical properties, such as flexibility, toughness, and transparency
• Lamination and coextrusion allowance to combine properties in multi-layers
• Low costs and excellent cost-benefit
Lastly, more recently, the choice of material is no longer a simple economic choice; it also
involves a sustainability analysis once it will reflect in consumer choice and the company’s
image. In that sense, a good material should also have low life cycle environmental impacts
and high recyclability and biodegradability [15].
The development of new packaging materials and techniques are driven to improve food
preservation and safety, for example, the development of modified atmosphere packaging
(MAP) and active and intelligent packaging, but also by the demands for recyclability or
other environmental considerations aligned to the SDGs 12 and 14 [9, 10, 13].
In 2021 the EU member states adopted and implemented the DIRECTIVE (EU)
2019/904 to reduce the impact of certain plastic products on the environment [16]. This pol-
icy established reductions on plastic as food packaging material. Consequently, to cope with
international treaties and to respond to the consumer demand for more sustainable products,
the food packaging industry has been forced to innovate. As a result, the market sector for
innovative packaging is growing, possibly exceeding the US$ 29 billion predicted for 2020 [11].
Primarily, the innovations are focused in developing active packaging technologies with
antioxidant and antimicrobial properties for food shelf life extension. Nevertheless, there
is also the demand for developing novel materials with a low environmental impact that
respond to circularity and add value. Hence, investing in novel materials from renewable
resources is an excellent opportunity to overcome the known environmental challenges [10].
In response to these efforts, in recent years, research has shown that biodegradable polymers
from renewable resources (such as agro-industrial and marine wastes and by-products) are
good alternatives to petroleum-based plastics [17, 18].
Furthermore, using biopolymers
and additives in food packaging might impact positively on the sustainability profile of the
product, thereby increasing consumer acceptability [10, 13, 19]. Among the novel materials
that are trend for investments are the edible films and edible coatings [10, 14], which will
be presented in the next section.
3.2
Edible packaging
Understanding that the field of edible food packaging is constantly developing, offering
uncountable options, solutions and demands, this section is dedicated to giving an overview
of the relevant scientific research available on the topic.
Page 7 of 58
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
3.2
Edible packaging
Edible food packaging is the type of food packaging that can be either consumed with
the food product or removed before eating, and it is used mainly as primary food packaging.
Altogether, its materials have biodegradability characteristics similar to food materials,
resulting in a sustainable packaging practice [20]. Additionally, edible food material can
be used as a pre-treatment during processing, for example, in the freezing or heating
stages, helping minimise quality losses. At the same time, it can be an asset to different
preservation techniques reducing food loss and waste rates. In both cases, the result is an
increase in shelf life. Furthermore, the current trend to overcome technical limitations and
tailor specific functionality into edible food packaging is to add sustainable nanostructured
materials [20].
The use of edible packaging materials in the food industry is increasing. Its market
value is estimated to reach US$ 11 billion by 2023, with the primary industries involved
in food and beverages, pharmaceutical, and medicinal use [20]. Even though the value is
increasing, production costs are still considered the main bottleneck for keeping the growth
trend. The key players in the market of edible food packaging are mainly from Europe and
North America. However, the industry is growing and spreading worldwide [20].
As mentioned previously, the trends for sustainable-sourced materials for food packag-
ing are driving investments in research and innovation in the field of novel materials. As a
result, several biobased materials are being investigated and developed. The main challenge
for those materials is to meet the same versatility and results of plastics-based materials.
However, one of the main drawbacks is the high solubility of these materials, limiting their
uses and including the need for secondary packaging for distribution [20].
On the other hand, edible packaging has different add-ons; its advantages as a material
are the non-toxicity, biocompatibility, biodegradability, availability, lower greenhouse gas
emission and lower overall carbon footprint. Moreover, being edible and having a short-time
biodegradability makes it an excellent material for zero-waste solutions [20]. Additionally,
edible packaging materials are excellent carriers of bioactive compounds responsible for
enhancing safety and maintaining quality [19].
Finally, a good edible material for food
packaging must pass microbiological and sensory tests and have nutritional, physical and
mechanical properties.
As a standard rule, edible packaging materials must be safe for human consumption,
and having additional nutritional properties may be an asset.
The biobased edible
food packaging materials are produced from polysaccharides (cellulose, starch, chitosan,
carrageenan), proteins (wheat gluten, gelatin, soy), lipids and waxes (beeswax, mineral
and vegetable oils), and resins sourced from either plants or animals. In addition, some
ingredients function as plasticisers and additives [20]. Figure 1 shows some of the edible
food packaging industry-targeted biomaterials. Furthermore, some of those materials are
land-based, such as cellulose and starch, whereas other materials are from the aquatic
source, such as chitosan, alginate and carrageenan [20].
Page 8 of 58
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
3.2
Edible packaging
Figure 1: Bio-based materials used in edible packaging.
Several of these materials can be obtained from side-streams of the food industry’s
production and/or transformation process. Therefore, recovering, recycling, and exploiting
industrial waste is an opportunity to incorporate a circular economy while reducing the
treatment and final disposal costs of solid and liquid waste [13, 14]. An excellent example
of upcycling is packaging made from chitosan, a side-stream from the seafood industry. It
has been shown as a potential material considering that its films have good mechanical and
antimicrobial properties, besides moderate permeability to gases [13].
According to its type of application, edible food packaging can be divided into two
main groups, edible coating and edible films.
The edible coating can be described as a
barrier layer built in a food product. The use of edible coating is not new; for example,
covering food in waxes has been done since the twelfth century in China [20]. Different
techniques can obtain the built-in layers, such as dipping in, spraying, foaming, brushing,
wrapping, and dripping, among others. However, regardless of the technique, the applica-
tion is made in liquid form and left to dry. In the end, the result provides extra physical
protection against exposure to light, temperature, microorganisms, gas interactions, and
water losses, among other possible threats to safety and quality [20].
As a result, an
edible coating can add flavours, enhance texture, keep moisture in or out, and add active
compounds, such as those responsible for reducing microbial growth and oxidation processes.
The other type of edible food packaging is edible film. First, it is formed into films,
similar to standard packaging materials. It can be produced using different techniques such as
casting, extrusion, and compression moulding. Then the application is made solid, covering
Page 9 of 58
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
3.2
Edible packaging
the product. As a premise, a good film must have an unbroken film structure. Furthermore,
the film’s quality and uses will depend on different physical characteristics and properties,
such as thickness, water solubility, wettability, sealing property, transparency, bendiness,
hardness, stiffness, and so on. [20, 14]. In particular, thickness is a physical parameter often
used to characterize films because it is connected to the mechanical and visual properties,
for the latter, regarding opacity and transparency [18]. An uniform thickness and free of
defects surface will ensure the structural integrity and full functionality [21].
3.2.1
Edible films made from carrageenan
Many different polysaccharides can be used for edible film production (Figure 1),
among them carrageenan, which is the focus of this research. Carrageenan is a polysac-
charide extracted from marine red seaweeds, such as Chondrus crispus, Eucheuma spp and
Kappaphycus spp, widely applied in the food industry because of its gelling, thickening,
and stabilising properties [22]. Additionally, most of its production comes from seaweed
aquaculture [23].
The carrageenan molecule is organised in linear chains, having the sulphate half-esters
attached to the sugar unit. In that way, carrageenan is water soluble, stable in a wide pH
range and able to form viscous solutions and films [22, 24]. Carrageenan’s solubility depends
on the content of ester sulfate and the presence of a potentially associated cation; at large,
higher levels of ester sulfate lead to lower solubility temperatures [24]; in particular, the
minimum temperature to dissolve kappa-carrageenan under an aqueous solution is 60 °C [23].
There are three types of carrageenan with commercial interests, the iota, kappa, and
lambda.
Each one of them has a unique profile and characteristic (Table 2, based on
McHugh, (2003)). For instance, the kappa type is the most common used carrageenan for
food purposes, and when comparing each type, it is the one that gives the strongest gels
[24, 23].
Page 10 of 58
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
3.2
Edible packaging
Table 2: The different types of carrageenan and its types characteristics.
Type
Characteristics
Seaweed
Iota
- Elastic gels formed with calcium salts.
- Clear gel with no bleeding of liquid (no synaeresis).
- Gel is freeze and thaw stable.
Eucheuma denticulatum
Lambda
- No gel formation, forms high viscosity solutions
Chondrus crispus
(mixture with kappa)
Sarcothalia crispate
(mixture with kappa)
Gigartina skottsbergii
(minority)
Kappa
- Strong, rigid gel formed with potassium salts.
Kappaphycus alvarezii
- Brittle gel forms with calcium salts.
Gigartina skottsbergii
- Slightly opaque gel becomes clear with sugar added
Sarcothalia crispate
(mixture with lambda)
- Some synaereses
Chondrus crispus
(mixture with lambda)
Biopolymers made from carrageenans have been shown to be a reliable solution for pro-
ducing edible films, mainly due to their superb mechanical properties (tensile strength and
elongation at break) [24]. Nonetheless, like other polysaccharide-based films, carrageenan
edible films do not have effective water vapour barriers because of their hydrophilic nature,
working only as a limited moisture barrier [24, 14]. On the other hand, they are a highly
successful barrier to lipids (fat and oils) and gases (for instance, oxygen and carbon dioxide),
resulting in an antioxidative add-on [24]. Additionally, carrageenan has been reported to
have antimicrobial and antifungal bioactive properties [24, 22]. Therefore, using materials
with antimicrobial and antioxidative properties can effectively improve food products’ shelf
life, quality, and safety [25].
A way of improving the water vapour barriers feature is by adding other types of
material, such as lipid-based. By doing that, it is possible to increase the moisture barrier
property and improve the cohesiveness and flexibility [14]. That is an example of tailoring
films according to their needs. Moreover, this approach can lead to a complex composition
containing single-type or multi-type materials, including combinations of different biopoly-
mers, lipids, solid particles (such as fibres), hydrophobic proteins, nanoparticles, and so on.
[14, 24].
In addition, the EU has established sustainability as the core of its Blue Economy
development in the SDGs.
Therefore, when investing in the blue economy within food
Page 11 of 58
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
industry development, using edible seaweeds or seaweed-derived extracts seems to be an
appealing strategy to develop a product with high sustainability profile. The main reason
is that seaweed is a natural resource and an excellent alternative ingredient for reducing
carbon footprint in the food industry.
Overseeing this opportunity,
The Seaweed Company
has developed a range of
seaweed-based edible films that have several possibilities of applications, from bags to
wrapping snacks and "ready-to-eat" products, such as sandwich wrapping and Fresh
fries gusset (Figure 2).
For that, the film is disposable, which is not a problem since
their R&D found that the material is biodegradable for up to 21 days.
However, even
though being harmless to the environment, this research plans to go one step further, test-
ing the possibility of adding a new application as an "eat-all" packaging for seafood products.
Figure 2: The Seaweed Company’s edible film current applications.
.
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) production has grown about 300% in the past two
decades. In 2020, its production accounted for 32.6% of the world’s marine, and coastal
aquaculture production [26]. Live, fresh or chilled aquatic food (excluding algae) represent
the largest share for direct human consumption, totalling 44%; this is also the most
preferred and highly-priced form of fisheries and aquaculture products [26]. In addition,
salmon is important in the seafood market, possibly because raw material from aquaculture
is available throughout the year and less than one week after slaughter [27]. Even though
on the rise, the competition in the salmon industry is high. Thus, delivering a high-quality
product can ensure success in the market [28].
Page 12 of 58
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
Seafood quality is a complex concept; in general, it concerns factors that contribute to
the optimal utilization of aquatic resources [29]. However, according to Huss (1995) and
Green (2010), in most cases, the fish quality is considered to describe the fish’s appearance
and freshness.
For that consumers tend to use their sensory to evaluate the product’s
organoleptic characteristics [29]. Therefore, any change in the sensory quality can affect
product acceptability.
Furthermore, this general view of quality may also contemplate
some safety aspects correlated to spoilage or other harmful issues such as the presence
of parasites, and chemical contamination [30]. Nevertheless, it is crucial to consider that
quality implies different factors and that its definition will differ among people [28, 30].
In general, salmon is a healthy food because it is an excellent source of bioactive
proteins, antioxidants, vitamins, and omega-3 fatty acids [31, 32].
However, like other
seafood products, salmon are a highly perishable food, and its spoilage is a natural process
resulted from different mechanisms, such as endogenous enzymatic activity, oxidation of
lipids, and microorganisms’ activity [33, 34, 31]. Food spoilage is closely related to shelf life
and it is connected to defining the safety and quality of a product. In the case of seafood,
the first signs of quality decay are the loss of colour and taste, evolving to changes in
texture, further changes in colour, and the development of off-flavours [34]. Moreover, once
oxidation affects proteins, it can alter their solubility, impacting the water-holding capacity
and nutritional value [31].
Shelf life can be defined as the period in which a food is safe and desirable to eat,
regulated by the "use by" or the minimum durability date [35].
There are different
methodologies to evaluate quality and safety for determining the shelf life of seafood. It can
include various instrumental for physicochemical and microbiology analyses and descriptive
sensory analyses [28, 34]. This research focuses on physicochemical and microbiology analy-
ses to evaluate the parameters related to fresh salmon products’ shelf life and eating qualities.
3.3.1
Safety parameters
4.3.1.1 Microbial growth
The General Food Law Regulation (EC-178/2002) establish that no unsafe food must
to be put in the market [35]. Accordingly, guaranteeing safety remains a central concern
facing the seafood industry, and it is a critical component in ensuring food and nutrition
security worldwide [36]. The low acidity in the salmon flesh (pH > 6) contributes to the
growth of microorganisms, ending as the primary cause of spoilage [33].
Along with it,
temperature and oxygen are the major environmental factors for microbial spoilage [32, 37].
There are two different kinds of microorganisms in seafood:
"spoilers" and "non-
spoilers".
The typical bacteria leading to seafood spoilage are Pseudomonas spp.,
H2S-producing bacteria, Shewanella spp., Enterobacteriaceae spp., Photobacterium phospho-
reum and lactic acid bacteria (LAB) [38]. Regarding safety, Listeria spp. contamination
Page 13 of 58
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
is one of the most serious hazards related to microorganisms in the seafood industry. The
reason is its high resistance under refrigeration conditions and its severity, having a high
mortality rate associated with listeriosis [39].
One way of understanding the mechanisms behind spoilage is by performing storage
trials with pre-defined conditions [35]. One standard method to measure microbial growth
during the trial is by the total viable bacteria counts (TVC). Even though TVC does
not directly relate to a specific food safety hazard and does not necessarily reflect actual
spoilage [31], it can give a general idea of microbial development. In that regard, spoilage
in seafood involves high concentrations of microorganisms, being 7 log CFU/g an indicator
for the end of the microbial shelf life, being considered the maximum permissible limit
of microorganism’ concentration [40, 41, 25]. According to the literature consulted, high-
quality fresh salmon are those fish with low TVC levels, often below 4 log CFU/g [42, 41, 43].
Studies have shown that packaging under reduced O2 and elevated CO2 (modified
atmosphere packaging, MAP) in combination with cold storage (0 - 2 °C) can extend
the shelf life of seafood products, including fresh salmon [33].
Besides, the presence of
bioactive compounds in the packaging has proven to be an alternative to increase food
safety and quality, providing a longer shelf life. Some examples of substances that have
these properties are bacteriocins, organic acids, chlorine dioxide, carbon dioxide, ethanol
and some types of salts. Likewise, adding essential oils and natural herbs into the packaging
can increase the antimicrobial effect [10].
Corroborating that, Moreno et al.
(2017)
managed to keep the TVC levels below the limit of 7 log CFU/g even after 45 storage days
at 5 °C by marinating salmon on a active starch-gelatin films before vacuum-packaging it [39].
Furthermore, depending on the storage condition, different bacteria will dominate the
spoilage process, and that might interfere directly in preventing hazards and extending
self life. Emborg et al. (2002) registered that P. phosphoreum was the dominant bacterial
species in fresh salmon fillets packaged in MAP (60% CO2, 40% N2). However, the same
authors found out that when the fillets were first frozen for four weeks at -20 °C and thawed
before packaging in the MAP, the Carnobacterium spp. became dominant, indicating that
P. phosphoreum was a cold-sensitive species. This procedure ended up increasing the shelf
life of the product [27].
Solutions such packaging material with antimicrobial properties may contribute to the
shelf life. A κ-carrageenan-based film containing ovotransferrin combined with EDTA has
been proven to extending the microbial shelf life of fresh chicken breast [44]. Furthermore,
both carrageenan-based coating and carrageenan-based coating enriched with essential lemon
oil had good antimicrobial activity and limited lipid oxidation of fresh trout fillets stored at
4 °C for 15 days [45].
Page 14 of 58
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
3.3.2
Quality parameters
4.3.2.1 Colour
The leading parameter for determining the seafood’s quality, regardless of how the
product is displayed, is appearance [29]. Appearance is directly connected to the shape and
colour of the product. Therefore, colour is a major quality attribute of seafood, particularly
salmon. The salmon’s fillet colour intensity is correlated with its freshness and oxidation;
thus, it is a critical quality attribute that can influence the product price [46]. Being the
first thing consumers see, colour can affect product perception without affecting nutrition
or flavour [32]. Consumers rank colour as one of the three primary quality characteristics
of salmon products, expecting to see a deep pink-red colour in the flesh when purchasing
salmon [46].
Salmon flesh has a pink pigmentation in its natural state connected to the concentration
of carotenoid pigments, such as astaxanthin [32, 46]. High fat content tends to dilute the
redness of salmon’s flesh, the difference is clear when comparing the belly, high in fat, to
the back, low in fat [47]. Because carotenoids are sensitive to light and oxygen exposure,
storage plays an essential role in preserving or inducing changes in the salmon’s colour
[32, 46, 48]. Furthermore, under freezing and chilling storage, the astaxanthin concentration
tends to reduce, fading the redness of the flesh [48]. Furthermore, the reduction in redness
is directly linked with lipid oxidation catalyzed by heme proteins [49]. Thereby, measuring
colour changes is a well-used method of following lipid oxidation in seafood.
In the 1930s, the International Commission of Illumination (CIE) proposed a universal
method for analyzing product colour changes. It uses a multidimensional method to quan-
tifies colour, giving values for L* (lightness), a* (redness or greenness), and b* (yellowness
and blueness). Colour analysis can indicate surface degradation of the product, and colour
difference value (∆E) can help distinguish the difference between storage treatments [32].
For seafood, in general, the flesh tend to get darker and opaque during storage [34].
The changes in the lightness (L* ) are most often connected to the overall deterioration
[41]. Whereas the changes in redness (a*) during storage, is connected to oxidation and
changes in pigments concentration [32, 48, 49]. Finally, changes in yellowness (b*) are often
associated with lipid oxidation, metmyoglobin, and methemoglobin accumulation [41].
After baking, the salmon flesh changes. The heat triggers the colour changes, making
the salmon’s flesh goes from red to pink and then to pale pink; in other parts, the release of
water-soluble proteins will change the yellow to grey curd [33]. Furthermore, the intensity
of redness (a*) of baked salmon is directly connected to pigment’s concentration in the raw
fish and shades after baking as a general rule. The lightness (L* ) also tends to decrease,
but it does not dependent on the raw material. Differently, the yellowness (b*) tends to
have minor variations, with a shy trend to increase [50].
Page 15 of 58
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
4.3.2.2 Lipid oxidation
Lipid oxidation is one of the most critical factors affecting shelf life in many lipid-rich
foods like salmon [31, 51, 52]. When lipids are oxidized, they produce unhealthy compounds
like free radicals and reactive aldehydes, reducing the nutritional value of the unsaturated
fatty acids. Lipid oxidation affects the salmon industry because it causes significant changes
in the sensory properties during processing and storage, including the product’s odour,
flavour, colour, and texture. This quality deterioration negatively affects the consumer’s
perception leading to food waste and economic losses [51, 52].
The lipid oxidation in fish oil can be divided into three kinds: auto-oxidation, photo-
oxidation, and enzymatic oxidation. Auto-oxidation is enhanced by heat, light, trace metals
(copper, iron), or enzymes. Photo-oxidation is accelerated when exposed to light in the
presence of photosensitizers such as chlorophyll and pheophytine. Finally, enzymatic oxi-
dation occurs when lipo-oxygenases incorporate oxygen into LH to yield lipid LOOH [53, 54].
During auto-oxidation, lipid free radicals are formed and, when reacting with oxygen,
produce lipid hydroperoxides as primary oxidation products. These primary lipid oxidation
products are tasteless and odourless fatty acid hydroperoxides (LOOH), thus not necessarily
compromise the sensory quality [53, 52]. With the development of primary oxidation, the
breakage of the hydroperoxides produces non-volatile and volatile secondary oxidation
products. The volatile compounds are responsible for the undesirable rancid flavour and
odour. Among them include aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, acids, and hydrocarbons. Further,
the off-odours and off-flavour depend on the volatile oxidation product concentration. The
more unsaturated the fatty acid, the more extensive the range of volatile compounds [53, 52].
There are different ways of measuring oxidation in food products, such as physical and
chemical analytical methods and sensory analyses. Among the chemical analytical methods,
peroxide value (PV) and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) are widely
used to characterize the primary and secondary oxidation status in seafood products be-
cause they have lipid peroxides and aldehydes as major oxidation products [55, 56, 53, 54, 49].
Peroxide value (PV) is an early indicator of oxidation (hydroperoxide formation), and
low values if it indicates a low degree of oxidation [31, 53, 54]. Moreover, PV measurements
often correlate poorly with sensory data because the hydroperoxides are odour and
flavour-free [52]. Some studies consider 0.5 meq/kg as the limit PV value because values
above this limit would indicate an oxidation process in fish oil in which the off-flavours,
from secondary oxidation products, could be perceived [52].
Considering the breakage into secondary products, it is recommended that an associ-
ated method for following the secondary oxidation be implemented, such as TBARS [53].
However, TBARS might not represent the best method for measuring lipid oxidation. This
because it is unspecific and not suitable for complex food systems, having interference from
protein and sugar degradation products [52].
Page 16 of 58
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
Secci and Parisi (2016) reported that a concentration between 5 and 8 mg MDA/kg
may still be considered a good quality for some frozen and chilled fish products, being 8
mg MDA/kg generally the maximum limit of acceptability [51].
According to the same
authors, others have reported a more conservative TBARS levels, considering TBARS <
0.58 mg MDA/kg as not rancid; 0.58 < TBARS < 1.51 mg MDA/kg as slightly rancid, but
acceptable; and values above 1.51 mg/kg as rancid, and not accepted [51]. In accordance,
Xiong et al. (2021) reported 1 - 2 mg MDA/kg of fish as the maximal permissible limit of
MAD for good quality fish products during storage [41].
As mentioned above, one intrinsic factor for lipid oxidation is the concentration of un-
saturated lipids in the food product. However, external factors, such as oxygen, temperature
and light, play a role in influencing the oxidation process [31, 53, 54]. As a result, reducing
or delaying this process can be succeeded by lowering the temperature, limiting oxygen and
protecting the product from light. Another way of affecting oxidation is by antioxidants [31].
Consequently, proper packaging material with gas barrier, and proper packaging design,
like MAP and active packaging tailored with antioxidant features, can be a way of dealing
with these three last factors.
AS an example, chitosan-based coating with 1% ascorbic
acid significantly reduces the lipid oxidation of frozen salmon over five months of storage [46].
Even though salmon have high fatty acids content, the presence of antioxidants, such as
astaxanthin, plays a substantial role in preventing oxidation in this fish [51, 43]. According
to Jessen et al.
(2014), lipid oxidation is not necessarily a problem for salmon since, if
followed proper processing and storage, it can maintain its quality acceptance for long
periods [57].
4.3.2.3 Water and Moisture content
Water or moisture content is also considered a quality parameter in seafood since
it affects the product’s sensory quality, microbiological stability (when considered the
water activity), and overall physicochemical characteristics.
In addition, the water
content determines the nutritional composition of the food product [58].
It is also
strongly connected to its texture; thus, any changes during processing, storage and
distribution will directly compromise the quality of the product.
In general, the water
content in seafood of the same species will vary due to the morphological and structural
differences of the tissues, as well as age, size, collection site or seasonality [58]. In that
regard, aquaculture is advantageous since it has higher control over several of these variables.
Generally, fish and fish products lose moisture to the environment during storage,
degrading their quality [59]. The water loss during storage also represents an economic loss,
and the industry is always looking for solutions to overcome such problems. For that, many
types of coatings have been tested to minimize changes during frozen storage. For example,
biodegradable coating-based made from soy protein, whey protein and chitosan are effective
as barriers to controlling moisture transfer during storage of atlantic cod, herring and pink
Page 17 of 58
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
3.3
Fresh salmon quality and safety
salmon fillets [59, 60, 61].
4.3.2.3 Other parameters
The acceptability of the final product is based on both the food’s intrinsic properties,
and the natural preference of the consumer [62]. As consumers, we judge a product by using
our senses; thus, taste, colour, odour, juiciness, and texture are common sensory attributes
used in assessing the quality of foods at the consumer level.
There is one large variety of cooking methods used in seafood preparation.
Each
technique can result in different quality attributes of the final product. The heat treatment
in an oven baking will enhance the water loss in the salmon fillet, being more critical during
the first minutes of the treatment [33]. This water loss is connected with cooking yield, and
to some extend it is expected. However, some storage conditions may trigger worse results,
representing an economic loss for the final consumer.
There is no consensus if adding
an edible coating will affect the cooking yield.
Some studies have shown no significant
difference, and some showed moisture retention [59, 60], although the latter may also be
explained by moisture retained during storage.
Page 18 of 58
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
4
Experiment design
The present research is based on two main experimental parts: the storage and baking
trials (Figure 3). For defining each experimental design, some pre-tests, assumptions and
characterizations were done. Initially, we were presented five different types of edible film.
The decision for which one to use was primarily based on on its ability to attach to the fish
fillet, the best option being the film that had a good surface contact.
Furthermore, considering the poor sealing property of the films using modified atmo-
sphere packaging (MAP) or vacuum packaging as the controls for the storage trial were
discarded as options.
Hence, the two treatments used to compare the edible film were
defined as non-covering, control, and covering with plastic wrap, defined as the conventional
plastic alternative.
Page 19 of 58
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
Figure 3: Scheme of the experiment design
Page 20 of 58
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
A simplified characterization (Figure 4) of the edible film was performed to help under-
stand the results of each experiment and is presented as part of the results of this investiga-
tion.
Figure 4: Scheme of the film characterization procedure
Page 21 of 58
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
5
Materials and Methods
5.1
Characterization of the edible film
5.1.1
Film materials
This study used an edible film made from 100% κ-carrageenan, kindly provided by
The Seaweed Company (The Netherlands) (Figure 5). In addition, its widespread used as
a conventional food packaging, plastic wrap was selected as a comparison treatment. The
plastic wrap used during the storage trial is made of low-density polyethylene (LDPE), and
its thickness is 0.012 mm.
Figure 5: Edible film used in the experiment.
5.1.2
Thickness
A digital micrometer (Coolant-Proof, Mitutoyo, Japan) was used to measure the edible
film thickness to the nearest 0.001 mm. The thickness of the edible film was measured at
room temperature randomly in twenty analytical replicates (n = 20).
5.1.3
Sealing property
A simplified sealing test was performed as a pre-test. The test was performed con-
sidering the heating sealing method,in which the two hot metal bars of the impulse sealer
(ELWIS-PACK, Denmark) are pressed over the surface of two films (surface-to-surface) [63].
The dwell time used was 1, 2, 3 and 4 seconds, whereas the cooling time was constant (3
seconds). The results are presented as success or failure; being a success when the sealing
gave a similar result as plastic materials (PE, PP, among others).
Page 22 of 58
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
5.1.4
Water content and Moisture absorption
We measured the water content of edible film samples at room temperature. It was
determined gravimetrically by measuring the weight loss of the film after drying it in an
oven (Heraeus T 5050 E, ThermoScientific, United States) at 105 °C for 40 h. The water
content was calculated according to Eq 1:
Watercontent(%) = W 1 −W 2
W 1
× 100
(1)
W1 being the initial weight of the films at room temperature, and W2 the dry weight of the
films.
A small storage experiment was performed to measure the film’s moisture absorption.
Twelve fish samples were stored in aluminium trays in a walk-in +2 °C refrigerator room
(Figure 4).
Sampling happened on days 3 and 7.
We assumed that refrigerators have
humidity levels between 30% and 50% as a starting point.
Half of the samples contained pieces of salmon covered with the edible film, and half
had only squares of the edible film (n = 3). Then the moisture absorption was measured
gravimetrically by the weight difference between the film at room temperature and the film
after storage in relation to the film at room temperature. Following the Eq 2:
Moisture(%) = W 3 −W 1
W 1
× 100
(2)
W1 being the initial weight of the films at room temperature, and W3 is the film weight
after storage.
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
5.2.1
Material and Sampling
This study used fresh salmon (Salmo salar) from an aquaculture farm in the Faroe
Islands (DK) purchased from a fish market in the Great Copenhagen region.
The fish
had a transport time of four days from the day of slaughtering to the lab facility. It was
transported as whole fish and was filleted in the fish store the same day as experiments were
conducted to reduce microorganism contamination. Therefore, for the storage trial, the day
of filleting and the start of experiments is considered day 0.
Page 23 of 58
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 6: The four full sides.
We bought two whole fish for running the experiment, filleting skin-on into four full
sides (Figure 6). Each side was divided into three main areas for sampling: tail, middle and
head (Figure 7). We used the middle part of the fish for the storage trial to guarantee more
resemblances between samples. For the same reason, we used the head part for the baking
test. These choices were based on the size and thickness of the fillets. Consequently, the
tail and the belly near the head part were discarded once considered too thin.
For the storage trial, the fish was cut into stripes (rectangles, as shown in Figure 7)
of at least 130 g each (151 ± 16 g). Then, each fillet was stored in individual aluminium
trays, put in a walk-in +2 °C refrigerator room, on eight different shelves, in a random
distribution. During the storage, the shelves were constantly reallocated to enable a more
similar condition within samples. Overall, every step of the process was done to ensure a
high randomized procedure in each way possible.
Figure 7: Scheme of sampling.
After cutting all the fillets, one-third were randomly selected for applying the plastic
wrap layer (5 x 20 cm), coded as PW, another third was chosen to use the edible film (5 x 20
Page 24 of 58
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
cm), coded as EF, and the remaining third were considered the non-treated control group,
coded as CONT (Figure 8). Sampling for analyses occurred on 0, 5, 10 and 15 days. On
day 0, our starting point was three fillets from the non-treated control group. For the other
days, the chosen analyses were conducted on triplicates (n = 3) of each treatment (totalling
nine fillets per day).
Figure 8: Images of the three different fillets on day 0. On top the non-treated control fillet
(CONT); on the left, the fillet covered with plastic wrap (PW ); and on the right, the fillet
covered with the edible film (EF).
On each day, analyses were run in the same order as presented in the following subsection
of this chapter.
5.2.2
Microbiological analysis
Microbiology was the first analysis on each day. For that, the laboratory was made into
a sterile environment to prevent contamination. The sampling consisted in cutting a piece
of fish from one of the extremes of the fillet, keeping the same surface area (3.5 x 1 cm) and
the approximately same depth (1 cm from skin) (Figure 9). In the EF group, the film was
kept on to avoid missing information. The remaining fish was kept in ice in a stereophonic
box for the other analyses.
Page 25 of 58
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 9: Sequence of how the sampling for microbiology analysis was conducted.
The method chosen to evaluate the growth of microorganisms is the total viable
count (TVC). This methodology is widely used in assessing the shelf life.
The prin-
ciple of the method is to estimate the concentration of microorganisms in the sample.
Thus, the count represents the number of colony-forming units per g or per ml of the sample.
To perform the method the peptone saline is used as buffer and dilution solution.
The peptone saline (2 L) was prepared from 2 g buffered peptone water (ISO) (Oxoid,
United Kingdom) and 17 g NaCl (Sodium chloride, VWR Chemicals, United States) in
2 L deionised water.
The solution was divided in four different bottles to reduce the
chances of microorganism contamination from each analysis day. Then, the peptone saline
was autoclaved (CertoClav multicontrol, Austria) in the standard mode, at 121 °C for 15
minutes, cooled down and storage in a 5 °C refrigerator.
On each day, 5.73 ± 0.89 g of salmon was aseptically diluted ten times in peptone
saline solution (8.5% m/v NaCl, 1% m/v peptone) and homogenized in stomacher bags for 3
minutes. Then 120 µL of the stock was used to prepare the dilution series in peptone saline
and inoculate the 3MTM PetrifilmTM Aerobic Count Plate (3MTM, United States) (Figure 10).
Page 26 of 58
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 10: Scheme of the dilution series for petrifilm incubation.
The inoculation was done at room temperature, using 1 ml of the solution from three
different dilutions, according to Table 3. The incubation was done at room temperature, in
which the petrifilms were kept inside a stereophonic box for 48 hours.
Table 3: Plating and dilution.
Day
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
0
x
x
x
5
x
x
x
10
x
x
x
15
x
x
x
The TVC were estimated according to the instructions of the petrifilm producer,
choosing the film that had from 30 to 300 colonies formed. Then, having the number of
colonies enabled us to calculate the final microorganism’s concentration using Eq 3 and 4.
The final results are presented in log CFU/g.
[x]CFU/ml = Nc × Df × Vp
(3)
[x]CFU/g = [y]CFU/ml
W Fish
(4)
Being: Nc = the number of colonies counted; Df is the dilution factor, represented by 10x;
Vp = the plating volume; [y] = is the concentration of microorganisms that were capable of
forming colonies in the established condition; WFish = the weight of the fish added to the
stomacher bag.
Page 27 of 58
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
5.2.3
Colour
The colour changes of the fish fillets with and without the film during storage were
done using a chroma meter (Minolta CR-200, Minolta Camera Co. Ltd, Japan) based in the
CIELAB colour spaces, in which L* values describe lightness/brightness (covering the range
of zero (black) to 100 (white)); a* values describe redness/greenness (covering the ranges
of -163 (green) to +126.6 (red)); and b* values describes yellowness/blueness (covering the
ranges of -127.7 (blue) to +145.3 (yellow)) [64]. The colours parameters values of the white
standard used for calibration were L* = 97.75, a* = -5.65, b* = +7.53.
The colour profile of the fish during the storage phase was measured on days 0, 5,
10 and 15 after the microbiology analysis.
The measurements were taken at five points
(nanalysis = 5) in each treatment triplicate (n = 3) to ensure a homogeneous screen on the
fish surface.
In the case of samples covered with either plastic wrap or edible film, the
measures were taken after removing the upper layers.
Calculating (∆E), estimated by Eq 5, can provide significant insight into the difference
between two colours. The ∆E metric uses the distance between two colour locations to
define their differences [65]. As a broad guideline, ∆E ≤1.0 means that the difference is not
perceptible by human eyes; if 1 < ∆E < 2, it becomes perceptible through close observation;
2 < ∆E < 10, it is noticeable at a glance; for the range of 11 to 49 it is considered that the
colours are more similar than opposite; and finally, closer to 100 more opposite the colours
become.
∆E =
q
(∆L*)2 + (∆a*)2 + (∆b*)2
(5)
5.2.4
Dry matter and water content
The sampling to determine the dry matter and primary and secondary oxidation were
done at once. The procedure consisted of cutting the upper part of the fish fillet (1,5 cm
from the bottom), mincing it (KnifetecTM 1095 Sample Mill, Foss, Denmark) to homogenize
the sample (Figure 11); then, specifically for the dry matter analysis ≈2 g of homogenized
fish was dried in an oven (Heraeus T 5050 E, ThermoScientific, United States) at 105 °C for
40 h to evaporate the water completely.
Page 28 of 58
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
5.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 11: Samples being homogenized for the analysis.
The dry matter of the samples was estimated by measuring gravimetrically the
differences between the wet and dry weight of the fish, as shown in Eq 6. Whereas, the
water content (%) was determined from dry matter, as shown in Eq 7.
Drymatter(%) = W 2
W 1
× 100
(6)
Watercontent(%) = 100% −Drymatter(%)
(7)
W1 being the wet weight of the fish, and W2 the dry weight of the fish.
5.2.5
Lipid oxidation: primary and secondary
The homogenization done as initial sampling procedure for the lipid oxidation analyses
is described in section 5.2.4.
After collecting the necessary amount for determining the
dry matter, the reaming fish was vacuum packaged and stored at -80 °C until the analysis day.
The primary lipid oxidation can be identified by the determination of the Peroxide
value (PV). For this study the PV was determined by the method described in International
Dairy Federation (1991) with few modifications [66].
To start, we performed an extraction to determine the oil content using the Bligh
& Dyer method with few modifications, in which we reduced both solvent volume and
sample weight [67].
For that, 5 g of salmon in 5 ml of water was mixed with 30 ml of
methanol (VWR Chemicals, United States) and 15 ml of chloroform (VWR Chemicals,
United States). This solution was blended in an Ultra Turrax-mixer (Ultra-Turrax T25,
IKA laboratory technology, Germany) for 1 min and 30 seconds at 15,000 RPM speed.
After the first 30 seconds, we added another 15 ml of chloroform; at minute one, we added
15 ml of distilled water and blended for another 30 seconds.
Afterwards, the samples
were centrifuged (Sigma 4-16KS and 4-15KS, Germany) at 2,800 RPM, 18 °C for 10
Page 29 of 58
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
5.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
minutes. In sequence, the water + methanol phase was removed using a vacuum suction
mechanism; the remaining solution (containing two phases: solid and chloroform + oil)
was filtrated using a phase-separation filter paper (Fisher Scientific, United States). The
mix was kept on ice and covered throughout the process to avoid light contact.
The
oil content of the extract is determined gravimetrically after evaporation of chloroform.
Each treatment sample (n = 3) in the analysis was done in analytical duplicates (nanalysis = 2).
After the extraction, 1 to 3 mg of the solution (depending on the extent of peroxidation)
was transferred to glass tubes and left evaporated under nitrogen gas.
Once done, 10
ml of chloroform-methanol (70:30 v/v) was added to the tubes. In sequence, ammonium
thiocyanate solution (0.05 ml) was added, and the sample was blown with nitrogen, mixed
and closed. Then 0.05 ml iron II from a ferrous chloride solution was added to the reaction
mixture following the same procedure of blowing nitrogen, mixing and closing the tubes.
Then the samples were incubated in the dark for 5 minutes at room temperature.
The
absorbance was measured at 500 nm using a spectrophotometer (UV-1280, Shumadzu,
Japan). The results of peroxide value (PV) were expressed in milliequivalents of peroxides
per kg fat. Note that the limitations of the method for PV between 0.1 and 0.5 can have
high relative standard deviation (RSD > 10%).
The secondary oxidation products of lipid oxidation were measured as TBARS (thio-
barbituric acid reactive substances) following the TBARS by extraction method described
by Vyncke (1970) and Vyncke (1975) with few modifications [55, 56].
The sample size
was reduced to ≈8 g of fish muscle. First, the fish was weighed in centrifuge tubes and
then homogenized with 30 mL of 7.5% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (Merck, United States)
solution containing 0.1% of EDTA and 0.1% of propyl gallate, using an Ultra Turrax-mixer
(Ultra-Turrax T25, IKA laboratory technology, Germany). The resulting suspension was
filtered using a paper filter (OOH, Munktell, Sweden) and kept in the dark glass bottles.
The extracted (5 ml) was added to glass tubes with 5 ml of 2-thiobarbituric acid reagent
(0.02 M TBA in distilled water). The mixture was heated in a water bath at 90 °C for 40
min; at the end, it was cooled in cold water. The absorbance of samples and standards were
measured at 530 nm in a spectrophotometer (UV-1280, Shumadzu, Japan). The TBARS
values are expressed as mg MDA/kg of fish muscle. Each treatment sample (n = 3) in the
analysis was done in analytical duplicates (nanalysis = 2).
5.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
5.3.1
Sampling
The baking trial ran for about a week, having two days of sampling, always a day
after the storage trial data collection (day 1 and day 6). It was performed in triplicates of
randomized samples of fish cut in squares of approximately 4 x 4 cm (Figure 12).
Page 30 of 58
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
5.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Figure 12: Overview of the 24 samples used for the baking trial.
After sampling, the fish were divided into four groups (1, 2, 3, 4). Groups 1 and 2
were picked for the analyses on day 1, whereas the 3 and 4 were stored in a walk-in +2
°C refrigerator room until day 6 (as presented in Chapter 4, Figure 3). For group 1, all
measurements were taken after approximately 5 minutes of the film application. The same
procedure was followed by group 2, but it included the baking treatment in this case.
The heat treatment was conducted in batches, simultaneously with all samples in the
oven (UNOX ChefTop, Denmark). The oven temperature was 180 °C, with a low-speed
circulation fan, for a total of 10 minutes.
5.3.2
Colour
This analysis follows the method described in section 5.2.3.
There were two main
particularities for this trial.
First was that the measurements were taken over the film.
Secondly, they were taken once for groups 1 and 3, representing the raw fish; and twice for
groups 2 and 4, both before and after baking. Results were expressed as mean and standard
deviation (n = 6, before oven; n = 3, for after oven treatment).
5.3.3
Cooking yield
The cooking yield (CY) is calculated to see if the edible film helps keep the fish’s
moisture during oven treatment. For that the CY (%) was determined as the loss in weight
after the 10 minutes in the oven, for both day 1 and 6 (Eq 8).
CY (%) = Wb −Wa
Wb
× 100
(8)
Page 31 of 58
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
5.4
Data analysis
Being Wb the relative weight of the fish sample when raw (before oven); and Wa the relative
weight after cooked.
5.3.4
Texture
The texture analysis was conducted to determine whether the edible film altered the
fish’s overall texture. Therefore, a return to start penetration method was performed to mea-
sure the hardness or rupture force of the fish’s outer layer (with and without the edible film).
Given the nature and size of the samples, we chose to use a 2mm diameter probe
attached to a TA.XT Plus Texture Analyzer (Stable Micro System Ltd., United Kingdom),
calibrated on a 5 kg load cell. Both pre-test and test speed were determined as 1 mm/sec,
and the travelling down distance was established as 15 mm, to guarantee the breakage of
the fish’s outer layer in all necessary conditions. For the results, the maximum force (N),
identified by the fracturability’s macro-analysis in the force-strain curves, was averaged to
represent a texture proxy.
The test was performed on the raw and baked material on days 1 and 6. Each value
recorded for one particular sample was generated by up to five independent measurements
(nanalysis = 5), for each treatment triplicate (n = 3). The measurement spot was chosen
randomly, taking special care to avoid direct contact of the probe with myocommata, the
major sheets of connective tissue separating the myotomes. Also, to guarantee a more fair
measurement, the texture analysis post baking was done in intervals, one sample of each
treatment at a time. So the samples of both treatments would have a similar waiting time.
5.4
Data analysis
The statistical analyses were done in the Prism 9.4.1 software (GraphPad, United
States), also used to produce the graphs. The statistic test chosen was ANOVA two-way
with replication and Tukey’s Test for post-hoc analysis; The post-hoc was done using
multiple comparisons, comparing every mean with every other mean. In addition, Microsoft
Excel 365 (Microsoft Inc, United States) was used to calculate means and standard
deviations. All experiments run in treatment triplicate, n = 3, unless said otherwise. For
those that had analytical replicates (nanalysis) their mean were considered the replicate value
(n). Additionally, the means are considered statistically significantly different when levels of
p < 0.05; when the relative standard deviation is < 10% (RSD =
SD
mean× 100), the standard
deviation is considered within a good range.
Page 32 of 58
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
6
Results and discussion
6.1
Characterization of the edible film
6.1.1
Thickness
The average thickness of our edible film is 0.102 ± 0.014 mm (n = 20), generally ten
times thicker than the conventional plastic wrap. The variation in the thickness is above
10% (RSD > 10%), showing that the film’s physical characteristic is irregular, which might
interfere with its overall properties’ outcomes [21]. Additional investigation regarding the
surface profile would rule out the presence of possible defects responsible for reducing the
structural integrity and full functionality.
Furthermore, being thicker than conventional
plastic packaging may affect consumer choice, considering the reduced transparency. One
way of improving its feature could be by adding a plasticizer to the composition. Lim et al.
suggest that adding plasticizers, such as sorbitol, reduced the thickness of cassava starch
films [68].
6.1.2
Sealing property
As shown in Figure 13, one-second heat contact showed to be inefficient and unable to
bond two sides. Even though exposure to heat for two seconds could glue the sides, they
were easily unattached, giving an unsatisfactory result. The best result occurred in three
seconds of dwell time, in which it was possible to seal the two sides, also providing some
resistance when stretched. However, it was possible to see some bubbles on the surface,
which could be a potential problem.
The bubbles resulted from the heat contact and
became more evident in the samples taken after four seconds. In this case, the heat was
responsible for burning the film and breaking it into two pieces when stretched or bent.
Sealing is an essential feature of food packaging materials since it ensures physical
protection and maximises the product’s shelf life [20, 9, 63]. Furthermore, this test was
crucial to the experiment design decision, in which we covered the fish with film instead of
building a sealed packaging.
Page 33 of 58
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
6.1
Characterization of the edible film
Figure 13: Sealing results, each colour represents different exposure to heat. Colours yellow,
orange, red, and brown take 1 second, 2 seconds, 3 seconds, and 4 seconds, respectively.
The results show that the EF sealing property is a disadvantage compared to plastic
solutions, representing one of the possible improvements needed for the edible film. Previous
studies suggest improving the sealing property by laminating the films with an additional
layer of protein-based films (e.g.
gelatin, zein, whey, etc.)
[63].
Another possibility is
adding plasticizers. Lim et al. (2020) tested the effects of plasticizers on the heat seala-
bility of cassava starch films, having positive results for films with higher sorbitol content [68].
6.1.3
Water content and Moisture absorption
At room temperature and ambient relative humidity conditions, our edible film presents
a water content of 22.4% ± 1.1 (n = 9).
Regarding moisture, Figure 14 shows that under storage, our edible film absorbs
moisture from both environments and the fish when in contact with it. When comparing
Figures 5 and 13 with Figure 14, it is possible to see that the film has changed colour and
texture in both situations, with and without fish, becoming whiteish and softer. For those
in contact with fish, for example, the film was dismantled when peelled off after storage.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, this could be explained by the fact that polysaccharide-based
Page 34 of 58
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
6.1
Characterization of the edible film
films are naturally hydrophilic [24].
Figure 14: Moisture absorption at day 3, (1) shows all samples, (A) shows the control, and
(B) the film over fish.
During storage, in the control group (bare films), due to moisture absorption, the film
weight was increased by 34.0% ± 2.6 on day 3 and 66.8% ± 38.9 on day 7.
However,
considering the high standard deviation on the data from day 7, we decided to exclude the
replicate that reported an increase of over 111%, considering that it was inconsistent with
the other two values; ending up with a rise of 44.4% ± 0.2 of the weight, on day 7 (Figure
15). For the control group, there was no significant difference in the results; in that regard,
longer storage time did not show relevance in the behaviour of the film.
In the case of the film in contact with fish, the absorption was higher; the films more
than doubled their weight, reaching 175.1% ± 20.6 and 117.4% ± 11.9 of it, on days 3 and
7, respectively. Indicating that the presence of the fish was an important source of water
for the film. In this condition, results showed a significant difference in both storage time
and condition (p < 0.05) (Figure 15); the contact with the fish played over 80% of the
total variance. Furthermore, the test identified a different moisture absorption behaviour in
the film covering fish. This could be attributed to water transfer from fish to film and the
moisture exchange with the environment (refrigerator). To illustrate it, Figure 16 shows a
schemed moisture transfer process, in which the film not only absorbs but also transfers
moisture to the surroundings once it reaches its saturation level.
Page 35 of 58
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
6.1
Characterization of the edible film
Figure 15: Moisture absorption during storage. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by (*)
are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands for non-significant.
Figure 16: Moisture exchange scheme, (A) shows the control, and (B) the film over fish.
As mentioned before, to be qualified as good primary packaging material, one of
the prerequisites is to be resistant to handling.
Based on these results, our edible film
would fail to resist the long-term humidity exposure in storage, becoming soft and easily
dismantling with touch.
Hence, it would fail as primary packaging.
One solution for
overcoming the hydrophilicity characteristic of polysaccharide-based films is to blend
and reinforce the carrageenan-based film with either organic or inorganic fillers that are
hydrophobic or less hydrophilic to extend their application [69], such as fibres and lipids.
For example, Hasan et al. (2019) improved the hydrophobicity of the seaweed-based films
by enriching them with bamboo-based cellulose fibres [69].
Additionally, when used in
contact with the fish, the edible film gave low protection to the fish from exchanging
Page 36 of 58
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
vapour with the environment, showing a low-quality barrier property. However, for future
references, it would be interesting to assess the oxygen and water vapour permeabil-
ity as complementary information on the film’s barrier properties.
Finally, because the
film sheets tend to absorb humidity easily, it is also essential to consider how they are stored.
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Table 4 summarizes the reference values for the storage trial analyses found on Day
0. These values represent the starting point for the three different storage treatments we
applied (CONT, PW and EF).
Table 4: Range of initial parameters of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) used in the storage
trial (day 0, control group).
Evaluated parameter
Microbial and physicochemical
analyses
Results
Microbial growth
(log CFU/g)
Total viable count
(TVC)
2.9 - 3.1
Physicochemical analyses
Colour:
L*
47.4 - 50.8
a*
6.4 - 7.9
b*
12.3 - 17.4
Water content (%)
64.2 - 70.7
Lipid oxidation:
peroxide values
(meqO2/ kg lipids)
0.23 - 0.45
TBARS (mg MDA/kg fish)
0.03 - 0.04
6.2.1
Microbiological analysis
The microbial growth is shown in Figure 17.
Initially, the salmon fillets showed a
TVC of 3.01 ± 0.14 log CFU/g, which is within the acceptable quality of salmon. This is
consistent with the results found in the literature. Xiong et al. (2021), Zhu et al. (2018)
and Souza et al. (2010) reported on day 0, TVC of fresh salmon between 2.60 and 3.74 log
CFU/g [42, 41, 43].
In this experiment, the TCV increased over storage, having its highest growth rate
between days 5 and 10 for the three treatments. It was only on day 10 that the differences
between the treatments became apparent. In that day, the PW samples showed a higher
total count of 6.94 ± 0.37 log CFU/g, statistically achieving its shelf life. In contrast, the
Page 37 of 58
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
EF samples presented a total count of 6.07 ± 0.41 log CFU/g, still below the maximum
permissible limit for the quality and freshness of salmon. The CONT samples showed results
between the other treatments, not presenting a significant difference from either, possibly
achieving the maximum permissible limit between days 10 and 15. Table 3 summarizes the
results for each day and treatment.
Figure 17: Total viable bacteria count for the CONT, PW and EF groups, stored for 15
days. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by different letters are significantly different (p
< 0.05). In red is the maximum permissible limit for the quality and freshness of salmon.
These findings suggested that the PW sample experienced the fastest growth in TVC
during the storage, which might be explained by its moisture surface, resulting in higher
water activity and increased bacteria growth viability. In addition, the better performance
of the EF group might be explained by the fact that carrageenan is a natural antimicrobial
agent.
Volpe et al.
(2009) reported that carrageenan coating had good antimicrobial
activity when applied to fresh trout fillets stored at +4 °C for 15 days.
Furthermore, even though the trial suggests that edible film delayed the microbial
spoilage of the fillet by about 5 days compared to the plastic wrap, it is impossible to
attribute that to only the antimicrobial property of the carrageenan, considering that
the control group gave a similar result (p > 0.05).
In that sense, studies indicate that
carrageenan-based coatings enriched with other antimicrobial agents enhance the microbi-
ological safety and quality of turkey poultry and smoked salmon products [70, 71]. That
is because carrageenan’s high efficacy as an antimicrobial carrier slows the antimicrobial
compounds’ migration from the coating to the food surface [70, 71, 45].
Accordingly,
cross-linking other agents could further improve the antimicrobial properties of the edible
film.
Page 38 of 58
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
6.2.2
Colour
The colour was examined to determine whether the edible film could improve the
quality over storage time.
However, the fact that salmon has natural colour variations
may be responsible for a considerable standard deviation in the results.
Overall from
Figure 18, it is possible to see the main tendencies of the changes over the storage
trial. The initial colour (Day 0) of the non-covered salmon fillet was for L* (lightness),
a* (redness) and b* (yellowness) 49.3 ± 1.8, 7.2 ± 0.8, and 14.9 ± 2.4, respectively.
The CIELAB profile of our fresh salmon fits within the wide range found in the liter-
ature, having L* varying from 37 to 57, a* from 5 to 12, and b* from 5 to 15 [41, 72, 31, 73].
The loss of lightness of salmon flesh can be caused by different factors, such as changes
in pH, protein denaturation, lipid oxidation, and microbial spoilage [41].
Therefore, a
reduction in the L* values was expected during the storage trial. As anticipated, there is
a decay in the first five days for all treatments, with insignificant difference between them,
reaching the range of 38.0 to 42.9. However, on day 10, the PW stood out from the other
two groups, keeping the L* values more stable over time. Both CONT and EF showed a
dropping tendency, reaching their lowest value on day 15, 36.8 and 37.7, respectively, in
contrast to 42.7 of the PW group. Overall, during the entire storage trial CONT and EF
behaved similarly.
Changes in the redness (a*) are expected during storage. Some reasons behind it are
the protein and lipid oxidation [49]. Another way of looking into it is that considering that
the carotenoids responsible for the pink-redness of the flesh are sensitive to light and oxygen
exposure [46]. That said, the results expected during the trial were that the redness (a*)
would decrease mainly for the CONT group, and keep stable for the PW and EF groups.
However, the results were different from expectations. The best result was attributed to
PW, showing no significant change over the 15 days.
On the other hand, both CONT
and EF show the same tendency to reduce, especially after day 10, not having significant
differences between treatments. This makes us consider that the edible film did not improve
the gas exchange condition, hence not preventing oxidation.
Regarding the yellowness, the b* values were expected to increase over time, as often
reported in the literature [41, 74]. However, the results show the opposite. The most likely
answer for that is the variability of colour with the samples. Regardless of the causes of
the b* values decay, CONT and EF groups displayed an apparent disposition to reduce
b* values over time, reaching 2.0 and 1.2 on day 15. On the other hand, the plastic wrap
presented as the best protection method, giving the PW group more stability over time,
not delivering a significant change within 15 days.
Page 39 of 58
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 18: Colour change during storage trial. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by
different letters are significantly different (p < 0.05).
Page 40 of 58
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
As a complementary procedure, the evolution of the colour change was registered in
photos, as presented in Figure 19.
From that, it is possible to perceive the differences
compared to the control (Day 0), changes that the consumer would be able to identify.
Figure 19: Visual changes in the fish flesh’s colour throughout the storage trial.
The calculation of ∆E supports the visual change.
As it is possible to see in
Figure 20, all the conditions resulted in changes above the eye detection (∆E > 2).
However, even though perceptible to the human eye, the changes in the PW group
were considerably lower than those in Group CONT and EF. Furthermore, there was
no significant change in relation to time, being treatment the leading cause of variation.
Finally, these results reinforce the idea that CONT and EF behave equally. Thereby, we can
assume that the edible film does not affect the fish’s colour, neither positively nor negatively.
Page 41 of 58
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 20: Visual changes in the fish flesh’s colour throughout the storage trial represented
by ∆E. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly different (p < 0.05),
varying in level, and (ns) stands for non-significant.
6.2.3
Dry matter and water content
The dry matter and water content changes during the storage trial are shown in Table
5 and Figure 21, respectively. The starting water content in the fresh fish fillets was 66.4%
± 3.7, following the range found in the literature, 65% to 77% [43, 72]. Indicating that our
fish had up to 14% of oil content, considering that, the general rule is that 80% of the flesh
constitutes water and fat [27].
Furthermore, a good food packaging material offers a vapour exchange barrier,
preventing the food product from drying out during storage [9]. Therefore, it was expected
that the EF would keep the water content constant, possibly giving a similar result as the
PW group. However, the results were different from that. Yet, the PW had the best per-
formance, whereas the EF group resembled the CONT, not offering any vapour barrier effect.
Throughout the 15 days of the storage trial, the PW kept the water content level above
65%. However, the CONT and EF groups showed an apparent decay in water content,
more evident after day 5, reaching levels below 60% on day 15. This reduction in water
content represents overall product weight loss and is directly connected to economic and
quality losses [75]. Therefore, CONT and EF groups perform less well than the PW group.
Even though Figure 21 shows EF having a lower water content, there was no significant
difference between that and the CONT group (p > 0.05). In addition, it is possible to see
that both respond to the same patterns of significant decay between days 5 and 10 and
more stable change in the last days. The latter could also be explained by the fish reaching
a dryness level that would slow down the water loss.
Page 42 of 58
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
From the results, it is likely that either using the EF or keeping it uncovered (CONT)
would cost to the fish product because the loss in weight during storage would lead to
economic and quality losses.
Table 5: The measurement results of reference values of dry matter per treatment and storage
time. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by different letters are significantly different (p
< 0.05).
Dry matter (%)
Storage (days)
Treatment
0
5
10
15
Control
33.6 ± 3.7ab
34.9 ± 1.4abc
40.0 ± 1.5bcd
41.2 ± 1.1cd
Plastic wrap
31.9 ± 2.3a
33.3 ± 1.7ab
31.0 ± 2.2a
Edible film
36.5 ± 1.24abc
41.7 ± 0.3cd
43.7 ± 2.1d
Figure 21: Water content changes during storage. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by
different letters are significantly different (p < 0.05).
6.2.4
Lipid oxidation: primary and secondary
The rancidity development on salmon loins during 15 days of storage was assessed
using primary (peroxide values) and secondary (TBARS) lipid oxidation.
Initially, from the lipid extraction prior to the PV determination, it was possible to
measure the total lipid content of the samples, totalling 12.0% ± 3.9 (n = 60). Even by
Page 43 of 58
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
only having two fish, the fat variation was more extensive than expected, which can be
explained by a natural uneven fat distribution in the salmon. In that regard, we expected
to overcome the significant inconsistencies (RSD > 10%) by selecting the middle part of the
fillet and removing the subcutaneous fat by cutting only the upper layer of the fillet, as well
as having a consistent way of sampling. Another possible cause could be associated with
the thawing procedure. That is because the same homogenized fish was going to be further
used for TBARS analysis. Thus, on the extraction day, we did not wait for the samples to
thaw completely, which might have interfered with the final results.
Regardless of the wide variance, the overall oil content is consistent with the values
found for water content (section 6.2.3), as well as with the values reported in the literature;
Lundebye et al. (2017) reported an average lipid content of 14% for farmed salmon (n =
100) [76].
The fresh salmon samples started the storage trial presenting peroxide values of 0.31
± 0.12 meqO2/kg lipids. These values were on the lower side of the range found in the
literature, 0.0 < PV < 2 meqO2/kg lipids [51, 31, 77]. The lower level of PV values as a
starting point can be related to fresh and well-handled fish.
Throughout the trial, PV did not show significant changes (p > 0.05) during the 15 days
of storage for all three treatments. The values varied between 0.08 to 0.34 mg meqO2/kg
lipids (Figure 22), way below the quality parameter of 5 and 10 meqO2/kg lipids, depending
on the method [31, 49]. All in all, the variance of the values made it impossible to determine
possible changes in time and treatment. According to the method limitations, PV < 0.5 mg
meqO2/kg lipids tends to have a high relative standard deviation (RSD > 10%), thus being
more challenging to measure nuances. However, from these results, it is possible to infer
that the low temperature during storage did not trigger primary oxidation for any treatments.
Page 44 of 58
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
6.2
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets shelf life
Figure 22: (A) Primary lipid oxidation (peroxide values in meqO2/kg lipids) during storage.
(B) Secondary oxidation (mg MDA/kg fish muscle) durign storage. Values (mean ± SD, n
= 3) followed by different letters are significantly different (p < 0.05).
The fresh salmon samples started the storage trial presenting a TBARS ratio of
0.035 ± 0.003 mg MDA/kg fish muscle, consistent with a very fresh fish. However, once
crossing with the literature results, we could not find a consensus metric for the definition
of the maximal permissible limit of malonaldehyde (MAD) for good-quality fish products
considering fish muscle. Most literature presents either in kg of lipids or non-specified kg
of sample. Trying to overcome this, we converted our unit into 0.33 ± 0.15 mg MDA/kg
lipid, considering the oil content of each sample. However, we know this result does not
reflect the accurate oxidation level since we test on the muscle and not on the oil extract.
Nevertheless, even though it is unclear if all are using the same methods and metrics for
evaluating the levels, comparing our values with the more conservative TBARS limit level, 1
- 2 mg MDA/kg, reported by Secci and Parisi (2016) and Xiong et al. (2021), it is possible
Page 45 of 58
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
to assume that our starting levels of TBARS are in the low range, representing a fresh and
non-rancid product.
During storage, the levels of lipid oxidation in the fresh salmon fillets were low
and statistically stable until day 10 for all treatments (Figure 22).
These results were
unexpected, considering that we measured a reduction in redness (a*) during storage,
which is directly linked with lipid oxidation [49]. On the other hand, these low levels of
lipid oxidation may be attributed to the low starting point, low primary oxidation, and low
temperature in the storage (+2 °C).
At the end of the storage trial, we can see an unforeseen result: the EF group peaked,
distinguishing itself from the other two groups. On day 15 the EF group reached 0.19 ±
0.01 mg MDA/kg fish muscle, an increase of 6-fold from day 0. Even though it is still below
the rancidity level, this result was considered unexpected because, in most of the analyses,
group EF behaved similarly to CONT, and if it did not succeed in having antioxidant
properties, the same trend was expected.
Thereby, a plausible explanation for it is the
higher oil concentration on the samples, increasing the overall levels of oxidation, which is
aligned with the high oil content found in the triplicates in question, varying from 12% to
28%.
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
6.3.1
Colour
Considering the results of the raw fish, when comparing CONT and EF, there were
no differences in lightness (L* ).
However, as expected and commented in section 6.2.2,
storage time was responsible for reducing both L* (Figure 23). In contrast, the redness (a*)
showed stability over the storage time but varied with treatment. A possible explanation is
that the film reduced the redness appearance of the flesh, which could interfere with how
consumers perceive the product. For the yellowness (b*) values, the variation was affected
by treatment and storage time, respectively, accounting for 35.16% and 44.52% of the total
variance. In both cases, b* values unexpectedly dropped on day 6, as in the storage trial
(section 6.2.2). The unexpected result was that the edible film did not increase the flesh’s
yellowness, considering the film’s natural colour.
Furthermore, when comparing this analysis’ results with the storage trial results (section
6.2.2), it is possible to see the same pattern. Both trials showed a notable drop in L* values
after the first days of storage. Additionally, in the case of a* values, there was an insignificant
change in any trials within the same time frame. Lastly, both experiments presented an
unexplained drop in b* values.
Page 46 of 58
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Figure 23: Colour changes of the raw fish with and without the film. Values (mean ± SD, n
= 3) followed by (*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands
for non-significant.
Page 47 of 58
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Figure 24: Colour differences due to oven treatment, (A) presents the raw fish; B presents
the fish after baking. The pictures were taken on day 1.
Page 48 of 58
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Regarding the baking results (Figure 24), first, when compared with the raw fish, the
increase in our fish’s overall CIELAB profile is noticeable, as seen in the literature [60, 59].
An increase in lightness is the main responsible for this change (Figure 25). The leaching
of the collagen, presented in the muscles, explains the rise in the L* values during heating
treatment [60].
On the other hand, the levels of a* and b* were expected to either be
stable or be reduced, considering the carotenoids’ instability to heat.
Accordingly, our
results show no significant change in the redness (a*) but an unexpected growth in b*.
Similar results were also reported for pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) and rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykis) by Sathivel (2005) and Choubert, Blanc and Courvalin (1992).
In these studies, the authors attributed the increase in yellowness to a mild exposure to
high temperature and the moisture loss from the heat treatment, concentrating on the
carotenoids [78].
When considering the presence of edible film, the values for lightness were higher in the
CONT group, on day 1, 75.03 ± 1.55, in contrast to 70.75 ± 0.84 for the EF group. Even
though the EF showed a lower level of lightness, it appeared to be more stable after storage,
not presenting a significant change (p > 0.05). The storage influenced the variations for the
changes in L* values, responding to 54.65% of them.
High redness in cooked salmon is a positive quality attribute by consumers. After the
oven, the a* levels did not significantly differ within groups, showing that storage had more
influence on the variances, 48.52%. The 13.22% of the total variance to the treatment is
responsible for the differences between the values for the EF group on day 6 and the CONT
group on day 1. However, that might be explained by the wide range of variation in colours
of the raw samples typical to salmon (above mentioned in section 6.2.2).
On day 1, the b* values of each group were significantly different. The CONT group
showed a lower level of yellowness with 30.98 ± 2.05, whereas the EF presented 32.92 ±
0.72. After storage, both groups reached the same range of b* values (p > 0.05). However,
it is impossible to infer whether the edible film is relevant, considering the high relative
standard variation (RSD > 10%).
Page 49 of 58
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Figure 25: Colour changes of the baked fish, with and without the film. Values (mean ±
SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns)
stands for non-significant.
From these results observed regarding colour changes, it is possible to infer that the use
of edible film on the fish had no substantial effect after oven-baking.
6.3.2
Cooking yield
The cooking yield on day 1 was 1.66 % ± 0.99 for the CONT group and 0.5 % ±
0.964 for the EF; on day 6 the CY reached 6.31% ± 0.47 and 6.54% ± 0.82 for the CONT
and EF, respectively (Figure 26). Altogether, the different treatments did not significantly
affect cooking yield (p > 0.05). Similar results were found in the literature, indicating that
different types of coating did not necessarily represent a change in the cooking yield in
salmon fillets [60, 59, 79]. Nonetheless, because of the large standard deviation, partially
Page 50 of 58
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
explained by the fillets’ size, height and composition, which affects the heat and mass
transfer during cooking, assuming that both treatments give a similar result requires more
extensive sampling.
On the other hand, storage time had more substantial effects than
treatment, representing 92.8% of the total variance on cooking yield, in contrast to 0.7%
from treatment. In that sense, storage increased the water loss of the cooked fish by about
5% in both CONT and EF groups.
Figure 26: Cooking yield. The water loss represents cooking yield (CY) after oven treatment
on day 1 and day 6 (n = 3). Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly
different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands for non-significant.
6.3.3
Texture
To understand how the film behaves when in contact with the fish, we tested it under
two conditions, before and after oven treatment. We also assessed how storage time could
contribute to changes in each treatment.
Figure 27 shows an example of the curves’ profile for raw fish, the values presented are
within the average found for each treatment. In the image, it is possible to see that there is
no apparent difference in the strength needed for breaking the fish’s surface layer in three
of these curves. Both curves from day 1 (curve blue for control and black for the edible
film) and the curve in red, representing the CONT on day 6, has a similar profile, with a
slight increase on day 6. On the other hand, the green curve, representing EF on day 6, is
outside the same strength range.
Page 51 of 58
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Figure 27: Texture analysis curves pre-oven presenting the maximum force (N) represented
by fracturability (F). The values given are the closest to the mean value found for each
treatment.
In numbers, the results from the texture analysis on the raw fish on day 1 showed
that the total force needed to break the fish’s surface was 0.43 ± 0.03 N and 0.50 ±
0.08 N for CONT and EF, respectively.
On day 6, the values registered were 0.56 ±
0.03 N and 0.66 ± 0.11 N for CONT and EF, respectively (Figure 28 [A]). Accordingly,
it appears that neither treatment nor storage alone played in the changes in the tex-
ture; hence no significant difference (p > 0.05) is found in most cases.
Nevertheless,
the interaction between both may explain the difference between the control on day 1
and fish covered with edible film on day 6. For a clear understanding, a more extension
sampling would be required to exclude any chances of normal variation from the salmon cuts.
For the baked fish, the fish’s surface texture analysis was intended to measure if
consumers could perceive changes in the textures; thus, it could help to qualify if it would
reduce the overall quality of the final product.
From that, we expected the film would
melt, so it would not create any resistance to the bite.
Another positive possibility, if
not melting, we predicted was that the film could turn into a crisp layer, simulating a
frying result. However, in the end, we found that the film became chewy and hard to bite
after oven treatment. This becomes clear when Figure 29 shows some curves’ profiles for
after-baked fish. The green curve, representing the EF on day 6, stands out from the other
curves, showing a higher force. In this image, it is also possible to see that both storage
and treatment interfere with the results, which is evident when seeing the results in numbers.
Page 52 of 58
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
Figure 28: Texture analysis. (A) show the results of the texture with (day 6) and without
(day 1) storage influence; (B) shows the results after the oven treatment with (day 6) and
without (day 1) storage influence. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly
different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands for non-significant.
Page 53 of 58
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis
6.3
Effects of edible films on salmon fillets baking quality
The after-baked fish’s results show that the film before storage (day 1) did not interfere
with the baking results, having no significant difference (p > 0.05) between treatments on
that day (Figure 28 [B]). On day 1, the force needed to break the fish’s surface was 0.69 ±
0.30 N and 1.48 ± 0.26 N for CONT and EF, respectively. However, the storage enhances
the treatment effect. On day 6, the values registered were 1.58 ± 0.09 N and 3.43 ± 0.54
N for CONT and EF, respectively. There was a small difference (*) between CONT from
days 1 and 6, indicating that storage alone could be responsible for creating a harder surface
layer after baking. The storage time accounted for 46%, Whereas treatment accounts for
40% of the total data variance.
Figure 29: Texture analysis curves post-oven presenting the maximum force (N) represented
by fracturability (F). The values given are the closest to the mean value found for each
treatment.
Unfortunately, we could not find in the literature similar experiment.
Most of the
research focuses on raw fish’s texture connected to measuring freshness. Nevertheless, as a
preliminary experiment, these results show that a consumer would be able to perceive the
difference between products after baking. The difference would become more apparent if
the fish were stored wrapped for a few days.
Page 54 of 58
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis
7
Conclusion
The application of edible films by the food industry is a trend in the market. Multiple
studies are testing how to improve edible films’ mechanical and physicochemical properties
to make them more competitive against conventional plastic alternatives.
Several also
evaluate the functionality of edible films when applied to food, testing their effect on storage
life. However, there is a clear gap in the literature regarding testing the use of edible films
as a safe zero-waste packaging (eat-all) alternative for the easy-to-bake salmon fillet, if
not just to be used as the final wrapping in e.g. fast food. As an eat-all packaging for
easy-to-bake salmon fillet to be used by retailers, the film must comply with being a food’s
primary material, provide the necessary function for maintaining or improving shelf life
regarding safety and quality, and pass tests, such as baking trials, to become part of the
final product.
This study aimed to provide a preliminary response to address the three objectives
mentioned above.
For that, different experiments and tests were done to evaluate if a
commercial edible film would be eligible for becoming a zero-waste packaging for salmon
fillets. Then, following the five initial hypotheses, conclusions were drawn.
H1.
The edible film’s intrinsic characteristics are suitable for protecting the
salmon fillets by functioning as a physicochemical barrier
For testing the H1, we considered the thickness, the sealing property, and the behaviour
under storage. The edible film’s thickness is 10x thicker than conventional plastic wrap,
which might impact the consumer’s choice, considering that the EF is less transparent.
Another issue regarding thickness was its significant variance (relative standard deviation -
RDS > 10%). We found that the thickness varied within the same sheet and among different
sheets, and that is an unsatisfactory situation because it might implicate the quality of the
film’s structural integrity and functionality. To test the sealing property, we applied heat
for different duration. A short heat contact (1 and 2 sec) proved inefficient. In contrast,
prolonged contact (3 and 4 sec) was able to seal but produced air bubbles and transformed
the surface into breakable.
Finally, during the storage, the film proved not capable of
protecting the fish from drying out during storage, showing a low vapour barrier property.
There was no significant difference in the water content of the fillets covered with the edible
film and the control group. Based on all these results, we reject the hypothesis that the
film has the intrinsic characteristics needed for primary packaging.
H2. The edible film made from carrageenan increases the microbial shelf life of
salmon fillets compared to non-treated or plastic wrap applied alternatives
Concerning the H2, we expected that the antimicrobial properties usually attributed
to carrageenan would positively reduce microbial growth and extend the shelf life. To test
Page 55 of 58
==PAGE:61==
Master thesis
that, we measured the total viable counts (TVC) during the storage trial.
The results
showed that all treatments behaved similarly during the first five days, not presenting any
significant difference (p > 0.05). However, on the tenth day, some distinctions started to
appear. The first group to reach the maximum permissible limit of 7 log CFU/g was the
PW. In contrast, the EF only meet the end of the shelf life on day 15, giving the impression
of delivering an increase on the shelf life of five days.
Nonetheless, because the CONT
group behaved similarly to both, it became difficult to distinguish whether the positive
result from the EF group was due to the antimicrobial effect or simply because it had lower
water activity on the surface than the PW group. All in all, there are two alternatives to
consider. On the one hand, we have a more optimistic one, in which we prove the hypothesis
since the EF group gives better results. Alternately, we have a more conservative one, in
which we reject the hypothesis that edible film made from carrageenan increases
the microbial shelf life of salmon fillets because there is no certainty that the
results are related to any substantial antimicrobial properties from the film.
H3. The edible film made from carrageenan decreases the oxidation of salmon
fillets compared to non-treated or plastic wrap applied alternatives
First, we found that our salmon fillets had about 12% of oil content, which could be
considered whiting the range of farmed salmon but on the fat side of the spectrum. The low
initial values of PV and TBARS are consistent with fresh fish. However, the inconsistencies
in the results and the significant variance made it impossible to observe a clear oxidation
process pattern. These were unexpected, considering the high oil concentration. Still, from
the numbers we got from the beginning to the end, the PV values and TBARS are under the
limits, indicating that the low temperature (2 °C) on storage slowed down the processes. The
fact that the numbers were close to the method limitations created large standard
variations, leading to no significant differences between treatments.
In the
end, from the data obtained, it is impossible to prove or disprove the hypothesis.
H4. The edible film from carrageenan melts during heat treatment (↑60 °C). It
will also reduce the water loss during the oven treatment, increasing the fish’s
oven-cooked texture quality (juiciness) compared to uncovered fish
For testing the H4, we built a baking trial to compare treatments. We found that the
edible film does not melt in a 180 °C oven. One possible explanation is that to melt or
dissolve the edible film needs more than a high temperature but a greater concentration of
water available. The second scenario imagined as an alternative was that the film would
become crispy. That is because when in a dry environment and under heat, the film changes
its consistency and turns into a stiff and breakable material. However, once again, that
did not represent reality. The oven treatment changed the edible film composition into a
hard and chewable layer, requiring a higher force to break through it.
Once again, the
film proved inefficient in keeping moisture on the fish during storage and oven treatment
Page 56 of 58
==PAGE:62==
Master thesis
because of its poor vapour barrier property. Therefore, it did not enhance the juiciness of
the final product. There was no significant difference in the water content and cooking yield
compared with the control group. These results reject the hypothesis that the edible
film would melt and keep moisture in the final product. Furthermore, the film
reduces the final baked product quality by creating a thick layer on its surface.
H5. The edible film will resist storage during the supply chain without being
ruined or changing the oven-baked quality due to the storage.
This was
mimicked by refrigeration (+2 °C) of the fish wrapped in the EF for six days.
An important characteristic to be eligible for an eat-all packaging is the material’s
ability to resist handling and be stable during storage. When the edible film was exposed
to humidity in a refrigerator, it showed a high level of hydrophobicity, changing its physical
characteristics. In addition, it was found that after the first week of storage, the film be-
comes very sensitive to touch, especially when in contact with the fish’s surface. Therefore,
it is also necessary to consider where to store the edible film sheets since it easily absorbs
moisture; the storage should be dry and humidity-controlled to avoid structure changes.
Moreover, the film baked after the storage period showed higher hardness, needing more
force to break through the surface after baking the fish. These results make us reject the
hypothesis that the film would resist storage during the supply chain without
being ruined or changing the oven-baked quality due to the storage.
In conclusion, considering that we reject our five hypotheses, we can assume that the
edible film from carrageenan is not designed to be a safe zero-waste packaging (eat-all) alter-
native for the easy-to-bake salmon fillet. Therefore, improvements in different fields would
be needed to turn the film eligible for this new application. Consequently, considering the
standing characteristics of the edible film, because of its hydrophilia, we do not recommend
its use for food with water content or food that requires chill storage. So, without changing
its composition by adding components that help to overcome this issue, we suggest applying
it to ready-to-eat food, preferably dry. The presence of fat is not a concern, so storing fried
food is a good opportunity.
Page 57 of 58
==PAGE:63==
Master thesis
8
Considerations and recommendations
For issues arising from the present study, it is recommended that future studies consider
more extensive replicates to help overcome the variance intrinsic from the salmon. We also
recommend larger sample sizes, guaranteeing possible analytical replicates and repetitions
of analysis if needed. Lastly, larger samples would also allow using different probes (such as
a shear blade) for texture analysis. Although, we believe that sensory analysis would better
represent the consumer perception of the product. The oxidation process could have been
measured better if the storage trial had been set at a higher temperature, such as 4 °C, to
speed up the process.
Continuing with the practical recommendation, regardless of the intention of further
developing the film into a new application, it would be an asset to test its mechanical
properties and investigate its surface structure’s integrity.
This information would help
to understand further the limitations of the edible film. Moreover, measuring the water
and gas permeability to test the film’s barrier properties could help answer which type of
product the edible film could be used as primary packaging material.
If the company is interested in improving the edible film to expand its application,
overcoming the hydrophilicity characteristic of polysaccharide-based films is a must. The
carrageenan could be cross-linked with organic or inorganic fillers such as fibres and
lipids, making the ending film less hydrophilic. Alternatively, creating multi-layers using
different biopolymers is a strategy to build a more complex film, giving different properties.
Furthermore, adding sorbitol to the composition might improve features such as sealing and
thickness. Finally, considering that carrageenan has a high efficacy as a carrier incorporating
antimicrobial and antioxidant agents would enhance the overall properties of the film.
Page 58 of 58
==PAGE:64==
List of Figures
1
Bio-based materials used in edible packaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
The Seaweed Company’s edible film current applications. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Scheme of the experiment design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Scheme of the film characterization procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Edible film used in the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
The four full sides.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Scheme of sampling.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
8
Images of the three different fillets on day 0. On top the non-treated control
fillet (CONT); on the left, the fillet covered with plastic wrap (PW ); and on
the right, the fillet covered with the edible film (EF). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9
Sequence of how the sampling for microbiology analysis was conducted. . . .
26
10
Scheme of the dilution series for petrifilm incubation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
11
Samples being homogenized for the analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
12
Overview of the 24 samples used for the baking trial. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
13
Sealing results, each colour represents different exposure to heat.
Colours
yellow, orange, red, and brown take 1 second, 2 seconds, 3 seconds, and 4
seconds, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
14
Moisture absorption at day 3, (1) shows all samples, (A) shows the control,
and (B) the film over fish.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
15
Moisture absorption during storage. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by
(*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands for
non-significant.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
16
Moisture exchange scheme, (A) shows the control, and (B) the film over fish.
36
17
Total viable bacteria count for the CONT, PW and EF groups, stored for 15
days. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by different letters are significantly
different (p < 0.05). In red is the maximum permissible limit for the quality
and freshness of salmon. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
18
Colour change during storage trial. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by
different letters are significantly different (p < 0.05).
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
19
Visual changes in the fish flesh’s colour throughout the storage trial. . . . . .
41
20
Visual changes in the fish flesh’s colour throughout the storage trial repre-
sented by ∆E. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly
different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands for non-significant.
. .
42
21
Water content changes during storage. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed
by different letters are significantly different (p < 0.05). . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
22
(A) Primary lipid oxidation (peroxide values in meqO2/kg lipids) during stor-
age. (B) Secondary oxidation (mg MDA/kg fish muscle) durign storage. Val-
ues (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by different letters are significantly different
(p < 0.05). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
23
Colour changes of the raw fish with and without the film. Values (mean ±
SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in
level, and (ns) stands for non-significant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
I
==PAGE:65==
Master thesis
List of Figures
24
Colour differences due to oven treatment, (A) presents the raw fish; B presents
the fish after baking. The pictures were taken on day 1. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
25
Colour changes of the baked fish, with and without the film. Values (mean
± SD, n = 3) followed by (*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in
level, and (ns) stands for non-significant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
26
Cooking yield. The water loss represents cooking yield (CY) after oven treat-
ment on day 1 and day 6 (n = 3). Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by
(*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns) stands for
non-significant.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
27
Texture analysis curves pre-oven presenting the maximum force (N) repre-
sented by fracturability (F). The values given are the closest to the mean
value found for each treatment.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
28
Texture analysis. (A) show the results of the texture with (day 6) and without
(day 1) storage influence; (B) shows the results after the oven treatment with
(day 6) and without (day 1) storage influence. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3)
followed by (*) are significantly different (p < 0.05), varying in level, and (ns)
stands for non-significant.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
29
Texture analysis curves post-oven presenting the maximum force (N) repre-
sented by fracturability (F). The values given are the closest to the mean value
found for each treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Page II of XI
==PAGE:66==
Master thesis
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Main functions of food packaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
The different types of carrageenan and its types characteristics.
. . . . . . .
11
3
Plating and dilution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Range of initial parameters of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) used in the
storage trial (day 0, control group). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
The measurement results of reference values of dry matter per treatment and
storage time. Values (mean ± SD, n = 3) followed by different letters are
significantly different (p < 0.05).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Page III of XI
==PAGE:67==
Master thesis
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
ANOVA Analysis of Variance
CFU Colony-Forming Unit
CIELAB International Commission of Illumination L*, a*, b* method
CONT Control
CY
Cooking Yield
EF
Edible Film
MAP Modified Atmosphere Packaging
PV
Peroxide value
RSD
Relative Standard Deviation
SD
Standard Deviation
SDG
Sustainable Development Goals
TBARS Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances
TVC Total Viable Counts
Page IV of XI
==PAGE:68==
Master thesis
References
References
[1] J.R. Jambeck, R. Geyer, C. Wilcox, T.R. Siegler, M. Perryman, A. Andrady,
R. Narayan, and K.L. Law. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science,
347(6223):768–771, 2 2015.
[2] R. Geyer, J.R. Jambeck, and K.L. Law. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever
made. Science Advances, 3(7), 7 2017.
[3] L.C.M. Lebreton, J. Van Der Zwet, J.W. Damsteeg, B. Slat, A. Andrady, and J. Reisser.
River plastic emissions to the world’s oceans. Nature Communications 2017 8:1, 8(1):1–
10, 6 2017.
[4] S. Kaza, L.C. Yao, P. Bhada-Tata, and F. Van Woerden. What a Waste 2.0: A Global
Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 2050. What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot
of Solid Waste Management to 2050, 9 2018.
[5] United Nations. The 17 goals | sustainable development, 2022. https://sdgs.un.org/
goals#history. Accessed on 2022-08-05.
[6] United Nations. The Sustainable Development Goals Report. Technical report, 2022.
[7] Ellen MacArthur Foundation.
The new plastics economy: rethinking the future of
plastics & catalysing action. Technical report, 2017.
[8] C.G. Avio, S. Gorbi, and F. Regoli. Plastics and microplastics in the oceans: From
emerging pollutants to emerged threat. Marine environmental research, 128:2–11, 2017.
[9] U. Stöllman, F. Johansson, and A. Leufvén. Packaging and food quality. In Shelf Life
Evaluation of Foods, pages 52–71. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1994.
[10] T.N. Tsironi and P.S. Taoukis. Current Practice and Innovations in Fish Packaging.
Journal of Aquatic Food Product Technology, 27(10):1024–1047, 11 2018.
[11] K. de la Caba, P. Guerrero, T.S. Trung, M. Cruz-Romero, J.P. Kerry, J. Fluhr, M. Mau-
rer, F. Kruijssen, A. Albalat, S. Bunting, S. Burt, D. Little, and R. Newton. From
seafood waste to active seafood packaging: An emerging opportunity of the circular
economy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 208:86–98, 1 2019.
[12] R.P. Singh. Scientific principles of shelf life evaluation. In Shelf Life Evaluation of
Foods, pages 3–27. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1994.
[13] A. Cammarelle, F. Bimbo, M. Lombardi, and R. Viscecchia. Health and Eco-Innovations
in Food Packaging. In Subramanian Senthilkannan Muthu, editor, Sustainable Packag-
ing, Environmental Footprints and Eco-design of Products and Processes, pages 31–70.
Springer Singapore, Singapore, 2021.
Page V of XI
==PAGE:69==
Master thesis
References
[14] M.R. Ansorena, M. Pereda, and N.E. Marcovich. Edible Films. In Polymers for Food
Applications, pages 5–24. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 1 2018.
[15] B. Noseda, A. Vermeulen, P. Ragaert, and F. Devlieghere. Packaging of Fish and Fishery
Products. In Seafood Processing, pages 237–261. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester,
UK, 11 2013.
[16] The European Parliament and Council of European Union. Directive (eu) no 2019/904
of the european parliament and of the council of 5 july 2019 on the reduction of the
impact of certain plastic products on the environment. OJ, L 551:1–19, 2019.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32019L0904&from=EN. Accessed on 2022-08-05.
[17] M. Flórez, E. Guerra-Rodríguez, P. Cazón, and M. Vázquez. Chitosan for food pack-
aging: Recent advances in active and intelligent films. Food Hydrocolloids, 124:107328,
3 2022.
[18] R. Govindaswamy, J.S. Robinson, J. Geevaretnam, and P. Pandurengan.
Physico-
functional and Anti-oxidative Properties of Carp Swim Bladder Gelatin and Brown
Seaweed Fucoidan Based Edible Films. Journal of Packaging Technology and Research,
2(1):77–89, 3 2018.
[19] I. Albertos, A.B Martin-Diana, M. Burón, and D. Rico. Development of functional bio-
based seaweed (Himanthalia elongata and Palmaria palmata) edible films for extending
the shelflife of fresh fish burgers. Food Packaging and Shelf Life, 22:100382, 12 2019.
[20] T. Ghosh and V. Katiyar. Edible Food Packaging: An Introduction. In Nanotechnology
in Edible Food Packaging, Materials Horizons: From Nature to Nanomaterials, pages
1–19. Springer Singapore, Singapore, 2021.
[21] S. Mali, M.V.E. Grossmann, M.A. Garcia, M.N. Martino, and N.E. Zaritzky.
Mi-
crostructural characterization of yam starch films. Carbohydrate Polymers, 50(4):379–
386, 12 2002.
[22] S.L. Holdt and S. Kraan. Bioactive compounds in seaweed: functional food applications
and legislation. Journal of Applied Phycology, page 543â597, 2011.
[23] D.J. McHugh and FAO. A Guide to the Seaweed Industry. FAO Fisheries and Aqua-
culture Report. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2003.
[24] E. Tavassoli-Kafrani, H. Shekarchizadeh, and M. Masoudpour-Behabadi. Development
of edible films and coatings from alginates and carrageenans. Carbohydrate Polymers,
137:360–374, 2 2016.
[25] M. Azizi-Lalabadi, L. Rafiei, B. Divband, and A. Ehsani. Active packaging for Salmon
stored at refrigerator with Polypropylene nanocomposites containing 4A zeolite, ZnO
nanoparticles, and green tea extract. Food Science and Nutrition, 8(12):6445–6456, 12
2020.
Page VI of XI
==PAGE:70==
Master thesis
References
[26] FAO. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2022. FAO, 6 2022.
[27] J. Emborg, Laursen B.G., T. Rathjen, and P. Dalgaard. Microbial spoilage and forma-
tion of biogenic amines in fresh and thawed modified atmosphere-packed salmon (salmo
salar) at 2 °c. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 92:790–799, 4 2002.
[28] M. Rødbotten, P. Lea, and Ø. Ueland. Quality of raw salmon fillet as a predictor of
cooked salmon quality. Food Quality and Preference, 20:13–23, 1 2009.
[29] C. Alasalvar, F. Shahidi, K. Miyashita, and U. Wanasundara. Seafood quality, safety,
and health applications: An overview.
In Handbook of Seafood Quality, Safety and
Health Applications, pages 1–10. Wiley-Blackwell, 9 2010.
[30] H.H. Huss. Quality and quality changes in fresh fish. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper,
348, 1995. Available on: http://www.fao.org/3/V7180E/V7180E00.htm#Contents.
[31] H. Dalsvåg, J. Cropotova, A.R. Jambrak, T. Janči, P. Španěl, K. Dryahina, D. Smith,
and T. Rustad. Mass spectrometric quantification of volatile compounds released by
fresh atlantic salmon stored at 4 °c under modified atmosphere packaging and vacuum
packaging for up to 16 days. ACS Food Science & Technology, 2:400–414, 3 2022.
[32] P. Dawson, W. Al-Jeddawi, and N. Remington. Effect of freezing on the shelf life of
salmon. International Journal of Food Science, 2018, 2018.
[33] I.S. Boziaris. Seafood Processing: Technology, Quality and Safety. John Wiley & Sons,
West Sussex, 2014.
[34] F. Toldrá and M. Reig. Seafood. In The Stability and Shelf Life of Food, pages 505–519.
Elsevier, 1 2016.
[35] C.M.D. Man. Food storage trials. In The Stability and Shelf Life of Food, pages 171–198.
Elsevier, 1 2016.
[36] J. Ryder, I. Karunasagar, and L. Ababouch. Assessment and management of seafood
safety and quality: current practices and emerging issues. FAO Fisheries and Aquacul-
ture Technical Paper No. 574, pages 1–432, 2014.
[37] S.K.J. Rasmussen, T. Ross, J. Olley, and T. McMeekin. A process risk model for the
shelf life of Atlantic salmon fillets. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 73(1):47–
60, 2 2002.
[38] P. Dalgaard. Microbiology of marine muscle foods. In Y.H. Hui, editor, Handbook of
Food Science, Technology and Engineering, pages 53–1 – 53–20. Taylor & Francis CRC
Press, 2006.
[39] O. Moreno, A. Gil, L. Atarés, and A. Chiralt. Active starch-gelatin films for shelf-life
extension of marinated salmon. LWT, 84:189–195, 10 2017.
Page VII of XI
==PAGE:71==
Master thesis
References
[40] L. Gram and P. Dalgaard. Fish spoilage bacteria - problems and solutions. Current
Opinion in Biotechnology, 13:262–266, 6 2002.
[41] Y. Xiong, M. Kamboj, S. Ajlouni, and Z. Fang. Incorporation of salmon bone gelatine
with chitosan, gallic acid and clove oil as edible coating for the cold storage of fresh
salmon fillet. Food Control, 125:107994, 7 2021.
[42] B.W.S. Souza, M.A. Cerqueira, H.A. Ruiz, J.T. Martins, A. Casariego, J.A. Teixeira,
and A.A. Vicente. Effect of Chitosan-based coatings on the shelf life of Salmon (Salmo
salar). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 58(21):11456–11462, 11 2010.
[43] Z. Zhu, H. Gao, T. Gao, and D.W. Sun. Quality comparison of grass carp and salmon
fillets packaged in modified atmosphere with different composite films. Journal of Food
Process Engineering, 41(5):e12803, 8 2018.
[44] K.H. Seol, D.G. Lim, A. Jang, C. Jo, and M. Lee. Antimicrobial effect of κ-carrageenan-
based edible film containing ovotransferrin in fresh chicken breast stored at 5 °c. Meat
Science, 83:479–483, 11 2009.
[45] M.G. Volpe, F. Siano, M. Paolucci, A. Sacco, A. Sorrentino, M. Malinconico, and
E. Varricchio.
Active edible coating effectiveness in shelf-life enhancement of trout
(Oncorhynchusmykiss) fillets. LWT - Food Science and Technology, 60(1):615–622, 1
2015.
[46] M.D. Hammond and D.I. Skonberg. Antioxidant Properties of Chitosan Coatings on
Frozen Atlantic Salmon Fillet Portions. Journal of Aquatic Food Product Technology,
21(4):351–361, 7 2012.
[47] U. Erikson and E. Misimi. Atlantic salmon skin and fillet color changes effected by
perimortem handling stress, rigor mortis, and ice storage. Journal of Food Science,
73:C50–C59, 1 2008.
[48] A.S. Dunn and T. Rustad.
Quality of superchilled vacuum packed atlantic salmon
(Salmo salar) fillets stored at -1.4 and -3.6 °c. Food Chemistry, 106:122–131, 1 2008.
[49] I. Undeland.
Oxidative Stability of Seafood.
In M. Hu and C. Jacobsen, editors,
Oxidative Stability and Shelf Life of Foods Containing Oils and Fats, pages 391–460.
Academic Press and AOCS Press, 2016.
[50] G. Skrede and T. Storebakken. Instrumental colour analysis of farmed and wild atlantic
salmon when raw, baked and smoked. Aquaculture, 53:279–286, 5 1986.
[51] G. Secci and G. Parisi. From farm to fork: lipid oxidation in fish products. a review.
Italian Journal of Animal Science, 15:124–136, 1 2016.
[52] C. Jacobsen, P.J. García-Moreno, B. Yesiltas, and A.D.M. Sørensen. Chapter 9 - lipid
oxidation and traditional methods for evaluation. In P.J. García-Moreno, C. Jacobsen,
A.D.M. Sørensen, and Betül Yesiltas, editors, Omega-3 Delivery Systems, pages 183–
200. Academic Press, 2021.
Page VIII of XI
==PAGE:72==
Master thesis
References
[53] M. Hu. Introduction. In M. Hu and C. Jacobsen, editors, Oxidative Stability and Shelf
Life of Foods Containing Oils and Fats, pages xvii–xxxviii. Academic Press and AOCS
Press, 1 2016.
[54] R. Mozuraityte, V. Kristinova, I.B. Standal, A.K. Carvajal, and M. Aursand. Oxidative
stability and shelf life of fish oil. In M. Hu and C. Jacobsen, editors, Oxidative Stability
and Shelf Life of Foods Containing Oils and Fats, pages 209–231. Academic Press and
AOCS Press, 2016.
[55] W. Vyncke. Direct Determination of the Thiobarbituric Acid Value in Trichloracetic
Acid Extracts of Fish as a Measure of Oxidative Rancidity. Fette, Seifen, Anstrichmittel,
72(12):1084–1087, 1 1970.
[56] W. Vyncke. Evaluation of the Direct Thiobarbituric Acid Extraction Method for Deter-
mining Oxidative Rancidity in Mackerel (Scomber scombrus L.). Fette, Seifen, Anstrich-
mittel, 77(6):239–240, 1 1975.
[57] F. Jessen, J. Nielsen, and E. Larsen. Chilling and freezing of fish. In Ioannis S. Boziaris,
editor, Seafood Processing: Technology, Quality and Safety, pages 33–59. John Wiley &
Sons, 2014.
[58] V.M.da Silva, L.A. Silva, J.B.de Andrade, M.C. Veloso, and G.V. Santos. Determination
of moisture content and water activity in algae and fish by thermoanalytical techniques.
Quimica Nova, 31:901–905, 2008.
[59] A.A. Ambardekar. Effects of edible coatings on the moisture content and lipid oxidation
of pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) fillets during three months of frozen storage.
Asian Fisheries Science, 20, 11 2007.
[60] S. Sathivel. Chitosan and protein coatings affect yield, moisture loss, and lipid oxidation
of pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) fillets during frozen storage. Journal of Food
Science, 70:e455–e459, 10 2005.
[61] Y.J. Jeon, J.Y.V.A. Kamil, and F. Shahidi. Chitosan as an edible invisible film for qual-
ity preservation of herring and atlantic cod. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry,
50:5167–5178, 8 2002.
[62] L. Brookmire, P. Mallikarjunan, M. Jahncke, and R. Grisso. Optimum cooking condi-
tions for shrimp and atlantic salmon. Journal of Food Science, 78:S303–S313, 2 2013.
[63] M. Das and T. Chowdhury. Heat sealing property of starch based self-supporting edible
films. Food Packaging and Shelf Life, 9:64–68, 9 2016.
[64] R.R. Buckley and E.J. Giorgianni. CIELAB for Color Image Encoding (CIELAB, 8-
Bit; Domain and Range, Uses). Encyclopedia of Color Science and Technology, pages
213–221, 2016.
Page IX of XI
==PAGE:73==
Master thesis
References
[65] D.H. Brainard. Color Appearance and Color Difference Specification. In The Science
of Color, pages 191–216. Elsevier, 2003.
[66] International Dairy Federation. FIL-IDF 74A Method: Anhydrous Milkfat, Determina-
tion of Peroxide Value. 1991.
[67] E.G. Bligh and W.J. Dyer. A RAPID METHOD OF TOTAL LIPID EXTRACTION
AND PURIFICATION. Canadian Journal of Biochemistry and Physiology, 37(8):911–
917, 8 1959.
[68] W.S. Lim, S.Y. Ock, G.D. Park, I.W. Lee, M.H. Lee, and H.J. Park.
Heat-sealing
property of cassava starch film plasticized with glycerol and sorbitol. Food Packaging
and Shelf Life, 26, 12 2020.
[69] M. Hasan, T.K. Lai, D.A. Gopakumar, M. Jawaid, F.A.T. Owolabi, E.M. Mistar, T. Al-
fatah, N.Z. Noriman, M.K.M. Haafiz, and H.P.S. Abdul Khalil. Micro Crystalline Bam-
boo Cellulose Based Seaweed Biodegradable Composite Films for Sustainable Packaging
Material. Journal of Polymers and the Environment, 27(7):1602–1612, 7 2019.
[70] G. Juck, H. Neetoo, and H. Chen. Application of an active alginate coating to control
the growth of listeria monocytogenes on poached and deli turkey products. International
Journal of Food Microbiology, 142(3):302–308, 2010.
[71] H. Neetoo, M. Ye, and H. Chen. Bioactive alginate coatings to control listeria monocy-
togenes on cold-smoked salmon slices and fillets. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 136(3):326–331, 2010.
[72] N.C. Moroney, A.H. Wan, A. Soler-Vila, R.D. Fitzgerald, M.P. Johnson, and J.P. Kerry.
Inclusion of Palmaria palmata (red seaweed) in Atlantic salmon diets: Effects on the
quality, shelf-life parameters and sensory properties of fresh and cooked salmon fillets.
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 95(5):897–905, 3 2015.
[73] E. Misimi, J.R. Mathiassen, and U. Erikson. Computer vision-based sorting of atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar) fillets according to their color level. Journal of Food Science,
72:S030–S035, 1 2007.
[74] A.Å. Hansen, T. Mørkøre, K. Rudi, E. Olsen, and T. Eie. Quality Changes during
Refrigerated Storage of MA-Packaged Pre-rigor Fillets of Farmed Atlantic Cod (Gadus
morhua L.) Using Traditional MAP, CO2 Emitter, and Vacuum. Journal of Food Sci-
ence, 72(9):M423–M430, 11 2007.
[75] C.R. Sonar, S. Al-Ghamdi, F. Marti, J. Tang, and S.S. Sablani. Performance evaluation
of biobased/biodegradable films for in-package thermal pasteurization. Innovative Food
Science and Emerging Technologies, 66, 12 2020.
[76] A.K. Lundebye, E.-J. Lock, J.D. Rasinger, O.J. Nøstbakken, R. Hannisdal, E. Karls-
bakk, V. Wennevik, A.S. Madhun, L. Madsen, I.E. Graff, and R. Ørnsrud. Lower levels
Page X of XI
==PAGE:74==
Master thesis
References
of persistent organic pollutants, metals and the marine omega 3-fatty acid dha in farmed
compared to wild atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Environmental Research, 155:49–59,
2017.
[77] H.H.F. Refsgaard, P.B. Brockhoff, and B. Jensen. Sensory and chemical changes in
farmed atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) during frozen storage. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, 46:3473–3479, 1998.
[78] G. Choubert, J.M. Blanc, and C. Courvalin. Muscle carotenoid content and colour
of farmed rainbow trout fed astaxanthin or canthaxanthin as affected by cooking and
smoke-curing procedures. International Journal of Food Science & Technology, 27:277–
284, 1992.
[79] L. Rodriguez-Turienzo, A. Cobos, V. Moreno, A. Caride, J.M. Vieites, and O. Diaz.
Whey protein-based coatings on frozen atlantic salmon (Salmo salar): Influence of the
plasticiser and the moment of coating on quality preservation. Food Chemistry, 128:187–
194, 9 2011.
Page XI of XI
