==PAGE:1==
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
Master thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
Master thesis
September, 2022
By
Kenny Falkær Olsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by: DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Asmussens
Alle, Building 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the Cognitive Systems section of the De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kenny Falkær Olsen - s164396
Signature
2nd of September 2022
Date
ii
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Machine learning models that can model the structure and content of music audio are desir-
able for large-scale music understanding, recommendation, categorization and composition.
In practice, long audio tracks are difficult to model because the time component of audio wave-
forms often spans hundreds of thousands of time steps for only a few minutes of audio at com-
monsamplingrates,andmanymusicalcharacteristicsareexhibitedatverydifferenttimescales.
Modern deep learning methods can scale to very high dimensionality, but popular sequence
modelling architectures struggle to learn long-range dependencies, and the more recent Trans-
former model scales poorly in memory and compute with the sequence length.
This work proposes to decompose the task of music generation into representation learning
and sequence modelling parts. A model is trained to map audio to and from a rich latent repre-
sentation, while a sequence model is trained on top of the latent representation to model audio
implicitly in the latent domain.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Morten Mørup for his time, help and advice throughout my
studies.
Iwouldalso liketo thank my friends and familyfortheirsupport andconsiderationduringthese
months, and the people from La Vida Pizza for always being there for me when I needed them
most.
iv
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminaries
3
2.1
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Backpropagation and gradient descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Gradient descent optimizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Design
5
4
Generative representation learning
7
4.1
Variational autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
Snake activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Weight initialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
Perceptual loss functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Sequence modelling with transformers
17
5.1
Dot-product attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
The transformer architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
Attention variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Fused attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.5
RQ-Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Experiments
23
6.1
MAESTRO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Free Music Archive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.4
VQ-VAE training setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.5
RQ-Transformer training setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Discussion
31
8
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Music is a uniquely human phenomenon, evoking emotion in humans from across all known
cultures (Peretz 2006). The diversity and sometimes stunning complexity of music continues to
fascinate, and instruments, song and styles continue to evolve. In recent years there has been
muchdevelopment in using machinelearningforthegenerationofimages(Creswelletal.2018;
Karras et al. 2021), and historically in the generation of symbolic music (Hiller Jr and Isaacson
1957; Moorer 1972; Simon and Oore 2017; Huang et al. 2018; Oore et al. 2020), but works aiming
to generate music in the waveform domain remain few (Dhariwal et al. 2020; Dieleman, Oord,
and Simonyan 2018).
Digital audio is commonly represented by pulse-code modulation (PCM), sampling the ampli-
tude of the analog waveform at regularly spaced interval and quantizing each sample to the
nearest binary-representable value. Quality is consequently limited by the resolution of each
sample (bits-per-sample), and the number of samples per second (sampling rate). For instance,
awell-knownformatistheCD-DAstandardusedforcompactdisc(CD)digitalaudio, wheresam-
ples are represented by signed 16-bit floating point numbers, with 44 100 (44.1 kHz) samples
per second.
Datasets for machine learning involving audio (in applications such as speech, sound event de-
tection, and music information retrieval) typically consist of audio sampled at 16 or 22.05 kHz
with 16-bit floating point numbers to represent each sample (Panayotov et al. 2015; Kong,
J. Kim, and Bae 2020; Dhariwal et al. 2020). At such sampling rates, a 4-minute long audio
track has 3 840 000 samples, which dimensionality-wise is roughly equivalent to a 2000 × 2000
greyscale image.
The extremely long-range dependencies between audio timesteps makes modelling raw audio
highly computationally challenging. Furthermore, dependencies exist at very different time-
scales in musical audio, spanning acoustic features on the scale of milliseconds to high-level
motifs separated by several minutes.
A natural choice for modelling audio is using a recurrent neural network (RNN), such as the
long short-term memory (LSTM) network, and this has seen some application in music gener-
ation (Oore et al. 2020; Vasquez and Lewis 2019) where each audio timestep is predicted from
a state conditioned on all prior timesteps. However, recurrent neural networks are inherently
constrained in their ability to model extremely long-range dependencies because all past de-
pendencies must be compressed into the hidden state, which forces an increasingly greater
amount of information into a single vector, and past information must be persisted for poten-
tially millions of timesteps. In practise Oore et al. (2020) find that an LSTM network is unable to
learn dependencies spanning more than a few thousand timesteps on symbolic music data.
Convolutional neural networks have revolutionized deep learning based computer vision by
greatlyimprovingparameterefficiencyoverfully-connectednetworks. Thisisachievedbylearn-
ing filters that connect inputs in only a small local receptive field, exploiting the property of
nearby pixels having high mutual information content and allowing parameter reuse by learn-
ing globally applicable filters. The convolutional block has since also found use in audio mod-
elling, wherever globally learned filters exploiting locality of samples are applicable (Dhariwal
et al. 2020; Luo and Mesgarani 2019).
TheTransformerisasequencemodelwhichdirectlyconnectselementsintheinputsequenceto
output elements through the attention operator (Tay et al. 2020), sidestepping the hidden state
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
1
==PAGE:10==
compression issue of recurrent models. The Transformer model has originally been applied to
natural language processing, but has since been adapted to other domains such as computer
vision(Dosovitskiyetal.2020), speechrecognition(Gulatietal.2020), andalsotobothsymbolic
and waveform music generation (Huang et al. 2018; Dhariwal et al. 2020).
Thechoiceofwhichdomaintoperformmusicgenerationinisalsoimportant. Somepriorworks
generate music in MIDI-format (Huang et al. 2018; Oore et al. 2020) where music is expressed in
terms of notes played by a set of instruments. As MIDI is a symbolic representation, it is inca-
pable of representing many real-world musical characteristics. A common representation used
in the music information retrieval (MIR) community is the spectrogram (Choi et al. 2017) which
takes the squared magnitude of a short-time Fourier transform (STFT) on short (often overlap-
ping) segments of waveform audio and then concatenates the resulting frequency components
along the time axis. Compared to raw waveform audio, this representation has the advantage
of reducing the time dimension and separating overlapping signals into constituent frequency
components, potentially simplifying the learning task.
Using spectrograms means discarding phase information given by the STFT, without which the
spectrogram cannot be inverted exactly. Discriminative MIR tasks such as classification, tag-
ging or clustering typically do not suffer from loss of phase information (Choi et al. 2017), but it
makes inverting the spectrogram back to audio domain difficult, as the phase information first
has to be (approximately) inferred from the spectrogram. Prior work modelling music in fre-
quency domain is MelNet (Vasquez and Lewis 2019), where very high resolution spectrograms
(in both frequency and time) are used such that approximate inversion algorithms are suffi-
cient.
It has also been shown that learning a parametric alternative to the spectrogram using a one-
dimensional convolutional encoder-decoder scheme as an alternative time-frequency repre-
sentationcanbebeneficialintaskssuchasspeechseparation(LuoandMesgarani2019; Kadıoğlu
et al. 2020) and music tagging (Pons, Nieto, et al. 2017). For music generation this alternative
also has the added benefit that the “time-frequency” representation can be returned to wave-
form domain directly by the decoder.
Priorworkalsoexistsgeneratingmusicintherawaudiowaveformdomain, suchasinDieleman,
Oord, and Simonyan (2018) where audio is modelled at progressively higher tiers of compres-
sion by autoencoders. In each tier, the audio sequence is encoded into a lower-resolution se-
quence that is subsequently reconstructed by a causal convolutional decoder. Similarly, Juke-
box (Dhariwal et al. 2020) also models audio at various tiers of resolution using autoencoders,
but uses a sparse Transformer variant with causal attention in both the encoder and decoder
to improve long-range modelling.
Recently much work has gone towards improving the computational efficiency of the Trans-
former architecture by introducing attention variants that have linear memory use in terms of
the sequence length, such as in Choromanskietal. (2020), Cao (2021), and Hua et al. (2022). Lin-
ear attention has been shown to work well for speech separation with a learned time-frequency
representation in Koizumi et al. (2021).
A recent development in the adjacent field of speech synthesis has been the use of generative
adversarial networks with multi-scale discriminators (Kong, J. Kim, and Bae 2020; You et al.
2021), where multiple discriminators operate at increasingly greater time-scales of the gener-
ated waveform to ensure that the generated waveform is natural-sounding at all time-scales.
This addition has been shown to greatly improve the fidelity of the generated speech, and could
be adapted directly to music generation.
2
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:11==
2
Preliminaries
2.1
Deep learning
Deep learning is the practice of composing many neural networks in a deep, many-layer ar-
rangement and using gradient-based optimization to approximate unknown functions of inter-
est based on observations of those functions.
Classical neural network components include the linear layer (also called multi-layer percep-
tron) with vector inputs x and outputs y,
y = Wx + b,
(2.1)
where W is a weight matrix and b is a bias vector. The magic of deep learning lies in apply
non-linear functions after linear layers, as this allows them to become universal approxima-
tors (Leshno et al. 1993). While technically any non-linear function is sufficient for the universal
approximatorproperty, itisapurelytheoreticalpropertyandinpracticesomefunctionssuchas
the ReLU (Nair and Hinton 2010) and ELU (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015) functions,
ReLU(x) = max(0, x),
(2.2)
ELU(x) =
(
x,
if
x > 0
ex −1,
otherwise ,
(2.3)
have been shown to work well with neural networks empirically. Another operation which is
often used in deep learning is the convolution where a small set of weights Wk called the kernel
are multiplied element-wise with a patch of the input to produce a single output value. This
operation is then applied over all possible patches in the input to produce an output map.
2.2
Backpropagation and gradient descent
Suppose we now want to find suitable parameters for a deep neural network that minimize
some loss function φ. We can do this by differentiating the loss function with respect to each of
the weights, and move in the direction of the negative gradient, called gradient descent. When
gradient descent is performed using a subset (mini-batch) of the data, it is called stochastic
gradient descent (SGD).
The backpropagation algorithm (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986) is used to compute the
gradients of the loss function φ with respect to each parameter in the neural network. Consider
a neural network with L layers and intermediate values at each node in the network {xl}L
l=1,
then the algorithm works by recursively applying the chain rule to find derivatives of the loss
function φ,
∂φ
∂xL−1
= ∂φ
∂xL
∂xL
∂xL−1
(2.4)
∂φ
∂xL−2
=
∂φ
∂xL−1
∂xL−1
∂xL−2
(2.5)
. . .
∂φ
∂x1
= ∂φ
∂x2
∂x2
∂x1
.
(2.6)
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
3
==PAGE:12==
The backpropagation algorithm decomposes the problem of differentiating the complicated
neural network into only needing to know the gradients of the mappings between each layer,
and keeping track of the gradient of the loss with respect to the subsequent layer. However,
in order to evaluate the inter-layer gradients, it is necessary to know the function value at that
point. For this reason in order to compute the gradients of the loss it is necessary to first com-
pute the intermediate values of input data throughout the neural network, and then propagate
the gradient backwards from the loss function while evaluating the gradients using the stored
intermediate values.
2.3
Gradient descent optimizers
Once the gradients are computed it is necessary to decide how far one should move the weights
in the negative direction of the gradient. Too little, and convergence is slow, too much and the
learning process becomes unstable.
A simple extension of SGD is to use momentum (Sutskever et al. 2013), where a moving average
of the gradient is stored and updated using the gradient at each optimization step. A further
extension of SGD with momentum is the Adam (Diederik P Kingma and J. Ba 2014) optimizer, in
which a moving average of the second order momentum is used to better inform the learning
rate varying. Despite this, some work has shown that neural networks trained using SGD with
momentum can often generalize better than if trained with Adam (Wilson et al. 2017).
4
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:13==
3
Design
In order to generate music with long-range structure using neural networks trained via back-
propagation we will have to train on music of the same length (so that the model can observe
the desired structure), and the model will have to process several music clips at once to get a
good enough estimate of the loss gradient.
In practice, this is costly both computationally and memory-wise when implemented on mod-
ern accelerators, as the use of backpropagation mandates that activations be stored in the for-
ward pass for use in the backward pass, causing the memory complexity of the forward pass to
become proportional to the amount of internal activations, which in turn is proportional to the
length of the sequence.
To overcome this limitation, this work proposes to split the modelling of the audio into two
models — the former models the short, sub-second dynamics of the audio and the latter is
trained on top of the latent representations learned by the former to autoregressively gener-
ate novel representations which may be inverted back into audio by the former model. The
design of these components is given in chapters 4 and 5. Chapter 6 deals with the evaluation of
the proposed models on large music datasets.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:15==
4
Generative representation learning
This section describes the design of an encoder-decoder network for learning to jointly extract
low-level audio features and reconstruct high-fidelity waveform in an end-to-end manner. The
task to be solved by this network is the approximate reconstruction of the input,
x ≈dec(enc(x))
wherexistheinputdata,inthiscaseawaveformoflengthN,x ∈RN. Asimplesetupistohave
the encoder compress the input into a much lower dimensionality, and to have the decoder
project the low dimensional latent variables from the encoder back into the high-dimensional
input space. When the encoder and decoder are parameterized by deep neural networks, this
setup is called an autoencoder, and is trained using gradient descent under some suitable mea-
sure of similarity between the input and the approximate reconstruction from the decoder.
4.1
Variational autoencoders
Many improvements have been proprosed to the basic autoencoder setup to improve recon-
struction and induce favorable properties in the latent variables. These include denoising au-
toencoders, in which noise is injected into the input to incentivize the model to extract latent
variables that are invariant to the chosen noise, and variational autoencoders where a para-
metric distribution is assumed on the latent variables (Diederik P Kingma and Welling 2013),
which has the advantages of preventing the autoencoder from learning a simple identity map-
ping, and putting a bound on the amount of information the autoencoder can pass through the
latent variables.
In the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework the autoencoder is recast in a Bayesian setting,
where the conditional distributions p(z | x) and p(x | z) model the underlying relationship be-
tween the input data x and the latent variables z. To perform inference over this model, it is
necessary to compute p(z | x),
p(z | x) = p(x | z) p(z)
p (x)
=
p(x | z) p(z)
R
p (x | z) p (z) dz .
(4.1)
The integral in the denominator of the expression for p(z | x) is unfortunately intractable, and
to overcome it variational inference (Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017) is used, in which an
approximate distribution q(z | x) is optimized to substitute p(z | x) under a chosen measure of
similarity between the distributions. In practice a common choice for a measure of similarity
between q and p is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017).
Tolearntheparametersofavariationalautoencoder,weparameterizethedistributionspθ(x | z)
and qφ(z | x) by neural networks with parameters φ, θ and optimize over these to minimize the
KL-divergence between qφ(z | x) and pθ(x | z),
DKL(qφ(z | x) ∥pθ(x | z)) = Eq[ln qφ(z | x) −ln pθ(x | z)]
(4.2)
= Eq[ln qφ(z | x)] −Eq[ln pθ(x, z)] + ln p(x) .
(4.3)
SeeingastheKL-divergenceisa non-negativequantity, andthelog-evidenceln p(x)isconstant
with respect to θ, minimizing the KL-divergence is equivalent to maximizing the quantity
L = Eq[ln pθ(x, z)] −Eq[ln qφ(z | x)] ,
(4.4)
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
7
==PAGE:16==
where L is called the ELBO, short for evidence lower bound. We can further manipulate this
quantity and obtain,
L = Eq[ln pθ(x | z)] + Eq[ln p(z)] −Eq[ln qφ(z | x)]
(4.5)
= Eq[ln pθ(x | z)] −Eq[ln qφ(z | x) −ln p(z)]
(4.6)
= Eq[ln pθ(x | z)] −DKL(qφ(z | x) ∥p(z)) .
(4.7)
The choice of how to parameterize qφ(z | x) and p(z) has a strong impact on the reconstruc-
tion quality as well as the learning dynamics. For instance, the original formulation of the VAE
imposes an isotropic Gaussian prior over p(z), and a diagonalized Gaussian for the variational
posterior qφ(z | x) such that
p(z) = N(0, I)
(4.8)
qφ(z | x) = N(µ, diag σ)
(4.9)
µ, σ = enc(x).
(4.10)
This is an attractive choice because the KL-term in the ELBO then has a closed form solution.
Thefinalremainingpieceisthereparameterizationtrickusedtoestimatethegradient∇φELBO
where the expectations with respect to q are estimated by averaging over samples z = µ+σ◦ϵ
where ϵ ∼N(0, I), which can be used to construct an unbiased estimator of the gradient.
Using a Gaussian prior has several drawbacksin practice (J.He et al. 2019). These include blurry
reconstruction caused by the Gaussian sampling process, as well as posterior collapse in which
a sufficiently powerful decoder network opts to ignore the latent variables.
4.1.1
Vector quantized VAE (VQ-VAE)
To alleviate some of the drawbacks of the Gaussian VAE, the vector-quantized VAE (VQ-VAE)
was introduced in Van Den Oord, Vinyals, et al. (2017). In this setup the latent variables (also
called latent codes) z are discrete samples from a K-way categorical distribution where the
prior distribution p(z) is assumed to be uniform, while the posterior variational distribution is
defined as
qφ(z = k | x) =
(
1
for
k = arg minj ∥enc(x) −ej∥2
0
otherwise
,
(4.11)
where {ei}K
i=0 is a collection of embedding vectors of the same dimensionality as the output
of the encoder network, called the codebook. During the forward pass the embedding vector
ez corresponding to qφ(z | x) = 1 in eq. (4.11) is passed to the decoder, and we say that enc(x)
was quantized to ez.
We see immediately that the KL-term in the ELBO is constant,
DKL(qφ(z | x) ∥p(z)) = Eq[ln qφ(z | x)]
|
{z
}
ln 1=0
−Eq[ln p(z)]
|
{z
}
−ln K
= ln K,
(4.12)
andsoallweneedtooptimizetheELBOistobackpropagatethroughtheexpectedlog-likelihood
Eq[ln pθ(x | z)],butthedicretebottleneckineq.(4.11)isnotdifferentiable,andunliketheGaus-
sian VAE we cannot use a reparameterization trick. Instead the gradient ∇enc(x)L is replaced by
the gradient coming from the decoder during backpropagation, ∇ezL. This gradient estimator
is called the straight-through estimator (Van Den Oord, Vinyals, et al. 2017), as the the gradient
is allowed “straight-through” the non-differentiable quantization bottleneck.
We now have everything required to optimize the network parameters φ, θ, but we have no way
of passing gradients to the codebook vectors {ei}K
i=0. One way to learn the codebook vectors
8
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:17==
is to introduce an additional quantization loss term ∥sg[enc(x)] −ez∥2
2 where sg[·] is the stop-
gradient operator, such that the argument of the operator is treated as a constant during dif-
ferentiation. This loss term pushes the codebook vector ez towards the encoder output enc(x)
that was quantized to it.
Lastly an additional commitment loss ∥sg[ez] −enc(x)∥2
2 is added to encourage the encoder
to output embeddings close to the codebook vector it is quantized to.
An alternative method for learning the codebook vectors instead of the quantization loss is to
use exponential moving averages (EMA), where for every gradient descent mini-batch at time t
the codebook vectors are computed as
ez = m(t)
z
n(t)
z
,
(4.13)
and the moving averages m(t)
z
and n(t)
z
are updated using the total number of embeddings
quantized to ez at time t, n(t)
z , and the mean of the vectors assigned to ez, m(t)
z , as
N(t)
z
←N(t−1)
z
γ + n(t)
z (1 −γ),
(4.14)
m(t)
z
←m(t)
z γ + m(t)
z (1 −γ),
(4.15)
with γ ∈[0, 1]. This method is is typically preferred in practice (Razavi, Van den Oord, and
Vinyals 2019; Zeghidour et al. 2021; D. Lee et al. 2022), as it is more stable. EMA is used through-
out this work with γ = 0.99.
The VQ-VAE has several compelling advantages over the Gaussian VAE. For one, it is fully de-
terministic and so does not introduce any noise into the reconstructions, and secondly it has
been empirically observed to be free from the posterior collapse phenomenon (Van Den Oord,
Vinyals, et al. 2017; Razavi, Van den Oord, and Vinyals 2019; Dhariwal et al. 2020).
Another property of VQ-VAE is that it is easy to quantify how much information the discrete la-
tent variables can convey as, for a codebook of size K, the information contained in any one
latent variable is at most log2 K bits. This reveals a potential weakness of the VQ-VAE, as in-
creasing the information of a latent variable by one bit requires doubling the codebook size.
Since the purpose of the autoencoder is to compress audio, it is natural to consider the bitrate
of the compressed audio to get a sense of how large a codebook would be needed to encode
audio at a target bitrate. Taking an example bitrate of 4 kbps (kilobytes per second) and 50
embeddings per second (80 bits per embedding) would require a codebook of size
K = 280 = 1208925819614629174706176,
which is intractable as an example of 256-dimensional codebook vectors stored as 32-bit float-
ing points numbers would consume about 1237 yottabytes (1024 bytes) of memory.
4.1.2
Residual quantization
In order to increase the bitrate of the VQ-VAE without an exploding codebook size we might
instead consider using several quantizers with separate codebooks to quantize each encoder
output. This drastically increases the bitrate as each codebook of size K offers log2 K bits inde-
pendently of the other codebooks, such that using 8 codebooks with K = 210 would yield the
desired 80 bits in the previous example, using only 8 × 210 = 8192 codebook vectors in total.
There are several ways to use many codebooks to quantize a single input. Let y = enc(x),
{Qi}Nq
i=0 be a set of Nq quantizers with separate codebooks of size K, and qi = Qi(y) be the
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
9
==PAGE:18==
output of each quantizer. Then one way to combine the outputs of the quantizers into a single
quantized vector would be to sum them such that by = PNq
i
qi is the final quantized vector
output, but since we are interested in training an autoregressive model on top of the latent
representations later it would be beneficial to introduce some sort of natural ordering of the
quantization process.
One such choice is to use residual vector quantization, first used in SoundStream (Zeghidour
et al. 2021), a neural audio codec. Residual quantization imposes an ordering on the set of
quantizers such that Q1 first quantizes y to q1 = Q1(y) with a residual r1 = y −q1. The
next quantizer, Q2 then quantizes the residual r1 to q2 = Q2(r1) with a new residual r2 =
r1 −q2, and so on. The final quantized vector is then by = PNq
i=1 qi. The procedure is shown in
algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Residual vector quantization
Input: encoder output y = enc(x), quantizers {Qi}Nq
i=1
Output: quantized output by
1: by ←0
2: r ←y
3: for i = 1 : Nq do
4:
by ←by + Qi(r)
5:
r ←r −Qi(r)
6: end for
7: return by
Bysuccessivelyquantizingresidualsweinduceamost-to-leastimportanceorderingofthequan-
tizers {Qi}Nq
i=1, which can later be used to autoregressively generate crude, low-fidelity samples
using the initial quantizers, and then successively filling in details by generating samples from
the later quantizers in the ordering.
4.2
Model architecture
The encoder and decoder networks are based on Streaming SEANet (Li et al. 2021) and Sound-
Stream (Zeghidour et al. 2021). Both networks are fully convolutional and include 4 down (up)
sampling layers in the encoder (decoder), respectively. The core building block of both net-
works is a residual block as originally used in ResNet (K. He et al. 2016) of which there are 3 per
down (up) sampling layer, which is implemented with strided (transposed) convolutions. Ac-
tivation functions are applied after every convolution except the last in both the encoder and
decoder. We experiment with ELU (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015) and Snake (Ziyin,
Hartwig, and Ueda 2020) activation functions in both encoder and decoder.
Figure 4.1: Dilated convolution
All convolutions except for the down (up) sampling layers are dilated, where instead of applying
the convolution kernel to contiguous inputs, the kernel is multiplied with inputs sampled at a
regular interval d, the dilation rate. See fig. 4.1 for an illustration. This allows the receptive field
of the networks to become much wider without drastically increasing the depth of the network,
which allows the networks to learn longer range dependencies in the data. Varying the dilation
rate across layers in the network also allows the network to discover dependencies at multiple
time-scales. The encoder and decoder networks are illustrated in fig. 4.2.
10
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:19==
DownBlock(16C, 8)
DownBlock(8C, 5)
DownBlock(4C, 4)
DownBlock(2C, 2)
Conv1D(k=7, c=C)
Conv1D(k=3, c=D)
Waveform (16 kHz)
Embeddings (50 Hz)
UpBlock(C, 2)
UpBlock(2C, 4)
UpBlock(4C, 5)
UpBlock(8C, 8)
Conv1D(k=7, c=16C)
Conv1D(k=7, c=1)
Embeddings (50 Hz)
Waveform (16 kHz)
Decoder(C)
Encoder(C)
Conv1D(k=2S, c=C, s=S)
ResidualUnit(C/2, 9)
ResidualUnit(C/2, 3)
ResidualUnit(C/2, 1)
DownBlock(C, S)
Conv1D(k=7, c=C, d=D)
Conv1D(k=1, c=C)
ResidualUnit(C, D)
ResidualUnit(C/2, 9)
ResidualUnit(C/2, 3)
ResidualUnit(C/2, 1)
Conv1D⊤(k=2S, c=C, s=S)
UpBlock(C, S)
Figure 4.2: The encoder and decoder networks where Conv1D(k, c, s, d) is a convolution with c
channels, kernel size k, stride s and dilation rate d and Conv1D⊤is a transposed convolution.
The encoder takes audio at 16 kHz and produces 50 embeddings per second.
4.2.1
Up- and downsampling
Strided convolutions and transposed convolutions are a straight-forward choice for up- and
downsamplingoperators,butmanyotheralternativesexists. Forupsampling,nearest-neighbor
or bilinear upsampling may be used, as well as PixelShuffle (Shi et al. 2016) where regular con-
volution is applied and feature maps from different channels are interleaved to produce an
upsampled feature map. For downsampling, max- or average-pooling (Gholamalinezhad and
Khosravi 2020) may be used, as well as the inverse of the PixelShuffle operator.
Infact, itiswell-publishedthatconvolutionalup-anddownsamplingintroducesundesiredarti-
facts, such as checkerboard artifacts (Odena, Dumoulin, and Olah 2016) which can blur details
in upsampled data, and aliasing (Karras et al. 2021), where high- and low-frequency compo-
nents of the signal become indistinguishable. These artifacts have been observed to occur in
both the image domain (Karras et al. 2021; Shi et al. 2016) and in the audio domain (Pons, Pas-
cual, et al. 2021; S.-g. Lee et al. 2022).
Another option is to use audio-specific methods for up- and downsampling such as pseudo-
quadraturemirrorfilters(PQMF)whereaudiocanbedecomposedintosubsampledband-limited
waveforms in such a manner that they can be near-perfectly reconstructed by the mirror filter,
with aliasing guaranteed to only occur for audio at less than −100 dB (J. O. Smith 2011). This
type of filter has been used for discriminative tasks in speech synthesis in Bak et al. (2022) and
Yamamoto, E. Song, and J.-M. Kim (2020).
Experimentallywefindthatallthetestedup-anddownsamplingoperatorseitherperformworse
than convolution or cause the loss to diverge when used in the encoder-decoder network, see
section 6.4.1.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
11
==PAGE:20==
4.3
Snake activation
The Snake activation function (Ziyin, Hartwig, and Ueda 2020) is defined as
Snake(x) = x + 1
α sin2(αx),
(4.16)
where α ∈R is a per-channel learnable parameter. Snake has been proposed as a way to pro-
vide an inductive bias for learning periodic functions by superimposing a sine-like wave with
learnable frequency α onto the input signal. Tthe sine component is squared to make the acti-
vation a monotonic function of x, such that optimization with respect to x is not subject to the
infinitely many local minimas of the sine function. The function is graphed in Figure 4.3.
−10
0
10
−10
−5
0
5
10
alpha=0.5
−10
0
10
alpha=1
−10
0
10
alpha=2
Figure 4.3: The Snake activation function plotted for α ∈{0.5, 1, 2}. The activation function
introduces new frequency components to the input and is monotonically non-decreasing ev-
erywhere.
InZiyin, Hartwig, andUeda(2020)theauthorsshowthatneuralnetworkstrainedontime-series
data with Snake activations are capable of extrapolating beyond regions of data seen during
training in ways that other activation functions such as ReLU, GELU and ELU are not. Snake ac-
tivation has also been used for high-fidelity speech synthesis in BigVGAN (S.-g. Lee et al. 2022)
where a large-scale neural network is trained to invert spectrograms back into audio. The au-
thorsofBigVGANfindthatusingSnakeactivationsimprovesperformanceandmakesthemodel
more robust to synthesizing out-of-distribution audio.
4.3.1
Accelerating Snake
Implementing the Snake function naively in PyTorch is straight-forward, but requires storing
several intermediate activations to compute gradients using reverse-mode automatic differen-
tiation. To avoid storing these intermediate activations we can provide analytic gradients to
PyTorch and compute them directly. Let y = Snake(x; α) be the output of a Snake activation
with frequency parameter α and φ be the final loss function value. Then,
∂φ
∂x = ∂φ
∂y
∂y
∂x ,
∂φ
∂α = ∂φ
∂y
∂y
∂α ,
(4.17)
where ∂φ
∂y is the gradient propagating back from the subsequent layer, so all we need to know
analytically is
∂y
∂x = ∂
∂x

x + 1
α sin2(αx)

= 1 + sin(2αx),
(4.18)
12
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:21==
and
∂y
∂α = ∂
∂α

x + 1
α sin2(αx)

= 1
αx sin(2αx) −1
α
1
α sin2(αx)
|
{z
}
y−x
= 1
αx sin(2αx) −1
αy + 1
αx
= 1
αx
 1 + sin(2αx)

−1
αy
= 1
α

x∂y
∂x −y

.
(4.19)
Using these analytic gradients memory consumption on the forward pass is reduced by 3x as
only the inputs and outputs of the function need to be saved for the backward pass.
There is also significant opportunity for optimizing the running time of the Snake function.
When implemented directly in PyTorch each elementary operation in the Snake function such
as multiplication, evaluating the sine function, squaring and summing involves reading mem-
ory from DRAM, performing the operation and writing the memory back. On modern parallel
processors such as GPUs, moving memory between compute cores and DRAM often dominates
the running time of algorithms (Hager and Wellein 2010).
To get a speed-of-light estimate of what sort of performance is possible for Snake we can profile
the running time of the forward and backward passes of activation functions with similarly ex-
pensiveoperations(evaluatingtranscendentalfunctions)suchasELUandGELU,seefig.4.4. We
see that ELU and GELU outperform the naive PyTorch baseline implementation of Snake sub-
stantially, completing about 550% faster on the forward pass, and 600% faster on the backward
pass.
Since the activation functions are applied after every convolution in the encoder-decoder net-
works, the computational overhead of using the baseline Snake implementation is substantial,
reducing the overall running time of the network by over 3x. To overcome this performance
bottleneck, we can use the GPU compiler Triton (Tillet, Kung, and Cox 2019) to implement
high-performance fused forward and backward kernels for the Snake function where memory
is loaded from DRAM once, the results computed in a single, fused computation in SRAM close
to the compute cores, and then written back to DRAM in a cache-optimal manner. The final run-
ning time of the fused compute kernel is in line with the ELU and GELU activations, as seen in
fig. 4.4.
4.4
Weight initialization
Following(K.Heetal.2015)weuseKaiminginitializationtoinitializenetworkweights,andFixup
initialization (H. Zhang, Dauphin, and Ma 2019) to properly initialize residual connections. The
primary insight from Kaiming initialization is that in deep neural networks the gradient of each
layer should have variance as close to 1 as possible, to avoid gradient explosion and vanishing.
At initialization, weights are set such that the post-activation values have variance as close to 1
as possible to better condition the gradient towards neither exploding nor vanishing.
Fixup initialization concerns the residual connections in deep residual neural networks. The
mainobservationisthattheresidualbranchintroducesadditionalvarianceintothepost-activation
values at every layer. The solution proposed in (H. Zhang, Dauphin, and Ma 2019) is to initialize
the weights of the residual branch to zero such that the variance introduced at initialization is
also zero.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
13
==PAGE:22==
GELU
ELU
Snake (T
riton)
Snake (Baseline)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time (ms)
3.75
3.75
3.97
20.3
9.7
10.2
11.6
61.8
Forward
Backward
Figure 4.4: Timing comparison between ELU, GELU and Snake on a 50 × 48 × 80 000 array of
32-bit floating point numbers on an NVIDIA V100 GPU. The final running time of Snake is in line
with ELU and GELU.
4.5
Perceptual loss functions
Training the network still requires a reconstruction loss to minimize. One simple choice would
be to optimize the element-wise difference between the input x and the reconstructed wave-
form bx under some norm,
Lrec = ∥x −bx∥p,
(4.20)
but this loss function is problematic due to its extreme sensitivity to imperceptible translations
ofthewaveformanddoesnotaccountforhumanperceptionsofsound. Another, morepractical
option, which is often used in text-to-speech and vocoder networks (You et al. 2021; Kong, J.
Kim, and Bae 2020; Yamamoto, E. Song, and J.-M. Kim 2020) is to take the norm of the difference
between spectrograms of the waveforms (typically the norm is p = {1, 2}),
Lrec =
 |STFT(x)|2 −|STFT(bx)|2 
p,
(4.21)
or the log-spectrograms,
Lrec =
 log|STFT(x)|2 −log|STFT(bx)|2 
p,
(4.22)
where STFT is the short-time Fourier transform, and the squared STFT is the spectrogram. Ex-
tensions of this include mapping the spectrograms onto the mel scale (Yamamoto, E. Song, and
J.-M. Kim 2020; Kong, J. Kim, and Bae 2020) which is a re-weighing of the frequency bins of the
spectrogram according to human perception of sound in various frequency ranges.
However the parameters of the STFT such as the choice of window and hop size influence the
lossfunction—usingalargerwindowmightmissshortchangesinthewaveform(akindofspec-
tral oversmoothing), and a small window is unable to reliably estimate longer-lasting spectral
features of the waveform.
To remedy these issues, a multi-scale spectral loss was introduced in Gritsenko et al. (2020).
With this loss, the authors propose to average over the L1 norm of the difference between spec-
trograms and L2 norm of the difference between log-spectrograms of different window lengths
and hop sizes. Let Ss
t (x) be the t-th frame (vector of frequency bins) of the mel-spectrogram
with window length s and hop-size s/4, and Ts the total number of frames for the STFT with
window length s. Then
Lrec =
X
s∈{26,...,211}
1
Ts
X
t
∥Ss
t (x) −Ss
t (bx)∥1 +
p
s/2 ∥log Ss
t (x) −log Ss
t (bx)∥2,
(4.23)
14
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:23==
is the multi-scale spectral reconstruction loss.
4.5.1
Adversarial losses
To further improve the perceptual quality of the reconstructions adversarial learning is also
used by introducing a discriminator network, which is trained to discriminate between ground
truth waveforms x from reconstructions bx. This discriminator is then used in a generative ad-
versarial network GAN (Creswell et al. 2018) setup where the encoder-decoder networks are
considered a (conditional) generator, which is trained to jointly minimize the reconstruction
loss Lrec and the discriminator loss LD.
There are several kind of GAN objectives that can be used to train generator-discriminator pairs,
including the original setup in which the discriminator D is modelled as a classifer predicting
whether a sample is in the “real” class (1) or “fake” (generated) class (0) and trained on both
real data and samples from the generator network G, which in turn is trained to output samples
that the discriminator classifies as real. Laterimprovementsinclude LS-GAN (Mao et al. 2017), in
which the discriminator now outputs continuous, unbounded values and is trained to minimize
the least-squares objective,
Ladv
D
=
 D(x) −1
2 + D(G(z))2,
(4.24)
Ladv
G
=
 D(G(z)) −1
2,
(4.25)
and the hinge loss used in Geometric GAN (Lim and Ye 2017),
Ladv
D
= max(0, 1 −D(x)) + max(0, 1 + D(G(z))),
(4.26)
Ladv
G
= max(0, 1 −D(G(z))).
(4.27)
In preliminary experiments it was found that the hinge GAN objective was more stable than the
LS-GAN objective, and all subsequent experiments use the hinge objective.
To compute the adversarial losses we use several neural networks. The first is adapted from
the discriminator proposed in MelGAN (Kumar et al. 2019), where the discriminator acts on the
generated and ground truth waveforms by first downsampling it using either max-pooling or a
differentiable PQMF, followed by a stack of 4 grouped convolutions with downsampling factor
4 each. We apply this wave-discriminator at different initial downsampling rates {1, 2, 4}.
Theseconddiscriminator,proposedinZeghidouretal.(2021),discriminatesonacomplexshort-
time Fourier transform of the generated and ground truth waveforms using a stack of 2D con-
volutions which downsample the frequency bins to eventually output a 1D signal.
4.5.2
Feature matching
Adversarial learning is intuitively concerned with learning a good loss function for the genera-
tor when a suitable loss function is difficult to define. A related notion is the use of perceptual
loss (Suvorov et al. 2022) where a network pre-trained on some adjacent task is used to form a
loss function for training a “student” network by taking L1 distance between the internal acti-
vations of generated and ground truth data. In this way a valid reconstruction loss is obtained
that can directly relate generated and target ground truth samples, as in the encoder-decoder
setup.
However, the use of the perceptual loss requires a pre-trained network trained on a suitable
task. An efficient alternative is to reuse the readily available discriminators and form a percep-
tual loss over the internal activations of the discriminators, also called feature matching (Larsen
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
15
==PAGE:24==
et al. 2016; Kumar et al. 2019),
Lfeat = E
 1
L
XD(l)(x) −D(l)(G(x))


,
(4.28)
where D(l)(·) is the internal activations at layer l in the discriminator D and L is the number of
layers in D.
16
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:25==
5
Sequence modelling with transformers
This section describes the design of the causal transformer model used to model audio in the
quantized latent space induced by the vector quantizing VAE described in chapter 4.
5.1
Dot-product attention
The standard scaled dot-product attention operation takes a query vector q ∈RD and a se-
quence of keys K = {ki}N
i=1 and values V = {vi}N
i=1 where ki, vi ∈RD and outputs a vector
o ∈RD, where
o = attention(q, K, V) = softmax(q · K⊤)V =
X
i
vi
esi
P
j esj ,
si = q · ki
√
D
.
(5.1)
Intuitively we can think of the attention operator as a linear combination of the vectors in V,
weighed by the softmax over the dot-products of the keys and query. Typically attention will
be used in conjunction with projection matrices WQ, WK and WV which project vectors into
queries, keys and values, respectively.
When attention is applied to a single sequence X = {xi}N
i=1, xi ∈RD, which is mapped
through the projection matrices to form Q = XWQ, K = XWK and V = XWV and applied
to all queries in Q, the operation is referred to as self-attention, and when the queries are de-
rived from a sequence different from X, the operation is referred to as cross-attention. Another
special case is when each of the vectors in the projected sequences Q, K, and V are split into
smaller chunks, which have the self-attention operator applied to them separately before sum-
ming the results back into a single sequence. In this case the operator is called multi-headed
self-attention (MHSA).
The self-attention operator may be turned into a causal operator by masking out dot-products
qi·kj ifj > isettingsij = −∞suchthatthesoftmaxoutputatposition(i, j)iszero, preventing
a vector in the query sequence from attending to keys and values that carry information from
future parts of the sequence.
5.2
The transformer architecture
The transformer, introduced in Vaswani et al. (2017) for language modelling and since adapted
to many other domains such as speech (Gulati et al. 2020), image (D. Lee et al. 2022) and music
generation (Huang et al. 2018; Dhariwal et al. 2020), involves stacking layers of multi-headed
self-attention and optionally cross-attention with LayerNorm (J. L. Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016)
and feed-forward layers in between eachattention layer. The LayerNorm with input x and scale
and bias parameters γ, β ∈RD is given by,
LN(x) =
x −E[x]
p
var [x] + ϵ
◦γ + β,
(5.2)
where ◦is element-wise multiplication.
In the original transformer formulation, two stacks of many layers of MHSA, LayerNorm and
feed-forward are used, called the encoder and decoder where additionally cross-attention is
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
17
==PAGE:26==
Linear(D, D)
Linear(4D, D)
GELU
Linear(D, 4D)
FeedForward
Dropout(p)
LayerNorm
MHSA
TransformerBlock (pre)
FeedForward
LayerNorm
MHSA
LayerNorm
TransformerBlock (post)
FeedForward
LayerNorm
Figure 5.1: Left: the post-norm transformer block. Middle: the pre-norm transformer block.
right: The feed-forward block consists of linear layers, a GELU activation and a dropout layer
with a dimensionality parameter D.
usedbetweenencoderanddecoder. Manyvariantshavesincebeenproposed, suchasdecoder-
only transformers (Brown et al. 2020; Chowdhery et al. 2022) in which only a single stack is used
with no cross-attention. In this work we focus on the decoder-only transformer.
The transformer can be arranged into blocks of LayerNorm, MHSA and feed-forward layers. The
transformer block itself has also been modified in many subsequent works. In the original for-
mulation there are residual connections around every multi-headed self-attention and feed-
forward layer, and each of these are followed by a LayerNorm layer, in what we refer to as the
post-norm transformer block, see fig. 5.1.
The post-norm transformer is unstable when many layers are used (Q. Wang et al. 2019) re-
quiring learning rate warmup and careful initialization to converge, and may still fail for very
deepnetworks(NguyenandSalazar2019). Amorestableapproachisthepre-normtransformer
block (Nguyen and Salazar 2019; Q. Wang et al. 2019), see fig. 5.1. In this block, a LayerNorm
precedes every MHSA and feed-forward layer, and residual connections bypass both the Layer-
Norm and the MHSA/feed-forward layer.
5.2.1
Positional encodings
The self-attention operator is permutation invariant, which we can easily see by noting that
the operation is applied element-wise to the vectors in Q, and involves taking a sum over the
keys and values where the order of computation does not matter. Since we are interested in
using attention on audio where the relative distance between samples is very important, we
may wish to inject some form of information about the position of the inputs in the sequence
into the attention operator.
One option is to add learned embeddings to the input sequence. This injects information about
the absolute position in the sequence, but relative positional information would have to be
learned for every position pair. Improvements such as sinusoidal position encoding (Vaswani
et al. 2017) proposed in the original transformer formulation still only aim to make it easier to
18
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:27==
learn the pairwise relative position information, but does not explicitly encode it.
Encoding relative positional information directly into the attention matrix QK⊤has been ex-
amined in Shaw, Uszkoreit, and Vaswani (2018) and used in Music Transformer (Huang et al.
2018). Using their relative positional encoding, an embedding is learned for every relative po-
sitional distance between query vectors and key-value vector pairs. The dot-products between
the embeddings and the query vectors are then taken and added to the dot-products between
the queries and keys in the attention operator, introducing a relative positional bias in the
element-wise sum over the query-key dot-products.
More recently development such as rotary positional encoding (Su et al. 2021) injects relative
positional information directly into the queries and keys by geometrically interpreting the vec-
tors as complex and applying rotations to model the relative positional distance. Another de-
velopment is ALiBi (Press, N. A. Smith, and Lewis 2021) where relative positional information
is injected into the attention matrix through a per-head linear bias mh and a relative position
matrix A, such that the matrix going into the softmax operator is
QK⊤+ mhA
(5.3)
whereAij = −|i−j|. This positionalencodinghasbeenshowntooutperformrotaryencoding,
particularly on long-range language modelling tasks (Guo et al. 2021; Alayrac et al. 2022).
5.3
Attention variants
The main issue with the attention operator is the softmax computation in eq. (5.1). The sum
P
j esj cangrowlargeveryrapidlyforsj > 1, andcaneasilyoverflowtoinfinityin32-bitfloating
point arithmetic. To circumvent this the LogSumExp-trick is used,
esi
P
j esj =
esi
P
j esj+m−m =
esi
em P
j esj−m ,
(5.4)
where m is chosen as m = maxj sj. This makes the computation stable, as now all exponents
in the sum are less than or equal to zero, and so each term in the sum is between zero and one.
However, computing the terms in the sum now requires the maximum value m, which is not
known before all query-key dot-products have been computed. The conventional solution is to
store the query-key dot-products in memory until the maximum is found for an O(N) memory
bound per query, and an O(N2) memory bound for self-attention.
Much research has gone into circumventing this problem by approximating or replacing the
softmax operator in eq. (5.1) with other feature maps. Some notable examples are the Lin-
Former (Sinong Wang et al. 2020) where a low-rank factorization of the attention matrix is used
and Performer (Choromanski et al. 2020) in which the attention matrix is approximated using
random features.
A major downside to using attention variants is that it is not generally well-understood how to
apply relative positional encodings such as ALiBi or how to apply causal masking for most at-
tention variants. Furthermore, while the asymptotic memory bounds of the attention variants
(and for some variants also the running time) may be sub-quadratic, many introduce additional
complexity which add significant computational overhead to the operation.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
19
==PAGE:28==
5.4
Fused attention
The stable softmax computation is necessary for standard scaled dot-product attention, but it
is not actually necessary to use the maximum m. Instead, we can rearrange eq. (5.1) to find that
attention(q, K, V) =
P
i vi esi
P
j esj .
(5.5)
This hints at a possible streaming algorithm for computing the attention operator: process the
keys and values in order and compute the sums in both numerator and denominator simulta-
neously, see algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Unstable streaming attention
Input: query q, keys K, values V
Output: attention output o, normalization constant s∗
1: v∗←0
2: s∗←0
3: for i = 1 : N do
4:
v∗←v∗+ viesi
5:
s∗←s∗+ esi
6: end for
7: o ←v∗/s∗
8: return o, s∗
then once all the keys and values have been processed we have v∗= P
i viesi and s∗=
P
j esj. The attention is then computed as attention(q, K, V) = v∗
s∗. However we have now
re-introduced the numerical instability of summing exponentials. To remedy this, we intro-
duce a LogSumExp-like trick again by additionally tracking the streaming maximum m∗, see
algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Stable streaming attention
Input: query q, keys K, values V
Output: attention output o, normalization constant s∗, maximum scaled dot-product m∗
1: v∗←0
2: s∗←0
3: m∗←0
4: for i = 1 : N do
5:
mi ←max(m∗, si)
6:
v∗←v∗emi−m∗+ viesi−mi
7:
s∗←s∗emi−m∗+ esi−mi
8:
m∗←mi
9: end for
10: o ←v∗/s∗
11: return o, s∗, m∗
This is the approach taken in FlashAttention (Dao et al. 2022) and Rabe and Staats (2021). Us-
ing this algorithm the self-attention operator can be computed using only the additional O(N)
memory necessarily to store the streaming normalization constants s∗and maximums m∗. In
practise s∗and m∗are kept in SRAM for high-speed access during the forward pass.
Due to its high compute efficiency and memory efficiency as well as potential for use with rela-
tive positional encodings this work uses FlashAttention to compute the attention operator. The
20
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:29==
FlashAttention
FlashAttention (ALiBi)
PyT
orch
PyT
orch (ALiBi)
0
20
40
60
80
Time (ms)
3.03
2.92
42.9
56.3
9.58
8.95
61.3
72.4
Forward
Backward
Figure 5.2: Timing comparison on a batch of 32 sequences of length 2048 in a multi-headed self-
attention setup with 16 heads each of dimensionality 64 using 16-bit floating point numbers
between the FlashAttention variants and PyTorch baselines on an NVIDIA A100 GPU averaged
over 10000 samples (all estimates with <10µs standard deviation). Curiously, FlashAttention
is consistently ≈4% faster on the forward pass and ≈7% faster on the backward pass with
ALiBi than without, despite the additional computation. Upon inspection, this is due to a quirk
in Triton causing it to emit slightly less efficient assembly instructions for the causal masking
when ALiBi is not used.
forward and backward passes are implemented in Triton for high performance. Due to the flex-
ibility of the Triton implementation, it is easy to fuse relative positional encodings that act on
the attention matrix such as ALiBi directly into the kernel at near-zero additional computational
cost with only minor modifications to the forward and backward passes.
The Triton FlashAttention forward and backward implementations are timed against a conven-
tional PyTorch implementation on example data, see fig. 5.2. During the forward pass the non-
AliBiPyTorchbaselineconsumedmorethan14GBofpeakmemory, andtheALiBiPyTorchbase-
line consumed more than 18 GB, while the FlashAttention implementations only use memory
proportional to the queries.
The FlashAttention implementation is much faster than the conventional implementantion not
only due to the speedup from using Triton to fuse operations into a single kernel, but because
while the asymptotic running time is still O(N2) for self-attention, the operation is strongly
memory bound (Dao et al. 2022) and FlashAttention makes far fewer DRAM accesses.
5.5
RQ-Transformer
Complementing the residual vector quantizer discussed in section 4.1.2 we consider explicitly
modelling the residual relationship between the latent codes from each successive quantizer in
theresidualVQ-VAEwithRQ-Transformer (D.Leeetal.2022). Thisisacheivedusingtwoseparate
causal transformers, the first beingthe timetransformer whichactsona sequenceoffully quan-
tized embeddings {byt}N
t=1 and a start token by0 to produce conditioning embeddings {ct}N
t=1
such that the conditioning embedding ct at time-step t depends on by0:t−1.
The conditioning embeddings are concatenated with the quantized residuals of yt to form se-
quences {ct, qt,1, qt,2, . . . qt,Nq−1} at every time-step t, which are put through the second res-
olution transformer independently at each time-step t. The vector outputs of the resolution
transformer are independently projected with a linear layer to vectors st,r of dimensionality K,
which are treated as unnormalized probability scores (logits) over the latent code at time-step
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
21
==PAGE:30==
t and at resolution r ∈{1, . . . , Nq}.
The RQ-Transformer minimizes the cross-entropy between the target latent codes and the out-
put logits,
L = −
X
t,r
qφ(zt,r | enc(x)) ln qθ(zt,r | z<t,r, zt,<r) ,
(5.6)
where qφ(·) is the variational VQ-VAE posterior and qθ(·) is parameterized by an RQ-Transformer
with parameters θ.
Exposure bias is the tendency for autoregressive models trained with next-step prediction like
the RQ-Transformer to fail to generalize from training to sampling time, due to the models out-
puts being distributed differently from the model inputs (Mihaylova and Martins 2019; Duck-
worthetal.2019). Toremedythisbias, weexperimentwithstochasticallysamplinglatentcodes
according to a categorical distribution as in D. Lee et al. (2022),
q∗
θ(z = k | x) ∝e−∥enc(x)−ek∥2,
(5.7)
instead of the one-hot distribution eq. (4.11) (dubbed soft sampling, as opposed to hard sam-
pling according to eq. (4.11)). This uses the geometric relationship between the codebook vec-
tors and the encoder output to better inform the RQ-Transformer about the geometry of the
RQ-VAE latent space. We also experiment with using this distribution as the target in eq. (5.6),
where the targets then become a full probability distribution instead of a one-hot vector (soft
target vs hard target).
Lastly, we also experiment with scheduled sampling (Mihaylova and Martins 2019; Duckworth
et al. 2019), where an additional forward pass is performed to sample the next-step predictions
which are then used as the inputs of a full forward-backward pass. The purpose of this setup is
to reduce the discrepancy between model inputs and outputs for better performance at sam-
pling time.
22
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:31==
6
Experiments
Thissectiondescribes thetrainingofboththeencoder-decodernetworkfromchapter4andthe
RQ-Transformer described in chapter 5, as well as evaluations of the models on the MAESTRO
and FMA datasets.
6.1
MAESTRO
The MAESTRO dataset (Hawthorne, Stasyuk, et al. 2019) consists of 1184 public domain classical
music performance spanning 172.3 hours of recording with both MIDI notes and raw waveform
at 44.1 kHz. available. The individual music tracks are long, typically ranging around 3 to 10
minutes of recording. Official train/test/validation splits are available, which we use.
Thedataispreprocessedbydownsamplingto16kHzandapplyingloudnessnormalization(Stein-
metz and Reiss 2021) to −20 LUFS.
6.2
Free Music Archive
The Free Music Archive (Defferrard et al. 2017) (FMA) consists of 106 574 audio tracks spanning
161 genres coming in at just over 343 days of recording sampledd at 44.1 kHz. There are three
official subsets, FMA-Large consisting of 30 second clips from all of the 106 574 tracks, FMA-
Medium consisting of 30 second clips from a 25 000 track subset from 16 genres and FMA-Small
with 30 second clips from 8 000 tracks spanning 8 genres. This work uses only the FMA-Medium
subset with official train/test/validation splits.
There are several errors in the FMA-Medium subset, such as zero-length tracks, tracks that ap-
pear to have a misspecified sampling rate playing at double speed and some clips at less than
15 seconds long. In this work we resolve the issues by discarding all clips which are less than
15 seconds long. As with the MAESTRO dataset audio is downsampled to 16 kHz and loudness
normalization is applied targeting a −20 LUFS average loudness.
6.3
Evaluation metrics
Objective evaluation of the generated audio samples is difficult, because in the case of the re-
constructions from the encoder-decoder network we do not have any prior about what kind of
distortions the generation process might introduce, which precludes reference-based metrics
such as the signal-to-noise ratio often used in speech and music enhancement works (Koizumi
et al. 2021; Kilgour et al. 2019), and when sampling novel audio from the transformer models
we do not have any reference sample to compare to at all.
In computer vision the Fréchet Inception distance (Heusel et al. 2017) (FID) has been proposed
as a reference-free metric for evaluating the similarity between distributions of images by com-
paring statistics computed over the internal activations of an Inception-V3 (Szegedy et al. 2016)
networkappliedtothoseimages. Specifically, theinternalactivationsofeachimagearetreated
as high-dimensional vectors and clustered using the k-means algorithm, and the mean and co-
variance of each cluster is estimated. The Fréchet distance is then computed between a set
of generated samples and ground truth samples (called the background samples) assuming
a multivariate Gaussian distribution over the cluster means and covariances. This metric has
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
23
==PAGE:32==
been used extensively in the litterature to evaluate the perceptual quality of novel generated
images (Karras et al. 2021; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018).
Analogously,theFréchetaudiodistance(Kilgouretal.2019)(FAD)hasbeenproposedasareference-
free metric for music enhancement algorithms, and shown to align better with human quality
ratings than signal-based metrics such as the signal-to-noise ratio without requiring any refer-
ence pairings. Fréchet audio distance uses a VGGish (Hershey et al. 2017) model trained on a
large dataset of YouTube videos as an audio classifier to match internal activations in place of
the InceptionV3 model in the Fréchet Inception distance. For reference, a baseline 0.2 FAD score
was ported for non-distorted clean audio in (Kilgour et al. 2019).
When reporting FAD scores we sample 1000–5 second audio clips to compute the score and
repeat this process 5 times to get an uncertainty estimate as well. We also report the average
perplexity of the codebooks, where the perplexity is
PP(p) = 2H[p] = 2−P
x p(x) log2 p(x),
(6.1)
and is a measure of how random the codebook distribution is. Since p here is distribution of
latent codes, the measure is maximized at PP(q) = K, corresponding to random quantization
— that is, the higher the perplexity, the higher the codebook usage.
6.4
VQ-VAE training setup
The networks were trained using the multi-scale spectral reconstruction loss and hinge GAN
objective minimizing the joint objectives,
LG = Lrec + λadvLadv
G
+ λfeatLfeat + λcommitLcommit
(6.2)
LD = Ladv
D
(6.3)
where LG is used to update the encoder-decoder networks, LD is used to update the discrim-
inators and {λadv, λfeat, λcommit} are weights balancing the loss terms in LG. The weights are
initially set according to Zeghidour et al. (2021) with λadv = 1, λfeat = 100 and λcommit = 1. In
preliminary testing it was found that changing the weights did not significantly influence train-
ing, except for the feature loss which is magnified to be on the same order of magnitude as the
reconstruction loss.
Four discriminators were used — three wave discriminators and one STFT discriminator as de-
scribed in section 4.5.1 with scaling parameter C = 16 for a total of 4.2 million parameters in
the wave discriminators operating at downsampling rates of {1, 2, 4} with either max-pool or
PQMF downsampling (reported as yes/no to PQMF in table 6.1), and 1.39 million parameters in
the STFT discriminator.
Kaiminginitializationisusedforallweights, andFixUpinitializationforallresidualconnections.
All Snake activations have their per-channel parameter α initialized to 0.5. Weight normaliza-
tion (Salimans and Durk P Kingma 2016) is applied to all convolution kernel weights.
Models are trained on 4 NVIDIA V100 32GB GPUs until convergence (around 2 million iterations)
using the Adam optimizer with β0 = 0.5 and β1 = 0.8 and an exponential learning rate sched-
ule to anneal the learning rate from an initial 10−4 to 10−5. Training takes around one day to
converge.
6.4.1
Results
All model tuning is done on MAESTRO and the best configuration is used on FMA. Replacing the
convolution up-/downsampling layers with PixelShuffle, PQMF, nearest neighbor upsampling
24
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:33==
Parameters
Test
Validation
Activation
C
Nq
K
PQMF
Codebook
Lrec
FAD
Lrec
FAD
Perplexity
ELU
16
8
1024
No
Separate
101.2 ± 2.19
2.1 ± 0.33
93.1 ± 1.95
2.2 ± 0.11
910.2
Snake
16
8
1024
No
Separate
92.4 ± 3.54
1.52 ± 0.24
81.7 ± 1.25
1.61 ± 0.52
980.5
Snake
16
4
16384
No
Separate
88.1 ± 2.52
1.41 ±0.43
75.3 ± 2.45
1.64 ± 0.21
8242.7
Snake
16
4
16384
No
Shared
84.9 ± 1.94
1.35 ± 0.19
71.7 ± 2.01
1.48 ± 0.14
10312.2
Snake
16
8
16384
No
Shared
83.8 ± 1.62
1.1 ± 0.12
65.2 ± 1.55
1.34 ± 0.24
11429.9
Snake
16
8
16384
Yes
Shared
84.5 ± 0.91
0.78 ± 0.35
70.6 ± 2.31
0.85 ± 0.3
11311.5
Snake
64
8
16384
Yes
Shared
80.4 ± 2.42
0.54 ± 0.08
63.5 ± 0.63
0.57 ± 0.09
13478.2
Table 6.1: Results for the MAESTRO dataset reported on test and validation splits for various
configurations of the encoder, decoder and discriminator networks.
Parameters
Test
Validation
MAESTRO pre-trained
Lrec
FAD
Lrec
FAD
Perplexity
No
77.7 ± 1.64
0.64 ± 0.09
76.1 ± 0.43
0.59 ± 0.08
14219.8
Yes
74.1 ± 1.52
0.51 ± 0.07
71 ± 0.56
0.45 ± 0.09
14310.3
Table 6.2: Results for the FMA dataset reported on test and validation splits with/without MAE-
STRO pre-training.
andmaxpoolinglayerswasalsotested,butthisconsistentlydegradedperformancebyatleast2
in FAD score, and in the case of nearest-neighbor upsampling and PQMF downsampling caused
the training loss to diverge. Similar difficulties are documented in S.-g. Lee et al. (2022).
In table 6.1 successive incremental improvements to the residual VQ-VAE on MAESTRO are doc-
umented. We see that using the Snake function has a strong effect on both reconstruction loss
and FAD score, and that scaling up the encoder-decoder networks (final configuration) is ben-
eficial. Interestingly, using PQMF downsampling in the wave discriminators leads to a consid-
erable improvement in FAD score, but worsens reconstruction loss. The final encoder-decoder
networks set the parameter scaling parameter C = 64, which leads to using 19.1 million and
20.2 million parameters in the encoder and decoder, respectively. Reconstructions from the
trained VQ-VAE are seen in fig. 6.1.
When training on FMA we reuse the best configuration on MAESTRO to train a new model, and
also experiment with reusing the weights and codebooks from the best MAESTRO model. Sig-
nificantly better performance on FMA is obtained by using models pre-trained on MAESTRO.
One worry was that the codebook trained on classical music might not learn a good coverage
of the wider genre gamut of the FMA dataset, but using a MAESTRO pre-trained model improved
performance across all genres on the FMA dataset.
6.5
RQ-Transformer training setup
As with the VQ-VAE we train several RQ-Transformers in various configurations on MAESTRO,
see table 6.3. The largest model has 223 million parameters, 132 million in the time transformer
and 88 million in the resolution transformer, with the remaining parameters being used in the
final projection layer to the logits. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer with β0 =
0.9 and β1 = 0.95 and initial learning rate 4 · 10−5 which is annealed to zero using a cosine
schedule (Loshchilov and Hutter 2016).
Some samples from the best models are seen in figs. 6.2 to 6.6. Figures 6.2, 6.3 and 6.5 show
successful generation, while figs. 6.4 and 6.6 show rapid drop to silence or deterioration in the
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.1: Clip from Alban Berg - Sonata Op. 1 reconstructed residually from top to bottom.
Details missed by initial quantizers are filled in by later quantizers.
26
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:35==
Parameters
Test
Validation
D
DH
H
N
Targets
Sampling
Scheduled
Next-step FAD
Sample FAD
Next-step FAD
Sample FAD
512
64
8
1024
Hard
Hard
No
7.41 ± 1.16
7.1 ± 0.59
8.15 ± 0.84
9.66 ± 0.74
512
64
8
1024
Soft
Hard
No
8.44 ± 1.52
8.89 ± 0.25
9.01 ± 0.72
10.4 ± 0.55
512
64
8
1024
Hard
Soft
No
4.65 ± 0.96
5.17 ± 0.14
7.87 ± 0.61
6.25 ± 0.71
512
64
8
1024
Soft
Soft
No
4.27 ± 1.1
5.19 ± 0.36
7.02 ± 0.46
4.16 ± 0.25
512
64
8
1024
Soft
Soft
0.2
3.92 ± 0.56
3.24 ± 0.2
4.96 ± 0.36
2.86 ± 0.64
768
128
16
1024
Soft
Soft
0.2
3.14 ± 0.56
2.5 ± 0.25
3.5 ± 0.61
2.01 ± 0.31
Table 6.3: Results for the MAESTRO dataset reported on test and validation splits for various
configurations of the RQ-Transformer. D, H, DH and N refer to the feed-forward dimension-
ality, the number of heads in multi-headed self-attention, the dimensionality of each head and
the length of sequences at training time, respectively.
Parameters
Test
Validation
MAESTRO pre-trained
Next-step FAD
Sample FAD
Next-step FAD
Sample FAD
No
6.62 ± 1.13
5.21 ± 0.67
6.2 ± 0.52
4.29 ± 0.72
Yes
5.14 ± 0.54
3.02 ± 0.16
4.63 ± 0.72
3.24 ± 0.31
Table 6.4: Results for the FMA dataset reported on test and validation splits the best-performing
configuration of the RQ-Transformer. Pre-training on MAESTRO drastically improves the perfor-
mance on FMA.
autoregressive generation.
Wealsoseefromtable6.4thatusingtheMAESTROpre-trainedRQ-Transformerisverybeneficial
to performance on FMA. It is difficult to say why the effect is so marked, but one possibility
is that there is a distributional discrepancy between the train and test/validation splits which
MAESTRO helps to bridge somewhat.
As in the RQ-VAE setup, we fine-tune the best performing RQ-Transformer from MAESTRO on
FMA, see table 6.4.
Figure 6.2: Spectrogram of an unconditional sample from the MAESTRO RQ-Transformer, dis-
playing sharp multi-frequency sound components.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.3:
Another spectrogram of an unconditional sample from the MAESTRO RQ-
Transformer.
Figure 6.4: Spectrogram of an unconditional sample from the MAESTRO RQ-Transformer where
the generation rapidly drops to silence.
Figure 6.5: Spectrogram of an unconditional generated sample from the FMA RQ-Transformer.
The model has learned some notion of periodicity, and is able to maintain the drumbeat.
28
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.6: Spectrogram of an unconditional sample from the FMA RQ-Transformer where gen-
eration deteriorates after a few seconds and is unable to recover.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:39==
7
Discussion
Both models were able to perform well and high-quality audio can be synthesized using the
two-model approach. However, there were issues with many samples becoming incoherent,
getting “stuck” or going silent.
It is also important to mention that both MAESTRO and FMA consist of non-commercial music,
which is very different from the kind of music the average listener typically consumes. The large
performance uplift on FMA from pre-training MAESTRO raises further suspicions that many of
the issues are actually due to a data bottleneck, and could be resolved by training on larger or
higher quality datasets.
Other issues include high memory use in the last layer of the RQ-Transformer as the model has
toprojecttheoutputfromeverytimesteptandresolutionr toa16384dimensionallogitvector,
and compute the cross-entropy between it and a (in case of soft labelling) also 16 384 dimen-
sional target vector. This uses an enormous amount of memory, which could be avoided by
fusing the last layer and cross-entropy operator into a single kernel with closed form gradients,
but that is out of scope for this work.
An alternative solution is to decrease the codebook size K and increase the number of quantiz-
ersinstead, but thiswasfoundduringpreliminarytestingtomaketheautoregressivemodelling
harder.
It is also possible that the autoregressive objective of the RQ-Transformer is too constraining.
Recent work has shown great progress in using diffusion methods to generate samples that
exhibit better global consistency than autoregressively trained models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020), in music generation as well (Hawthorne, Simon, et al. 2022).
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:41==
8
Conclusion
This work proposed to generate music audio in the raw waveform domain using a two-model
approach—onemodelistaskedwithlearninghowtomapaudiotoandfromhigh-qualitylatent
representations of the waveform of a much lower dimensionality, and another model is tasked
with modelling the sequential generation of audio in the latent domain.
Both models were trained on the MAESTRO and FMA datasets and were able to produce high-
quality audio samples, using several techniques which demonstrably improved sample quality
and generation consistency. However, issues such as sampling degeneration and silent clips
were present. In chapter 7 it is speculated that the autoregressive objective of the sequence
model may constrain the generation process.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
Peretz, Isabelle (2006). “The nature of music from a biological perspective”. In: Cognition 100.1,
pp. 1–32.
Creswell, Antonia et al. (2018). “Generative adversarial networks: An overview”. In: IEEE signal
processing magazine 35.1, pp. 53–65.
Karras, Tero et al. (2021). “Alias-free generative adversarial networks”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 34, pp. 852–863.
Hiller Jr, Lejaren A and Leonard M Isaacson (1957). “Musical composition with a high speed dig-
ital computer”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 9. Audio Engineering Society.
Moorer, James Anderson (1972). “Music and computer composition”. In: Communications of the
ACM 15.2, pp. 104–113.
Simon, Ian and Sageev Oore (2017). Performance RNN: Generating Music with Expressive Timing
and Dynamics. https://magenta.tensorflow.org/performance-rnn. Blog.
Huang, Cheng-Zhi Anna et al. (2018). “Music transformer”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.04281.
Oore, Sageev et al. (2020). “This time with feeling: Learning expressive musical performance”.
In: Neural Computing and Applications 32.4, pp. 955–967.
Dhariwal,Prafullaetal.(2020).“Jukebox:Agenerativemodelformusic”.In:arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.00341.
Dieleman, Sander, Aaron van den Oord, and Karen Simonyan (2018). “The challenge of realistic
music generation: modelling raw audio at scale”. In: Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 31.
Panayotov,Vassiletal.(2015).“Librispeech:anasrcorpusbasedonpublicdomainaudiobooks”.
In: 2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, pp. 5206–5210.
Kong, Jungil, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae (2020). “Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial net-
works for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 33, pp. 17022–17033.
Vasquez, Sean and Mike Lewis (2019). “Melnet: A generative model for audio in the frequency
domain”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01083.
Luo, Yi and Nima Mesgarani (2019). “Conv-tasnet: Surpassing ideal time–frequency magnitude
masking for speech separation”. In: IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech, and language
processing 27.8, pp. 1256–1266.
Tay, Yi et al. (2020). “Efficient transformers: A survey”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.06732.
Dosovitskiy, Alexey et al. (2020). “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recog-
nition at scale”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929.
Gulati, Anmol et al. (2020). “Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for speech recog-
nition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08100.
Choi, Keunwoo et al. (2017). “A tutorial on deep learning for music information retrieval”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.04396.
Kadıoğlu, Berkan et al. (2020). “An empirical study of Conv-TasNet”. In: ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, pp. 7264–
7268.
Pons, Jordi, Oriol Nieto, et al. (2017). “End-to-end learning for music audio tagging at scale”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02520.
Choromanski, Krzysztof et al. (2020). “Rethinking attention with performers”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.14794.
Cao, Shuhao (2021). “Choose a transformer: Fourier or galerkin”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 34.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
35
==PAGE:44==
Hua,Weizheetal.(2022).“TransformerQualityinLinearTime”.In:arXivpreprintarXiv:2202.10447.
Koizumi, Yuma et al. (2021). “DF-Conformer: Integrated architecture of Conv-TasNet and Con-
former using linear complexity self-attention for speech enhancement”. In: 2021 IEEE Work-
shop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA). IEEE, pp. 161–165.
You, Jaeseong et al. (2021). “Gan vocoder: Multi-resolution discriminator is all you need”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05236.
Leshno, Moshe et al. (1993). “Multilayer feedforward networks with a nonpolynomial activation
function can approximate any function”. In: Neural networks 6.6, pp. 861–867.
Nair, Vinod and Geoffrey E Hinton (2010). “Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann
machines”. In: Icml.
Clevert, Djork-Arné, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter (2015). “Fast and accurate deep
network learning by exponential linear units (elus)”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289.
Rumelhart, David E, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams (1986). “Learning representations
by back-propagating errors”. In: nature 323.6088, pp. 533–536.
Sutskever, Ilya et al. (2013). “On the importance of initialization and momentum in deep learn-
ing”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR, pp. 1139–1147.
Kingma, Diederik P and Jimmy Ba (2014). “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Wilson, Ashia C et al. (2017). “The marginal value of adaptive gradient methods in machine
learning”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30.
Kingma,Diederik P and Max Welling (2013). “Auto-encodingvariationalbayes”.In: arXivpreprint
arXiv:1312.6114.
Blei, David M, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe (2017). “Variational inference: A review for
statisticians”. In: Journal of the American statistical Association 112.518, pp. 859–877.
He, Junxian et al. (2019). “Lagging inference networks and posterior collapse in variational au-
toencoders”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05534.
Van Den Oord, Aaron, Oriol Vinyals, et al. (2017). “Neural discrete representation learning”. In:
Advances in neural information processing systems 30.
Razavi, Ali, Aaron Van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals (2019). “Generating diverse high-fidelity im-
ages with vq-vae-2”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 32.
Zeghidour, Neil et al. (2021). “Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec”. In: IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 30, pp. 495–507.
Lee, Doyup et al. (2022). “Autoregressive Image Generation using Residual Quantization”. In:
ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,pp.11523–
11532.
Li, Yunpeng et al. (2021). “Real-time speech frequency bandwidth extension”. In: ICASSP 2021-
2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE,
pp. 691–695.
He, Kaiming et al. (2016). “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778.
Ziyin, Liu, Tilman Hartwig, and Masahito Ueda (2020). “Neural networks fail to learn periodic
functionsandhowtofixit”.In:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems33,pp.1583–
1594.
Shi, Wenzhe et al. (2016). “Real-time single image and video super-resolution using an efficient
sub-pixel convolutional neural network”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1874–1883.
Gholamalinezhad, Hossein and Hossein Khosravi (2020). “Pooling methods in deep neural net-
works, a review”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07485.
36
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:45==
Odena, Augustus, Vincent Dumoulin, and Chris Olah (2016). “Deconvolution and Checkerboard
Artifacts”. In: Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00003. URL: http://distill.pub/2016/deconv-
checkerboard.
Pons, Jordi, Santiago Pascual, et al. (2021). “Upsampling artifacts in neural audio synthesis”. In:
ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, pp. 3005–3009.
Lee, Sang-gil et al. (2022). “BigVGAN: A Universal Neural Vocoder with Large-Scale Training”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04658.
Smith, Julius O. (2011). Spectral Audio Signal Processing. http://ccrma.stanford.edu/ jos/sasp/.
Bak, Taejun et al. (2022). “Avocodo: Generative Adversarial Network for Artifact-free Vocoder”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13404.
Yamamoto, Ryuichi, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim (2020). “Parallel WaveGAN: A fast wave-
formgenerationmodelbasedongenerativeadversarialnetworkswithmulti-resolutionspec-
trogram”. In: ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, pp. 6199–6203.
Hager, Georg and Gerhard Wellein (2010). Introduction to high performance computing for scien-
tists and engineers. CRC Press.
Tillet, Philippe, Hsiang-Tsung Kung, and David Cox (2019). “Triton: an intermediate language
and compiler for tiled neural network computations”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN
International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages, pp. 10–19.
He, Kaiming et al. (2015). “Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance
on imagenet classification”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision, pp. 1026–1034.
Zhang, Hongyi, Yann N Dauphin, and Tengyu Ma (2019). “Fixup initialization: Residual learning
without normalization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09321.
Gritsenko, Alexey et al. (2020). “A spectral energy distance for parallel speech synthesis”. In: Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 13062–13072.
Mao, Xudong et al. (2017). “Least squares generative adversarial networks”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2794–2802.
Lim, Jae Hyun and Jong Chul Ye (2017). “Geometric gan”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02894.
Kumar, Kundan et al. (2019). “Melgan: Generative adversarial networks for conditional wave-
form synthesis”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 32.
Suvorov, Roman et al. (2022). “Resolution-robust Large Mask Inpainting with Fourier Convolu-
tions”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision,
pp. 2149–2159.
Larsen, Anders Boesen Lindbo et al. (2016). “Autoencoding beyond pixels using a learned simi-
larity metric”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR, pp. 1558–1566.
Vaswani, Ashish et al. (2017). “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems 30.
Ba, Jimmy Lei, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton (2016). “Layer normalization”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1607.06450.
Brown, Tom et al. (2020). “Language models are few-shot learners”. In: Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems 33, pp. 1877–1901.
Chowdhery,Aakankshaetal.(2022).“Palm:Scalinglanguagemodelingwithpathways”.In:arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.02311.
Wang, Qiang et al. (2019). “Learning deep transformer models for machine translation”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.01787.
Nguyen, Toan Q and Julian Salazar (2019). “Transformers without tears: Improving the normal-
ization of self-attention”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05895.
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
37
==PAGE:46==
Shaw, Peter, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani (2018). “Self-attention with relative position
representations”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02155.
Su, Jianlin et al. (2021). “Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09864.
Press, Ofir, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis (2021). “Train short, test long: Attention with linear
biases enables input length extrapolation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409.
Guo,Mandyetal.(2021).“Longt5:Efficienttext-to-texttransformerforlongsequences”.In:arXiv
preprint arXiv:2112.07916.
Alayrac, Jean-Baptiste et al. (2022). “Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198.
Wang, Sinong et al. (2020). “Linformer: Self-attention with linear complexity”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.04768.
Dao,Trietal.(2022).“FlashAttention:FastandMemory-EfficientExactAttentionwithIO-Awareness”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14135.
Rabe, Markus N. and Charles Staats (2021). “Self-attention Does Not Need O(n2) Memory”. In:
CoRR abs/2112.05682. arXiv: 2112.05682. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.05682.
Mihaylova, Tsvetomila and André FT Martins (2019). “Scheduled sampling for transformers”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.07651.
Duckworth,Danieletal.(2019).“Parallelscheduledsampling”.In:arXivpreprintarXiv:1906.04331.
Hawthorne,Curtis,AndriyStasyuk,etal.(2019).“EnablingFactorizedPianoMusicModelingand
Generation with the MAESTRO Dataset”. In: International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1lYRjC9F7.
Steinmetz, Christian J and Joshua Reiss (2021). “pyloudnorm: A simple yet flexible loudness
meter in Python”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 150. Audio Engineering Society.
Defferrard, Michaël et al. (2017). “FMA: A Dataset for Music Analysis”. In: 18th International Soci-
ety for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR). arXiv: 1612.01840. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1612.01840.
Kilgour, Kevin et al. (2019). “Fréchet Audio Distance: A Reference-Free Metric for Evaluating Mu-
sic Enhancement Algorithms.” In: INTERSPEECH, pp. 2350–2354.
Heusel, Martin et al. (2017). “Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local
nash equilibrium”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30.
Szegedy, Christian et al. (2016). “Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision”. In:
ProceedingsoftheIEEEconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition,pp.2818–2826.
Brock, Andrew, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan (2018). “Large scale GAN training for high
fidelity natural image synthesis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096.
Hershey, Shawn et al. (2017). “CNN architectures for large-scale audio classification”. In: 2017
ieeeinternationalconferenceonacoustics,speechandsignalprocessing(icassp).IEEE,pp.131–
135.
Salimans, Tim and Durk P Kingma (2016). “Weight normalization: A simple reparameterization
to accelerate training of deep neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems 29.
Loshchilov,IlyaandFrankHutter(2016).“Sgdr:Stochasticgradientdescentwithwarmrestarts”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983.
Ho, Jonathan, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel (2020). “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pp. 6840–6851.
Hawthorne, Curtis, Ian Simon, et al. (2022). “Multi-instrument Music Synthesis with Spectro-
gram Diffusion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05408.
38
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
==PAGE:47==
Generative Multi-scale Modelling of Music
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Asmussens Alle, Building 322
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
