==PAGE:1==
Data fusion between sensors and computer
vision
Mads Aaskov Carstensen <s202740>
September 8, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This report was written at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in order to fulfill the
requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engi-
neering.
The project was carried out from February 28th 2022 to September 8th 2022,
and represents a workload of 30 ECTS points.
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Charalampos Orfanidis of the Technical
University of Denmark for his guidance and feedback throughout the thesis.
I would similarly like to thank my other supervisor PhD Xenofon Fafoutis of
the Technical University of Denmark for the same.
Lastly, I would like to thank my girlfriend for her support and for providing me
meals during some of the long hours of writing this thesis.
2
==PAGE:4==
Summary
Wearable devices are becoming ubiquitous in modern society. Today, training
in sports have been improved by various digital systems involving wearables or
similar, which assist athletes. Specifically at a professional competition level,
there is a lot of research where sports technology is developed rapidly.
K2 (2 person) or K4 (4 person) kayak training can be improved by using such
a digital system involving various sensors. An instrumentation system which
will monitor the synchronization between paddling of the athletes would help
to investigate and improve the paddling technique.
This thesis proposes a modular proof-of-concept system for providing assistance
in sports training with multi-person kayaks. The project uses OpenPose which
is a computer vision framework able to estimate human posture. The target of
this thesis is to associate the readings of the software with an external clock, and
thereby to show that data fusion between the computer vision data and sensor
data is feasible and that the accuracy is suitable for the intended use case. The
external clock source is implemented on Arduino devices, which communicates
via Bluetooth Low Energy technology. We evaluate both the Bluetooth synchro-
nization protocol, and the entire system involving both the Bluetooth protocol
and the computer vision application. This thesis provides a solid foundation
for future work on determining the level of synchronization between athletes
involved in sports activities, where synchronization is important for efficiency,
such as in multi-person kayak training.
3
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
6
2
Related works
8
3
Background
15
3.1
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
OpenCV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
OpenPose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Design and Implementation
19
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
DensePose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.2
OpenPose and OpenCV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
External clock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4.1
SimPy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.2
Arduino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Integrating Bluetooth synchronization and computer vision code
27
5
Evaluation
31
5.1
Evaluation of synchronization scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.3
Reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.5
Extension: Long synchronization intervals . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.6
Extension: Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Evaluation of entire system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.3
Reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.5
Extension: Two consecutive motions . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion and Future Work
55
4
==PAGE:6==
A Appendix
59
A.1 Arduino specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 Overview of program files and scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 Overview of data files
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Wearable performance devices and sensors are becoming more and more avail-
able to the general public and athletic teams [1]. These devices include both
movement sensors such as pedometers, accelerometers, and Global Positioning
System (GPS) devices, as well as physiologic devices such as heart rate monitors,
sleep monitors, and temperature sensors.
Wearable technology has increasingly become an important and valuable instru-
ment for improving sports performance by providing physicians, coaches, and
training staff with a way of monitoring movement and physiologic parameters
during training and competitive scenarios.
One sport in which wearable technology has become a stable is in kayaking where
devices such as the Vaaka cadence sensor1 or the Motionize Paddle Sensor2 is
being used for their ability to provide real-time stroke data and post training
analysis for athletes of various skill levels including Olympic level. While devices
such as these are good for individual athletes, there currently does not exist
any system for assisting in training the synchronization between the athletes in
multi-person kayaking. The system consisting of a camera and sensors proposed
by this thesis is intended as a foundation for allowing a coach or training staff
to determine the level of synchronization between athletes in K2 or K4 kayaking
by performing data fusion between computer vision data and sensor data. The
system can be used both indoors and outdoors as it functions without being
dependent on a GPS module.
1https://www.vaakacadence.com
2https://paddling.com/gear/motionize-paddle-sensor
6
==PAGE:8==
(a) K2 kayak. Credit.
(b) K4 kayak. Credit.
The contributions of this thesis are:
1. A rudimentary one-step time synchronization protocol for use over Blue-
tooth Low Energy running on Arduino devices.
2. A video pipeline which results in captured content with pose estimation
overlaid on top for later assessment of synchronization between the people
filmed.
3. A modular proof-of-concept system where video from a camera is synchro-
nized on time with sensor data.
4. Datasets for evaluating synchronization error rates of the proposed system
with various time synchronization intervals, and in various conditions.
In Section 2 we will go over the current state of the art in the area of wearable
performance devices or the like related to the system presented in this thesis.
We will then move on to give some background to some of the technologies used
in the thesis in Section 3. Having taken care of the background information, we
move on to Section 4 where we examine the actual design with the choices made
on the system that is the basis of this project. This system is then evaluated in
Section 5 where we perform experiments on two different parts of the system:
one focusing on the Bluetooth synchronization scheme used between the sensors,
and one involving the entire system of both the sensors, a camera capturing
video, and a computer performing pose estimation via machine learning on
the output of the camera. Last but not least, in Section 6 we conclude and
discuss the shortcomings of the project and possibilities for future work. An
overview of the scripts and programs being used in this thesis can be found in
Section A.2, and an overview of the data files used and generated can be found
in Section A.3.
7
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Related works
This thesis is inspired by the work done by Orfanidis et al. in a technical re-
port [2] on the area of using technology for assisting in kayak training. The
technical report proposes a system for multi-person kayak training composed of
dual radio devices utilizing LoRaWAN and Bluetooth Low Energy, which are
synchronized over long range with an accuracy of less than 2.5 milliseconds dif-
ference between the time on the devices on average. This thesis adds a computer
vision aspect to the training system, but foregoes range by only utilizing Blue-
tooth Low Energy as the means of communication. Thus, the synchronization
protocol of [2] is not reused for this project as it is developed for the LoRaWAN
technology where, because of the longer ranges, transmission delays have to be
accounted for.
There have been various papers published focusing on synchronizing sensors or
utilizing computer vision to aid sports performance, but only a few published
on the fusion of these two areas as this project sets out to do.
This thesis
proposes a proof-of-concept system in which the areas of time synchronization
and computer vision are fused. There are already a multitude of papers focusing
on sensor time synchronization available in which protocols are proposed and
could potentially be reused, and thus we start by going over some of the state
of the art on sensor synchronization. We then move on to related papers on
computer vision.
LongShoT: Long-Range Synchronization of Time (2019)
In [3] Ramirez et al. introduces the LongShoT protocol, which enables time syn-
chronization within 10 µs over long ranges on LoRaWAN without using GPS.
The protocol is based on a two-way time transfer (see Figure 2.1) wherein a
client sends a request to a reference device and receives a response containing
time information that allows for time synchronization between the devices. The
scheme achieves an average synchronization error of less than 2 µs and com-
pensates oscillator drift to less than 0.1 ppm on devices distributed within 4
kilometers of a gateway.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: Two-way time transfer model. t0, t1, t2 and t3 mark the packet send and
receive times on the client and reference device.
They identify the following sources of delay in LoRaWAN: (1) Send Time and
Receive Time, (2) Access Time, (3) Transmission and Reception Time, (4)
Propagation Time, (5) Interrupt Handling Time, and (6) Radio State Delays.
With so many sources of delay, synchronizing time is even more important.
The LongShoT scheme provides two synchronization approaches: one-step and
two-step synchronization. They both provide accurate time and drift correction
but they have different use cases – the first being more bandwidth efficient and
the second being more long range. Overall the paper is related to the work
of this project but is solely focused on time synchronization between sensors,
whereas this project focuses on time synchronization between a computer vision
application and sensors. The protocol is not useful for the purposes of this thesis
as it focuses on the LoRaWAN technology, whereas we utilize the shorter range
Bluetooth Low Energy technology in which transmission delays over range do
not play a role.
Local Time Synchronization in Bluetooth Piconets for Data Fusion
Using Mobile Phones (2011)
Another synchronization scheme is the one used in [4] by Wåhslén et al. It
is also a two-step protocol, where a master node keeps track of the difference
in time between it and all the slave nodes communicating with it. This is in
contrast to the LongShoT scheme where slaves or clients keep track of their
own time difference to a master or reference device. The protocol utilizes three
timestamps: T1 and T3 set by the master device, and T2 set by the slave device
(see Figure 2.2).
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: Two-step synchronization protocol from [4].
The offset or difference between slave and master is calculated with the equation:
o = (T1 −T2) + Tround/2
(2.1)
Here Tround is defined as T3 −T1, so Equation 2.1 can be expanded and then
simplified to:
o = T1 −T2 + (T3 −T1)/2 = (T1 −T2 + T3 −T2)/2
(2.2)
For each time synchronization the protocol is repeated 30-50 times while keeping
track of the average offset time between the messages.
This takes less than
1.5 seconds in total every time the time has to be synchronized between the
devices [4, p. 5].
While this protocol could very well have been used in this thesis, the choice
was made to keep the time synchronization more simple as the focus is not
on the individual parts of the proof-of-concept system proposed in our project,
but rather the fusion of the parts. If one was inclined, swapping the current
time synchronization protocol for the one proposed in [4] could be done. One
negative with the protocol Wåhslén et al. proposes is that a lot of messages are
sent when synchronizing, which means that a lot of energy is spent compared
to a more simple scheme.
SyncWISE: Window Induced Shift Estimation for Synchronization
of Video and Accelerometry from Wearable Sensors (2020)
In [5] Zhang et al.
introduces a new approach called SyncWISE (Window
Induced Shift Estimation) which synchronizes time between a chest-worn ac-
celerometer and a wearable camera. SyncWISE focuses mostly on the problem
of partial observability and coordinate transformation. It synchronizes by find-
ing the best offset value between the sensor data and the recorded video via
machine learning and then shifts the dataset so they match up as can be seen
in Figure 2.3.
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: For each window that contains high quality accelerometer data they
search for the offset by shifting the video window by differing amounts
to examine corresponding segments in the video (shown as blue, cyan,
and green boxes) [5].
The various sensor data points are synchronized with each other via a smart-
phone application called mCerebrum that timestamps accelerometer packets to
a common clock, thus the synchronization problem is reduced to simply syn-
chronizing one of the sensors (as all sensors should be synchronized with each
other) and the camera. In practice this means that a smartphone has to be
present near the system at all times for it to work properly, which might not be
the case in kayaks and might not be wanted.
Another shortcoming is that the algorithm requires a recorded video to synchro-
nize the time of the camera with the sensor data, which is more complex and
restrictive than our system that synchronizes time between the compute device
attached to the camera and the sensors without using video. This demerit is
too confining for this project, where either recorded or live video should be us-
able in the system. Our solution does end up mainly using recorded videos (for
pose estimation, not time synchronization) instead of streaming live because of
the time cost of computation on each frame, which makes the resultant output
look sped up if using a streamed video. We do, however, supply the option of
using the system with a live video stream in the case of computer vision frame-
works becoming more computationally lightweight in the future (or hardware
becoming so fast that it does not matter), such that the current computer vision
framework can easily be substituted for an appropriate new one.
Vision2Sensor: Knowledge Transfer Across Sensing Modalities for
Human Activity Recognition (2019)
In [6] Radu et al. introduces the Vision2Sensor system, which consists of one or
multiple sensors (eg. a phone), and one or multiple compute enabled cameras.
The system provides mobile sensor labeling by transferring the knowledge from
vision based devices to inertial sensors, while the sensor is in the field of view
of the camera. This labeling is performed by utilizing a Convolutional Neural
Network. The overall goal of this system is thus Human Activity Recognition
(HAR), but to achieve this goal the system needs to achieve time synchronization
and data fusion.
Synchronization between camera and accelerometer is done in one of two ways
depending on if it should be done online or offline. For the online approach
time is synchronized from the internet time of one of the sensors (phone or
smartwatch) to the camera – the exact details being quite murky. For the offline
11
==PAGE:13==
approach time is synchronized via an intensive shake of the phone (which acts as
the accelerometer) as this gives a point of reference to calculate the difference in
time and store the offset. Both methods are unviable for the system proposed by
this thesis – the first because no phone or smartwatch is present in our system
and thus internet time is not available, and the second because systems reliant
on participant-based methods introduce additional participant burden and a
single point of failure [5]. There might arise situations in which participants
forget to synchronize at the start, invalidating the entire session and fostering
frustration with the system.
Time synchronization and data fusion for RGB-Depth cameras and
inertial sensors in AAL applications (2015)
In [7] Cippitelli et al.
develop a system consisting of a Microsoft Kinect (a
video depth camera), a computer, and wireless sensor nodes from Shimmer Re-
search with accelerometer capabilities. The paper attempts to perform time
synchronization and data fusion much in the same manner as this thesis. They,
however, focus heavily on Ambient Assisted Living (AAL), which is care for
the elderly, whereas our project is focused on assisting in synchronized sports –
specifically multi-person kayaking. The time synchronization is divided into two
issues: synchronizing the computer and the Shimmer node via Bluetooth, and
synchronizing the Kinect sensor and the computer. For the wireless synchro-
nization between the computer and the Shimmer node they adopt the protocol
developed in [4] by Wåhslén et al. The biggest issue is thus solving the synchro-
nization between the Kinect sensor and the computer. To solve this they first
need to estimate the delay in capturing a frame on the Kinect and receiving it
on the computer.
The synchronization protocol between the Kinect and Shimmer node can then
be boiled down to three steps:
1. The synchronization protocol described in [4] is applied between the com-
puter and Shimmer node.
2. The frames received from the Kinect camera to the PC are subjected to
time compensation.
3. The Shimmer packets closest to each frame are determined and associated.
This approach is different than the one used in this project as our system relies
on the time being synchronized on every device and therefore have no need of
determining which packets are closest to which frame etc. as the timestamps of
each frame should already match up with the timestamps of accelerometer data.
The method proposed in [7] also requires a separate LED board and elaborate
steps in order to estimate the time needed to compensate in step 2, which could
vary from setup to setup.
SyncUp: Vision-based Practice Support for Synchronized Dancing
(2021)
In [8] Zhou et al. introduces the SyncUp system which is used to determine
levels of synchronization between dancers: both in pose similarity and temporal
12
==PAGE:14==
alignment of movements. The system uses 14 key points found via AlphaPose,
which is a computer vision framework for pose estimation, to compute body part
feature vectors for each person. These vectors can then be used to estimate
the accumulated absolute difference of each body part of the participants to
determine the level of synchronization.
Based on these absolute differences
SyncUp generates heat maps as can be seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The left side shows the heat map overlays that SyncUp generates on top
of dancers [8]. Colors closer to red represent higher body part discrep-
ancy and closer to blue lower discrepancy. The right side shows the web
interface developed to overlay the heat map on top of a input video and
generate two 1D heat maps for easy frame finding where discrepancy is
high.
SyncUp does not utilize sensors, but relies solely on computer vision to de-
termine synchronization. While this makes [8] unsuitable for the overall sys-
tem proposed in this thesis, one could envision a version where AlphaPose was
swapped for OpenPose and this modified SyncUp could be used in tandem with
the sensor data already utilized in this project. The reason for making the swap
of computer vision framework is because OpenPose is invariant to the number
of people in the frame, while the inference time of AlphaPose grows linearly
with the amount of people in the frame [9, p. 9] as can be seen in Figure 2.5.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: Inference time comparison from [9]. This analysis was performed using
the same images for each algorithm and a batch size of 1. Each analysis
was repeated 1000 times and then averaged. This was all performed on
a system with a Nvidia 1080 Ti and CUDA 8.
14
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Background
This section gives some background to the main technologies used in this project
– whether that be protocols or frameworks.
To start with, we will go over
Bluetooth in Section 3.1, specifically the low energy version, as that is used in
the time synchronization protocol described later in this paper. Then we will
describe the OpenCV framework for computer vision applications in Section 3.2.
Lastly, we will go over the OpenPose framework for pose estimation in images
and videos in Section 3.3.
3.1
Bluetooth
The Bluetooth standard was created in 1994 by Dr. Jaarp Haartsen who worked
at Ericsson [10]. It uses short-link radio technology and operates at the 2.4 GHz
to 2.485 GHz band. Using radios it allows for multiple devices to connect to
one another. Since the inception Bluetooth has changed considerably during
development and since Bluetooth 4.0 the most utilized modes are called Classic
Bluetooth and Bluetooth Low Energy. These two modes are not compatible with
each other and therefore does not work together. Classic Bluetooth is usually
seen in devices such as headphones or similar, while Bluetooth Low Energy is
seen in more power-constrained devices such as wearables or sensors.
For this thesis we are using Bluetooth Low Energy also called BLE. In BLE
devices have various roles and responsibilities.
In any Bluetooth connection
there are two roles: the central role and the peripheral role. Devices with the
central roles are usually called the servers and ones with the peripheral role
are usually called the clients. The central device scans for information which
is advertised or broadcast by the peripheral device (see Figure 3.1). When the
central device picks up the information from the peripheral device a connection
can be established. The information exchange is done via services.
Services and Characteristics
A service is a group of capabilities. An example would be a smartwatch with
heart rate sensors, which could then give heart rate information as well as
physical activity and sleep information. These capabilities could be wrapped in
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.1: The central and peripheral role in Bluetooth.
a service called Health Service. The upside of grouping capabilities in services in
this way is the ease of finding, selecting, and interacting with desired capabilities
of a device – if you know what you need to access is related to health, you go
for the health service. A group of services is called a profile. Each of these
services have a unique identification code called an Universally Unique Identifier
(UUID), which is either 16-bit or 32-bit long for official Bluetooth specification
services. Unofficial Bluetooth services are 128-bit long, which is what is used
for this thesis.
Within these services are a list of characteristics. In the smartwatch example
this would be the three capabilities (heart rate, physical activity and sleep).
Characteristics have a unique UUID that is 16-, 32- or 128-bit long as well.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: Example of smartwatch with heart rate monitor and capability of mea-
suring heart rate, physical activity, and sleep.
For this project we will use BLE for communication between our sensors.
3.2
OpenCV
OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision Library) is an open source computer
vision and machine learning library [11]. It was initially launched in 1998 as an
Intel Research initiative [12]. The reason for OpenCV’s existence is to provide
a common infrastructure for computer vision applications without the makers
of every application having to built their own framework.
One of the main advantages of the library is the amount of algorithms already
implemented for various applications. In fact, it boasts more than 2.5 thou-
sand optimized algorithms. These cover applications such as detecting faces,
identifying objects, classifying human actions in videos, tracking moving ob-
jects, stitching images together to produce high resolution images, recognizing
scenery, and finding similar images from an image database – to name a few.
The library is extensively used in research groups, governmental bodies and by
well-established companies such as Google, Yahoo, Microsoft, Intel, IBM, and
Sony among others, but also by smaller start-ups. OpenCV is written natively
in C++ but it features C++, Python, Java, and MATLAB interfaces while full-
featured CUDA and OpenCL interfaces are in the works. It currently supports
Windows, Linux, Android, and Mac OS.
For this project we will use OpenCV for interacting with an attached camera
(reading frames, saving frames to an output video etc.).
17
==PAGE:19==
3.3
OpenPose
OpenPose is the first publicly available real-time multi-person system that can
detect human body, foot, hand, and facial key points on single images [9]. This
allows for 2D human pose estimation in both images and videos as a video can
be split into frames, OpenPose be used on each frame, then the frames can be
re-spliced into a video.
While earlier pose estimation systems have struggled with performing the anal-
ysis in real-time, OpenPose introduces a bottom-up representation with Part
Affinity Fields (PAFs) – essentially 2D vector fields that encode the location
and orientation of the limbs of each person. These PAFs are predicted via a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) split up into 51 operations (see Figure 3.3
for the architecture).
Figure 3.3: Architecture of the CNN used in OpenPose.
One advantage of using OpenPose over similar frameworks such as AlphaPose
and Mask R-CNN, is that while the inference time of the other systems grows
linearly with the number of people in the images, the inference time of OpenPose
remains constant no matter the amount of people [9, p. 9].
For this project we will use OpenPose for overlaying pose estimations on top of
videos.
18
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 4
Design and Implementation
4.1
Overview
In the following we will go over both the technologies which were considered,
but ultimately discarded, as well as the technologies successfully used for this
thesis.
Computer Vision (CV)
For the CV part of the project we initially look
at the DensePose1 framework developed by the AI Research team at Facebook
(the company now known as Meta). This however, proves to be quite an in-
flexible tool with “in development” aptly describing the state of the code and
corresponding documentation.
The search for a new CV framework starts and a few potential candidates are
found – among them are VIBE2 and OpenPose3.
In the end we settle for
OpenPose as the framework has been refined since at least 2016 and therefore
the code documentation is superior to that of VIBE, which was released in
2020 and is maintained by a smaller team with just 79 commits versus the 700
commits of OpenPose at the time of writing.
Everything is not perfect with OpenPose, however, and ultimately it is needed
to write code that is a mixture of OpenPose and OpenCV (which OpenPose uses
for a lot of its camera interaction). This blend is needed as OpenPose is used
on individual frames and it cannot provide the needed flexibility of executing
separate code between the frame reads and calculations, which we require for
timestamping and various other tasks.
External clock
For the time component we require an external clock that
will act as the master clock, which all other devices can synchronize their own
time against. The initial candidate for this is the SimPy4 framework for Python.
After testing and tinkering the framework is found to be unfit for the purpose
and a substitution is needed, whereafter we turn to one of the devices made by
1https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2/tree/main/projects/DensePose
2https://github.com/mkocabas/VIBE
3https://github.com/CMU-Perceptual-Computing-Lab/openpose
4https://pypi.org/project/simpy/
19
==PAGE:21==
Arduino – the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense5. We adopt two of these devices
to act both as time synchronizers and as accelerometers for mimicking paddle
sensors.
Thus we are left with a system utilizing the technology of the OpenPose and
OpenCV frameworks as well as the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense devices. This
process of testing, discarding and adopting technologies can be seen in a graph-
ical form in Figure 4.1.
Time
Framework too rigid, 
find substitutes
DensePose
Narrow selection down
VIBE,
OpenPose
Framework too rigid,
adopt mixture
OpenPose
Find external clock
component
OpenPose, 
OpenCV
External clock unfit,
find substitute
OpenPose, 
OpenCV,
SimPy
OpenPose, 
OpenCV,
Arduino
Figure 4.1: Which technology was considered, discarded and adopted as part of the
exploration phase of the project.
4.2
Setup
The entire setup consists of two Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense, a computer, and
a webcam. One of the Arduinos, Arduino 1, is connected with a USB cable to
the computer. The other Arduino, Arduino 2, can be worn by a person around
the wrist, or as we resort to: held in the hand. It can be powered by either a
power bank or a laptop (which we end up doing). Arduino 1 and Arduino 2 are
connected wirelessly over BLE. The webcam is also connected via a USB cable
to the computer. See the block diagram for the setup in Figure 4.2.
5https://docs.arduino.cc/hardware/nano-33-ble-sense
20
==PAGE:22==
Physical connection
Computer
Bluetooth Low Energy
Arduino 1
Physical connection
Wearing/holding
Physical connection
Arduino 2
Power
bank/laptop
Figure 4.2: Block diagram of the system proposed by this project. The central clock
everything is synchronized with is the hardware clock on the Arduino 1
device.
What follows in the succeeding sections is a more in depth discussion of the
various technologies which are considered for this project – both the overall
experience with them as well as their respective pros and cons.
4.3
Computer Vision
4.3.1
DensePose
DensePose is a framework released in 2020 by the Facebook AI Research team.
Its goal is to learn how to establish correspondence between image pixels and
3D object geometry of deformable objects such as humans or animals [13]. It
does so by utilizing a Region-Based Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN).
The only easily discoverable documentation for how to use DensePose is found
on their “Getting Started” page [14]. Here they mention an apply_net.py file
which takes as input a trained model, its configuration, and an image on which
the pose estimations should be calculated on and overlaid on top of. To use this
on a video one could grab each frame of said video and apply this Python script
to them, then convert the images back to a video.
When the decision to abandon the use of DensePose for this project was taken, it
was based on the thought that a framework which only works on images would
be too complex and time consuming (because of the modifications needed to
work on videos) to utilize, and a framework that worked on video primarily
would be preferable. Ultimately, the solution that this project uses does also
utilize a CV framework wherein each frame is manipulated and then “sewn” back
into a video, so DensePose might have been usable in the same way. DensePose
gives no promise of being invariant to the amount of people in the frame like
OpenPose does, however.
Another option for using the framework is to install it via pip (the package man-
ager of Python) and DensePose should then be importable. The only problem
is that they do not provide any documentation on the various functions of this
package whatsoever, so one is left quite in the dark and a costly exploration
21
==PAGE:23==
of the package would have to be undertaken, which as the CV part is not the
central part of this project, we choose to not pursue.
4.3.2
OpenPose and OpenCV
OpenPose is mostly coded in C++ and the Python API, which is what we use,
is basically just a wrapper around this to call C++ functions. The API only
have a few basic functions like configure, start, and execute which sets up
the wrapper function, readies it, and lastly allows it to execute by opening the
camera and putting each frame through the CNN. The resultant video is shown
in a window and the pose estimation overlaid on top, but given that there is little
documentation, it is unclear how to save these streamed videos. In Figure 4.3
one can see the code responsible for using the OpenPose framework on video
streamed from a webcam (note that a lot of set up code is omitted for brevity).
The documentation is not really there and apart from a few basic tutorial files
(with very little comments in them) there is no help to get.
opWrapper = op.WrapperPython(op.ThreadManagerMode.Synchronous)
opWrapper.configure(params)
opWrapper.execute()
Figure 4.3: OpenPose code responsible for starting camera, performing CV on each
frame that is then shown in a window.
No independent code can be
executed between frame grabs.
From here there are essentially two routes to go: (1) mixing OpenPose and
OpenCV, and (2) running OpenCV first and then OpenPose afterwards on the
output from OpenCV.
Mix of OpenCV and OpenPose
The first option is to create a mix of
OpenPose and OpenCV functionality (OpenPose seems to use OpenCV under
the hood anyways). It is now directly OpenCV which is responsible for opening
the camera and reading each frame. Before each of these frames are written
to a saved video, OpenPose is run on them to overlay pose estimations. The
result of this is a recorded video from the webcam with pose overlays. Iterating
through the streamed video frame by frame in this manner also allow one to
record precise timestamps for each frame. We choose to record these into a text
file which is created alongside each recorded video. This text file is made up
of one line for each frame with the frame number first, then a space, and then
the time the frame was done being processed and saved. We will discuss the
time used for the timestamps later in detail, but for now we can say that it
is represented in milliseconds and gotten from synchronizing with the central
Arduino.
Utilizing a mix of OpenPose and OpenCV code like this allows us much greater
flexibility in what code to execute between frame reads. In Figure 4.4 one can
see a pseudocode representation of some of the code utilized in this project
with a mix of OpenPose and OpenCV functionality (here set up code is again
omitted). This runs in a loop where each iteration is a frame of the video which
22
==PAGE:24==
allows for much more precision. The loop terminates upon hitting the key “q”.
In Section 4.5 we will describe how we calculate the time to stamp each frame
with.
In line 2 we read the frame from the attached camera. Then in line 4 we can
input the frame into the OpenPose framework and overlay pose estimations on
top. In line 6-8 we can then append this newly modified frame to the output
video, and show the result in a window. Line 10-11 checks if “q” has been
pressed in each iteration and halts the execution, if so.
1
while True:
2
frame = readFrameFromCamera()
3
4
openPoseOnFrame(frame)
5
6
writeFrameToFile(frame)
7
8
showFrame(frame)
9
10
if 'q' pressed:
11
break
Figure 4.4: Pseudocode showing a mix of OpenPose and OpenCV responsible for
starting camera, reading each frame, performing CV on it, writing it to
a video and simultaneously showing the result in a window. Notice that
we can execute separate code between each frame processing.
This approach would be ideal if not for one thing – the computation time re-
quired for OpenPose to process frames. The maximal frames per second (FPS)
the framework can handle is around 6.5, which is still so low that it makes re-
sultant videos look sped up by a factor of around 4 for a 30 FPS video and 8
for a 60 FPS video. This brings us to the second approach.
OpenCV first, then OpenPose
Instead of transforming each frame with
OpenPose during recording, one can record with OpenCV first and then feed
the saved video into OpenPose afterwards. The code then becomes even more
simple, removing line 4 from Figure 4.4. OpenPose comes with an executable
file (they call it a demo6) which can be fed a saved video file, that we utilize for
this project. This approach does come with the drawback that using OpenPose
on a 10 second recorded video running 30 FPS takes approximately 40 seconds.
This brings the performance in line with the first approach, but results in a
video in normal speed versus the sped up version of the first.
4.4
External clock
Then comes the topic of the external clock, which is the backbone of the system
with which the compute device, to which the camera is attached to, and the
6https://github.com/CMU-Perceptual-Computing-Lab/openpose/blob/master/doc/01_
demo.md
23
==PAGE:25==
sensor will synchronize to achieve the same notion of time.
4.4.1
SimPy
Initially this was scheduled to be implemented as a software clock in SimPy.
After working with SimPy it became apparent that it was not very suited for
the kind of work needed to utilize it in the system presented in this thesis.
SimPy runs simulations and in order for functions to be run in parallel with
threads, all code has to be part of the simulation. This means that recording
streamed video from the webcam and processing the frames with OpenPose also
has to be done within the confines of this simulation. One of the problems is
that while it at first glance might look like parallelism is possible in SimPy,
it turns out to be incredibly limiting. This is because only one function can
actually execute at the same time, but multiple functions can be scheduled and
interact with each other via interrupts etc. Thus, if the OpenPose function is
active, the clock will be paused meanwhile, so the time will not be accurate
anymore. This lead us in search of another option. Because of hardware that
was already available to us, excellent documentation, and ease of programming,
we decided to experiment with Arduino devices instead.
4.4.2
Arduino
Arduino is an open-source hardware and software company.
They produce
boards with a mixture of microprocessors and controllers on them. For this
project we are utilizing the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense devices (see Figure 4.5).
The defining characteristics of these boards are an array of sensors that makes it
able to detect color, proximity, motion, temperature, humidity, and audio, and
the possibility to use Bluetooth Low Energy for connecting to other devices.
The attached SMD 2520 crystal oscillator runs at a frequency of 32 MHz with
a load capacitance of 10 pF +/- 10 ppm [15, p. 59].
Figure 4.5: Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense board.
The Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense has 8 analog and 14 digital pins. These pins
can either be used as input or output, which means that they can either be
read or written to. They are important for the evaluation process which is the
focus of Section 5. See Figure A.2 for an overview of the pins. The technical
specifications of the relevant features for the project of the Arduino Nano 33
BLE Sense are listed in Figure A.1.
24
==PAGE:26==
As mentioned earlier this project uses two of these Arduinos, where one of them
acts as a master clock with which the other synchronizes its time. For syn-
chronization we first utilized a modified version of the two-step synchronization
scheme from [3], but decided that it was too complex for such a simple use
case. The two-step is good for accuracy when used with long-range protocols
like LoRaWAN, but as our setup is intended for shorter range use with BLE we
downgraded to a one-step scheme. This works by the central Arduino device
sending its current time, t0, to the peripheral device, which marks the time of
receiving the message as t1 (see Figure 4.6). The peripheral device can then cal-
culate their difference in time by subtracting t1 from t0 and keeping this value
saved as an offset. Whenever the peripheral time has to for example timestamp
something, it can use its current time and add the offset to make sure that the
timestamp is consistent with the clock of the central device.
Central
Peripheral
t0
t1
Figure 4.6: One step synchronization scheme.
The time synchronization is set to only occur at certain intervals governed by
a synchronization interval variable. This is ensured by a constantly running
timer implemented by noting the time at the start and continually checking if
subtracting this saved time from the current time yields a value larger or equal
to the synchronization interval. If so, synchronize, save the current time, and
start over again.
As mentioned in Section 3.1 BLE makes use of the concepts of services and
characteristics. Our synchronization scheme makes use of only one service –
the Time Service. This does, however, contain two characteristics: the Time
Characteristic and the Code Characteristic, see Figure 4.7.
Various types of data has to be sent for different reasons when the Arduinos
are used for evaluations in Section 5. As the Time Characteristic is used
for both the central device to communicate with the peripheral (in the case of
synchronization) and vice versa (in cases such as when sending accelerometer
data for evaluation as described in Section 5.2), the Arduinos need a way to
know what kind of data is currently residing in the channel such that they, first
of all, know what to do with it, and secondly, that they do not overwrite vital
data. This is done via the Code Characteristic. This can have the values 0,
1, or 2 summarized by Table 4.1. This extra characteristic is not strictly needed
for the basic time synchronization to work, but is simply introduced to assist in
the evaluations.
25
==PAGE:27==
Code
Characteristic
(UUID)
Time
Characteristic
(UUID)
Time Service
(UUID)
Figure 4.7: Service with characteristics used in one-step BLE time synchronization
protocol.
Code
Purpose
0
Regular time synchronization data (t0).
Reset by the peripheral device after sending accelerometer data.
1
Accelerometer data.
Set by the peripheral device.
2
Acknowledgement of received accelerometer data.
Set by the central device.
Table 4.1: Various values used for the Code Characteristic and their purposes.
The use of these are currently isolated to the evaluation described in
Section 5.2.
Another consideration was the protocol developed in [4] by Wåhslén et al. Unlike
the other two-step scheme in [3] by Ramirez et al. that protocol is also intended
for work with Bluetooth.
In the end we decided that there certainly exists
better synchronization protocols than the simple one we used (the one in [4]
being an obvious candidate), but that the time synchronization itself is just a
small part of the larger system which we build, and the focus should not be
on the individual parts themselves. Of course it has to be accurate enough to
be used for the use case of multi-person kayaking, otherwise the system would
make no sense, but as we will describe in Section 5, we believe that it is. The
system is a proof-of-concept and made to be modular – if another BLE protocol
fits whatever use case one has better, then swapping out that part should be
trivial.
26
==PAGE:28==
4.5
Integrating Bluetooth synchronization and
computer vision code
As noted earlier a text file containing timestamps of each frame is to be created
alongside the video output from the CV application. One has to wonder how
to get the time of the central Arduino device into the Python code running the
CV program in order to write this text file.
A first thought could be saving the time to a file and then reading that from
the Python code into a time variable. This idea is quickly shut down by the
realization that the Arduino code runs on the actual Arduino device and not
a computer and as such saving the time to a file would force it to be to a SD
card attached to the Arduino. This is unfeasible to be used in conjunction with
the Python program as one would have to continually remove the card from the
Arduino and load it into the computer to then reinsert it into the Arduino.
A better idea is probably to read the value required from the serial connection
of the Arduino by the use of Python package PySerial7. This, however, also
presents some challenges. The main problem is when to read from this serial
connection. We know that the CV code runs in a loop where each iteration reads
a frame from the camera and writes it to a video file – putting the frame through
the OpenPose framework before writing, if the approach with intertwined code
is chosen. An aspect one has to keep in mind is that on a read of the serial
connection, if a value is returned, one can not be sure exactly when it was written
as the serial connection acts as a buffer with space for one value. It could be
written several seconds ago, which would really throw off the timestamps. A
logical idea would then be to attempt to read it as often as possible, which in
this case would mean in every iteration of the loop. Without some tweaking
this results in very janky video when viewed during recording and a seemingly
sped up version when playing the recorded video back afterwards. This could be
due to OpenCV wanting to keep the video at 60 FPS (as set when creating the
video writer). As it cannot record 60 FPS while reading the serial connection
for each frame, the resulting video is still 60 FPS, but those 60 frames span
multiple seconds of real time so the video looks sped up.
Upon closer inspection of the way the serial connection in PySerial works, one
can see that the time it takes to read the connection is variable depending on
if anything has been written to it or if it is “empty” (meaning we already read
the latest value and reading again will not retrieve the same value). If there
is a new value present it will be fetched within a few milliseconds, but if there
is none then it will continuously attempt to read up till a threshold known as
the timeout. By default this timeout is not set, so it would attempt to read
until a new value has been written to the serial connection by the Arduino,
which would be seriously detrimental to the video recorded as nothing would
be captured meanwhile. When setting the timeout to 1 seconds, which seems
to be the norm when reading around the internet, we end up with the situation
described in the previous paragraph with janky video that looks sped up in
the recorded version. Setting the timeout to 0 seconds results in “missing” the
read of the t0 value several iterations.
Through trial and error the current
7https://pypi.org/project/pyserial/
27
==PAGE:29==
optimal setting seems to be around 0.05 seconds of timeout – which still results
in some slightly jumpy video but allow time for reading the serial connection
and achieving time synchronization to use for the timestamping. It is clear that
this solution is not the answer either.
Instead we turn to multi-threading. In order to not have the reading of the serial
connection have any effect on the video, the reading needs to be performed in
a separate thread. Python comes with the threading library which allows for
creating threads that run specific functions with given arguments. Extracting
the code responsible for reading the serial connection and processing the values
into a separate function and putting a while-loop around it provides an excellent
opportunity for multi-threading. We do this and start a thread (before entering
the main loop) which executes this newly created function with the sole respon-
sibility of continuously reading the serial connection. The next order of business
is to make sure that successful reads by the auxiliary thread propagates to the
variables used in the loop run by the main thread. There are multiple ways to
accomplish this with everything from signal interrupts to global variables. We
choose to utilize call by reference instead as we feel it is the most simple and el-
egant. Python uses a mixture of call by value, where the value of variables such
as integers, strings etc. given as input are simply copied into the function and
the arguments therefore are immutable, and call by reference where the value
of objects given as input – hereunder arrays – can be changed in the function
body and these changes will also be reflected on the object outside the function.
Therefore to accomplish sharing integer values between threads we put them
inside arrays and use those as arguments. They can then be indexed into where
necessary to use the integer value.
One other point of note is how one keeps track of time elapsed since the last
successful read of the serial connection, as one needs that information to ac-
curately timestamp the frames. Here the overall formula of timestamp = t0
+ (current_time - saved_time) applies, where current_time is the current
time on the computer running the CV code and saved_time is the time on the
computer when it successfully read the last t0 value. As long as we make sure
that the output of the parentheses is in milliseconds before we add it to t0, we
are sure to have a valid timestamp. The question now remains exactly how we
are to record this saved and current time and here the most popular method is
via the time library. One could also use the datetime library, but this compli-
cates a rather simple task as we only need timing functionality and datetime
also includes heaps of other functionality such as arithmetic with dates.
In the time library the most commonly used method is time() which returns
an integer representing seconds passed since Epoch, which is a Unix timing
construct of time passed since 1970. One could theoretically multiply this value
by 1000 and approximate the time in milliseconds, but this is highly inaccurate
as we go from less to more precision. There is also the issue that even though
the time() function returns a float, some systems cannot provide better time
accuracy than 1 second resolution [16]. Another approach where we instead go
from more to less precision is the time library function time_ns() which returns
the time passed since Epoch in nanoseconds. The output can then be divided
by 100000 to approximate the time in milliseconds.
28
==PAGE:30==
As mentioned in Section 4.3.2 there are two basic ways of utilizing OpenPose
in this project: either (1) perform the relevant OpenPose transformation on
a frame by frame basis which suffers from the video only being recorded in
around 6.5 FPS, or (2) record the video frame by frame without the use of
OpenPose until the video has successfully saved – then run the entire video
through OpenPose to achieve pose estimation on top. We choose to go with
option (2) but the project also comes with a Bash script for trying option (1).
Note that going with option (2) also has the advantage of making the system
more modular.
As the CV aspect of the system is no longer intertwined in
the code of the recording and timestamping of frames but merely a step in a
Bash script, substituting the OpenPose framework for something more suited
for one’s use case, or perhaps something newer at some point, is easy. As is also
mentioned in Section 4.4.2 this modularity in every aspect of the system has
been important as we believe it also makes it more future-proof in that outdated
frameworks or protocols can be swapped for newer ones at some point.
Implementation
In this section we will quickly go over the flow of the program running on the
computer. The flow chart of the result of integrating the time synchronization
with the computer vision code can be seen in Figure 4.8. One thread (in the
figure called Thread 0) is always responsible for continually reading the serial
connection of the connected Arduino. If there is an error in the data read, which
is usually manifested as an old timestamp being read, then the thread sets a
global break flag and ends its execution.
The main thread, Thread 1, is responsible for everything related to the camera.
The loop the thread executes starts with reading a frame from the connected
webcam – this also includes noting the time it was read.
The next step is
checking the global break flag and ending the execution, if it is set. This flag is
the one Thread 0 can set as described above, if errors exist in the received data.
Then, the read frame will be written to the output video. Straight afterwards a
timestamp is written for the particular frame to a timing file as described in the
previous section. Next step is showing the current frame to a window, so that
the user can follow the recording. This step is not strictly necessary and for
some configurations and use cases might be left out. The last thing happening
in the loop is checking if the ’q’ button has been pressed and, if so, ending the
execution. If not, the program executes from the top of the loop again. When
the execution of the loop has stopped, the resulting output video is run through
the OpenPose framework, which adds an overlay of pose estimation on top of
the video.
29
==PAGE:31==
Read serial
Thread 0
Thread 1
no
Read frame
false
true
Check break flag
Write timestamp
Write to video
Show frame in
window
no
yes
'q' pressed?
END
Run output video
through OpenPose
yes
Error in data read?
Set break flag
END
Python script
Bash script
Figure 4.8: Flow chart of the behaviour of the resultant integrated code running on
the computer. The entire thing in the red square is run via a Bash script,
and the steps inside the blue square is done inside a single Python script.
30
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
As the system is thought to be primarily used on a kayak, the evaluation have
to reflect this and support that the intended use case is indeed possible. The
evaluation was done with two different setups. One setup testing the Bluetooth
synchronization protocol used to synchronize time between the sensors, and
evaluating the synchronization error rates in increasing synchronization inter-
vals. The other setup is used to evaluate the entire system with camera and the
accompanied computer vision facet included. The former is done in Section 5.1
where we begin with a look at the setup, an overview of the design of the eval-
uation, a description of how to reproduce the evaluation, and then results – the
latter in Section 5.2 which follows the same structure.
5.1
Evaluation of synchronization scheme
Power efficiency is alpha and omega when discussing embedded devices being
used for kayaking as there is no power source, save for the battery, available.
Being able to synchronize time with a large interval in between is thus preferable
as message packets cost energy. The overall goal of this evaluation is to ascertain
the synchronization error rate, including drift, in the synchronization protocol
when synchronizing at different intervals.
5.1.1
Setup
This evaluation setup consists of two Arduino Nano 33 BLE Senses, a laptop,
and a logic analyzer. See Figure 5.1 for a block diagram of the setup. The laptop
used is an Apple MacBook Air1 from 2020 with an ARM M1 chip and 16GB
RAM. The logic analyzer used is a Analog Discovery 2 (AD2) from Digilent2.
1https://support.apple.com/kb/SP825
2https://digilent.com/reference/test-and-measurement/analog-discovery-2/start
31
==PAGE:33==
Physical connection
Physical connection
Laptop
Bluetooth Low Energy
Arduino 1
Arduino 2
Physical connection
Physical connection
Physical connection
Logic
Analyzer
Figure 5.1: Block diagram of the setup tested in this evaluation. The central clock
everything is synchronized with is the hardware clock on the Arduino 1
device acting as the central device.
5.1.2
Method
For this project, we test with synchronization intervals at 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 30, 60,
and 120 seconds. The experiment is performed three times for each synchro-
nization interval to gather more data points.
During this procedure the pin connectors of the AD2 device is connected to
the two Arduino devices via their respective D12 pins (see Figure A.2 for pin
information on the Arduinos). Using the WaveForms application3 from Digilent
we can use the AD2 as a logic analyzer. See Figure 5.2 for a reference of how
the setup looks.
3https://digilent.com/shop/software/digilent-waveforms/
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.2: Setup for the synchronization evaluation.
The Arduinos are set to synchronize time as described in Section 4. To evaluate
the worst case error rate for the given synchronization interval, we compare the
clocks of the central and the peripheral device just before a new synchronization
is due to ensure maximum potential drift (see Figure 5.3).
Drift
Check error rate
Central
Peripheral
Sync interval
Figure 5.3: The goal is to determine the error rate just before a new synchronization
so the potential for drift is the largest. This data is collected just before
every synchronization during the entirety of the experiments.
In order to be able to compare the clocks of the central and peripheral devices
with this maximum potential drift, we do the following: start a timer on both
devices to go off 5 milliseconds before the next synchronization determined by
the synchronization interval. The timer is implemented by simply noting the
time at the start and continually checking if the difference between the current
time and the start time is larger or equal to the timer value.
We initially had one approach to performing this evaluation, but later simplified
33
==PAGE:35==
this approach to be done differently. First, we will describe the initial, more
complicated approach and discuss why we decided to move away from it. Then,
we will move on to describe the simplified approach.
Initial approach
In the following we assume the pins of the devices will not stay on for more
than 1000 milliseconds (1 second).
This is done by using the remainder of
the values described below after having performed modulo by 1000.
When
the timer goes off, both devices fire up one of their pins (we choose the D12
pin), which can be read by the logic analyzer. The millis() function on the
Arduinos return an integer value corresponding to the amount of time elapsed
in milliseconds since the Arduino booted up. The central device will keep its
pin on for millis() milliseconds, while the peripheral will keep its pin on for
millis() + diff milliseconds, where diff is the offset value saved from the
last time synchronization.
See Figure 5.4 for a visual representation of this
pattern.
sync_interval - 5
sync_interval - 5
millis() % pin_max
central
sync_interval - 5
sync_interval - 5
(millis() + diff) % pin_max
peripheral
sync
sync
sync
sync
Figure 5.4: Pin pattern which the devices follow. Line down represents the pin being
off, line up represents it being on. This representation is the same as the
one used in the WaveForms software, which we will mention in detail a
little later. pin_max is a variable which we set to 1000. Note that this
pattern of “pin down, pin up” seen between the sync markers repeats
until the Arduinos are powered down.
The synchronization scheme is built such that checking the millis() value on
the central device against the millis() + diff value on the peripheral just
after a synchronization should yield values very close to each other. Given that
we check these values when as much time as possible has passed since the last
synchronization, we should be able to see the additional drift manifest itself in
the difference in when the pins shut off. Calculating this difference is simply
done by taking the time when one device shuts its pin off and subtracting it
34
==PAGE:36==
from the time the other device shuts its pin off. The devices might not fire their
pins at exactly the same time even though they both should after timers set to
the exact same value. One of the reasons for this might be Operating System
(OS) related delays on the Arduinos. Another reason is the way the timer (upon
which firing of the pins is contingent) is implemented, which will also be subject
to drift. To include the drift displayed here in the overall error rate we calculate
the difference in pin on for the two Arduinos and add that to the error calculated
in the previous step – see Figure 5.5 for a visual representation.
t2
t3
error = abs(t3 - t2) + abs(t1 - t0)
t0
t1
Figure 5.5: One continuous line represents the central device, the other the periph-
eral. Like in Figure 5.4 line down represents the pin being off and line up
the pin being up. As oscillator drift might have an influence on when the
pins turn on, we add the difference in pin up to the error rate calculated
from when the pins shut off.
As the final datasets, which are the output from the WaveForms application
used for evaluation, contain a multitude of these “peaks” we need a way to
automatically calculate these synchronization error rates. For this we create a
Python script, which goes through the data line by line, and using the formula
and method from Figure 5.5 calculates error rates from all “peaks” it encounters.
This simply involves marking the time when one of the devices change their pin
value from 0 to 1 indicating turning it on as t0, then when the other device
device does the same noting that time as t1. Then doing the same for when the
value subsequently changes from 1 to 0 and marking those as t2 and t3. Then
it is just a matter of applying the formula from Figure 5.5, writing this value
to a file, and redoing the above steps again until there are no more lines in the
dataset.
In Figure 5.6 we visualize an example of various synchronization error rates
calculated like described above for several different synchronization intervals.
The data is visualized as a box plot of the results starting from the lower to
upper quartile values of the gathered data. The yellow lines in the middle of
the boxes indicate the median of the data for each interval. The lines extending
horizontally from the box, called whiskers, represent the lowest and highest value
measured. The x-axis represents the synchronization interval used for each case
and the y-axis represents the synchronization error. For instance, the first box
35
==PAGE:37==
from the left represents the synchronization error between the Arduinos when
the synchronization interval is 3 seconds, the next when the synchronization
interval is 6 seconds and so on.
Figure 5.6: Box plot of error rates calculated from data exported from WaveForms.
Outliers have been omitted.
As can be seen the synchronization error rates are quite high, and our theory is
that most of it can be attributed to the previously mentioned OS delays present
when performing action involving the pins on the Arduinos. We also note that
both having the difference in pin up time and pin down time be part of the
error rate gives a superfluously high value, when either one in isolation would
probably suffice as an indicator of drift etc. There is no need to comment further
on the specifics of the results as this approach was abandoned. Thus, we move
on to the simplified version, which we end up using.
Simplified approach
With the previous experiences and observations in mind, we turn to a more
simple approach in which we only utilize the time difference in pin up between
the Arduinos as an indicator of drift and overall error rate. The formula in Fig-
ure 5.5 is therefore changed to error = abs(t1 - t0). To keep changes to a
minimum the Arduinos still follow the pattern described in Figure 5.4, but the
amount of time the pins stay up, which was paramount to the more complex ap-
proach, is now irrelevant as it is not used for the calculations. We do, however,
know that the Arduinos will have to sync up just after pin down, so keeping the
pin pattern is fine and should not interfere with the results of the new approach.
5.1.3
Reproduction
How to reproduce the evaluation will be described next.
36
==PAGE:38==
Prerequisite steps
1. Ensure that the WaveForms and the Arduino IDE programs are installed.
Also install Python 3, hereafter just referred to as Python. Install the
matplotlib Python package with pip to be able to graph the results.
2. Ensure that the two Arduinos and the AD2 are connected to the computer
on which the evaluation is to be performed.
3. Ensure that the pin connector 0 on the AD2 is connected to the D12 pin on
either Arduno. Ensure that the pin connector 1 on the AD2 is connected
to the D12 pin on the other Arduino.
4. Ensure that the eval1 flag is set to true, while the eval2 flag is set to
false in both the BLE_Central.ino and the BLE_Peripheral.ino files.
5. Ensure that the syncDelay variable is set to the synchronization inter-
val desired in milliseconds in both the BLE_Central.ino and the BLE_
Peripheral.ino files.
6. Ensure that one Arduino runs the program BLE_Central.ino and the
other runs the program BLE_Peripheral.ino. Use the Arduino IDE for
this.
7. Verify that the LED located on the Arduino boards next to the blox chip
is glowing. If glowing red, then the Arduinos have yet to connect. If after
30 seconds they are still not connected or if the LED is not glowing at
all, open the Serial Monitor in the Arduino IDE program running on the
computer. Ensure that one of the appropriate ports have been selected
under Tools > Port. If you see some output in the Serial Monitor switch
to the port of the other Arduino and check the Serial Monitor there. This
is usually enough to allow them to connect. Sometimes it seems like they
are not booting until the Serial Monitor is started on their port.
Evaluation steps
1. Open the WaveForms program. If it is the first time one uses the program
a Device Manager usually pops up. Select the Discover2 device that is
listed as connected over USB.
2. Click on the Logic instrument in the left side.
This will open a new
workspace.
3. Set the mode to Record, Samples to 1 M, and Rate to 2 kHz. This will
automatically set the Base to 50 s/div. With these settings we collect 1
million samples at 2000 samples a second, which will take approximately
8.34 minutes.
4. Click on the small green plus button under the larger Config button,
select Signal, choose DIO 0 from the menu, and click add. Do the same
for DIO 1.
5. Click on the large Record button and the status should change to Prefill.
After around half the time of the experiment, the status will change to
Trig’d.
37
==PAGE:39==
6. When the all the samples have been collected the workspace will have been
populated with data. See Figure 5.7 for an example of how the workspace
of the WaveForms program will look at this point.
7. Now there are two ways of evaluating the error rate of the captured data
– a manual and an automatic.
For the manual way: Select the Quick Measure: Vertical tool, which
is the second from the left a bit below the Rate drop down menu. Then
click once at the start of the ramp up of the fastest line to begin rising
and once on the start of the ramp up of the slowest line to begin rising.
You should now be able to see a ∆x value which is the synchronization
error rate. See Figure 5.8 for an example.
For the automatic way: Utilize the Python script e1_get_errors.py, the
basic principle of which is described at the end of Section 5.1.2.
This
requires three files for each synchronization interval evaluated, which is:
3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 30, 60, and 120 seconds. These 24 files are included with
this project, but can also be regenerated if one wants. The files are in the
included Data/E1Data folder, for the naming conventions of the files look
in Section A.3.
Figure 5.7: Capturing measurements in WaveForms.
The chosen instrument is
Logic, the Mode is Record, the Samples are set to 1 M and the Rate
is set to 2 kHz.
Figure 5.8: Example of measuring the error rate of the synchronization in the Logic
instrument of WaveForms with the Quick Measure:
Vertical tool,
which allows us to see that the error rate for this particular measure-
ment is 3.508 milliseconds.
5.1.4
Results
As mentioned earlier, the experiment performed in this evaluation is redone for
several synchronization intervals. We choose the intervals 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 30, 60,
and 120 seconds, as this covers a wide range of use cases and associated energy
consumptions. The input of 24 datasets exported from WaveForms is processed
by a Python script (e1_get_errors.py) outputting error rates. The shorter the
interval synchronization, the more data points as the pins are activated more
frequently as can be seen in Table 5.1.
38
==PAGE:40==
Variant
Duration
Iterations
Amount
3 seconds
8 minutes
3
265
6 seconds
8 minutes
3
173
9 seconds
8 minutes
3
128
12 seconds
8 minutes
3
102
15 seconds
8 minutes
3
84
30 seconds
8 minutes
3
45
60 seconds
8 minutes
3
23
120 seconds
8 minutes
3
12
Table 5.1: Different synchronization intervals and the corresponding number of data
points gathered for each.
After the error rates have been calculated, another Python program (e1_create_
plot.py) is responsible for visualizing the data. See Figure 5.9 for a box plot of
the results starting from the lower to upper quartile values of the gathered data.
Like the previous box plot the yellow lines in the middle of the boxes indicate
the median of the data for each interval. The lines extending horizontally from
the box represent the lowest and highest value measured. The x-axis represents
the synchronization interval used for each case and the y-axis represents the
synchronization error.
The various boxes represent differing synchronization
interval cases.
Figure 5.9: Box plot of error rates calculated from data exported from WaveForms.
The experiments as described in Section 5.1.3 were performed three times
for each synchronization interval tested, which resulted in a total of 24
datasets. Outliers, of which there were four, have been omitted to keep
the graph readable.
From the box plot we can observe that there is only a small increase in the
synchronization error rate recorded the larger the synchronization interval is,
and it is not monotonically increasing. This also means that there is a base
39
==PAGE:41==
error rate of around 4 −6 milliseconds regardless of drift. Much of this error we
guess has to have something to do with the operating system on the Arduinos,
possibly some tasks sometimes taking longer etc., as the deviation is quite high
– often around 3−4 milliseconds from one experiment to the next. In Table 5.2
we can see the mean and standard deviation of each case – both in milliseconds.
We do see that our experiences with the deviation from one experiment to the
next is confirmed by the standard deviation being between 3 and 4 milliseconds
for each synchronization interval variant. The mean shows, just like the median
lines of the box plot, that the error is not monotonically increasing the higher
the synchronization interval is set. A synchronization interval of around 60 sec-
onds seems reasonable given the results, and should be a good balance between
accuracy and power efficiency.
Variant
Mean
Standard deviation
3 seconds
5.3
3.5
6 seconds
6.0
3.5
9 seconds
5.2
3.2
12 seconds
5.8
3.6
15 seconds
5.3
3.4
30 seconds
6.3
3.5
60 seconds
5.5
3.4
120 seconds
7.1
3.5
Table 5.2: Mean and standard deviation for each case or variant in this evaluation.
Thus from an energy conservation viewpoint these results show that the syn-
chronization interval can be kept fairly long without noteworthy loss of accuracy,
and energy therefore can be saved. As there is only access to power in the form
of a battery on a kayak, and the devices therefore are required to be power effi-
cient to be continuously used, this is good news. If one was inclined one could
find the most optimal synchronization interval by the use of machine learning
to estimate when the power saving from a longer synchronization interval is
less than the accuracy loss from increasing the delay further. This is, however,
outside the scope of this thesis.
5.1.5
Extension: Long synchronization intervals
As the results of the evaluation does not show any significant drift in the syn-
chronization intervals ranging from 3 to 120 seconds, we decide as an extension
to see what happens to the drift if the synchronization interval is increased
to an artificially high rate. The higher a synchronization interval one can get
away with without significant drift, the more energy savings and the better for
a product which has a battery as its sole power source. For this we test the
synchronization intervals 20, 30, and 60 minutes. As these synchronization in-
tervals are so long, we extend the duration in which the WaveForms application
gathers data. Due to time constraints we have one run of around 7 hours for
each long synchronization interval, and then two additional runs of 1.5 hours
for each. The former is achieved by selecting 50M as the amount of Samples
gathered in WaveForms with 2kHz still being the Rate, the latter by changing
the Samples to 10M and keeping the same Rate. The various synchronization
40
==PAGE:42==
intervals, the duration of the tests, and the total data points collected can be
seen in Table 5.3. Note that we include the experiments with a synchroniza-
tion interval of 3 seconds for reference.
The same approach as described in
Section 5.1.3 can be used for these experiments with the changes to Samples in
WaveForms as described above.
Variant
Duration
Iterations
Amount
3 seconds
8 minutes
3
265
20 minutes
7 hours
1
↓
20 minutes
1.5 hours
2
27
30 minutes
7 hours
1
↓
30 minutes
1.5 hours
2
17
60 minutes
7 hours
1
↓
60 minutes
1.5 hours
2
8
Table 5.3: Different synchronization intervals, the duration of each test, how may
iterations were performed, and the corresponding number of data points
gathered for each.
The synchronization error rates are once again calculated by use of the e1_get_
errors.py program – this time by including the -ext argument when running
it by issuing the command python e1_get_errors.py -ext. The same is done
with the e1_create_plot.py program to visualize the data by issuing the com-
mand python e1_create_plot.py -ext. See Figure 5.10 for the results. The
layout of the graph is identical to the one presented in the previous evaluation
with each box representing a synchronization interval variant, the yellow lines
representing the medians and the whiskers representing the lowest and highest
values measured. The x-axis is once again the synchronization interval for each
case and the y-axis the synchronization error.
Figure 5.10: Box plot of error rates calculated from data exported from WaveForms.
41
==PAGE:43==
It can be seen that the median increases as the synchronization interval dramat-
ically increases. While there is a jump visible from a synchronization interval of
3 seconds to 20 minutes, the greatest jump is visible when we get to 60 minutes.
In Table 5.4 we can see the mean and standard deviation for the data. Here
we see a doubling in the mean error from 3 seconds to 60 minutes and a 60%
increase in mean error from 30 minutes to 60 minutes, which is a huge increase.
This is obviously an unacceptable decrease in accuracy even in the face of the in-
creased energy efficiency. We do, however, see that the means of 20 minute and
30 minute synchronization intervals are similar to some of the sub-120 second
intervals, but we do believe that the uncertainty present in the data is too high
to use this as the sole reason for picking 30 minute synchronization intervals in
the system, if it was to be used for assisting in kayak training. A more sensible
60 seconds interval might be a more defensible choice.
Variant
Mean
Standard deviation
3 seconds
5.3
3.5
20 minutes
6.2
3.0
30 minutes
6.5
4.1
60 minutes
10.4
3.8
Table 5.4: Mean and standard deviation for each case or variant in this evaluation.
5.1.6
Extension: Temperature
The drift of oscillators are impacted by the ambient temperature of the location
in which they are placed. As the use case of the system proposed in this thesis
is on kayaks, a scenario is likely in which one device is located on the actual
kayak and another is located in an enclosure on the paddles that are submerged
in water during paddling. As the water is hardly ever the same temperature as
the air, there can be a difference that is significant in the amount of drift present
between the devices. Therefore, as another extension to the evaluation of drift
we perform some additional experiments with the Arduinos in differing locations
with varying temperature.
We do not have access to waterproof enclosures
for the Arduinos used in this project and thus we simulate the temperature
difference by utilizing one of the most ubiquitously available resources – the
sun.
The evaluation is performed outside on a sunny day. One of the Arduinos is
placed in direct sunlight, while the other is placed behind a sheet of reflective
metal to keep it as cool as possible and achieve as high a temperature difference
between the Arduinos as possible – see Figure 5.11 for an image of the setup.
The temperature is measured in both the direct sunlight, where the one Arduino
is placed, and behind the sheet of metal, where the other is placed. In direct
sunlight the temperature is measured as high as 46 degrees Celsius and in the
shade 31 degrees Celsius, which means that taking into account smaller inac-
curacies and uncertainties the temperature difference between the one Arduino
and the other is probably an average of 12 −15 degrees Celsius throughout
the testing. The same approach is used as described in Section 5.1.3, where
we gather data for synchronization intervals of 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 30, 60, and 120
seconds over a period of around 8 minutes, and then repeating that three times
42
==PAGE:44==
for each interval.
Figure 5.11: Setup for the temperature extension evaluation.
As performing these experiments takes time, and the sun unfortunately is always
moving, they are split over two days. The temperatures recorded are therefore
also not exactly the same. To see which tests are done in which temperatures
look at Table 5.5.
Variant
Iterations
Temperature difference
Amount
Day 1
3 seconds
3
46 −31 = 15◦C
258
6 seconds
3
46 −31 = 15◦C
162
9 seconds
3
46 −31 = 15◦C
75
12 seconds
3
46 −31 = 15◦C
92
15 seconds
2
46 −31 = 15◦C
↓
Day 2
15 seconds
1
45 −29 = 16◦C
81
30 seconds
3
45 −29 = 16◦C
45
60 seconds
3
45 −29 = 16◦C
24
120 seconds
3
45 −29 = 16◦C
12
Table 5.5: Overview of which experiments were done under which temperature dif-
ferences. Note that temperatures are approximate. We also note that
there are fewer total error rates for the 9 seconds interval than the 12 and
15 second intervals, which is likely due to the high temperature impacting
the laptop used to gather the data and causing drop outs.
The results are once again generated with the e1_get_errors.py script – this
time with the -heat argument ie. python e1_get_errors.py -heat. The re-
sults are also once again visualized with the e1_create_plot.py program with
the -heat argument as above ie. python e1_create_plot.py -heat. See Fig-
43
==PAGE:45==
ure 5.12 for the results. Once again the boxes represent different synchronization
interval variants, the yellow lines the median and so on.
Figure 5.12: Error rates of varying synchronization intervals in temperature differ-
ential environment.
Surprisingly, the results show a lower overall synchronization error in more or
less all synchronization interval variants compared to the evaluation performed
where both Arduinos are operating under the same temperature. This might
be due to various reasons, one of them being that the temperature difference
might have an effect, but in a positive way. If the clock in one Arduino was
previously always drifting ahead and the other behind, then the temperature
change might have caused the first one to slow its drift or the second to now
drift a little faster ahead depending on which device was left in the sun. To
really get to the bottom of this, one would need to repeat the experiment and
make sure that it is the device that was previously in the sun that is now in the
shade and vice versa, and see the differences. Due to time constraints, this is
however outside the scope of this thesis.
In Table 5.6 we can see the mean and standard deviation of the various synchro-
nization interval variants. These numbers give us another plausible explanation
in that these recordings might simply just be lucky due to the still high devia-
tion, and performing the entire evaluation again might result in means that are
higher than the normal evaluation.
44
==PAGE:46==
Variant
Mean
Standard deviation
3 seconds
4.6
3.2
6 seconds
4.8
3.3
9 seconds
5.8
4.7
12 seconds
4.9
3.3
15 seconds
4.8
3.1
30 seconds
5.3
3.6
60 seconds
4.7
3.4
120 seconds
5.9
3.1
Table 5.6: Mean and standard deviation for each case or variant in this evaluation.
5.2
Evaluation of entire system
The overall goal of the system is to provide a way of determining how synchro-
nized athletes on a multi-person kayak is. To help in this we attempt to achieve
a level of synchronization between the timestamps of video captures from the
attached camera and sensor readings captured on the Arduinos – the goal of
this evaluation is to calculate how accurate this level of synchronization is.
5.2.1
Setup
This evaluation setup consists of two Arduino Nano 33 BLE Senses, a computer,
a laptop, and a webcam. For a block diagram of the setup refer to Figure 5.13.
The computer used runs Pop!_OS 20.04 LTS, has 32GB RAM, an Intel Core
i7-4930K CPU @ 3.40 GHz x 12, and an NVIDIA GP106 (GeForce GTX 1060
6GB) graphics card. The laptop is the same as used in Section 5.1, but the
specifications are irrelevant as it is simply used as a power source. The webcam
is a Logitech C922 Pro HD Stream capable of 720p at 60 FPS. An image showing
the exact setup can be seen in Figure 5.14.
Physical connection
Computer
Bluetooth Low Energy
Arduino 1
Physical connection
Physical connection
Arduino 2
Laptop
Figure 5.13: Block diagram of the setup for the evaluation of the entirety of the
system.
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.14: Setup for the evaluation of the entire system proposed in this thesis.
5.2.2
Method
The Arduinos are set to synchronize time as described in Section 4 with a syn-
chronization interval of 3 seconds. The peripheral device is set to be able to
capture accelerometer events and write their timestamps to the BLE time char-
acteristic, and the central device continuously reads the BLE code characteristic
to see if new accelerometer timestamps has been written from the peripheral
device.
Peripheral device
In each iteration of the loop the peripheral device reads
the accelerometer data. This returns a value for the x, y, and z axis correspond-
ing to how much G-force was measured in the respective direction. In order to
not capture every movement of the peripheral device we set a threshold of 1.5
G. If any of the values are higher than 1.5 or lower than -1.5, the current time is
saved to an array. This array can hold a maximum of 20 values, and if 20 values
have already been stored, then subsequent readings will not store additional
timestamps even if their value exceeds the threshold. The array size of 20 is
arbitrarily chosen and could be even lower as what we utilize for this evaluation
is the first recorded value. The reason for storing timestamps in an array instead
of instantly writing them to the BLE time characteristic for the central device
to read, is that if multiple writes happen in sequence then only around 20% of
those will be read by the central device as it cannot read fast enough for the
values to not be overwritten. Thus, we create an alternative transmit protocol.
If any timestamps have been stored in the array, then the peripheral device will
write the next element to the BLE time characteristic. The value 1 will also be
written to the BLE code characteristic indicating an accelerometer timestamp
awaiting reading. These two writes will only happen if: (1) the current value
46
==PAGE:48==
of the BLE code characteristic is 0 indicating no transfer currently in progress,
or (2) the current value is 2 indicating an acknowledgement from the central
device of having read the previously written accelerometer timestamp.
It is
therefore insured that no value will be overwritten before it has first been read
by the central device.
Central device
In each iteration of the loop the central device checks if the
current value of the BLE code characteristic is 1 indicating accelerometer times-
tamp data ready to be read from the peripheral device.
If so, it reads the
timestamp from the time characteristic, writes it to the serial connection so
the connected computer can also read it, and changes the value of the BLE
code characteristic to 2 to indicate having read the current timestamp to the
peripheral device.
Computer
The computer with attached camera is responsible for saving the
streamed video as well as various timestamps to file. The thread responsible
for reading the Arduino serial connection either reads a message of the pattern
“V XXXX” or of the pattern “A XXXX”, where the Xs are the timestamp in
the form of a millisecond value. V-messages are regular time synchronization
timestamps from the central device, which the program uses to set its own time.
The A-messages are only used for this evaluation and are the accelerometer
timestamps, which when read are saved to a separate accel.txt file.
To achieve the overall goal this evaluation is used to ascertain how accurate the
time difference between the computer and the peripheral is after synchroniz-
ing both with the central device. The evaluation is performed by starting the
camera attached to the computer as described in Section 4.5. The Arduinos
run the regular time synchronization code with the extensions described in the
paragraphs above. The peripheral Arduino device is brought into view of the
camera – carefully to ensure not exceeding the threshold on the accelerometer
force triggering the accelerometer readings being recorded. It is then forcefully
jerked downwards to trigger the accelerometer captures, a short while after
which acknowledgements of receiving the data will be printed to the terminal,
and the program is manually terminated by pressing the ’q’ key. The saved
video is then run through the OpenPose framework to overlay pose estimation
on top. Using the ffmpeg program one can then overlay the frame numbers
on top of this altered video. See Figure 5.15 for a graphical overview of how
the video is prepared for the evaluation. Subsequently going through the video
allows one to pinpoint the exact frame number in which the peripheral is be-
ginning to be jerked downward, which is the time that the first accelerometer
timestamp should have been recorded. Noting the frame number and looking in
the basicvideo.txt file (which is the file where frame timestamps are written
to) for the line corresponding to the frame number gives a timestamp. This
time can now be compared with that of the first accelerometer timestamp in
the accel.txt file, and subtracting one from the other and taking the absolute
value will give an error rate in milliseconds.
47
==PAGE:49==
OpenCV
Video
Video with pose
estimation and frame
numbers overlaid
Video with pose
estimation overlaid
ffmpeg
OpenPose
Output
Framework or 
program
Figure 5.15: Diagram of the video pipeline for the full system evaluation. Results
in a recorded video with pose estimations and frame numbers overlaid
on top.
5.2.3
Reproduction
How to reproduce the evaluation will be described next. The evaluation de-
scribed below assumes that the method where the video is recorded first and
then run through OpenPose afterwards is used, but as described in Section 4.5
there are other options. One could use any of the other scripts developed to
perform this evaluation instead. Refer to Section A.2 for the available scripts
and their descriptions – note that files related to OpenPose have to be copied
to a specific location in order to work, see the appendix.
Prerequisite steps
1. Ensure that Python 3 is installed, and that the OpenCV and PySerial
and matplotlib packages are installed. OpenCV is installed with whatever
package manager your distribution comes with, and PySerial and mat-
plotlib is installed with pip. Also ensure that OpenPose has been cloned
from their GitHub and build. Lastly, install the Arduino IDE program.
2. Ensure that the central Arduino is connected to the computer on which
the evaluation is to be performed, and that the peripheral Arduino is
connected to either a laptop or power bank.
3. Ensure that the eval2 flag is set to true, while the eval1 flag is set to
false in both the BLE_Central.ino and the BLE_Peripheral.ino files.
4. Ensure that one Arduino runs the program BLE_Central.ino and the
other runs the program BLE_Peripheral.ino.
5. Verify that the LED located on the Arduino boards next to the blox chip
is glowing. If glowing red, then the Arduinos have yet to connect. If after
30 seconds they are still not connected or if the LED is not glowing at
all, open the Serial Monitor in the Arduino IDE program running on the
computer. Ensure that one of the appropriate ports have been selected
under Tools > Port. If you see some output in the Serial Monitor switch
to the port of the other Arduino and check the Serial Monitor there. This
is usually enough to allow them to connect. Sometimes it seems like they
are not booting until the Serial Monitor is started on their port.
6. Ensure that the path of the Arduino serial connection at the top of the
threaded_opencv.py file (or the threaded_full.py file if the method
48
==PAGE:50==
of putting each frame through the OpenPose framework before writing is
used) is set to the correct path of the central device. This path can be
found in the Arduino IDE when selecting port.
7. Ensure that the computer on which one runs the evaluation either has an
internal webcam or an external connected.
8. Ensure that mpv player is installed. If another video player is to be used,
edit the run_openpose_after.sh file (or appropriate file depending on
method used, see Section A.2 for file corresponding to chosen method)
and change the line with mpv to your preferred player.
Evaluation steps
1. Run the e2_run_openpose_after.sh script (or appropriate script for cho-
sen method) by issuing the ./e2_run_openpose_after.sh command from
a terminal pointed to the directory with the script inside.
2. After the initial time synchronization the camera will turn on.
3. Slowly pick up the peripheral Arduino and carry it inside the camera view.
4. Forcefully move the Arduino in any direction while still inside the camera’s
view.
5. Acknowledgements of received accelerometer data should appear in the
terminal running the e2_run_openpose_after.sh script after a small de-
lay.
6. With focus on the window with the camera frame showing press the ’q’
button to quit.
7. The saved video will be run through the OpenPose framework, if the
default method has been chosen. This will take approximately four seconds
per one second of captured footage.
8. ffmpeg will automatically run now to overlay the frame numbers on the
video.
9. mpv or whichever video player was specified in the script will now begin
playing the video. Find the frame in which the peripheral device is just
beginning to be moved forcefully. Depending on the force of the movement
this might not be the first frame after movement as the accelerometer has
to register a G-force over or under 1.5 before it captures the timestamp,
so it might be the second or third frame after movement started. Our
approach to getting the correct frame was to perform the movement very
forcefully and quickly and then choosing the first frame in which movement
is detected. Utilize the Next Frame and Previous Frame actions in your
video player to locate the correct frame accurately.
10. Quit the video player and a prompt for frame number will appear in the
terminal window, this is the e2_check_error.py program running. Write
the frame number which corresponds to when the peripheral began moving
and press ENTER. An error rate will now be displayed and also appended
to the eval2data.txt file.
49
==PAGE:51==
For an example of how the process of finding the correct frame and inputting
the frame number to check the error rate looks see Figure 5.16 and Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.16: Video frame just as the peripheral Arduino is being forcefully jerked.
Figure 5.17: Inputting
the
frame
number
from
Figure
5.16
into
the
e2_check_error.py program.
5.2.4
Results
The experiment was repeated 75 times to gather sufficient synchronization error
rates for statistics. This was done in batches of 25 back to back experiments
performed in a loop. After the synchronization error rates have been calculated
by the procedures described above they are visualized by use of the Python
program e2_create_plot.py. This generates a scatter plot of the data and
outputs the mean. The results of the experiments can be seen in Figure 5.18.
Each dot is one of the 75 synchronization error rates. The color of the dots are
randomly chosen to make it easier to differentiate dots that are close to each
other. The black line represents the mean of the error rates and the mean/aver-
age is displayed above it. The x-axis represents the individual experiments for
a total of 75 data points, and the y-axis represents the synchronization error.
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.18: Results of 75 different experiments.
The average synchronization error rate of these 75 experiments is 16.04 millisec-
onds. While some of the experiments led to error rates that were outrageously
high such as above 60 milliseconds, these were in the minority and probably
the result of picking an incorrect frame for multiple reasons. Removing the four
largest outliers, which are likely the result of something going wrong in that
particular test, and which are quite far from the rest of the error rates, results
in an average of 13.25 milliseconds, which is quite the reduction. Given the un-
certainties in this kind of testing, which are described further down, the results
are more or less as expected.
This experiment has multiple sources of uncertainty and error due to the nature
of how the ground truth is assessed. The correct frame representing the ground
truth is picked manually, which means that the skill of the assessor directly
influences the synchronization error rate. While manually picking a frame that
is closer to correct becomes easier with practice, there sometimes are situations
in which deciding the best frame is hard.
One of the other sources is the fact that a force either exceeding the threshold
of 1.5G or falling below the threshold of -1.5G has to be achieved to trigger
accelerometer readings. This is likely to be the main reason for some of the
high error rates encountered during testing as one might pick a frame where
the Arduino is moving, but the force has not been adequate to trigger the
accelerometer readings being captured and thus it is an “incorrect” frame. This
is a problem that is hard to solve as the threshold has to be high enough to
not trigger capturing readings by the smallest of movements, but low enough
that it is consistently triggered for the evaluation. The threshold was picked
after testing of several different values by moving the Arduino about, and is
in our opinion a reasonable pick offering the necessary balance of susceptibility
to movement. One could in theory repeat the experiment with varying levels
of movement threshold and pick the one giving the best results, which is more
51
==PAGE:53==
involved than the procedure we used to pick the threshold, but as it only has
an impact on this evaluation and not on the actual capabilities of the system,
we choose to not venture deeper down this rabbit hole as we believe the time
cost to results ratio is too skewed.
Another source of uncertainty and error is the fact that there is an average of
33.3 millisecond time difference between individual frames, so if one is so unlucky
that the actual start of the movement of the Arduino is between two frames,
one will be off by at least 16.5 milliseconds no matter the choice of ground truth
frame. This average of time between frames was calculated by recording for one
minute and then finding the average time difference between every line and the
previous in the time text file that is created upon recording. This recording
and calculating was repeated several times and the average of these is 33.3
milliseconds between each frame. One minute recordings where the peripheral
device is moved often to trigger capturing accelerometer data and sending it
to the central device is also gathered to check if performing actions with the
accelerometer have an effect on time between frames – it does not. Changing
the synchronization interval does not have an effect on time between frames
either.
All in all the average synchronization error is what we expect given the uncer-
tainties described above. We see a few ways to improve this. First, increasing
the FPS would decrease the worst case error and just the error in general if the
movement of the Arduino is started in between two frames. This does, how-
ever, require more of the camera used for the system and increases the price as
higher FPS cameras are usually more expensive if the quality is decent. Second,
finding a different way of selecting the ground truth frame, which we now do
manually by picking the suspected frame in the video. It is unclear exactly
what could be changed about this – maybe just more experience as an assessor
would reduce the error and allow for a more consistent correct pick. Another
option is to use some external hardware to decide exactly when movement starts
such as wearable sensors, but then the inaccuracies and cost of those would also
have to be taken into account. Thirdly, some part of the synchronization error
is of course also due to the synchronization protocol itself as can be seen in
Section 5.1, where even a synchronization interval of 3 seconds has a mean of
5.3 milliseconds synchronization error. Implementing a protocol such as the one
Wåhslén et al. introduce in [4] should keep the part of the synchronization error
caused by the protocol as low as possible and in turn would result in a lower
synchronization error in this evaluation.
5.2.5
Extension: Two consecutive motions
As the system proposed in this thesis is thought to be used in sports assistance,
specifically in multi-person kayak training, it makes sense to verify that it can
handle more complex motions and that the synchronization error for these are
not unacceptably high.
Thus, we implement an extension to the evaluation
of the entire system in which the motion is not simply one sudden downward
jerk of the Arduino, but also a subsequent upward jerk. This gives a basis for
evaluation of more complex motions than previously tested.
The experiments are performed like described in Section 5.2.3 with some slight
52
==PAGE:54==
modifications. Instead of only one sudden motion jerking the peripheral Arduino
downwards, we also perform a sudden jerk upwards afterwards as mentioned.
A small pause of movement of between 0.5 −1 second is performed in between
these movements to ease in finding the start of the second motion. This allows
us to define the start of the second motion as the first accelerometer reading that
happens 500 milliseconds after the previous. This small pause is obviously not
going to be present in movements if the system is to be used in assisting kayak
training, but it is solely there to simplify this evaluation.
Another change,
albeit a very minor one, is in the code the peripheral Arduino continuously
executes. Here we change the size of the array holding accelerometer values
from 20 to 50, such that the data captured from the extended movement can
fit. The last significant change is in the script responsible for calculating the
error. Here we use a variant of the script used in the previous evaluation – now
called e2_check_error_2m.py. It is utilized in the same step of the procedure
as in the antecedent evaluation after having chosen the frame of the video in
which movement starts.
In this case we note both the frame in which the
downwards movement start and the one in which the upwards start. These two
frame numbers are input into the Python script and a synchronization error is
displayed and written to the appropriate file.
The experiment is, like the previous, repeated 75 times to gather sufficient
synchronization errors for statistics.
After the synchronization errors have
been calculated they are visualized with the same Python script as in the an-
tecedent evaluation but with the argument -2m – thus being run by python
e2_create_plot.py -2m. This once again generates a scatter plot of the data
and outputs the mean. See Figure 5.19 for the results. Again each dot repre-
sents one of the 75 calculated synchronization errors, the colors are randomly
picked to differentiate the points, and the black line represents the mean with
the numerical value displayed above it. The x-axis represents the individual
experiments for a total of 75 data points, and the y-axis represents the synchro-
nization error.
The average synchronization error of these 75 experiments is 32.84 milliseconds.
Given the sources of uncertainty and inaccuracies described in the previous eval-
uation, this is a more or less expected doubling of the synchronization error for
just one motion. We attribute this mostly to the "time between frames"-issue
previously mentioned. As in the antecedent evaluation the possible remedies
include increasing the FPS of the recording, finding a better way of determin-
ing the ground truth frame, and improving the synchronization protocol itself.
Overall, the system handles multiple motions as well as expected.
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.19: Result of 75 different experiments.
54
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Future Work
In this thesis we propose a modular proof-of-concept system the goal of which
is to aid in sports training where synchronization between individual athletes
is important – specifically multi-person kayaking. The system is composed of
a camera, attached compute device, and two embedded Arduino devices. We
implement a synchronization protocol to keep time synchronized between the
Arduinos and the computing device running a computer vision application. The
system works both indoors and outdoors as the protocol functions without the
use of a GPS module. We evaluate the protocol to show that a good synchroniza-
tion interval, meaning the time duration between each synchronization between
the devices, is around 1 minute, which should provide a good balance between
accuracy and power consumption, and that increasing it much further up to 60
minutes results in almost doubling the synchronization error. We also evaluate
the entire system to show that the synchronization error between the computing
device and the Arduinos is kept relatively low while executing code that cap-
tures video from the attached camera and putting it through a computer vision
application, which is the intended use case.
While the project achieves fusion between computer vision and sensor data, and
provides a solid foundation, there is still future work to do before the system
can be used to determine synchronization between athletes. Building upon this
foundation one could for instance integrate a version of the system proposed by
Zhou et al. in [8]. This version should somehow include the sensor data to pro-
vide even more granularity and better precision in determining synchronization
between the athletes.
For other future work there are several things that could be implemented. One
is the use of a more complex synchronization protocol such as the one Wåhslén
et al. proposes in [4] in which the error rate is kept to a minimum. The devices
used in that project seems to be a dedicated IMU unit, whereas we use an
Arduino with multiple sensors and capabilities which one would think equals
more bloat in the code executed on device. Therefore it is probably not likely
that the error rate would be as low as [4] achieved if the protocol was adopted
into the system proposed in this thesis, but it would undoubtedly be better than
the current.
Another feature which could be worked on in the future is increasing the range
55
==PAGE:57==
of the system. While the current system uses Bluetooth Low Energy, a fitting
technology is LoRaWAN which has successfully been used in similar applica-
tions. The synchronization protocol introduced in [3] by Ramirez et al., which
is also used in [2], might then be adopted. This would open up for applications
in which the central device does not necessarily have to be on the kayak, which
would simplify the setup as space is already at a premium on such a small vessel.
The last relatively small improvement, which does however require some equip-
ment and additional time, is to accurately measure the power consumption of
the Arduino devices during synchronization with various synchronization inter-
vals to have a proper basis for discussion on the balance of accuracy versus
power consumption.
56
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1] Ryan T. Li, Ryan T. Li, Scott Kling, Michael J. Salata, Sean A. Cupp,
Joseph Sheehan, and James E. Voos. Wearable Performance Devices in
Sports Medicine. Sports Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach, 2016. 6
[2] Charalampos Orfanidis, Linus Remahl, Xenofon Fafoutis, Jonas Wåhslén,
Hans Rosdahl, Johnny Nilsson, and Martin Jacobsson. Synchronization
over long range: A kayak training scenario. QC 20201022. 8, 56
[3] Ceferino Gabriel Ramirez, Anton Sergeyev, Assya Dyussenova, Assya
Dyussenova, Assya Dyussenova, Anton Sergeyev, Anton Sergeyev, and
Bob Iannucci. LongShoT: long-range synchronization of time. 2019 18th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor
Networks (IPSN), 2019. 8, 25, 26, 56
[4] Jonas Wåhslén, Ibrahim Orhan, and Thomas Lindh. Local Time Synchro-
nization in Bluetooth Piconets for Data Fusion Using Mobile Phones. 2011
International Conference on Body Sensor Networks, 2011. 9, 10, 12, 26,
52, 55
[5] Yun Zhang, Shibo Zhang, Miao Liu, Elyse Daly, Samuel L. Battalio, Samuel
Battalio, Santosh Kumar, Santosh Kumar, Bonnie Spring, James M. Rehg,
and Nabil Alshurafa. SyncWISE: Window Induced Shift Estimation for
Synchronization of Video and Accelerometry from Wearable Sensors. Proc.
ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 2020. 10, 11, 12
[6] Valentin Radu and Maximilian Henne. Vision2Sensor: Knowledge Transfer
Across Sensing Modalities for Human Activity Recognition. Proc. ACM
Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 2019. 11
[7] Enea Cippitelli, Samuele Gasparrini, Ennio Gambi, Susanna Spinsante,
Jonas Wahsleny, Ibrahim Orhany, and Thomas Lindhy.
Time synchro-
nization and data fusion for RGB-Depth cameras and inertial sensors in
AAL applications. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Communica-
tion Workshop (ICCW), 2015. 12
[8] Zhongyi Zhou, Anran Xu, and Koji Yatani. SyncUp: Vision-based Practice
Support for Synchronized Dancing. arXiv: Human-Computer Interaction,
2021. 12, 13, 55
[9] Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo Martinez, T. Simon, S. Wei, and Y. A. Sheikh. Open-
Pose:
Realtime Multi-Person 2D Pose Estimation using Part Affinity
57
==PAGE:59==
Fields. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
2019. 13, 14, 18
[10] Connecting Nano 33 BLE Devices over Bluetooth.
https://docs.
arduino.cc/tutorials/nano-33-ble-sense/ble-device-to-device.
Accessed: 2022-05-11. 15
[11] OpenCV About. https://opencv.org/about/. Accessed: 2022-05-30. 17
[12] OpenCV. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenCV. Accessed: 2022-05-
30. 17
[13] DensePose in Detectron2.
https://github.com/facebookresearch/
detectron2/tree/main/projects/DensePose. Accessed: 2022-07-11. 21
[14] Getting
Started
with
DensePose.
https://github.com/
facebookresearch/detectron2/blob/main/projects/DensePose/
doc/GETTING_STARTED.md. Accessed: 2022-07-11. 21
[15] nRF52840 SoC product brief.
https://infocenter.nordicsemi.com/
pdf/nRF52840_PS_v1.7.pdf. Accessed: 2022-09-05. 24
[16] time — Time access and conversions.
https://docs.python.org/3/
library/time.html. Accessed: 2022-07-01. 28
58
==PAGE:60==
Appendix A
Appendix
This appendix holds information that was not important enough to go directly
in the main report, but that none the less gives some background information
or overview of pieces of the project. In Section A.1 we list the specifications
and pin information for the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense used in the system
proposed for this thesis.
In Section A.2 we give an overview of the various
files and programs used in the system by describing their purposes. Finally, in
Section A.3 we provide an overview of the data files used in the thesis.
59
==PAGE:61==
A.1
Arduino specifications
Figure A.1: Relevant features of Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense.
60
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.2: Pin overview of Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense.
61
==PAGE:63==
A.2
Overview of program files and scripts
Code/
Description
BLE_Central.ino
File which should be running on one of the Ar-
duinos to enable them to synchronize time via
BLE.
BLE_Peripheral.ino
File which should be running on the other of the
Arduinos to enable them to synchronize time via
BLE.
e1_get_errors.py
Used in the evaluation described in Section 5.1.
Takes either no argument for the evaluation de-
scribed in Section 5.1.3, -ext for the one de-
scribed in Section 5.1.5, or -heat for the one
described in Section 5.1.6. Depending on argu-
ment the script is responsible for reading the csv
files output from the WaveForms application of
the corresponding evaluation, and calculating er-
ror rates for the various time synchronization in-
tervals. Outputs text files with error rates as de-
scribed in Section A.3.
e1_create_plot.py
Used in the evaluation described in Section 5.1.
Creates a box plot from the output data from
e1_get_errors.py, and like that script takes ei-
ther no argument, -ext, or -heat depending on
which box plot to generate.
e2_check_error.py
Used in the evaluation described in Section 5.2.
Receives as input the frame one suspects to be
the one in which the peripheral Arduino begins
moving. Output is the synchronization error rate
calculated by subtracting the time the first ac-
celerometer data was captured from the times-
tamp of the chosen frame. The output is writ-
ten to the eval2data.txt file described further
in Section A.3.
e2_check_error_2m.py
Same as above, but takes two frame numbers in-
stead. Used for the evaluation in Section 5.2.5.
Writes output to the eval2data_2m.txt file de-
scribed further in Section A.3.
e2_create_plot.py
Used in the evaluation described in Section 5.2.
Creates a box plot from the output data from
e2_get_errors.py
or
e2_get_errors_2m.py.
Use no argument for the former and -2m for the
latter.
Note that all scripts shown in Table A.1 requires the scripts to be placed in the
build/examples/user_code directory inside of your OpenPose folder (after
OpenPose has been cloned and build according to the instructions on their
62
==PAGE:64==
GitHub1).
Code/
Description
threaded_opencv.py
Runs the part of Figure 4.8 in the blue
“Python script” box. Records video until
stopped and saves output to a video file
as well as timestamps into a time text
file of when the individual frames were
read. Also keeps time synchronized with
the central Arduino.
threaded_full.py
Runs the version of the code in which
OpenPose is used on every individually
read frames while in the loop. Only runs
at max 6.5 FPS.
e2_run_full.sh
Used in the evaluation described in Sec-
tion 5.2.
Runs the threaded_full.py
script, then overlays frame numbers on
top
of
the
output
video
and
opens
the
transformed
video
in
the
cho-
sen
video
player
(default
is
mpv).
Upon exit from video player runs the
e2_check_error.py script, such that the
frame number which was just found can
be entered.
e2_run_opencv.sh
Used in the evaluation described in Sec-
tion 5.2.
Same as above but starts by
running the threaded_opencv.py script
instead.
e2_run_openpose_after.sh
Used in the evaluation described in Sec-
tion 5.2.
Same as e2_run_opencv.sh
with the change that the output video
is run through OpenPose, which overlays
pose estimations, before frame numbers
are overlaid, and the video is opened in a
video player.
e2_run_openpose_after_2m.sh
Used in the evaluation described in Sec-
tion 5.2.5. Same as above, but runs the
e2_check_error_2m.py file when having
to input frame number instead.
Table A.1: Table of scripts used for evaluation described in Section 5.2.
1https://github.com/CMU-Perceptual-Computing-Lab/openpose#installation
63
==PAGE:65==
A.3
Overview of data files
Data/E1Data/
Description
XXs_10m_Y_2khz.csv
Here XX is pattern for a synchronization in-
terval and Y is pattern for a number between
1 and 3.
Output data from WaveForms for
evaluation in Section 5.1.
XXm_7h_1_2khz.csv
Here XX is a pattern for a synchronization
interval.
Output data from WaveForms for
evaluation Section 5.1.5.
XXm_2h_Y_2khz.csv
Here XX is a pattern for a synchronization
interval and Y is a pattern for a number be-
tween 1 and 2. Output data from WaveForms
for evaluation Section 5.1.5.
XXs_heat_10m_Y_2khz.csv
Here XX is pattern for a synchronization in-
terval and Y is pattern for a number between
1 and 3.
Output data from WaveForms for
evaluation in Section 5.1.6.
XXs_output.txt
Here
XX
is
pattern
for
a
synchroniza-
tion
interval.
Created
as
output
by
e1_check_errors.py with no argument.
XXs_heat_output.txt
Here
XX
is
pattern
for
a
synchroniza-
tion
interval.
Created
as
output
by
e1_check_errors.py with the -heat argu-
ment.
XXm_output.txt
Here
XX
is
pattern
for
a
synchroniza-
tion
interval.
Created
as
output
by
e1_check_errors.py with the -ext argu-
ment.
Data/E2Data/
Description
eval2data.txt
Output data from 75 experiments for evaluation in Sec-
tion 5.2. Written to file by e2_check_error.py.
eval2data_2m.txt
Output data from 75 experiments for evaluation Sec-
tion 5.2.5. Written to file by e2_check_error_2m.py.
The data files in Table A.2 are files generated during the use of the system,
and are thus not included with the thesis. They are all overwritten on a new
execution of the generating programs.
64
==PAGE:66==
File
Description
basicvideo.mp4
Video
file
output
from
either
threaded_full.py
or
threaded_
opencv.py.
Has pose estimations
overlaid on top of recorded video
if output from the former, no pose
estimations if from the latter.
basicvideo_frames.mp4
Video from above which has had
frame numbers overlaid on top by use
of the ffmpeg program.
basicvideo_openpose_frames.mp4
Video
output
from
running
the
e2_run_openpose_after.sh or e2_
run_openpose_after_2m.sh
script.
Thus, can be identical in end re-
sult with basicvideo_frames.mp4 as
pose estimations and frame numbers
are overlaid on the recorded video,
but it has been generated differently.
basicvideo.txt
Text
file
output
from
either
threaded_full.py
or
threaded_
opencv.py.
Contains one line per
frame with the timestamp for that
particular frame.
accel.txt
Used in the evaluation described in
Section 5.2. Contains the accelerome-
ter reading timestamps received from
the central device, who in turn got it
from the peripheral device.
Table A.2: Files generated during the use of the system.
65
