==PAGE:1==
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser
Cut HTS Tapes
Master Thesis
DTU Energy Conversion and Storage
Work performed at THEVA Dünnschichttechnik, Ismaning, Germany
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
Master Thesis
August, 2022
By
Pedro Gil
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU Physics, Fysikvej, 311, DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Pedro Gil ­ s202928
Signature
Date
ii
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This work is focused on the electro­mechanical behavior of tapes manufactured at THEVA
Dünnschichttechnik. It is part of the Filaments for Fusion project aimed at the production
of high performance high temperature superconductors (HTS) filamentized tapes to re­
duce the AC losses in Conductor on Round Core (CORC) cables,
The first section of the thesis gathers the results regarding the single bending of laminated
and copper coated tapes. For this study, the laminated tapes had the HTS layer about 4
times closer to the neutral axis than the copper coates tapes. The tapes tested had both
a substrate layer of Hastelloy with a thickness of 100 μm and a 3.5 μm thick HTS layer.
The bending was performed under compressive bending for the copper coated samples
and under tensile mode for the laminated samples.
Following the mechanical loading of the tapes, resistive measurements giving I­V plots
were obtained and compiled in a statistical study that comprised in total 96 samples of
both kinds. Overall decrease of the critical current was observed in all tapes for lower
bending radii (around 3 mm). One of the objectives of the electromechanical testing was
the determination of the critical bending radius at a 95 % of IC retention criterion. The
results yielded critical bending radii of 3.5 mm and 3.1 mm for copper coated and lami­
nated samples respectively. A further analysis of the n­factor extracted from power­law
fits was conducted and showed similar behavior, with the n­factor decreasing for bending
radii close to the critical bending radius for both kinds of tape, with the laminated tapes still
displaying higher n­factor values. SEM investigations showed structural damage around
the area which underwent higher stress values, displaying protrusion lines and cracks
aligned with the ab­planes that are characteristic of the crystal lattice of GdBCO.
The second section concentrated on the striation of silver coated tapes, which was fol­
lowed by the deposition of copper via Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD) and a first mea­
surement of the critical current via Tapestar also yielding magnetic field profiles and a
second resistive measurement of the critical current. The striations obtained were anal­
ysed by SEM after the copper deposition, the width of the striations was of about 30 μm
corresponding to the laser beam width used to remove the top layers. The depth of the
striations was of around 7 μm meaning that the laser ablation successfully removed the
full silver, full HTS and partially MgO layers without damaging the substrate. The Tapes­
tar measurements showed an average of 122 A for non­striated copper coated segments,
while for striated sections the IC dropped to 18 A. Moreover, the magnetic field profiles
were U­shaped corresponding to a lower magnetic field plateau in the interior of the tapes
instead of the expected Bean­model V­shaped profile. In order to understand this phe­
nomenon a model written in Python of the magnetic field profile produced by the striated
tape was provided taking into account the distance between the tape and the Hall de­
tectors. The model determined that the plateaus were a measurement effect from the
distance that is too large for the detectors to be able to offer a good enough resolution to
visualize the magnetic field generated by the HTS filaments. Further use of the Python
code was used to accurately model the occurence of IC peaks in the Tapestar critical cur­
rent profiles. It was concluded that the peaks were due to faulty functioning of the lasers
that failed locally to remove the HTS layer. Finally, resistive measurements determined
the critical current of 7 striated samples. The values were scattered between 50 A and
90 A, however, at least 2.5 times higher than the results given by Tapestar and it was
concluded that the striation brought additional ohmic contributions to the flow of current
damaging the total critical current.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Pedro Gil, MSc Physics and Nanotechnology, DTU
First of all, I would like to express my immense gratitude to my two supervisors, one in
Germany, one in Denmark: Dr. Cornelia Hintze for all the support, sympathy and for
always providing good decisions, opportunities and corrections, and Dr. Jean­Claude
Grivel for all the relevant remarks, pertinent questions, guidance and patience even with
the distance separating us.
Thank you to Dr. Veit Grosse for providing the initial opportunity to work at THEVA, for
the disponibility despite an early goodbye. and for the vision that set the guidelines for
the thesis.
To Thérèse Chabert I am very grateful for all the work that was developed with you, the
initiatives, the friendship and company.
A special thanks goes to Dr. Rastislav Ries, from the Institute of Electrical Engineering in
Bratislava for giving the opportunity to visit the facilities, for the experimental cooperation
and help with the chemical etching.
I also would like to dearly thank Jochen Mesle for having the patience of teaching me the
ways of the SEM and ion milling processes at THEVA and for the good company provided
while working.
A great thanks to Stefan Furtner for helping me with the modeling of the Tapestar data
and providing all the necessary information to have reliable results.
A vielen Dank to Dr. Christian Hoffman from CERACO for teaching me and providing the
conditions to perform the chemical etching of the samples.
Dr. Anis Smara deserves a special thanks for the advices regarding the resistive mea­
surements, and the experimental preparation of the tapes.
iv
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Motivation
1
1.1
CORC Cable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Application Of HTS For Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Definition Of A Superconductor And Crystallographic Structure Of REBCO
Superconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electrical and Magnetic Properties Of HTS Superconductors
. . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Production Of REBCO Thin­Films At THEVA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Mechanical Properties, Filaments And Effects On Performance . . . . . . . 12
3
Experimental Procedure
16
3.1
Structure Of The Tapes And Set­Up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Experimental Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Sample Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Single Bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Critical Current Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.6
SEM and Chemical Etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.7
TapeStar Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Results and Discussion
31
4.1
Electro­Mechanical Study Of 3 mm Laminated And Copper Coated Tapes . 31
4.2
Striation Of 3 mm Tapes And Critical Current Dependence . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Conclusion And Future Prospects
55
6
Annex
61
6.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.2
Bending Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.3
Tape Striation and Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:9==
1
Motivation
The work presented in this thesis was done within the project Filaments for Fusion (F4F).
The global aim of the project is to deliver high quality magnets that are suitable for fusion
energy and more specifically for compact tokamak fusion systems. In order to achieve
the necessary plasma temperatures for fusion in a tokamak, the corresponding magnets
made of high temperature superconductors (HTS) have to generate a high enough pulsed
magnetic field to drive a plasma current. These pulses induce AC losses in the super­
conductors and particularly high losses coated conductor tapes, due to the high aspect
ration between width and the thickness [1]. More concretely it can be stated that the main
goal of the F4F consortium is to investigate how it is possible to manufacture REBCO
tapes that prevent the screening currents or eddy currents that are behind the AC energy
losses. The problem associated with these losses is that they generate heat in the su­
perconducting layer and it must be removed by a cryogenic cooling system. AC losses
might therefore increase the cost of cooling and impede the practical application of RE­
BCO tapes [2]. However, there is a high interest in REBCO tapes because of their high
critical current, high critical magnetic fields (these terms are explained in the Theorical
Background section) and potential for reduced costs given their high critical temperature
([2]­[4]).
Moreover, in order to reduce the AC losses striation is considered to be a strong canditate
[1]. It has also been demonstrate by Wang et al. (see [3]) that striation in Conductor on
Round Core (CORC) cables is useful in reducing AC losses. However, this is only valid in
certain regimes: for example at low magnetic fields an increase in losses was observed
and for a low number of striations, while increasing the number of filaments effectively de­
creases the energy dissipation. Therefore an investigation should be realized in order to
better assess the feasibility and the properties of the tapes that are manufactured for this
purpose. This why a first section is dedicated to the bending study of a tape fabricated by
THEVA Dünnschichttechnik which is a part of the F4F consortium and second part analy­
ses the electrical performance of striated tapes via laser ablation in order to simulate the
HTS filaments on a tape that are to be deposited on 3D textured substrates produced by
SUBRA S/A.
1.1
CORC Cable
The first section of this work is dedicated to the electro­mechanical study of REBCO tapes.
The objective is to determine what the performance of the tapes is in out­of­plane bending
and estimate how well they can perform in a CORC cable. This type of cable consists of
a core that can contain a cooling path as shown in Figure 1.1 and around which REBCO
tapes are wounded helical manner and optionally displaying a spacing between them to
allow the cooling fluid to absorb heat. There is also the possibility to put different HTS
tapes layers that are transposed, this reduces the cable magnetization and increases
mechanical flexibility of the cable [5]. The number and width of tapes used can vary
depending on the application of the cable, however, performances having an engineering
current of 340 A/mm2 at 4.2 K and 17 T have been observed [7].
Furthermore, CORC cables with diameters of 3.6 mm have been fabricated [6]. This sets
a high requirement for the coated conductor tapes since they have to be able to withstand
low bending radii. One of the objectives of this work is therefore to estimate the critical
bending radius for the superconducting tapes and see how different layer structure can
affect the performance.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Scheme of a CORC cable for two REBCO tape layers adapted from [6].
1.2
Application Of HTS For Fusion
In recent years, considerable efforts have been put to achieve nuclear fusion. The most
well­studied and funded device is the tokamak, which consists of a torus put in strong
magnetic fields generated by external coils. This system allows to confine a plasma,
where the fusion reaction between tritium and deuterium atoms occurs, releasing high
amounts of energy that can be used under the form of heat for the production of electricity.
The goal of fusion research today is to enhance as much as possible the total fusion output
power. There are two traditional ways to do it: by increasing the size ratio of the reactors
or by reaching higher coil magnetic field values. It is known that the fusion power scales
quadratically with the magnitude of the toroidal magnetic field ([7], [8]). This would not
only allow for better confinement and performance but it would also decrease the size of
reactors and make them more compact which is a direct way to reduce costs.
Currently, in order to reach fields in the order of 10 T, low temperature superconductors
(LTS) are preferred due to their reliability. However, high temperature superconductors,
if successfully manufactured, could offer an increase in critical current density by a factor
of 10 which would result in a reduction of cost of electricity (CoE) of 4.4 % compared
to LTS. Also, if the magnetic field strength of the magnetic fields is increased by 40 %
this leads to a reduction in CoE of 3.4 % [8]. Therefore, there is a great interest in the
use of HTS for fusion magnets. However, as mentioned before, the nature of the pulses
necessary to generate the magnetic fields requires a decrease of the AC losses and this
can be conducted through the striation of the tapes. This work investigates how it can be
achieved on tapes through laser ablatio and the corresponding impacts on current carrying
performance of the HTS tapes and how it affects the results in non­invasive inductive
measurements.
2
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Definition Of A Superconductor And Crystallographic
Structure Of REBCO Superconductors
A superconductor is a material that exhibits particular electro­magnetic properties. The
most notable characteristics are zero direct current (DC) resistance and the expulsion of
magnetic fields from its volume. This however is complete only possible when the mate­
rial falls bellow the so­called critical temperature TC (and other parameters such as the
critical field and current that are presented in later sections), which marks the transition
from its normal state to the superconducting state. Each material has its own different
critical temperature, values can range between close to 0 K and 90 K at ambient pres­
sure. Superconductors can be classified through critical temperature meaning that there
are high temperature superconductors (HTS) which transition at temperatures higher than
30 K and low temperature superconductors which exist at temperatures lower than 30 K.
For industrial purposes HTS are of greater interest since the they can be cooled to the su­
perconducting state using liquid nitrogen, which is more abundant and therefore cheaper.
The requirements on thermal insulation and cooling power are also lower. One type of
superconductors that is of particular interest (which is discussed in the following sections)
is the rare­earth cuprate superconductors (REBCO). As these cuprates are brittle ceram­
ics, they cannot be drawn like metallic wires. However, long aspect ratio products are
required to manufacture cables and coils. Therefore, thin­film tapes are produced, where
a functional thin film of superconducting REBCO material is deposited on a metallic sub­
strate supplying the mechanical properties. The focus of this thesis is on the properties
of this particular kind of superconducting materials.
The structure in Figure 2.1 can be analysed by noticing a network of CuO2 located for
example along the Cu(2) plane that is parallel to the (001) plane. Moreover, Cu­O chains
along the b­direction on both top and bottom of the unit cell and the layers between the
CuO2 can be seen as charge reservoirs. Not only they enhance the stability of the crystal
structure but they supply the charge carriers (electrons) to the CuO2, that then combine
into Cooper pairs. Cooper pairs can be defined as couples of bound electrons due to
electron­ion interactions and are considered to be the source of superconductivity after
being introduced by the BCS (Bardeen­Cooper­Schrieffer) theory in 1957 [10], however
this goes beyond the scope of this work.
The pronounced anisotropy coming from the crystal lattice is also eminent in the critical
magnetic fields and critical current varying along the crystallographic directions. This is
only possible because the ceramic is oxygen deficient. In its original form, with x=0, it as­
sumes a tetragonal crystal structure and is insulating at all temperatures. Through oxygen
doping (i.e. increasing x), a phase transition occures from tetragonal to the orthorhombic
structure shown in Figure 2.1, creating the Cu­O chains. The stability of the supercon­
ducting state and therefore the critical temperature is therefore a function of the oxygen
doping x, and assumes a maximum at x=0.93 [9].
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Unit cell for GdBa2Cu3O7, from [45].
2.2
Electrical and Magnetic Properties Of HTS
Superconductors
The development of REBCO tapes allows operation at significantly higher temperatures
compared to LTS. Additional advantages are the higher critical current density (of the order
of 106 A.cm−2) and higher critical magnetic fields at 77 K, which is the most important
parameter for magnets. This was however not the case in the early beginnings of the
manufacture of the tapes. Mainly low current densities were achieved due to the granular
nature of the superconductor and large BC2 and JC anisotropy [11]. Since current flows
through the material, intuitively it is understandable that it should flow without obstacles.
This works well when the bulk material presents a regular lattice throughout its volume.
However, the highly anisotropic nature of cuprate superconductors results in lower current
flow across grain boundaries the larger the lattice misalignment between the grains. This
ultimately results in weak links only letting considerably low currents pass.
As it is possible to observe in Figure 2.2, the critical current density decreases by 80 %
for just a 20◦misorientation angle. A simple approximation used by Gurevich in [12] to
describe this dependency that then paved the way for the more detailed function displayed
in Figure 2.2, is the following:
Jc,GB = Jc0e−θ
θ0
(2.1)
where JC,GB is the critical current density at the grain boundary characterizing the weak
link, JC0 is the bulk current density and θ and θ0 are the misorientation angle and a scaling
factor, usually between 3◦and 6◦respectively [13].
4
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Critical current density dependency on the grain boundary misorientation tilt
angle for a high temperature superconductor [46].
2.2.1
Critical Magnetic Fields And Flux vortices
The second parameter relevant to the performance of HTS cuprates are the first and sec­
ond critical magnetic fields: BC1 and BC2. Since superconductivity breaks down at high
magnetic fields, it is possible to determine a critical magnetic field, which tells that for
values below it, the material is in the superconductive state. In this phase, the super­
conductor expels magnetic fields completely, it is called the Meissner state, above it the
material returns to the normal state for type I superconductors. However, type II super­
conductors exhibit an additional state for values above the first critical field BC1 and BC2,
the mixed state. The mixed state predicted by Abrikosov corresponds to an intermedi­
ate phase between the Meissner state and the normal state, where instead of rejecting
the full magnetic field, there is a partial penetration of external field [13]. In this phase
it is energetically favorable for the superconductor to let the magnetic field penetrate its
volume. Therefore the normal regions appearing within the superconductor are called
flux vortices, which allow a quantized magnetic flux to penetrate ϕ0 =
h
2e [11]. Now it is
possible to define the first critical magnetic field BC1 as the value of the magnetic field at
which the first flux vortex appears in the material. As the magnetic field is ramped up the
flux vortex lattice becomes denser and after a certain threshold the flux vortices start to
overlap, BC2 has been reached.
As it can be understood, flux vortices play an essential role in the definition and charac­
terization of a Type II superconductor and ultimately in the determination of its type. Two
length scales are used to define the vortex state. The coherence length and the London
penetration length. The former corresponds to the distance over which superconductivity
ends, and the latter quantifies how far a magnetic field can penetrate into the sample.
One way to mathematically represent superconductivity is through the order parameter
|Ψ| = √n where n is the density of Cooper pairs (pair of electrons carrying the super­
conducting current) and its full expression is: Ψ = √neiθ, with θ as a phase factor. The
characteristic lengths are shown in Fig. 2.4.
Understandably, from Figure 2.4, the lines describing a Gaussian­like profile describe the
intensity of the magnetic field: by getting further away from the center of the flux vortex the
intensity of the magnetic field decreases. Moreover, the diameter of the flux vortex shown
in grey is determined by the coherence length. The distinction between Type I and Type
II comes from the comparison between λ and ξ for the same material. If λ < ξ then it is a
Type I, and when the relation is reversed it is of Type II. With the cuprate superconductors
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: From left to right: phase diagram showing the dependence of the supercon­
ducting state on the applied magnetic field and temperature. Illustration of the physical
phenomena associated with each state: a) Meissner state, complete expulsion of mag­
netic field, b) Mixed state, partial penetration through flux vortices, c) Normal state: full
penetration [14].
Figure 2.4: Sketch displaying the principle behind the field penetration through a flux
vortex, the background can be assumed to be the bulk superconductor. λ1,2,3 refer to
an increasing London penetration length for different materials for example, ξ to the co­
herence length. Φ0 is a Cooper pair density threshold that determines the length of the
coherence length. [13]
belonging to the latter, in the materials used in the present work, the length over which
superconductivity is restored is smaller than the field penetration length.
2.2.2
Flux Pinning
Generally, flux vortices behave like liquids, i.e. they move through the material. However,
they can be pinned. This phenomenon is exploited in so­called hard superconductors.
The pinning­sites associated with this represent potential wells that trap the vortices. This
is highly important in the development of superconducting magnets since the pinning force
is what prevents the loss of the superconducting phase at high fields and reduces the pos­
sibility for quenching. Naturally occuring or artificial pinning sites can be impurities, atom
specific doping, atom exchange and particular surface topography [14]. The importance
of pinning can also be understood as a way to prevent the generation of heat.
When a current flows through the superconductor, there is an interaction ( ⃗
fvort = ⃗J × ⃗Φ0)
between the flux vortices (Φ0) and the current J coming the Lorentz force. This induces
6
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: Scheme showing a simplified version of how a flux vortex gradient generates
a supercurrent. Also shown is the direction Lorentz force resulting from the interaction
between the transport current flowing (J) along the wire and the parallel magnetic field
that penetrates the material through flux vortices. [15]
the movement of the flux vortices. Since these correspond to quantized magnetic fields
that vary across the superconductor because of the movement, it induces a voltage. The
voltage therefore generates Joule heating. However, there is no movement of the vortices
and hence no heating if
⃗
fvort is inferior to the pinning potential, as illustrated in Figure 2.5.
2.2.3
Critical Current And Irreversible field
One major distinction that makes Type II superconductors more suitable for certain appli­
cations in comparison with Type I superconductors is their ability to carry superconducting
currents of high magnitudes. In Type I superconductors, there is only one state that marks
the superconducting phase: the Meissner state, which is defined by a net zero magnetic
field in the bulk. This implies that as soon as the material is superconducting there is no
transport current that is allowed to flow, otherwise the net zero­field state would be broken
through the current induced magnetic field. This also means that current is only allowed
to flow in the outer shell of the material, whose volume is determined by the London pen­
etration length defined above. There is here a need to make a clear distinction between
the persistent circulating current generating the flux lines, the transport current and sur­
face screening current. The surface screening current is present in all superconductors
in all superconducting states, flows in the direction generating an opposed magnetic field
to the one applied. This gives the superconductor its perfect diamagnetic properties in
the Meissner state (χ = −1). The transport current is conventionally defined as the cur­
rent carrying charge, used for applications and the main parameter studied in this thesis.
Finally the persistent circulating currents are similar in nature to the surface screening
current, however they generate the flux vortices and flow in the opposed direction to the
surface screening currents.
When performing an IC measurement, what is being measured is the transport current.
The typical IC plot for a real superconductor is shown in Figure 2.6. The curve is generally
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: I­V curve of a real superconductor showing the three distinct regimes for the
behavior of the flux vortices: thermically assisted flux flow (TAFF), Flux Creep and Flux
Flow and the criterion to determine the critical current density [16].
modelled by the following power law:
U = Uc( I
Ic
)n
(2.2)
where U is the measured voltage across the voltage taps, UC is the critical voltage as­
sociated to IC the critical current, I is the transport current, and n the exponential factor
containing in its value information on the temperature ,magnetic field and qualitiy of the
superconductor (homogeneity of the crystal lattice for example). The n­values vary gen­
erally between 18 and 30. An ideal superconductor would have an infinite n­value and
the curve would be a of infinite slope step function. A particularly high value of n is usually
desired for it generally means high pinning forces as reflected in Expression 2.3.
n = Upin
kBT
(2.3)
where Upin corresponds to the pinning potential which encompasses the magnetic and
crystallographic characteristics of the material [17] and T is the temperature of the super­
conductor.
From Figure 2.6, it is possible to extract important information about the behavior of the
superconductor. There are three visible regimes. The first one starts from 0 to the begin­
ning of the steep increase in voltage, it is defined as thermally activated flux flow (TAFF).
In this part of the curve, the flux vortices are pinned and their movement is restrained
to thermal fluctuations, this allows for a smooth current flow and virtually no resistance
is observed. Next, it is visible that the curve steeply increases before suffering a slope
decrease. This section is known as flux creep, and corresponds to the initial phase of
interaction between the transport current and the flux quanta ϕ0: ⃗FL = ⃗JT × ⃗ϕ0. In this do­
main the flux vortices start to break apart from their pinning centers and become mobile.
The movement of the vortices at this stage is a consequence of the interaction between
8
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:17==
the flux lines and the force resulting from the magnetic pressure of the latter, actually ex­
ceeding the magnitude of the Lorentz force. Once FL > FP , with FP being the pinning
force, the flux vortices start to move. With Faraday’s law of induction it is straightforward
that this movement creates a varying magnetic field generating a voltage, hence the steep
increase. It is also within the flux creep range that the critical current is defined, however
arbitrarily it is set to the corresponding current density value to a voltage drop of 1 μV/cm.
As the current continues to increase, the final domain denominated Flux Flow is reached.
Defined as the section where all the flux vortices are depinned, this regime possesses
high Lorentz forces inducing non negligible resistive losses that keep on increasing until
the normal state is reached.
Figure 2.7: Critical Surface of a superconductor defined by the magnetic field, temperature
and current flowing. [15]
The effect of flux vortices being depinned by either a sufficiently high magnetic field
(>Birr), temperature (>Tirr) or transport current density (>JC) is a transition from an ir­
reversible state to a reversible one where flux vortices are free to move. The onset that
marks the transition is defined by the irreversibility line, showing the mutual dependency of
the irreversibility field on temperature and current as shown in Figure 2.7. It is to be noted
that the irreversibility surface sets an upper limit to the conditions under which applications
can be realized.
2.2.4
Bean Model And Kim Modification
One model that has been particularly successful in representing the magnetic field and
current density inside a superconductor is the Bean model. It corresponds to a simplified
critical state model, since the main assumption is that the critical current density does not
depend on the magnetic field. Moreover, one of the suppositions is that as soon as the
superconductor is in a magnetic field the current density equals the critical current density
everywhere and is time independent, this ultimately translates into the Maxwell­Ampère
equation in a static electric field:
∇B = ±µ0JC
(2.4)
If for instance an infinite slab along Y and Z in a homogeneous magnetic field B is con­
sidered, as shown in Figure 2.8. According to Equation 2.4, in this simplified geometry
the distribution of the magnetic field is: B = ±µ0x depending on whether x is positive or
negative. This is shown in Figure 2.8, worth noting is that the distance over which the
magnetic field penetrates the sample varies linearly with the intensity. This also implies
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
9
==PAGE:18==
that in this model there is a region over which the current density switches abruptly from
the critical current density to 0. This continues being the case until the magnetic field
reaches a value that corresponds to a full penetration of the superconductor. In this case
the critical current density is reached throughout the sample and has reached a saturation
point, i.e. the critical state. This model presents relatively good results for low magnetic
fields, however for higher magnetic fields the dependence of the critical current density
on the magnetic field breaks the homogeneous distribution.
Figure 2.8: Cross­section of an infinite slab showing the profile of the homogeneous cur­
rent density at a value of Jc (in red) as well as the linear distribution of the magnetic field
(in blue), which displays a linear dependence on the position along the superconductor
[16].
In order to account for the dependence of the critical current density on the magnetic
field, Kim proposed a modification of the Bean model [18] after realizing magnetization
experiments on Nb3Sn and Nb −Zr. Upon reaching the critical state, it was observed
that the critical current decreases in magnitude with an increasing applied magnetic field.
Ultimately, the conclusion was made that the critical current density has the following
expression:
Jc(B) =
Jc0
1 + B
B0
(2.5)
here Jc0 is the critical current density at zero field and can be determined experimentally
by performing a DC measurement, and B0 is close to the thermodynamic critical field of
the superconductor, also possible to be deduced experimentally. This development by
Kim later led Anderson to propose a physical explanation for the flux creep phenomenon
previously explained in section 2.1.2.
10
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Production Of REBCO Thin­Films At THEVA
As already mentioned in the introduction of section 2.1, in order to achieve the optimal
performance of the tapes, it is essential to achieve excellent grain alignment and biaxial
texture. In order to realize this, THEVA uses the Inclined Substrate Deposition (ISD)
method.
2.3.1
Substrate Layers and Inclined Substrate Deposition (ISD)
The first layer that serves as initial substrate is an electropolished Hastelloy C­276 sub­
strate with a thickness that can be either 50 μm or 100 μm. On top of this, MgO is de­
posited through ISD. The reason why MgO is chosen as a substrate for epitaxial growth of
GdBCO is because the MgO substrate performs well for chemical reactivity with the RE­
BCO layer and larger thermal expansion despite the large lattice mismatch between MgO
and GdBCO [19]. MgO and GdBCO have respectively a lattice parameter of a = b = 4.2 Å
and a=3.8 Å. The principle behind ISD is that the substrate is tilted by an angle of α with
respect to the evaporation source. Since columns with (001) oriented facets grow at a
faster rate than others, they shadow other slower growing nucleii therefore preventing the
deposition of MgO on other smaller columns. This effectively induces the selection of one
particular facet above all others and results in homogeneous facet orientation throughout
the substrate and texture.
Figure 2.9: SEM picture of the surface of the MgO layer after ISD and deposition of the
MgO cover layer. Biaxial texture is clearly visible as well as the orientation of the ab­
planes.[20]
However by physically evaporating MgO there is a certain angle spread corresponding
to the solid angle of the evaporating process of MgO, this means that for a static target
the (110) direction of MgO would vary by 14◦regarding tape length. However, since
THEVA performs deposition on a tape that is running at constant speed, the deviation
compensates itself and good alignment of the grains is achieved, therefore guaranteeing
a better critical current.
Moreover, the columnar structure of the MgO layer does not have a sealed roof, it is
necessary to close all the interstices. This is done by depositing a cover layer of about
400 nm of MgO that not only allows to close the top surface but also makes it smoother,
which is achieved by heating the tape, thus increasing the atomic surface diffusion. A
surface like the one shown in Figure 2.9 allows a defect­free deposition of the GdBCO,
since it provides the necessary textured, smooth stepped surface for the epitaxial growth
of the superconductor [21].
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3.2
HTS Layer And Electro­Mechanical Stabilization
Once the MgO layer is ready, the next step is the physical evaporation of the GdBCO onto
the substrate. However, this cannot be done strictly on top of the cover layer. Before it
is necessary to grow a thin seed layer that guarantees a good lattice match between the
HTS layer and the substrate. This seed layer is grown heteroepitaxially on the MgO, and
it is relevant to note that the goal here is not to reach good superconducting properties,
but rather to enforce an ideal lattice match between the two different layers. The thick
(usually 3 μm) HTS layer is then deposited on top and the (001) facet grows parallel with
the previous (001) MgO facet. This allows for the ab­planes to be well aligned and prevent
degradation of critical current. This aspect is of utmost importance and represents the
main reason why biaxial texture is desired.
Tapes from THEVA have displayed high homogeneity of the value of critical current through­
out the tapes revealing optimal orientation. Furthermore, in order to isolate and improve
the current contacts the GdBCO layer is sealed with a 1 μm layer of silver that also al­
lows the diffusion of oxygen in post processing of the tapes for oxygen doping in order to
increase the critical temperature of the superconductor.
Eventually the tape is coated with a surrounding copper layer of typically 10μm. The pur­
pose of copper in this case is to allow for electrical support and mechanical stabilization.
Note that in the TAFF regime displayed in Figure 2.6, the current flows completely through
the superconductor, however, as soon as the regime changes, superconductivity begins
to break apart and a resistive regime appears, this leads to Joule heating that can dam­
age the superconductor if the tape is not properly supported. This is why the copper layer
is deposited, to take a portion of the electric current and to lighten the effects of Joule
heating on the superconductor. A final step of soldering an extra layer of laminate on top
of the copper layer can bring additional mechanical and electrical stability to the tape.
2.4
Mechanical Properties, Filaments And Effects On
Performance
2.4.1
Single Bending
The superconductor layers as mentioned before have usually a thickness of 3 μm and
while decreasing the thickness also decreases the rigidity of the material, defined as
the inability to be bent, it comes at the cost of lower engineering current density. Fur­
thermore, a REBCO superconductor is a ceramic brittle material, meaning that even at
low thicknesses, the tapes are still prone to breaking under certain mechanical condi­
tions. As shown by H.S. Shin et al. in [22], REBCO CC tapes manufactured using metal
organic deposition on Rolling­Assisted Biaxially­Textured Substrates RABiTS substrates
were subjected to bending. It was found that cracks appear in the REBCO layer after the
mechanical stress and that they were the primary source for IC degradation. However,
this behavior only appeared under tensile bending compared to compressive bending up
to strains of ϵ = 1.5 %. Indeed, an important difference that must be stated for the rest of
this work is that the mechanical response from the tapes is considered to be best when
under compressive bending. This means that the layer of REBCO lies below the neutral
axis when performing the bending. It is concave bending for the REBCO layer.
The configuration shown in Figure 2.10 is the one in which all experiments were made,
since the Conductor on Round Core (CORC) cables are manufactured with the REBCO
layers of the tapes under compressive strain and to enable current sharing. This choice
can be justified by the fact that degradation of the critical current is observed for higher
strain values under compression mode in comparison to tension mode [22]. The expres­
12
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.10: Sketch of the cross section of a copper coated bent tape in tensile mode,
showing the neutral axis zn, bending radius r and relative order of the layers, not to scale.
sion for strain in bending mode is shown below:
ϵ = ∆z
R
(2.6)
where ∆z = zHTS −zn corresponds to the distance from the neutral axis of the center
of the HTS layer, and R is the bending radius. It is worth noting that in this convention, if
the center of the HTS layer is higher than the neutral axis, bending will be performed in
tensile mode as displayed in Figure 2.10 and the sign of ϵ is positive. The essential trait
of the neutral axis is the fact that any material that is located directly at the neutral axis is
not subjected to any strain, therefore retaining all of its structural properties. For a beam
made of a single material, the neutral axis is located at the geometric center of gravity
of the beam along the Z­axis. Since the tapes made at THEVA contain different layers,
this means that the neutral axis is shifted. In order to calculate its position the following
formula is used [30]:
zn = 2 Pn
i=1 Ci
Pi
k=1 hk −Pn
i=1 Eibih2
i
2 Pn
i=1 Bi
(2.7)
where Ci = EiAi with Ei is the Young’s modulus of the i­th layer and Ai the corresponding
cross­sectional area, bi the i­th layer width, hi the associated thickness, and Bi = Eibihi.
The closer the HTS layer is to the neutral axis, the lower the strain on it will be.
Moreover, a reversible increase in the critical current under compressive mode has been
observed up to 4 % of the IC. One possible explanation for this behavior is the release
of residual strain [23]. This can be understood as a correction of the defects that were
deforming the superconducting layer, for example inducing a new orientation for the inter­
grain angles decreasing the tilt misalignment as presented previously in Figure 2.2 . One
question that remains to be answered is the possible correlation between the improve­
ment or degradation of the critical current density through bending and the evolution of
the n­value in the power law modelling. As mentioned previously the n­value reflects the
magnitude of the pinning potential, which is inherently linked to the critical current density
as it has been proposed theoretically for a single vortex pinned by a circular defect in
[24] ignoring the interactions with other vortices. However the verification of such a link
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
13
==PAGE:22==
through experiments is not straightforward, since the n factor reflects a macroscopic prop­
erty of the material averaging out the contributions of all the pinning centers and erasing
clear geometrical dependencies while incorporating also inter­vortex interaction such as
Coulomb interactions between the electrons.
2.4.2
Filaments Of Tapes
One main aspect severely diminishing the performance of HTS tapes in the Alternating
Current AC regime is the presence of a time­varying magnetic field, oriented perpendic­
ularly to the ab­planes of the HTS. Although current is transported at no resistance, the
movement of flux vortices, exiting and re­entering the superconductor following the mag­
netic field variations, induces a time­varying electric field, which generates heat and thus
dissipates energy, resulting in losses. In order to visualize the amplitude of these losses,
an example is given by [25] where a 12 mm wide tape is considered with 340 A critical
current in self field. A 20 mT magnetic field being applied perpendicularly to the tape at
50 Hz induces a dissipation of 1 W/m, which is suggested to be enough to cancel the ad­
vantages of using superconductors over regular conductors. Minimization of AC losses is
therefore key in improving the thermal stability of the HTS cable, thus relaxing the cryo­
genic constraints, leading to a reduction in cost and improved operational cost advantage
over conventional cables. AC regime is usually found in applications such as transform­
ers, motors, magnets for tokamaks and cables. The losses are an intrinsic property of
the material and are directly linked to the hysteresis loop that characterizes the supercon­
ductor and more specifically to the area of the loop shown in Figure 2.11. One proposal
to decrease the energy dissipation when operating in the AC regime is the striation of
tapes. This method helps to reduce the eddy currents which induce losses by reducing
the overall surface of a superconducting filament and reducing the large aspect ratio of
the superconducting layer (width with respect to thickness) [25]. The principle behind the
manufacture of filaments is to subdivide the initial tape into N superconducting filaments
separated by N −1 isolating strands. Two main techniques to striation are laser ablation
and the use of filamentized substrates ([2], [26]). In this work, laser ablation is performed
before the deposition of copper on top of the silver layer. Moreover, [1] also confirms
that the effect of reduction of AC losses of striated tapes is also present in CORC cables.
It has been demonstrated in [27] and [28] that the dissipation losses increase with the
square of the tape width as seen in Equation 2.8.
Qloss = 4µ0a2JHag(Ha/Hc)
(2.8)
where, Qloss are the magnetization losses, a is the half­width, J is the current density, Ha
is the applied field perpendicular to the superconducting layer, g(x) = 2/xln(cosh(x)) −
tanh(x) and Hc = J/π. This means that if N filaments are created, the losses will be
reduced by N, suggesting therefore the striation of the tapes. One way to assess the AC
losses is through a hysteresis loop as shown in Figure 2.11.
The corresponding AC loss or dissipation energy per volume for such a loop is given by
the integral of the magnetization over the magnetic field:
QAC =
I
MdH
(2.9)
where QAC is given in Joules per cubic meter. However, according to [25] and [1], con­
tributions can also arise from intrinsic magnetic losses due to magnetic materials in the
14
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.11: Typical magnetization versus applied magnetic field plot describing a hys­
teresis loop for a sample with pinning, showing the first and second critical fields. The
area of the loop corresponds to the AC losses [13]
tapes and eddy current losses coming from induced currents in the Hastelloy, copper and
silver by an external varying magnetic field. Potentially imperfect striation i.e. the pres­
ence of conducting bridges such as additional stabilizing copper layers can cause current
coupling between the filaments, which increases the total energy dissipation and induces
a dependency of the AC losses on the frequency of the applied magnetic field [29]. Stria­
tion alone is not enough to avoid the AC losses. In order to achieve full electromagnetic
decoupling, it is necessary to twist the tapes so that the filaments are transposed. This
requires more challenging cable designs and emphasizes how important it is to have a
high quality importance of tape resistance to mechanical loading for striated tapes.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Experimental Procedure
3.1
Structure Of The Tapes And Set­Up
The layer structure of the tapes that were used in this work are presented below in Figure
3.1. In this study both variants shown are tested and possess a non­magnetic Hastelloy®
C­276 substrate followed by two MgO buffer layers to ensure bi­axial epitaxial growth.
Then the HTS layer is deposited on top of the MgO, which is then covered with a silver
layer. What distinguishes both tapes is the thermo­mechanical and electrical stabilization
of the thin­films. In this work a tape of kind CC corresponds to a tape with a surround
copper layer and the tape of kind LAM possesses a thick laminate layer that is applied on
top of the copper layer requiring an intermediary solder layer.
Figure 3.1: Two different tapes (LAM and CC) available at THEVA for applications and
used in this work.
The properties of the tapes used in this work are shown in Table 3.1:
Thickness (μm)
Young’s Modulus (GPa)
Source
Hastelloy C­276
100
205
[47]
MgO
3.5
249
[48]
GdBCO
3
115
[49]
Ag
1
83
[50]
Cu (CC Tape)
10
130
[51]
Sn0.965Ag3Cu0.5 (LAM)
4
51
[52]
Brass, 90 % Cu (LAM)
150
130
based on [51]
Table 3.1: Layer thicknesses in the tapes and corresponding Young’s moduli at Room
Temperature (RT).
These parameters correspond to already manufactured tapes that are optimized for cable
applications. Therefore, tapes 3 mm wide have been used throughout this work. Using
the information from Table 3.1 and Equation 2.7, it is possible to compute the neutral axis
referenced to 0 at the bottom of the Hastelloy layer. The results are displayed in Table
3.2. Firstly, in a homogeneous beam the neutral axis is expected to be located at in the
center of the sample. However, a slight displacement of the neutral axis for both CC and
16
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:25==
LAM kinds is observed. The use of different materials for the different layers of varying
thicknesses results in a shift of the neutral axis. For the CC tapes, the neutral axis is
shifted slightly (about 5 μm) towards the HTS layer. Adding the laminate, the neutral axis
position almost doubles shifting it to the other side of the HTS layer, resulting in a tensile
stress being applied on the HTS rather than a compressive one. Also worth noting is the
fact that for the CC tape the position of the HTS layer is relatively distant to the neutral
axis as compared to the laminated tape, it is five times further away from the neutral axis
than in the laminated tape. Therefore, the laminated tape is expected to perform better,
i.e. is expected to have a smaller critical bending radius. Note that throughout the chapter
the Tapestar is mentioned as a method to obtain IC values and is only presented in detail
at the end of the Experimental Procedure section.
Full thickness (μm)
Neutral Axis Position zn (μm)
∆z of the HTS layer (μm)
CC
128.5
63.9
­50.9
LAM
282.5
155
12
Table 3.2: Values for the total thickness, neutral axis location and distance between the
center of the GdBCO layers and the neutral axis. Here ∆z = zHTS −zn.
For the second part of the thesis, one originally silver coated, 3 mm wide tape with 50 μm
Hastelloy substrate was used. Once the filaments were delineated, a final layer of 10 μm
copper was deposited on top through Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD). The technique
regarding the striation of the tape is explained in the next section.
3.2
Experimental Protocol
3.2.1
Single Bending and Resistive Measurements
The practical order of actions to perform the measurements is straightforward. The fol­
lowing list describes step by step the experimental procedure adopted for the electro­
mechanical testing:
1. Preliminary work: using the Tapestar data segments of tape were chosen with a
sufficiently high critical current. This was done for both laminated and CC tapes
noting the start and end position of each segment relative to the total tape. Then a
list divided into batches was created, each batch containing 8 samples intended for
bending around a given diameter.
2. Segments of the tape were cut with scissors from the original coils and labelled.
3. Soldering of the copper plates contacts for measurement was conducted on the
extremities of the samples.
4. Soldering the voltage taps onto the samples.
5. Pre­bending resistive measurements were performed for each sample.
6. Radial bending of the samples of one batch was conducted.
7. Post­bending resisitive measurement was performed with the same procedure.
8. A portion of the samples was selected where the maximal stress was applied and
the laminate was removed if necessary.
9. The copper and silver layers were removed by chemical etching.
10. Through SEM analysis the surfaces and cross­sections of the tapes were analysed.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
17
==PAGE:26==
3.2.2
Striated Tapes
For the tapes with filaments, the protocol is similar however, the preparation requires
additional steps since the tape is not ready to be electro­mechanically tested solely with
the silver layer on top.
1. The filaments were engraved using the laser cutting machine throughout the totality
of the tape.
2. Copper deposition via PVD (10 µm).
3. Tapestar measurement is conducted along the tape and across to get a profile of
the magnetic field along the width.
4. Sample preparation for electro­mechanical testing was reiterated.
5. Electro­mechanical procedure was reiterated.
6. Perform SEM analysis of the top surface, cross sections and inclined tape to analyse
quality of the striations.
3.3
Sample Preparation
3.3.1
Electro­mechanical Testing
The first step of the mechanical tests as mentioned above concerns the selection of suit­
able segments. Suitable means that the critical current of the sample should be high
relative to the tape average and should not present any major defects. The criteria for
the latter is, however, flexible, for this work it was chosen that critical current of the de­
fect should not be lower than 10 A relative to the sample average and should not affect a
length longer than 1 cm. This analysis is possible to be done thanks to the data gathered
through Tapestar. The critical current of a sample is established as the minimum critical
current over the length of the sample. The resistively measured critical current on any
length of sample is generally lower than the minimum value obtained from the inductive
meaurement in the Tapestar, this will be discussed in later sections. This forces to set an
arbitrary lower bound for the performance of the tapes. For LAM samples the limit was
set to 160 A and for CC samples to 130 A since the overall quality was lower than for
LAM tapes, meaning that the LAM tape had a smooth IC profile with little to no defects
and a higher average IC. The smooth profile can be deduced from Table 3.3, since for the
laminated tapes even the standard deviation of 6.41 A is lower than the tolerance (10 A)
mentioned above regarding minimum IC. Other types of indicators that reflect the quality
of the tapes are the minimum critical current for laminated tapes which is about 102.6 A
higher than the one from CC tapes or maximum critical current which for CC Tapes is
almost as the average of LAM tapes.
Minimum Critical
Current (A)
Average
Critical Current (A)
Maximum Critical
Current (A)
Standard
deviation (A)
LAM
143.3
187.3
208.5
12
CC
40.7
161.3
189.3
6.41
Table 3.3: Tapestar current characteristics of the CC and LAM tapes used.
Once the selection is done, labelling the samples is followed according to the following
code: SAMPLE NUMBER­TAPE TYPE­SB, for example: 47LS­SB or 36KB­SB, where LS
stands for Laminated Sample, KB for Kupfer Band (copper tape) and SB means Single
Bending.
18
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:27==
In a statistical study in order to ensure repeatability and reproducibility it is essential to
provide consistent experimental conditions to all the samples. Resistive measurements of
the probes requires interfering methods where the sample is in direct contact with copper
contacts on both ends and two solder taps along the length. For the specific case where
the tape reaches the point of plastic deformation after pure bending, this means that in­
serting the sample into the measurement holder available can break the superconductor
layer near the contact. For this reason, one option was considered where the tapes are in
indirect contact with the current feeds. It consists of soldering the two ends of the tape on
two thin copper plates (around 400 µm thick) that can be easily bent to adapt the current
taps to the bending angle. Also, at every solder contact between two materials, Zinc Chlo­
ride was used, since it exhibits excellent cleaning and reducing properties, meaning that
it captures any oxygen present on the soldering joints therefore avoiding any oxidation,
i.e. isolating sections resulting in sufficiently low contact resistance.
This technique also offers additional thermal isolation that highly improves the success
rate of resistive measurements. Using the experimental set­up displayed above, on a
typical series of measurements there is a 60­70 % success rate for pre­bending tests,
meaning that 30­40 % of the samples will burn and even break sometimes before un­
dergoing bending. With this preparation of the tapes it is expected to highly improve this
percentage. The length and width of the copper plates were chosen so that they could fit
in the current contacts having a width of around 1 cm and a length of 5.5 cm, moreover
the HTS tapes were chosen to have a length of 30 cm yielding an exact aspect ratio of
100 (3 mm width versus 30 cm length), being therefore suitable to represent macroscopic
effects of long tapes. In order to solder the tapes In97Ag3 was used since the melting point
is below 200 ◦C (141◦C) hence it does not damage the superconducting layer and also
an Indium based solder withstands the thermal contraction and retains its ductility when
working under cryogenic conditions [33].
5.5 cm
30 cm
2 cm
HTS Tape
In97Ag3
Copper
Figure 3.2: Scheme representing a prepared sample ready to be measured with the two
extremities soldered on top of two copper plates using In97Ag3.
Figure 3.3: Photo of the sample 47KS­SB already prepared put next to a ruler for scale.
During the process of soldering the tapes to prepare for the 4­point probe, the samples are
heated in two different steps to the temperatures of 160◦C across the totality of the surface
and locally above 190◦C for the duration of 2 minutes and half a minute, respectively
(temperatures are displayed on the soldering devices). However, as shown by S. Yazaki
et al.([34]) for GdBCO tapes with similar structures, an exposure to heat above 195◦C
for 1 hour can induce a decrease of the critical current by 5 % and 33 % in 36 hours. It
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
19
==PAGE:28==
is therefore considered that the duration of the soldering steps and the temperature rise
generated in the samples is not enough to significantly damage the samples.
Shown in Figures 3.2 and 3.3 are a scheme of the intended end result and a real sample,
respectively. The dimensions displayed in the before mentioned figures where always
preserved with a variation of maximum 3 mm regarding the soldered length of the tape
and of about 2 mm regarding the distance between the voltage taps. Furthermore, be­
cause the alignment between the tape and the copper plates is done by hand, it also
displays some variability that should however not impact the measurement since it does
not influence the bending and it is possible to adapt the holders for the current contacts.
Finally, the last step in the preparation of the samples is soldering the voltage contacts,
this is done by using two copper wires that are twisted around each other to minimize
noise generated by an electromotive force induced by any current flowing through them
and to avoid creating a wire loop. Again, In97Ag3 is used to solder and Zinc Chloride
serves as a cleaning material. It is also important to always sandpaper the tips of the
wires to remove the isolating layer before soldering.
3.3.2
Striated Tapes
In the second stage of this thesis, a single tape 50 m long was prepared in order to emulate
the filaments performed in previous works such as [35]. The idea is to shine a laser as
shown in Figure 3.5 (typically used to divide the 12 mm tapes into 3, 4 or 6 mm ones) onto
the tape in order to dig trenches. The initial approach is to start with three trenches that
originate from the three different lasers displayed in Figure 3.4 that divide the tape into 4
equally spaced filaments.
Figure 3.4: Laser Cutting Machine used to engrave the striations in the tape.Three aligned
lasers are visible.
The laser beam has a known width of 50 μm, it is therefore assumed that the trenches also
acquire that width. Moreover, the filaments possess different widths with the two external
ones being 750 μm wide and the two inner ones 725 μm. In reality the power of the laser
beam and the speed at which the tape is being pulled through the stationary laser beam
can be tuned so that only the silver and superconducting layers are removed. Figure 3.6
shows the intended design that is to be structured by the lasers onto the tapes with a top
view and cross section view, it is not to scale.
The process of setting up the laser cutting machine involves adjusting the tape to be
perpendicular to the laser beam. Then, the distance between the laser tip and the tape is
set with a feeler gauge placed between the tape and laser. The lasers are then assigned
20
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Close­up of one of the left lasers cutting a 12 mm tape.
to their in plane positions via a stepper motor.
The first runs for the striation of the tapes were directly done on the CC dummy tape.
However after several attempts with varying intensity and rolling speed, it was found that
it was impossible to cut striations into CC tapes with the available set­up, since the copper
layer is highly reflective. As long as the intensity is too low for the laser­beam to couple
into the copper, it is not possible to remove any material at all. Increasing the laser power
enough to couple into the copper results in high enough power to separate the filaments
completely from each other, cutting through the entirety of the substrate. From this, it was
decided to striate the sample before copper­coating. The silver layer is thinner (1 μm thick
compared to the 10 μm of copper) and the laser can couple into it at lower power, so it is
possible to reduce the laser power enough in order to avoid complete separation. When
setting up the machine to the silver capped tape, the first runs were done on low quality
sections of the tape usually found at the extremities. In total around 54 m of silver capped
tape was structured. The settings were set to the minimum for power and maximum in
speed accessible in the given machine hardware and software.
Experimentally it was found that the best settings to prevent cutting the tape completely
and ensure stability was a net speed of 1000 m/h and a power output of 70 % of the total
power. The laser tips were set at a distance of 0.3 mm away from the tape surface.
750 µm
725 µm
725 µm
750 µm
50 µm
Ag
HTS
MgO
Hastelloy C-276
HTS
MgO
a)
b)
Figure 3.6: Schematic showing the ideal case where the filaments are equally spaced
and the trenches only go until the MgO layer.
The results of the silver tapes that were filamentized are shown in Figure 3.7. On Figure
a) the back side of the tapes is visible, on Figure b), 4 HTS filaments are visible separated
by three black trenches designed by the laser.
In Figure 3.7a) the marks of the striations are visible on the back side of the tape, meaning
that the laser beam has pierced through the layer of MgO and even etched the Hastelloy
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.7: a): View of the substrate (Hastelloy C­276) side of the filamentized tapes. b):
View of the top layer of the filamentized silver tapes.
layer without piercing it. It is expected that the mechanical stability of such tape is lower
because of the discontinuous structure that is imposed and the expected partial etching
of the substrate and thus weakening the tape mechanical stability. Moreover, it was also
determined that the striation is not constant throughout the tape: on certain segments,
the filaments join and form either 1.5 mm wide or fully 3 mm wide HTS sections. This is
expected to be visible in the Tapestar measurements.
3.4
Single Bending
As for the mechanical testing in literature, bending can be performed either in compres­
sive or tensile mode with tension being exerted at the extremities in order to hold the
sample [36]. However, this adds additional strain to the sample and in this work the main
goal was to perform bending tests without tension or load analogously to 3­point bending.
This requires a cylindrical shape upon which the samples are bent perpendicularly to the
cylinder length. For this matter 7 tubes of different diameters (3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 and 12 mm)
were chosen. In order to bend the tape in a 3­point manner, the center between the two
voltage taps which also corresponds to the center of the 30 cm long tape was determined
as bending point. The bending takes place 5 cm away from both voltage taps, with the
solder not influencing the mechanical properties of the tape around the bending area. The
process of bending is described in Figure 3.8.
Tape
length
Tube length
Stabilizers
Tube
Two bending points
a)
b)
c)
Figure 3.8: Schematic showing the 3­point bending process and the alignment of the tape
with regards to the test tube. a): side­view of the tape when it is fully bent around the tube.
b) cross­sectional view of the initial phase of the bending process. c): cross­sectional view
of the tape on the tube once it is fully bent.
22
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:31==
When preparing the tube for testing it is important to choose a tube that has a smooth
surface so that its roughness does not damage the HTS tape, since it is facing down on
the cylinder. It is essential to avoid any friction when handling the tape. Moreover, in order
to keep the tape in place, two stabilizers (ribbon tape) were placed around the tube with a
spacing of 3 mm, this ribbon tape is also relatively soft comparing to the HTS tape, which
also minimizes damage. Then the tape is placed between the stabilizers made of kapton
tape. With the tape in position, it is possible to manually apply pressure on the two points
of contact depicted in Figure 3.8 in b) and c) and therefore fully bend the tape.
3.4.1
Statistical Study
Since a statistical study is being performed regarding the bending tests, it is necessary
to estimate beforehand the sample size, this can be done according to the Student’s t­
distribution formula:
ntot = t2σ2
e2
where ntot is the sample size, t is the t­value corresponding to a 99 % confidence level at
2.58 , σ is the standard deviation of the critical current ratio pre and post bending estimated
at 0.19 from a previous report done at THEVA, and e is the margin of error accepted at
0.18. This yields ntot = 8. Student­t distribution formula is adopted due to the sample size,
the statistical population is much less than 30, and the distribution of the ratio of critical
current is expected to be uni­modal which also supports the use of this formula. This
distribution can also be understood as a distribution that already accounts for results with
a relatively high standard deviation compared to more well­known normal and Gaussian
distributions. With this data, 7 different bending radii were determined: [6, 5, 4.5, 3.5, 3,
2.5 and 1.5] mm with 8 samples per bending radius. This yields a total of 56 samples per
kind, 112 samples in total were prepared and measured.
3.5
Critical Current Measurements
3.5.1
4­Point­Probe
In order to measure the resistance or to acquire the I­V curve of an HTS tape sample the
4­point­probe can be employed to deliver reliable data. This method is usually found in
the semi­conductor industry to measure sheet resistance of thin­films and characterize
conductance. Traditionally, the measurement is conducted by attaching two electrodes
at the two extremities of the samples, this is however not possible for REBCO tapes that
are copper coated and the thickness is in the order of micrometers. Moreover, the mea­
surement of the voltage requires an accuracy in the order of nanovolts, this means that if
the measurement is performed with two leads that acquire both voltage and current data,
they will also account for the voltage drop accross the contacts. With a 4­point­probe both
the practical and experimental demands can be fulfilled. By separating the current leads
from the voltage leads it is possible to neglect the contact resistance between the sample
and the voltage taps since virtually no current flows through them and these voltage elec­
trodes can be placed on the surface of the thin­film. This can be understood by a potential
Φ(r) on the surface of the thin film. Considering that the current leads are at points rA
and rB as shown on Figure 3.9, the potential yields: Φ(r) = Φ(r, rA, rB). The voltage that
is ultimately measured is then expressed between the two voltage taps at points C and
D: VCD = Φ(rD, rA, rB, ) −Φ(rC, rA, rB) [31].
The typical experimental set­up is displayed in Figure 3.9, where a power source delivers
a DC current that flows through the sample. Using a voltmeter voltage is acquired and an
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
23
==PAGE:32==
A
V
Sample
rA
rC
rD
rB
Figure 3.9: Sketch displaying the measuring principle of the 4­point­probe.
amperemeter is used for current.
While the contact resistance contribution can be eliminated, there are still some sources
of error, for example heat generation at any of the contacts. This could potentially in­
duce a thermal electro­motive force that is described by the Seebeck effect. If there is
a temperature difference between two points of a material this can induce a voltage and
therefore a resistance, which would affect the data acquisition. The ratio between the in­
duced voltage and the temperature is the Seebeck coefficient and for copper it is 6 μV/K
(relative to platinum) [32]. This means that if there is just 1 K difference between the point
of contact between the copper plate and the HTS tape and the current lead, this could
raise the resistance by 6 μV which is on the order of magnitude of the voltage criterion
to define the superconducting­normal transition. This means that the contacts have to
be near perfect, which also minimizes an offset brought on by any contact resistance. In
order to avoid significant influences both from the Seebeck effect as well as from contact
resistance at the current feeds, the tape is contacted by pressing the copper plate be­
tween two well­polished copper blocks, fixed with four crews. To ensure homogeneous
pressure onto the copper plates, a torque wrench is used to fix the screws with a torque
of 2 Nm as displayed on Figure 3.10. Depending on how the bending plastically deforms
the tapes, the position of the current leads can be adapted on the stainless­steel beam
(also in Figure 3.10) that supports the apparatus to prevent additional stress coming from
the resistive measurement set­up.
Figure 3.10: Picture of one of the current leads, where the contact between the lead and
the copper plate is established.
24
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:33==
As shown in Figure 3.11, the usual apparatus for 4­point­measurements is used, as de­
scribed in section 2.3.3. However, the voltmeter has to be a nano­voltmeter, able to
measure voltages below 1 μm. Also in 3.11 the diagram corresponding to the electrical
circuit is displayed.
R3
R4
R1
Multimeter
Nanovoltmeter
Rsample
Rshunt
I = 875 A
R2
Figure 3.11: Circuit diagram of the 4­point probe measurement performed with the LAM
and CC tapes [24].
The DC power supply comes from an Agilent 6680A device with a three­phase input and
a maximum output current of 875 A and maximum voltage of 3 V. A shunt resistor (60 μm)
is added to the cable that links the power supply to the tape. Since the resistance of the
shunt is known, it is possible to measure the current that flows through the sample using
a Keithley 2700 multimeter (see Figure 3.11). Moreover, in order to measure the voltage
a nanovoltmeter is used (Keysight 34420A, see Figure 3.11) [36].
The LabView programme controlling the measurement apparatus allows setting of min­
imum current, current step size, maximum current, over­voltage acceptance and shunt
resistance. The optimal parameters to avoid burning of the sample are shown in Table
3.4.
Minimum
Current (A)
Current
Step (A)
Maximum
Current (A)
Sample
Overvoltage (µV )
Shunt
Resistance (µΩ)
LAM
0
1
180
12
60
CC
0
1
150
10
60
Table 3.4: Parameters for the 4­point­probe measurements for laminated and copper
coated tapes.
The over­voltage represents the maximum voltage that the set­up allows between the two
voltage taps, this prevents burning the tapes since it sets a higher bound on the emerging
resistive heating of the tapes. This comes from the convention used to determine the
critical current at a voltage drop difference of 1 μV/cm [13], and since the distance between
the voltage taps is always 10 cm in this case, the critical voltage is 10 μV. However as it
can be seen in Table 3.4, the over­voltage for the laminated tapes was set higher than for
the CC tapes, as the latter are more likely to burn. However, setting the limit below 10 μV
means that the measurement stops before actually reaching the critical voltage, hence
the critical current measurements can only be determined from estimations in this case.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
25
==PAGE:34==
Moreover, maximum current was also set to smaller values for the CC tapes based on the
Tapestar measurement of critical current shown in Table 3.3.
Once all the parameters were set and the sample was mounted on the support, the two
current leads were connected to the support and the set­up is put in a 45x35x30 cm3 box
shown in Figure 3.12 which is filled with liquid nitrogen. After lowering the sample into
the liquid nitrogen bath, it is necessary to wait around 3 minutes to let the sample cool
down before starting the data acquisition. All the measurements are done at 77 K and the
critical bending radius was determined from a 95 % of critical current retention criterion.
Figure 3.12: Picture of the experimental set­up for the 4­point­probe measurement.
3.6
SEM and Chemical Etching
3.6.1
Chemical Etching
In order to investigate morphological changes in the HTS layer due to mechanical testing,
it is necessary to etch away, using KI3 as an oxidant, the top layers of the tapes, namely
the laminate, copper and silver while still preserving the integrity of the HTS layer.
This was done at the Institute for Electrical Engineering at the Academy of Sciences of
Slovakia in Bratislava. The recipe for etching is as follows. First 70 g of KI ( potassium
iodide) are added to 50 mL of water under constant stirring. It is essential that a supersat­
urated solution is created therefore more KI is added until salt grains remain undissolved
at the bottom of the beaker, this does not damage the quality of the solution. This dissolu­
tion is an endothermic reaction, therefore the solution cools down during the process, so
the beaker is warmed up to room temperature or higher (around 35◦C) while adding the
KI. Then, with constant mixing for around 5 minutes, 15 g of I2 (iodine) are added. When
mixing with a magnetic stirrer, the beaker should be covered but not sealed airtight. The
solution that is produced is supposed to be black.
Etching the HTS tape (3 mm wide and 1 cm long, with 1 μm Ag and 10 μm Cu overlayers)
takes about 1 minute and is conducted by fully submerging the sample in the solution.
After the etching process, the tape is immersed in water to remove the rest of the KI3
etchant from the surface. Adhesive tape is enough to protect the part of the tape that
should remain unetchted. Etching proceeds following Equations 3.1 and 3.2:
Ag + 2 I−−−→AgI2−+ e−
(3.1)
I3−+ 2 e−−−→3 I−
(3.2)
26
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:35==
As stated previously, the oxidant is KI3 (I3 – ) that comes from the reaction of I2 with I – . It is
the iodine that reacts with either Ag or Cu to form either AgI (silver iodide) or CuI (copper
iodide). The presence of KI allows the improvement of the solubility of the compound
formed, therefore increasing the etch rate.
Both laminated and copper coated samples were etched. Figure 3.13 a and b show
samples of laminated and copper coated samples after chemical etching, respectively.
While the CC samples show a uniform dark color belonging to the HTS layer, the laminated
samples (Figure 3.13 a) show inhomogeneous etching including yellow/white areas.
Figure 3.13: a): Laminated tape after etching. b): Copper coated tape after etching.
3.6.2
SEM And Ion Milling
Checking the structural integrity of the superconductor layer can be done via Scanning
Electron Microscopy (SEM). The device used is a HITACHI SU8000 SEM, achieving a res­
olution of around 5 nanometers. The principle behind SEM is the scanning of a surface
with an electron beam and detecting the output of either secondary (SE) or backscattered
electrons (BSE) and linking it to the position of the primary beam, in ultra­high vacuum.
The electron beam is generated by field emmission cathode. The emitted electrons are
focused into a beam by a series of condenser lenses as shown in figure electrons are
then focused using condenser lens as shown in Figure 3.14. SE usually have low ener­
gies in the range of 10 eV and come from the inelastic interaction between the surface and
the beam electrons, which eject weakly bound valence or conduction electrons (so­called
secondary electrons) from the surface atoms. SE offer information on surface topogra­
phy, they come from the top section of the interaction volume.
BSE, on the other hand, arise from inelastic collisions with sample atoms. This kind of
scattering is therefore sensitive to atomic weight revealing the nature of the sample. Heav­
ier atoms scatter electrons more effectively, meaning that these will appear brighter in the
image, while lighter atoms appear darker.
In this kind of microscopy, contrast comes from the orientation of the surface regarding
the incoming electron beam, meaning that if the surface normal is aligned with the detec­
tor, it will appear brighter. This means that the displayed image is a mapping of the yield
of electrons coming from the surface, an example of such characterization is shown in
Figure 3.15. This picture obtained with SEs shows 4 different layers that are present in
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.14: Sketch showing the system behind a Scanning Electron Microscope [37].
the tapes with their respective thicknesses, notable is the difference in brightness for all
the surfaces which reveals the difference in the tilt of the texture throughout the cross sec­
tion of each layer. As illustrated by Figure 3.14, it is also possible to profit from additional
phenomena that are generated by the electron beam, such as X­rays. The impinging
electron beam knocks out electrons from the atomic core levels. Consequently, electrons
from outer, higher­energy shells relax to the energetically lower­lying ones. The excess
energy is emitted in the form of X­rays with an energy that is specific to each element.
Thus, it is possible to analyse the chemical composition of the sample in the SEM by
energy­dispersive X­ray analysis (EDX). In order to analyze cross­sections of the sam­
Figure 3.15: Cross­section of a superconducting tape of CC tape with the estimated thick­
nesses of each layer.
ples, ion milling is necessary since it ensures a clean cut of the tapes without damaging
the edge that is cut (as opposed to cutting with scissors for example). The device used
28
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:37==
is a HITACHI E­3500. This technique is an etching method used to physically eliminate
material from a sample to a certain depth through ion bombardment with energies within
1 to 3 keV. For this, an inert gas such as Ar is employed and the etching is done in high
vacuum. First the ionization process is done by free electrons originating from thermionic
emissive filaments that ionize the argon atoms to Ar+. Then the ions are accelerated to­
wards the sample through a set of grids with adapted voltages in order to set the energy
and focus the beam of ions, reducing divergence effects coming from space­charge inter­
actions between positively charged ions. Moreover, the reduction of such effects can also
be achieved through neutralizers consisting of filaments that add electrons to the beam
therefore decreasing repulsion and beam spreading [38]. The shape and etch area are
usually defined by a mask that is placed on top of the sample. Typical etch rates for the
machine are around 60 μm/h for diameters of about 1 cm.
3.7
TapeStar Measurements
In the continuation of the characterization methods for the estimation of the critical current,
the TapeStar device served as a quick and reliable way to make profile measurements.
This machine is typically used to make local inductive measurements of the critical current
density on a rolling tape. The measuring principle of the Tapestar is displayed in Figure
3.16, the set­up displayed is immersed in liquid nitrogen (77 K). The field is applied by
a DC­coil so that the orientation of the field is perpendicular to the tape and presents
homogeneous distribution. The response of the tape (shielding of the magnetic field by
screening currents) is then measured by a linear array of Hall sensors placed along its
width in order to obtain a cross­sectional profile of the magnetic field at several points in
the tape. An example of such a field profile is shown in Figure 3.17. From this profile
and using the Bean Model explained in Section 2.1.4 and Equation 2.4 and modifying it
to this kind of HTS tapes such as the Kim adaptation it is possible to determine the critical
current density at a certain length position of the tape. This means that by running the
measurement every mm of the length of tape, a critical current profile of the tape can be
constructed.
⃗B
8 mm
0.8 mm
Field coils
Hall sensors
HTS tape
Rotor
Figure 3.16: Sketch showing the measuring principle and orientation of the magnetic field
regarding the tape of the TapeStar device
The minimum distance from the tape at which the Hall sensors can be placed is 0.8 mm.
The applied magnetic field strength can go up to 120 mT. The spatial resolution of the
Hall sensors is about 0.6 mm, and the lengthwise resolution is down to 1.2 mm. The
value of the applied magnetic field should also be taken into account. A field that is too
strong could suppress completely IC due to its field dependence as shown in Equation
2.5 and a field too weak does not fully penetrate the superconductor, therefore preventing
the critical current to flow accross the whole width. Therefore, an estimation of IC is put
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.17: Field profile over the width of the tape of the magnetic field allowing the
extraction of the critical current.
into the Tapestar software to determine the magnitude of the applied field B0 according
to Formula 3.3.
B0 = 0.172IC
(3.3)
B0 is given in mT. However, since the values are calculated from local inductive response
with limited resolution, the critical current values displayed are overestimated as will be
discussed in later sections. This is explained by the fact that defects smaller than 1.2 mm
are potentially ignored. While the defects play a limiting role in the estimation of IC in
resistive measurements that often require long portions of tape, the spatial resolution of
Tapestar can overlook the presence of defects. Nevertheless, this device allows a good
detection of large areas of defects and serves as good indicator of uniformity of the critical
current. It is also worth noting that the tape is continuously rolling meaning that when the
tape enters the magnetic field area it goes through a progressive magnetic field increase
from 0 to the stabilized value. This increase of the magnetic field coupled to the movement
of the tape induces a voltage across the width of the tape ( around 10 nV) that generates
a current closing the loop. This phenomenon is displayed in Figure 3.18.
⃗B
Field coil
Hall sensors
Flow direction
⃗j
Figure 3.18: Top view from the measurement apparatus with the direction of the current
density (grey) in the tape and delineated are the areas of increasing and decreasing mag­
netic field.
30
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:39==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Electro­Mechanical Study Of 3 mm Laminated And
Copper Coated Tapes
4.1.1
Critical Current Behavior And Statistical Study Of Critical Radius
Determination
As explained in section 3.0.4, it was essential to have a large enough group of different
samples in order to account for different types of processes that induce a variation in the
critical current within a tape and to be able to make predictions and ensure quality control.
In this section, the techniques used to estimate and determine the critical current analyti­
cally are presented as well as the impact of bending in the critical current.
Firstly, a first assessment of the distribution of the critical current according to Tapestar
data for the first 32 samples was conducted (LAM and CC). This was useful since it could
then be compared to resistive measurements and offer a reliable estimation of the accu­
racy of the Tapestar for further use when choosing samples. It was found that on average
for laminated tapes Tapestar overestimates the critical current by 7.1 % while it is of about
4.7 % for copper coated sample when compared with resistive data which is coherent with
the Tapestar accuracy of +/­ 5 %. Also, it was found that Tapestar data has consistently a
lower standard deviation than resistive measurements: for LAM samples it was 1.5 times
higher for resistive data and for CC tapes 3 times higher. This had obviously an impact
when choosing the samples as explained previously as the tolerance limits for Tapestar
data had to be set higher than initially thought.
Figure 4.1: I­V plot for 3 mm laminated tapes before and after bending at 5mm radius
Displayed in Figure 4.1 are the I­V plots for 3 different laminated samples before and
after bending at 5 mm. All samples exhibit critical current superior to 150 A. As can
be observed, bending does not seem to degrade the tapes, on the contrary here it can
be observed that the critical currents is even higher for bent tapes. For these 3 tapes
the critical current was improved on average by 1 %. These results are already of great
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
31
==PAGE:40==
interest since it is known that tensile bending can only damage the critical current of tapes
as opposed to compressive bending ([23],[39]). This improvement of the critical current
was also observed for compressive bending. However, an increase of 1 % most likely
means no change within measurement accuracy Moreover from Figure 4.1, it is seen
that the voltage measurement for some of the samples does not reach the criterion of
10 μV. This is due to the overvoltage limit of 10 μV that stops the measurement before
reaching higher values as explained in section 3.0.3. In order to accurately estimate the
IC in these cases, a power­law fitting of the I­V curve was used and adapted until the
correlation coefficient reached at least a value of 0.995.
In addition, the expected behavior of critical current degradation for lower radii was also
confirmed. An example of such is shown in Figure 4.2 where only one copper coated
sample is shown for clarity.
Figure 4.2: I­V plot for a 3mm copper coated tape before and after 3,5mm radius bending.
This sample was subjected to 3.5 mm radius bending, the IC before bending is of 116 A,
however after bending it suffered a degradation of 12.7 % down to 93.5 A. Also not to be
neglected is the analysis of the n­factor that is directly correlated to the pinning potential
of the tape, while the evolution is not visible here it will be investigated in later sections.
This suggests that too small radii can influence and damage the performance of REBCO
tapes since this tape falls far below the 95 % of IC retention level. Then all the data is
gathered for the 96 samples and a statistical study is conducted in order to determine the
critical bending radius for these tapes and the associated critical bending strain. The final
result is displayed in Figure 4.3. The spread of the data is shown in Figures 6.8 and 6.9
for both kinds (see Annex).
To be able to compare the performance of laminated versus copper coated tapes, the crit­
ical current is normalized by dividing the post­bending current by the pre­bending value.
For the first three larger radii of 6, 5 and 4.5 mm no degradation of the critical current is
observed and as mentioned previously even an increase in the critical current is visible
32
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.3: IC depending on radius for compressive bending of laminated and copper
coated tapes.
for both types. The average improvement of critical current for these radii is displayed
in Table 4.1. The laminated samples show overall better behavior than copper coated
tapes even in tensile bending. The augmentation in critical current decreases with radius
for LAM samples, while it appears to have an optimum for CC tapes at 5 mm, or at an
equivalent strain of ­1 % , according to Formula 2.6. This result is better than expected
since according to the literature ([36],[40],[41]) the peak of critical current for compres­
sive strain is situatied between 0 % and ­0.4 %. However the studies mentioned were
performed on SuperPower tapes that did not possess an ISD substrate which could ex­
plain the discrepancies. One other explanation is the experimental procedure because
the value mentioned by the two previous studies was achieved by doing the resistive mea­
surement while bending the tapes, while here the resistive measurement was performed
after applying the mechanical stress. Since the bigger radii here used for bending did not
induce plastic deformations (only elastic deformation of the tapes was observed), it is pos­
sible that between the mechanical testing and the electrical testing, by thermal expansion
for example, the tapes relaxed and released some of the strain.
6 mm
5 mm
4.5 mm
∆IC for LAM (%)
1.8
1.4
0.3
∆IC for CC (%)
0
1.4
0.9
Table 4.1: Critical current improvement after bending for laminated and copper coated
samples for different radii.
From Graph 4.3, it was possible to determine the critical bending radius rCfor both types
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
33
==PAGE:42==
of samples, this was obtained by using a 95 % of IC retention criterion. Since the bending
radius for the latter criterion was not directly available from the data, the estimation of
rC was obtained by establishing a linear function between the two nearest data points.
Where this line hits 95 % Ic, the critical radius is found. This method gives two distinct
values for the laminated and copper coated samples: rC1 = 3.1 ± 0.05 mm for LAM sam­
ples and rC2 = 3.5 ± 0.07 mm for CC ones. As it is visible in Figure 4.3, the laminated
tapes do not differ considerably from the copper tapes up until 3.5 mm, then it is at this
point that the latter steeply decrease in critical current down to 13.6 % of the pre­bending
value for a radius of 3 mm and then down to 0 % as no CC tape survived lower radiuses.
On the other hand, laminated tapes meet the 95 % retention criterion up until 3.1 mm then
a similar decrease as for CC tapes is observed, however, at a radius of 2.5 mm, it still
exhibits 16.5 % of its original critical current and then no tape survived bending at 1.5 mm
radius. The result of the critical radius is in good accordance with a previous study real­
ized by S.C. Richter et al. ([42]) on similar THEVA tapes (4 mm width and 80 μm Hastelloy
substrate) which found a critical bending radius of 4 mm in compressive bending.
The associated strain values for the critical strain ϵC are: ϵC1 = 0.4 % for laminated tapes
and ϵC2 = −1.5 % for copper coated ones. The difference between both values comes
directly from the relative position of the HTS layer to the neutral axis. Also this result
confirms that being closer to the neutral axis and thereby reducing the strain contributes
to higher mechanical tolerance of the tapes. When comparing with values available in
literature it was found that the tensile performance of the laminated tapes is similar to
SuperPower tapes with a 30 μm substrate and 40 μm copper layer which had a critical
strain around 0.3 % [40], which is also found in ISD/Coevaporated tapes [23]. However,
it was also demonstrated that this value can go up to 0.5 % ([23], [40]).
Regarding the tapes under compressive bending, a critical strain of ­1.5 % is relatively
high compared to what can be found in the studies mentioned before ([23],[40],[41]) which
consistently showed ϵC = −0.5 ± 0.1 %.
Finally regarding the accuracy of the measurements, the 95 % level confidence interval
(CI) was calculated for each data point present in Figure 4.3. Table 4.2 summarizes the
results that are incorporated into the full graphs in Figures 6.10 and 6.11 in the Annex.
6 mm
5 mm
4.5 mm
3.5 mm
3 mm
2.5 mm
1.5 mm
CI for LAM (± %)
2
0.3
0.4
4.4
6.4
16.4
­
CI for CC (± %)
1.5
0.4
0.3
6.7
9.5
­
­
Table 4.2: Confidence intervals values for the normalized critical current of laminated and
copper coated tapes for the different bending radii.
The values in this table tell the range around which the normalized critical current falls
95 % percent of the time for a random sample at a specific bending radius. Table 4.2
displays for both laminated and copper coated tapes a relatively small confidence interval
for radii between 6 mm and 4.5 mm, ranging between ±2 % and ±1.5 % meaning that
the dispersion in the measurements was minimal therefore proving great reproducibility
and repeatability of the experiments. However after 4.5 mm both types show a steady
increase in the confidence interval, which translates to a higher variability in the results
for the critical current, reaching a value of ±16.4 % for the laminated kind at 2.5 mm.
This can be understood from the fact that the HTS layer is a ceramic layer, meaning that
its behavior near the mechanical breaking point is governed by statistical micro­defects,
rather than the properties of the bulk material itself, and depends on more sensitive factors
34
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:43==
that can affect the stress applied on the sample such as additional thermal strain that
comes from the deformation of the copper layers at 77 K or simple handling mistakes.
The values for the CI for the smaller radii are not available because the tapes did not
survive as mentioned previously
4.1.2
Impact Of Bending On N­Factor
In this part the influence of bending in either compressive or tensile modes on pinning
capacities of the tapes is studied. The data presented was collected from the I­V plots of
each sample and then a fit was performed and corrected so that it gives a good enough
approximation of the power­law in Equation 2.2. The requirement set for a good approxi­
mation was set by a correlation factor of at least 0.995. It is worth mentioning that the fits
were only possible for plots with only positive values, this means that each plot had to be
first corrected with an offset. Furthermore, in order to meet the requirement for the cor­
relation factor, only the last 16 data points corresponding to higher current values (close
to the IC) were picked from each fit as it can be observed in Figure 4.4 where a correla­
tion factor of 0.9954 was calculated, this was also considered one of the worst examples,
since the average for R2 for all the samples was of 0.998. This can be justified by the
fact that if all the data points were considered the statistical weight of the voltage data
points corresponding to lower current values considerably hindered the approximation,
since the values were all 2 orders of magnitude lower. In order to have relevant data the
n­factor that was extracted from the post­bending fits was then normalized with regards
to the n­factor before bending.
Figure 4.4: I­V curve of a laminated tape with a power­law fit (5 mm bending radius).
According to the resistive data before bending by taking all the bending radii into account,
the n­factor average for LAM samples was 42.1 and for CC tapes 39.1. After bending,
the n­factor average was about 6.2 % lower at 39.5 for laminated tapes and 18.8 % lower
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
35
==PAGE:44==
at 31.8 for copper coated samples. This was already a great indicator of the impact of
bending on the pinning potential of tapes and how laminated tapes also outperform CC
ones.
Figure 4.5: Normalized n­factor versus bending radius for both laminated and copper
coated samples.
The data regarding the dependence of the n­factor on bending radius is displayed in Fig­
ure 4.5. For both kinds of tape there is clear decrease of the n­factor that accompanies
the decrease in bending radius and both start with a normalized n­factor above 1, sug­
gesting that bending the laminated tapes in tensile mode and the copper coated tapes in
compressive mode improves flux­pinning. As for Figure 4.3 regarding the critical current,
this graph can be decomposed into two areas: the first one corresponds to a relatively
stable minor decrease of n, however once each kind hit its critical bending radius, they
enter the second area where there is a steep decrease for both laminated and copper
coated samples. Nevertheless, in Figure 4.5, there is a clear difference between LAM
samples and CC. Laminated samples only reached a value of n1/n0 = 0.8 at a bending
radius of 3 mm while copper coated samples hit that value at already 3.5 mm. This means
again that laminating a thick layer of copper alloy on top of copper coated samples offers
additional mechanical and electrical stabilization but also pinning stabilization even in ten­
sile bending. Also, this data was compared to the critical current damage from Figure 4.3
in order to assess if the variables n and IC in Equation 2.2 were mechanically dependent
by seeking a correlation between the two bending data. The correlation factor calculated
between the n­factor and the IC for the different radii was of exactly 0.97 for both kinds of
tape, this hints a strong correlation between both, however the accuracy of this calcula­
tion is to be taken carefully. Shown in Table 4.3 are the 95 % confidence intervals for the
n­factor data depending on the bending radius for both types of tape.
As done in the previous section, the confidence intervals are shown in percentage. As it is
visible for LAM and CC tapes there is one value that is below 10 %, at 8.6 % which is still
relatively high when compared to previous results for the critical current displayed in Table
4.2. Also clear is the high increase of the CI for laminated tapes as the bending radius
36
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:45==
6 mm
5 mm
4.5 mm
3.5 mm
3 mm
2.5 mm
CI for LAM (± %)
10.9
8.6
11
13
17
26
CI for CC (± %)
18
11
11.4
12.4
12.3
­
Table 4.3: 95 % confidence intervals concerning the n­factor for different radii for both
laminated and copper coated tapes. This can be associated with Figure 4.5
goes from 5 mm to 2.5 mm going from 8.6 % up to 26 %, indicating growing variability of
the n­factor data extracted from the fits. However, this increase is not as clear for the CC
tapes as the values start at 11 % for a 5 mm radius and increase only by about 1.4 % as
the radius decreases to 3.5 and 3 mm. The last value for the CC tapes is not available
since no tape survived. In conclusion there is a possible correlation between the n­factor
and the critical current through bending however high variability in the estimations of n
make it delicate to affirm anything at this point and demand further studies.
4.1.3
Microscopic Study Of Bent Samples
Further investigation was conducted to assess how the mechanical stress applied af­
fected the integrity of the HTS layer. This was done by performing scanning electron
microscopy on selected samples. The samples were etched before going through the
SEM as explained in the Experimental Procedure section. The samples studied were
picked randomly among each radius and the radii picked were the same for both kinds
at 2.5, 3, 3.5 and 5 mm to see how the ceramic layer behaved around the critical radius
and to compare with a radius that showed high performance of the tape. The expected
response to be observed is no degradation for tapes bent around 5 mm and therefore no
visible structures arising and then progressive cracks and protrusion line formation as the
radius approaches its critical value. Laminated samples did not provide as clear images
as copper coated samples after etching, therefore most of the figures here displayed are
from CC samples. The images were measured under 10 kV electrons.
As predicted all the samples studied after 5 mm bending radius did not show any struc­
tural signs of degradation as is shown in the Annex (Figure 6.1). Throughout the whole
area where stress was most applied the sample displayed a homogeneous surface. This
result is coherent with the critical current and n­factor values calculated in the two previ­
ous sections. Next, CC samples that were subjected to 3.5 mm bending were put under
the microscope as can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Here, two protrusion lines are can be identified by the sharp contrast with the black back­
ground that corresponds to the HTS layer. A protrusion line can be defined as a linear
fracture of a layer separating two plates where one of these is elevated relative to the
other. These lines are overall parallel and display here a preferred direction of around 70◦,
however all other samples at 3.5 mm bending showed a preferred angle of 45◦(respec­
tively 135◦) relatively to tape length (see Annex Figure 6.2). One plausible explanation for
the 45­degree preference is the orientation of the crystal lattice of both MgO and GdBCO,
since the (110) plane is parallel to the tape length. This mechanical failure could be linked
to the low density of the columnar MgO structure explained in section 2.3.1, which makes
MgO layer have interstitial holes between columns. The white dots randomly distributed
correspond to silver precipitates that are physisorbed on the surface. These protrusion
lines, however, were not homogeneously distributed along the surface of the tape, these
could only be found on the area subjected to maximal stress, i.e. the bent area with a
curvature radius equal to the bending radius. On laminated tapes, no protrusion lines
were visible and presented a similar aspect to the one seen in Picture 6.1, however with
a considerable amount of waste matter from etching.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.6: SEM image of a sample after etching and 3.5 mm radius bending.
Figure 4.7: a): Top view of the protrusion lines distribution for a CC tape at a bending
radius of 3 mm. b): Zoom on protrusion lines belonging to the area delineated in red.
Then, SEM images were performed on CC samples that were bent at 3 mm as displayed
in Figure 4.7. From picture a), it is visible that bending at 3 mm generated a multiplicity
of protrusion lines, scattered throughout the whole bending area covering a surface of
around 3×2mm2. The tendency to fracture at an angle of 45 degrees can be better seen
in Figure 4.7 b). Nevertheless, the distribution of the angles was studied by taking the
angle of protrusion lines showing an average length of 0.36 mm. One protrusion line was
defined as a line at least 30 μm (lines smaller than this value were considered to belong
to a longer protrusion line), and showing a constant orientation angle.
40.2 ­ 58.2◦
58.2 ­ 76.2◦
76.2 ­ 86.2◦
22.2 ­ 40.2◦
4.2 ­ 22.2◦
Counts (%)
50
25
16.7
5.6
2.7
Table 4.4: Distribution of the angles of the protrusion lines present in CC tapes after 3 mm
radius bending.
In Table 4.4 is shown the distribution of angle orientation of a total of 36 identified protru­
38
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:47==
sion lines. Exactly half of them are situated in the interval between 40.2 and 58.2 degrees,
which corresponds to a dispersion close to the 45 degree value. However when the inter­
vals are narrowed down the dispersion is centered around two values: 44◦and 55◦. This
bi­modal distribution and dispersion can be explained by a contribution coming from lines
smaller than the 30 μm criterion but having oriented angles above 45 degrees. Indeed,
the presence of protrusion lines with angles superior to 45 degrees represent more than
50 % of the totality of the counts, which is revealing of a different mechanism behind the
fracture of the superconducting layer.
Figure 4.8: a): Zoom on the vertical protrusion line at a bending radius of 3 mm (CC tape).
b): Random cracks and protrusion line orientation at a bending radius of 3 mm (CC tape).
In Figure 4.8 it is possible to see a close­up on two protrusion lines where the angles are
different than 45 degrees and also possess cracks along them. The protrusion line in Fig­
ure b) is strictly vertical and assuming that the ab­planes are still distributed as shown in
Figure 2.9, the line is perpendicular to the (110) planes. This failure occurrence can also
appear under the form of cracks as seen in Picture a) where a crack formed following the
same direction as previously mentioned. However, the formation of cracks near protru­
sion lines edges is a regular failure with often a vertical orientation, still random cracks can
also appear as seen in Picture 4.8 b). Despite considerable amount of structural defects
that arose from the 3 mm bending, these tapes were still able to reach about 13.6 % of
their original critical current.
Finally, samples that were bent following a radius of 2.5 mm were investigated under the
SEM. In Figure 4.9 two different samples are displayed that were subjected to the same
bending and then etched. Both samples appear to have lost the thick superconduct­
ing layer in the maximal stress area. However further EDX analysis (see Annex Figure
6.3) has shown that a residual superconducting layer remains attached to the MgO layer.
Moreover, these two images confirm the hypothesis previously mentioned where it was
stated that minor bending radii would induce more considerable damage. According to
Figure 4.9, damage can be seen in the loss of the superconducting layer and exposed
MgO layer (chemical structure was confirmed by EDX in Annex Figure 6.3) and also in
the presence of long cracks and protrusions lines. The exposed MgO shows a great
alignment between the cracks and the orientation of the ab­planes (Annex Figure 6.4).
Moreover, the reason behind the easy etching of the superconducting layer is the stress
applied by the bending in compressive mode that is directed towards the center of the
tape as shown in Figure 4.10 a). This zone undergoes high local axial compression and
the mechanism to release energy is found under the form of buckling. Since the HTS layer
is brittle the buckling leads directly to fracture of the layer. The direction of the fracture
obeys the principal of maximum stress as is shown in Figure 4.9 b), where the center of
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.9: a): Top view of the damaged area after 2.5 mm bending for CC sample 34KB.
b): Top view of the interface between the damaged area and the intact superconducting
layer.
the damaged area is vertical, however in the vicinity of this region the fractures follow the
ab­planes direction which could be understood as a competing mechanism.
Figure 4.10: Scheme showing the two fracture mechanisms that were observed in the
bent tapes.
For the laminated tapes, since the bending was performed under tensile mode, it was
expected to observe important cracks perpendicular to tape length following the reverse
mechanism shown in 4.10 b). This was not visible in samples that underwent bending
inferior to 3 mm since the etching completely removed the area that experienced high
amount of tensile stress of the superconducting layer.
4.2
Striation Of 3 mm Tapes And Critical Current Dependence
4.2.1
Modelling Of The Striation And Magnetic Profiles
In this section the results regarding the striation of superconducting tapes are presented
as well as a model. The process regarding the striation has been explained previously in
section 3.0.3. The first results came from TapeStar. A first test measurement was made
on a non­striated, silver­coated tape, the tape that was chosen presented an average
critical current of around 145 A. After the copper layer deposition the IC was 122 A on
average for non striated sections. This change however does not show visible impact
40
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:49==
on the magnetic profiles provided by Tapestar. On the other hand, the impact of striation
was clearly visible on the Tapestar data since the critical current was visibly decreased
down to an average of 18 A for the full width, the striation also impacted the magnetic field
profile as it is shown in Figure 4.11. Both measurements were done at a field of 19.4 mT
generated by the DC coils. The main difference between the two profiles is the decrease
of magnetic field within the tape. In Figure a), the amplitude reaches a value of 13 mT at
the center of tape (assuming an offset of the positions of 1 mm) while the striated tape
only manages to screen the field down to 17.5 mT. Moreover, the non­striated segment
shows a typical V shape profile following the Bean model while the striated one contains
a plateau­like form. From this, it can be understood that the striation strongly modifies the
properties of the tapes, preventing a clear estimation of the critical density since the Bean
model can no longer be applied as it is for a normal tape. Therefore, the average that is
displayed of 18 A is not a good estimation.
Figure 4.11: a): Magnetic field profile for a non striated tape after copper layer deposition.
b): Magnetic field profile for a striated tape after copper layer deposition. The blue line
corresponds to a fit made following the Bean model in order to extract the critical current
Furthermore, the critical current was not homogeneous throughout the measured tape, as
it presented random peaks sometimes reaching 40 A and even 50 A (see Annex Figure
6.12). This can come from incomplete striation, meaning that ideally 4 filaments are cre­
ated with the laser ablation of 3 trenches, if there is one section where one of the lasers
did not correctly etched the surface leaving the HTS layer intact, it could lead to doubling
the measured IC. However, since Tapestar measurements are not fully reliable in this
configuration, and it is not possible to verify with the naked eye by looking at the cor­
responding sections, an explanation for this phenomenon as well as for the plateau­like
profiles is presented in this section.
4.2.2
Microscopic Investigation Of The Striations
In this final section, the quality of the striations on the superconducting tape is investigated
under the microscope. One of the main interests here is to determine how deep and how
wide the trenches really are. These results were then used in the simulations performed
in section 4.2.2 and in the estimation of the critical current for a single tape with the width
of 4 filaments in section 4.2.3. The cross­sections of the tapes were done through ion
etching targeted at the position of one striation. The first observation shown in Figure
4.12 was done the striated tapes before the copper deposition where the top layer was
still silver.
From Figure 4.12 it was possible to measure the depth of the striation at around 7 μm
meaning that the laser reached the MgO substrate layer and successfully removed the
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.12: a): Overview of the cross­section and one striation of the silver coated 3 mm
tape. b): Cross­section of the striation on the silver coated 3 mm tape.
HTS layer without damaging the Hastelloy. Also, the width of the striation was estimated at
30 μm (see Figure 6.7 in the Annex). It is also visible that the despite the good penetration
of the laser, the ablation process left a considerable amount of debris on only one side of
the striation in the form of a small 12 μm hill that follows the striation all along the way. In
order to confirm the remaining layer on the floor of the trenches, additional EDX analysis
was carried out on a close­up section of the striation (see Figure 6.6 in the Annex). There
are no traces left of the GdBCO layer, identified were a top silver layer, an underlying MgO
layer and the Hastelloy underneath. Also from Figure 6.6, the shape of the MgO layer is
no longer flat, the laser ablation deformed considerably the Hastelloy layer, possibly due
to thermal expansion brought by the heat from the laser beam. The top thin (< 1 μm)
silver layer can be understood as an extra deposition layer coming from the evaporation
of surrounding silver during the laser etching or ion etching process for SEM preparation.
Next, the quality of the copper deposition was observed using the same process as before.
The corresponding images are visible in Figure 4.13, from Figure a) it can be noted that the
copper coating was homogeneously applied to the totality of the surface, even irregular
structures such as the hill and the trench were completely covered.
Figure 4.13: a): Overview of the cross­section and one striation of the CC 3 mm tape. b):
Cross­section of the striation on the CC 3 mm tape.
Also, Figure 4.13 b) shows that the deposition is even successful in areas that would
appear masked such as bottom of the trench near the left wall where the it would be ex­
42
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:51==
pected that the proximity to a higher level would shade the trench area. Therefore, the
interest is also made on the electrical contacts between the top copper layer and the bot­
tom of the trench, since these can be responsible to electrical coupling between filaments
(as discussed later in section 4.2.4). The cross­section image shows a clear continuity
between the right top copper layer covering the hill and the striation floor, however, the
quality of the electrical contact between the latter and the left top copper layer is not as
clear, nevertheless, it can be expected that further irregularities along the striation allow
the flow of current or even a contact the top silver layer can act as conducting path.
To conclude, the striation worked as expected by removing the silver and superconduct­
ing layer and not damaging the Hastelloy layer. Nevertheless, the laser ablation left a
consistent amount of debris along the righthand side of the trenches under the form of a
hill. These structures did not affect the deposition of the copper layer on top which was
effectively able to cover the totality of the surfaces including the floor of the trenches. Ad­
ditionally, the hill structure could affect the homogeneity of the current distribution when
loading electrically the tape and the quality of the contacts when soldering the voltage
taps, which could lead to the anomalous measurements as will be shown in section 4.2.4,
assuming that the trenches are not completely isolating given the possible contacts be­
tween top layers and bottom trench layers.
4.2.3
Theoretical Explanation
In order to get an approximation of the critical current that is measured, the ideal striated
tape with 4 filaments is modeled by 4 slabs each of width w put next to each other ,
of infinite length and having no thickness. Through them flows an equivalent 2D current
density: JC = IC
w . The goal is to compute the magnetic field that is generated by each slab
according to the Bean model when there is complete penetration of an external magnetic
field inducing a distribution of current similar to Figure 2.8, inducing the flow of the critical
current over the totality of the width. The coordinate system and notations are shown in
Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Scheme showing the infinite slab along x together with the orientation of
position vectors.
In order to compute the magnetic field B1 generated above the slab, two approximations
are done. First, since according to the Bean model the critical current flows in opposite
directions within one slab, for simplicity one slab is approximated as two adjacent slabs
of width w
2 and each having opposite current flow directions. The second approximation
is that the magnetic field contributions mainly from the line perpendicular to tape length
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
43
==PAGE:52==
directly below the target point as shown in Figure 4.14. The magnitude and direction of
the magnetic field is given by Biot­Savart equation for a 2D geometry in a 3D space:
−→
B1 = µ0
4π
Z
S
−−→
JC0 × −→r
|−→r |2
dS
(4.1)
where S corresponds to the total surface of the slab, −→
r1 = Y −→
ey + Z−→
ez is the vector giving
the coordinates of the target position at which the magnetic field information is wanted
and −→r is the vector giving the distance and direction between the target point and the
magnetic field source point at point −→s = y−→
ey. Also, −−→
JC0 = 2IC
w −→
ex.
However, given the second given above, since only the contribution coming from the y­
direction are counted, Equation 4.1 becomes:
−→
B1 = µ0
4π
Z
w
2
0
−−→
JC0 × −→r
|−→r |2
dy
(4.2)
Now, −→r can be expressed as:
−→r = −→
r1 −−→s = (Y −y)−→
ey + Z−→
ez
(4.3)
and the vector product between −→r and −→
JC yields:
−−→
JC0 × −→r = 2ICZ
w
−→
ey + 2IC(Y −y)
w
−→
ez
(4.4)
This expression is then injected into Equation 4.2, however the detection in the Tapestar
measurement is the response regarding the z component of the magnetic field, therefore
the B­field is projected onto the z­axis:
B1z = µ0
2π
Z
w
2
0
IC(Y −y)
w((Y −y)2 + Z2 dy = µ0IC
2πw (1
2ln(Z2 + Y 2) −ln(|Z2 + (w
2 )2 −wY + Y 2|)
(4.5)
This process is reiterated for the magnetic field B2 generated by the other half of the slab,
this time accounting for opposite current direction and that the target point is common with
the previous slab, therefore −→r = (Y +y)−→
ey +Z−→
ez. This translates into the final expression
for Bz = B1z(Y, Z) + B2z(Y, Z):
Bz(Y, Z) = µ0IC
2πw (ln(Z2+Y 2)−1
2(ln(|Z2+(w
2 )2−wY +Y 2|)+ln(|Z2+(w
2 )2+wY +Y 2|))
(4.6)
From the formula given in Equation 4.6 it is clear that the z­component of the magnetic
field generated by the full slab is dependent on two variables: position relative to tape
width and relative to height. Moreover the expression given is also symmetric relative to
the center of the tape, this is also coherent with measurements done on standard tapes
that are not striated. This expression also means that the sensibility of the detectors is
dependent on distance relative to the tape.
44
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:53==
To have a full understanding of the implications of this expression, simulations were per­
formed in Python where the response of a 3 mm tape was computed assuming that
JC = 80 A in order to plot the magnetic field profiles across the tape. The simulations
can be divided into two three independent studies: the first one concerns the estimation
of the critical current for the non striated tape case, the second case focuses on the in­
fluence of the height relative to the tape, and the third case analyses how the striation
defects can affect the measurements. All simulations were then compared to experimen­
tal results.
The inputs of the simulations were current flowing through the samples corresponding to
the real critical current, tape width, number of filaments, number of detectors and detector
distance. Then geometries were adapted regarding the distribution of the striations. The
outputs are real magnetic field, measured magnetic field, and measured critical current.
The method used to infer the critical current was based on the Bean model stated in the
section 2, meaning that the value of the magnetic field was taken at one of the filaments
extremities and then subtracted to the value in the middle of the tape, then the total was
divided by the distance between both positions giving the critical current density JC and
then this value was multiplied by experimental data of the cross­section area of the su­
perconducting layer. It is worth noting that in the estimations of IC, an extra scaling factor
has been added since all computations were initially far from experimental values due to
the assumption that the filaments have no width and therefore the multiplication by the
cross­section area would lose physical meaning.
Critical Current Calculation For A Non­Striated Tape.
In order to find the scaling factor for further investigations it was necessary to do a run
test to prove that the model was close to the experiments. This first simulation seeks to
find the magnetic field profile for a non striated slab (shown in black Figure 4.15) with an
0.8 mm distance for the detectors, which corresponds to experiment conditions.
Figure 4.15: Magnetic field profile and critical current density calculated for a 3 mm wide
non striated tape.
This blue line in Figure 4.15 corresponds to the magnetic field profile generated by the
slab, and can be compared to Figure 4.16. The first observation concerns the magnitude
of the magnetic fields, unlike 4.16 the values of the calculated magnetic field are negative
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
45
==PAGE:54==
and this is due to the fact that it is purely the generated magnetic field and does not contain
the offset of 19.4 mT that comes from the DC­coil field.
Figure 4.16: Tapestar profile for a non­striated 3 mm tape in a 19.4 mT magnetic field
generated by the DC­coils.
Both curves exhibit the behavior of the magnetic field with an increase in magnitude with
same order of magnitudes at around 20 mT in the vicinity of the slab and then a steep
decrease of the magnetic field towards the center of the slab. The calculated magnetic
field profile while it is not purely linear as described by the Bean model, exhibits linear
behavior in the slab region excluding the center (where |B| ∝y2). This is demonstrated
in the Annex in Equation 6.2 after performing a Taylor expansion, which validates the ap­
proximation, where the Bean model is used to extimate the critical current. The calculated
IC value is coherent with the experimental values since it was calculated at 117.6 A ver­
sus an average of 118.2 A for the a real tape. Since this method showed results close
to the real Tapestar values, it was considered a good enough approximation to pursue
the simulations. It should be noted, that even if there is a good match between simu­
lated and measured values, the real IC remains at 80 A, meaning that the IC is grossly
overestimated in the simulations.
Magnetic Profile And Critical Current Dependence On Sensor Distance
The next step is to comprehend the impact of the measuring distance on the data by
performing multiple simulations for different heights and observing the evolution of the
magnetic profile for a striated tape. The ultimate goal of this section is to find the reason
behind the existence of plateaus in the Tapestar profiles. For this, the simulations were
performed at Z = [0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1] mm in 4 adjacent slabs with 727 μm
width and separated by a 30 μm void simulating the laser ablated trenches, summing up
to a 3 mm wide tape. The IC assumed to be flowing through one filament was of 20 A.
To ensure good resolution of the results, the simulations were done with an interdistance
between detectors of 10 μm, which does not correspond to the reality. The total profile is
computed by adding the individual profiles of each slab that are determined at a specific
Z. The result is displayed in Figure 4.17, the black and blue rectangles represent the HTS
slabs and trenches respectively.
It is visible that as Z gets close to 0 mm there are two consequences: an increase of the
maximum magnitude measured by the detectors together with the detection of individual
filaments. For Z = 0.3 mm the local maxima of the magnetic field coincide exactly with
46
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.17: Simulation of the magnetic field profile when varying the sensor height rela­
tive to the tape.
the position of the trenches, however as the detectors are positioned further away from
the surface of the tape, sensitivity is lost and the oscillations of the magnetic field are
dampened. This leads after 0.8 mm in a plateau that occupies the total area of the tape,
as is shown in Figure 4.11 b). It is to be reminded that is in the case of high spatial
resolution, in reality the detectors are spaced by 600 μm, which is 60 times lower than
shown in 4.17. Lowering the resolution and setting the distance relative to the tape at real
values leads to Graph 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Simulation of the individual and total magnetic field profiles for a 3 mm striated
tape into 4 filaments with a detector distance of 0.8 mm.
Here, the individual profiles are computed with a higher resolution for clarity. Neverthe­
less, the superposition of all fields shows no trace of striation is ultimately what is mea­
sured by the Tapestar detectors. Despite the spatial inaccuracy, when taking the values
from for the magnetic field and estimating the critical current for the tape, the simulation
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
47
==PAGE:56==
gives a value of 18.4 A, which is only an 8 % difference from the real value for a single
filament and not the full tape. This is unexpected since it is an understimation of 8 % com­
pared to the overestimation of 47 % for the previous calculations for the full slab. Still, the
value of 18.4 A is also in good agreement with experimental values, which are at 19.5 A,
if the latter are considered for a single filament. In order to estimate the full critical current
for the fully filamentized tape, resistive measurements are necessary.
Impact Of Defects On The Magnetic Profile
It was also detected that the critical current profile randomly displayed artifacts where the
IC value would double, sometimes almost triple. One hypothesis already mentioned is the
faulty striation inducing segments where two or even three filaments are able to merge,
therefore the critical current would locally increase. This phenomenon was investigated
using the same simulation principles, however this time the geometry was modified so
that it could fit to different merging possibilities. Recurrent artifacts would raise the critical
current up to values of 40 A and even 54 A. Each artifact also came with a spatial signa­
ture, which indicated the possibility of spontaneous merging of two filaments. In order to
simulate the joining of two filaments the trenches were simply replaced with HTS, how­
ever the current flowing through a slab that corresponded to the merging of two slabs was
assumed to be the double, meaning that contributions of the trenches to the total critical
current were neglected. Two main geometries were analysed: first considering that the
two central slabs merged and second with the three right slabs together. The results are
shown in Figures 4.19 and 4.20. It is also worth mentioning that in the name of clarity the
superposition of the fields was calculated at high spatial resolution and does not exactly
reflect what is displayed in the Tapestar profiles.
Figure 4.19: Simulation of the magnetic field profile and critical current for a 3 mm tape
striated into 3 filaments where the central one is double as wide as the two outer ones.
Regarding Figure 4.19, it can be seen that the central defect induces a higher individ­
ual magnetic field for the central wire as expected due to the higher value for the critical
current. The creation of a wider center slab generates a magnetic field that almost com­
pletely engulfs the two neighboring fields coming from the right and left slabs. Assuming
that the estimation of the critical current is performed the same way as before, it ignores
48
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:57==
local variations of the magnetic profile (as seen at y = 0.001 m) and sticks to the linear
approximation of the field.
Figure 4.20: Simulation of the magnetic field profile and critical current for a 3 mm tape
striated into 2 filaments where the right filament is three times as wide as the left one.
Such approximation yields a critical current of 40.1 A. According to the experimental val­
ues the critical current for this geometry is consistently around 41 A, Figure 4.21 b) is one
example of such a defect. Indeed, when comparing spatial distribution of Figures a) and
b) it is clear that the magnetic field minimum is shifted towards the left for the b) Graph and
is centered around the same coordinate (y = 7 mm) as the one in the profile displayed in
Figure 4.16 which possesses a symmetric profile. This suggests that the merging of the
wires should be in the center. There is therefore a good match between the simulation
and the experiment regarding both magnetic field profile, and IC estimation.
Figure 4.21: a): Tapestar magnetic field profile for an artifact position where the critical
current reaches 54.5 A.b):Tapestar magnetic field profile for an artifact position where the
critical current reaches 40 A.
As for Figure 4.20, this is the only possible assymetric configuration when considering the
merging of the slabs. Again, the connection of 3 slabs this time means that the current
flowing through the right slab is proportionally higher than the left filament. This trans­
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
49
==PAGE:58==
lates to a considerably stronger magnetic field that prevents the clear visualization of the
contribution of the left filament. Nevertheless, as shown for the previous case, there is an
irregularity in the superposition of the fields, also around y = −0.001 m. A similar profile
can be observed in Figure 4.21 a), where there is a clear shift of 0.8 mm of the minimum of
the magnetic field, and the simulations also show a shift of 0.4 mm. It is worth noting that
the spatial resolution of the detectors induces a possible variation of 0.3 mm of the peak.
Moreover, applying the same method for the estimation of the critical current leads to a
value of 69.9 A, which is 28.3 % more than the Tapestar value of 54.5 A. It is worth noting
that Figure 4.20 also shows asymmetric critical current values for the full tape since on
the right side of the tape the IC is of 99.6 A. Additionally, other defects with the same ge­
ometry have given values of the critical current of 42 A. This discrepancy of results can be
traced back to the assumption in Tapestar fits that the magnetic field profile is symmetric
relative to tape center. This is not the case for tapes where there is simultaneous failure of
the striation on two adjacent lasers, this could therefore explain both differences between
computational projections and experiments, and within multiple experiments. Despite the
critical current estimations, the magnetic field profile results for the final geometry are still
coherent with experimental values and were also successfully used in confirming the ori­
gin of the defects and presence of plateaus in the profiles. In conclusion, the magnetic
field profiles can satisfyingly be explained by the faulty striation of the lasers and it would
appear that the main defects would come from local decrease in beam intensity, this can
be due to bigger interdistance between the tape and the laser, local acceleration of the
tape, punctual defect in the tape or unstable beam source intensity.
On a side note, for symmetrical configurations of the slabs, there is an observable con­
sistent simulation error in the estimation of the critical current relative to the actual critical
current flowing through the filaments. Indeed, for single non merged slabs (case displayed
in Figure 4.18), the error in IC is of around 0 %. Then in the case where the two central
filaments are merged, it decreases to ­3.6 %. Finally, in the case of the non striated tape
analysed in Figure 4.15, it reaches +48 %. This error grows with an increase in width of
the slab, this could be linked to the scaling factor assumed to be constant when used to
compensate homogeneity in the calculation coming for the assumption of an infinitely thin
slab.
4.2.4
Resistive Measurements
Following the Tapestar results that could only be valid if considered for a single filament,
since the data was inconclusive regarding the critical current for the full tape, resistive
measurements were conducted with the goal of determining the real IC and investigating
the behavior of the tape in different regimes of current flow. For this the copper covered
striated tapes were subjected to the same apparatus as described in section 3.0.5. The
measuring method where the tapes are soldered onto copper plates ensures that the
current is evenly distributed among the 4 filaments at the current leads and minimize
weak contacts. The results are displayed in Figure 4.22.
First, the plots can be split into 2 categories: samples with negative resistance and sam­
ples with positive resistance. This distinction is done because among the seven samples
two of them, namely samples 1KB and 14KB, show negative linear slopes between 30 A
and 60 A and between 0 A and 43 A respectively. Regarding the 5 other samples, these
behave as having a positive resistance throughout the measurement, however, as it is
most visible from samples 7KB, 15KB and 19KB the power­law is considerably modified.
In this section, investigation consists in the explanation of these different behaviors.
First, the focus is made around the samples displaying solely positive resistance. From
Figure 4.22, the modification of the power­law induces a linear dependency of the voltage
50
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.22: I­V plots for seven 3 mm striated tapes.
with regards to the current. This implies the presence of an ohmic resistance contribution
to the total voltage. It is worth noting that for all samples apart from 1KB and 14KB, the
behavior for low current values is purely superconducting since the voltage is stable at
values in the order of 10−8 V. The fact that the linear dependency only takes shape for
higher current values means that the ohmic contribution must come from the coating ma­
terials once the current is redistributed to other layers to reduce the thermal load on the
superconductor.
This ohmic contribution can be understood as an an additional term that can be directly
expressed as Ohm’s Law: U = U1 + U2 where U1 = U0( I
IC )n and U2 = R2 ∗I. It
is then clear that for low currents the linear term controls the evolution of the voltage
since the power­law is negligible. Then, once the current approaches the flux creep area,
the contribution from the superconductor overtakes the ohmic voltage and dominates the
increase in voltage. This is well visible in the curves in Figure 4.22 for the samples 7KB
and 13KB, where at 66 A and 80 A respectively there is a visible transition from one regime
to the other. Furthermore, the fact that the linear term is dominant over the polynome
of higher degree for low currents is also able to explain the linear decrease of voltage
mentioned previously, however, this is only possible if the resistance term is negative.
The possibility for a negative resistance in arrays of filaments has been investigated by
Kim et al. (see [43]) where for an array of superconducting nanowires disposed in a similar
configuration as in Figure 4.23 a), a 4­point probe measurement was performed. It was
found that the placement of the probes leads to different expressions of the equivalent
resistance of the circuit.
Here a similar method to demonstrate the presence of a negative resistance was adopted.
In Figure 4.23 b) is shown the equivalent electric circuit reproducing the electric system
displayed in Figure 4.23 a) which consists of two superconducting filaments and one
trench. The resistance RHTS corresponds to the resistance present in each filament once
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.23: a): Configuration of an anomalous 4­point probe on a tape with two HTS
filaments and one laser ablated trench, this set­up is similar to the one studied. b): Equiv­
alent electric circuit describing the experimental set­up for an anomalous 4­poiint probe
on a tape with two superconducting filaments and one resistive trench.
the pure superconducting regime is lost, accounting for the resistance coming from the
additional layers and eventual movements of the flux lines. The trenches between two
filaments were considered to be purely resistive and therefore they are represented by
the resistance of the RT which quantifies the ohmic contribution when current flows from
one filament to the other. Points A and G show where the current leads are and the points
F and C where the voltage taps are. This circuit is electrically equivalent to an array of
two filaments and one trench, but it can be extended to more iterations of the structure
by increasing the values of the resistances. The positions of the current leads are crucial
relative to the voltage taps. Indeed, according to Kim et al. ([43]), changing the positions
of the voltage taps F and C to positions B and G leads to a total resistance of Rtot = RHTS
2
which is inherently positive. Additionally, the arrangement of the contacts displayed in Fig­
ure 4.23 b) is the only one that can exhibit a negative result. The associated expression
shown in 4.7 is the total calculated resistance of the circuit:
Rtot = 2R2
HTS + 2RHTSRT −R2
HTS
4(RHTS + RT )
(4.7)
By taking RHTS as a variable and solving the second degree polynomial in the numera­
tor, it can be determined that Rtot is strictly negative for RHTS <
√
3−1
2
RT . This means
that the total resistance of the system is negative when the resistance of the filaments is
strictly smaller than about one third of the value of the resistance of the trenches. An­
other consequence of this result is that the total resistance can change signs depending
on the RHT S
RT
ratio. This could explain change in behavior for sample 1KB for the interval
[0 A, 60 A] where there is an initial positive linear ohmic behavior followed by a negative
resistance regime. However, it remains unclear how a reversal from positive resistance
to negative resistance is possible. If the distribution of current remains coherent with the
fact that with growing current the HTS layer delegates an increasing fraction of the current
to the silver and copper layers, then it should not allow reverse mechanisms where the
HTS layers recovers the original or most of the current it gave to the other layers, at least
at constant temperature. Nevertheless, the expected reversal from negative to positive
resistance can explain the phenomenon of an intermediate plateau between the ohmic
region and the regime where the power­law dominates. As mentioned previously, if the
current is high enough then RHTS can approach
√
3−1
2
RT sufficiently fast such that |Rtot|
52
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:61==
decreases towards zero at a rate equivalent to the increase in current, in other words, for
high currents RHTS can behave be such that the voltage U = Rtot
I
remains constant. This
characteristic can be seen in the samples 1KB and 14KB in the intervals [55 A, 60 A] and
[42 A, 52 A], respectively.
On another note, the estimation of the critical current is also in this section purely based
on the interception between the curves and the voltage threshold of 10 μV, the results are
displayed in Table 4.5.
1KB
7KB
13KB
14KB
15KB
18KB
19KB
IC (A)
­
72
93
74
85
56
54
Table 4.5: Critical current for the 7 striated samples determined with the 4­point probe.
Unlike the values obtained through the Tapestar data, the IC values are all well above
20 A, the smallest value being of 54 A which is still three times higher than the Tapestar
projection. In order to characterize better the influence of the filaments on the critical
current calculation, it is of interest to calculate what the critical current is of a tape of
width 3 mm minus the total ablated width of the trenches but with the same electrical
properties. Such calculation should determine if additional phenomena arising from the
filaments impact the critical current. A simple calculation yields an average expected IC
of 114 A, which is considerably higher than the values available in Table 4.5. In a study
made by Kesgin et al. ( see [44]) it was shown that the expected decrease in critical current
should mainly come from the removal of material, meaning less superconducting material.
This means that striation in this case has indeed additional impacts to the electrical quality
of the full tape.
In conclusion, different samples were measured through a 4­point probe measure which
not only allowed the estimation of the critical current but also gave insight into the pres­
ence of unexpected electrical mechanisms where the striation seems to impact the overall
resistance of the tapes sometimes even making it negative and turns the 4­point probe
measurement sensitive to the exact placement of the voltage taps and the current leads
across the tape. The critical current values while higher than the Tapestar values and
confirming its inaccuracy as predicted by the simulations, are still lower than the values
for non striated tapes but of equivalent width of the 4 filaments.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:63==
5
Conclusion And Future Prospects
In this work, the performance of high temperature superconducting tapes manufactured
by THEVA was analysed and tested under various electro­mechanical conditions. The
ultimate goal was to prove the suitable use of these tapes for the manufacture of magnets
for fusion devices. Concretely, this thesis focused in two main aspects: the electrical per­
formance after applying mechanical stress under the form of out­of­plane bending and the
electrical properties of tapes after laser ablation in order to simulate the striations used
to reduce the losses when working with an AC current. For the former, a comparison be­
tween laminated and copper coated tapes was established and for the latter initially silver
coated tapes were used for the striations which were subsequently covered with copper.
The main parameters that were chosen as indicators of quality of the tapes where the IC,
the n­factor, the critical bending radius and the critical current profile generated by Tapes­
tar measurements.
Testing often meant that the tapes were subjected to conditions that could potentially in­
flict damage to their properties. Therefore a specific experimental method was developed
to prevent the burning and quenching of the tapes. This method consisted of soldering
two copper plates to the two extremities of the tapes and using them as current contacts
when using the 4­point probe. This offered extra thermal protection of the superconduct­
ing layer since it ensured that a good contact between the tape and the current leads
avoiding contact voltages that could generate heat and providing additional material at
the extremities of the tape where current could circulate when the electric load was too
high. This technique allowed a success rate for laminated tapes near 100 % and above
70 % for copper coated ones, which demonstrated the efficiency of this method compared
to the average rate of 60 %.
Regarding the bending experiments, a statistical methodology was used in over 96 sam­
ples in order to deliver relevant data regarding the electro­mechanical stability of the tapes.
The whole process comprised three separate steps: first bending, then measuring the IC
at 77 K and finally compiling all the results to extract a critical bending radius. During the
experiments the laminated tapes were bent in tensile mode whereas the copper coated
tapes in compressive mode. While the expected result was that compressive bending
yields lower critical bending radii, this was not the case in this study, where the laminated
tapes showed a critical bending radius of 3.1 ± 0.05 mm against 3.5 ± 0.07 mm for the
copper coated case. This result together with the success rate mentioned shows how
soldering the laminate on top of the copper layer as well as having the HTS layer closer
to the neutral axis contributes to the enhancement of the mechanical and electrical char­
acteristics of the tapes despite the fact that these were bent in tensile mode.
Moreover, the associated n­factor could also be extracted from the power­law fits of the
I­V curves. They displayed similar behavior as a function of the bending radius indicating
laminated tapes as having better pinning properties (which are connected to the n­factor).
SEM investigations after having performed chemical etching to expose the HTS layer
showed minor damage to the structure of the superconducting layer of both kinds up to
the bending radius. However, close to rC the samples showed characteristic protrusion
lines and cracks aligned with the ab­planes, these can be considered responsible for the
decrease in critical current.
Further investigations should be focused on the performance of the tapes under 20 K,
since the mechanical results showed satisfying performance. Another aspect to be in­
vestigated is the influence of torsion of the tapes since for the functioning of the tapes
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
55
==PAGE:64==
in CORC tables tapes should possess stable properties in torsion and bending. Regard­
ing the striation of the tapes, initial IC measurements were performed through Tapestar
to monitor the quality of the tape before striation and copper deposition and showed an
average of 145 A. However, after striation the IC dropped to around 18 A and exhibited
magnetic field profiles on the Tapestar possessing plateaus instead of the expected V­
shape plots. In order to understand this phenomenon, a physical model was proposed for
the magnetic field generated by a superconducting slab and implement in Python. The
simulation results were satisfying as they successfully attributed the existence of plateaus
to the relative distance between the tape and the Hall detectors.
Furthermore, the model was able to explain irregularities in the plots where there were
local peaks for the critical current as sections where the laser did not remove the super­
conducting layer. Finally, resistive measurements showed that the actual IC was between
54 A and 90 A, showing higher values than those given Tapestar values. It is then pos­
sible to confirm that the value measured through inductive techniques only showed the
critical current of one filament and not of the totality of the tape. Also, from the I­V plots it
was possible to observe a linear contribution coming from ohmic resistance of the copper
coated trenches. This linear contribution corresponded to mostly positive resistances, still
a negative resistance could also be measured and an explanatory model proposed that
a faulty placement of the voltage taps on different filaments leads to such results. Finally,
SEM imaging confirmed the satisfying deposition of copper on the striated tapes, as well
as the presence of a continuous contact of copper across the trenches. This non only
contributes to the validity of the model for negative resistance but also confirms that the
current method of PVD is suitable for the deposition of copper in already structured sub­
strates with striations.
In order to have a full picture of the performance of laser ablated tapes, it would be neces­
sary to conduct the laser ablation by placing a particle or dust collector near the ablation
surface to prevent the forming of the hills on one side of the striations. Then it would
be essential to perform additional tests regarding AC­losses, also an improvement of the
4­point probe measurement could be proposed where the voltage taps would cover ho­
mogeneously the totality of the tape. One aspect that could also be investigated is the
electro­mechanical performance of the striated tapes as done previously in this work to
assess the electric behavior and influence of the filaments under mechanical stress.
56
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1] Aurélien Godfrin, AC Losses in High­Temperature Superconductor Tapes and Cables
for Power Applications, PhD Thesis, Karlsruher Institut für Technologie, 2020.
[2] Mark D Ainslie, Reducing AC losses in high­temperature superconducting coated­
conductor wires towards more efficient superconducting electric power applications,
Superconductor Science and Technology, Volume 32, page 030501, IOP Publishing,
Jan. 2019, 10.1088/1361­6668/aafc40.
[3] Yawei Wang and Min Zhang and Francesco Grilli and Zixuan Zhu and Weijia Yuan,
Study of the magnetization loss of CORC cables using a 3D T­A formulation, Supercon­
ductor Science and Technology, Volume 32, page 025003, IOP Publishing, Jan. 2019,
DOI:10.1088/1361­6668/aaf011.
[4] Yang,
J.,
Li,
C.,
Tian,
M. et al. Analysis of AC Transport Loss in Con­
ductor on Round Core Cables. J Supercond Nov Magn 35,
57–63 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10948­021­06031­5.
[5] Van der Laan, D. C., Lu, X. F.
Goodrich, L. F. Compact GdBa2Cu3O7–δ coated
conductor cables for electric power transmission and magnet applications. Supercond.
Sci. Technol. 24, 42001 (2011).
[6] Barth, Christian Laan, D Bagrets, Nadezda Bayer, Christoph Weiss, K­P Lange,
Christian. (2015). Temperature­ and field­dependent characterization of a conductor
on round core cable. Superconductor Science and Technology. 28. 10.1088/0953­
2048/28/6/065007.
[7] Zohm Hartmut 2019,On the size of tokamak fusion power plants, Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
A.3772017043720170437, https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2017.0437.
[8] T.S. Lee, I. Jenkins, E. Surrey, D.P. Hampshire, Optimal design of a toroidal field
magnet system and cost of electricity implications for a tokamak using high temperature
superconductors, Fusion Engineering and Design, Volumes 98–99, 2015, Pages 1072­
1075, ISSN 0920­3796, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2015.06.125.
[9] Zimmermann, M. v. and Schneider, J. R. and Frello, T. and Andersen, N. H.
and Madsen, J. and Käll, M. and Poulsen, H. F. and Liang, R. and Dosanjh, P.
and Hardy, W. N., Oxygen­ordering superstructures in underdoped YBa2Cu3O6+x
studied by hard x­ray diffraction,
Phys. Rev. B, Volume 68,
issue 10,
page
104515, Sep. 2003, American Physical Society, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.68.104515,
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.68.104515.
[10] Reinhold Kleiner, Werner Buckel, Superconductivity An Introduction, Third Edition,
Wiley­VCH Verlag GmbH and Co, 2016, ISBN: 978­3­527­68652­0.
[11] R. G. Sharma, Superconductivity: Basics and Applications to Magnets, Springer Edi­
tions, Second Edition, 2021.
[12] Gurevich, A. and Pashitskii, E. A., Current transport through low­angle grain
boundaries in high­temperature superconductors, Phys. Rev. B, Volume 57, issue
21, pages 13878–13893, Jun 1998, American Physical Society, DOI: 10.1103/Phys­
RevB.57.13878, https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.57.13878.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
57
==PAGE:66==
[13] K. Fossheim and A. Sudbø, Superconductivity: Physics and Applications, John Wiley
Sons Ltd, 2004.
[14] Y. Aparecido Opata, Studies of doping effects on the superconducting properties of
DyBa2Cu3O7­x and its possible manufacture as thin film in view of potential use for
power applications, PhD Thesis, DTU Energy, December 2017.
[15] DTU Course 47325: Large­Scale Superconductor Technologies, session 7 on Large
scale and multiphysics by Asger B. Abrahamsen, DTU Energy.
[16] DTU Course 47325: Large­Scale Superconductor Technologies, session 6 on mag­
netisation and J(B) by Anders Christian Wulff and Andrea Insignia.
[17] Fundamental Elements of Applied Superconductivity in Electrical Engineering, First
Edition. Yinshun Wang, 2013 Science Press. Published 2013 by John Wiley
Sons
Singapore Pte. Ltd.
[18] Y.B. Kim, C.F. Hemstead, A.R. Strnad, Phys. Rev. 129, 528 (1963).
[19] Nomura, K., Hoshi, S., Yao, X. et al. Preferential growth mechanism of REBa2Cu3Oy
(RE = Y, Nd) crystal on MgO substrate by liquid phase epitaxy. Journal of Materials
Research 16, 979–989 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1557/JMR.2001.0138.
[20] G. Sigl. Herstellung von technischen Substraten mit biaxial texturierten Puffer­
schichten fur supraleitende Bandleiter der 2. Generation. Dissertation, Technische Uni­
versitat München (2009).
[21] T. Koenen, Korrelation zwischen der Filmstöchiometrie und der mechanischen
Stabilität bzw. kritischen Stromdichte in Filmen aus dem Hochtemperatursupraleiter
GdBCO, 2012, Augsburg University.
[22] H.S. Shin, M.J. Dedicatoria, J.R.C. Dizon, H.S. Ha, S.S. Oh, Bending strain charac­
teristics of critical current in REBCO CC tapes in different modes, Physica C: Super­
conductivity, Volume 469, Issues 15–20, 2009, Pages 1467­1471, ISSN 0921­4534,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physc.2009.05.067.
[23] M. A. Diaz, H. S. Shin, and J.­H. Lee, Characteristic responses of critical current in
REBCO coated conductor tapes under tensile/compressive bending strains at 77 K,
Progress in Superconductivity and Cryogenics, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 31–35, Dec. 2018.
[24] Bespalov, A. Mel’nikov, A.. (2013). Abrikosov vortex pinning on a cylindrical cavity
inside the vortex core: Formation of a bound state and depinning. Superconductor
Science and Technology. 26. 085014. 10.1088/0953­2048/26/8/085014.
[25] Francesco Grilli and Anna Kario, How filaments can reduce AC losses in HTS coated
conductors: a review, 2016 Supercond. Sci. Technol. 29 083002.
[26] A. C. Wulff and M Solovyov and F Gömöry and A B Abrahamsen and O V Mishin
and A Usoskin and A Rutt and J H Lundeman and K Thydén and J B Hansen and J­C
Grivel, Two level undercut­profile substrate for filamentary YBasub2/subCusub3/subO,
Superconductor Science and Technology, Volume 28, May 2015, IOP Publishing, DOI:
10.1088/0953­2048/28/7/072001.
[27] Zeldov E, Clem J, McElfresh M and Darwin M 1994 Phys. Rev. B 49 9802–22.
[28] Brandt E H and Indenbom M 1993 Phys. Rev. B 48 12893–906.
58
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:67==
[29] R.
Gyuráki
et
al.,
”Interfilament
Resistance
at
77
K
in
Stri­
ated
HTS
Coated
Conductors,”
in
IEEE
Transactions
on
Ap­
plied
Superconductivity,
vol.
26,
no.
8,
pp.
1­6,
Dec.
2016.
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=arnumber=7747450isnumber=7560673.
[30] D. Zabulionis, Stress and strain analysis of layered beams under hygrothermal and
mechanical loads, MECHANIKA. 2006. Nr.3(59), ISSN 1392 ­ 1207.
[31] Peter Uhd Jepsen, Nano2: Nanoscale conductivity Optical measurements with ter­
ahertz radiation, DTU Fotonik ￿Department of Photonics Engineering, August 2021.
[32] C.
J.
M.
Lasance,
The
Seebeck
Coefficient,
Electronics
Cooling,
2006,
https://www.electronics­cooling.com/2006/11/the­seebeck­coefficient/.4
[33] Rui W. Chang, F. Patrick McCluskey, Reliability assessment of indium solder for low
temperature electronic packaging, Cryogenics, Volume 49, Issue 11, 2009, Pages 630­
634, ISSN 0011­2275.
[34] S. Yazaki et al., Critical Current Degradation in High­Temperature Superconducting
Tapes Caused by Temperature Rise. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON APPLIED SUPER­
CONDUCTIVITY 23.3 (2013), p. 4602304. doi: 10.1109/TASC.2013.2244157.
[35] Kesgin, Ibrahim Levin, George Cai, Xinwei and Li, Xiao­Fen and Haugan, Timothy
Selvamanickam, V.. (2014). Influence of Oxygenation in Copper Stabilized Multifila­
mentary 2G HTS Tapes Made by Selective Electroplating and Laser Ablation. IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity. PP. 1­1. 10.1109/tasc.2014.2366372.
[36] M. Breschi et al., Experimental Study on the Impact of Double Bending at Room
Temperature on the Performance of YBCO Coated Conductors, IEEE TRANS­
ACTIONS ON APPLIED SUPERCONDUCTIVITY, VOL. 32, NO. 4, JUNE 2022,
10.1109/TASC.2021.3133827.
[37] I. Chorkendorff, J.W. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics,
2003, WILEY­VCH Verlag GmbH Co. KGaA, Weinheim ISBN: 3­527­30574­2
[38] Oxford Instruments Plasma Technology,
Ion Beam Etching
Milling (IBE),
https://plasma.oxinst.com/technology/ion­beam­etching.
[39] M. Sugano, K. Shikimachi, N. Hirano, S. Nagaya, Simultaneously bending and tensile
strain effect on critical current in YBCO coated conductors, Physica C: Superconduc­
tivity and its Applications, Volumes 463–465, 2007, Pages 742­746, ISSN 0921­4534,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physc.2007.03.501.
[40] F. Pierro, M. Delgado, L. Chiesa, X. Wang and S. O. Prestemon, ”Measurements
of the Strain Dependence of Critical Current of Commercial REBCO Tapes at 15
T Between 4.2 and 40 K for High Field Magnets,” in IEEE Transactions on Ap­
plied Superconductivity, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1­5, Aug. 2019, Art no. 8401305, doi:
10.1109/TASC.2019.2902458.
[41] Rui He, Yunfei Tan, Ziyi Huang, Yiming Xie, Guangda Wang, Yifan Wang, Qiong
Wu, Junwen Wei, Bending and uniaxial tensile strain effects on the critical current of
REBCO coated conductor tapes, Cryogenics, Volume 116, 2021, 103285, ISSN 0011­
2275, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cryogenics.2021.103285.
[42] S.C. Richter et al., “Bending Radius Limits of Different Coated REBCO Conduc­
tor Tapes ­ An Experimental Investigation with Regard to HTS Undulators”, in Proc.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
59
==PAGE:68==
IPAC’21, Campinas, SP, Brazil, May 2021, pp. 3837­3840. doi:10.18429/JACoW­
IPAC2021­THPAB042.
[43] Jeong­Gyun Kim, Sung Ju Hong, Haeyong Kang, and Dongseok Suh, Anomalous
Negative Resistance Phenomena in Twisted Superconducting Nanowire Yarns, ACS
Nano 2020 14 (3), 3337­3343 DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b09026.
[44] Kesgin, Ibrahim Levin, George Cai, Xinwei Li, Xiao­Fen Haugan, Timothy Sel­
vamanickam, Venkat. (2014). Influence of Oxygenation in Copper Stabilized Multifil­
amentary 2G HTS Tapes Made by Selective Electroplating and Laser Ablation. IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity. PP. 1­1. 10.1109/tasc.2014.2366372.
[45] Meirzhan Dosmailov, Functional oxide thin­films by pulsed layer deposition: ion
beam nanostructuring of epitaxial YBa2Cu3O7­d and growth of conductive transpar­
ent Zn1­xAlxO on compliant substrates, PhD Thesis, Johannes­Kepler Universität Linz,
2015.
[46] Critical Current Density Through Grain Boundaries in High­Temperature Supercon­
ductors, Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism, November 2016, DOI:
10.1007/s10948­016­3729­2.
[47] Haynes
International,
https://www.haynesintl.com/docs/default­source/pdfs/new­
alloy­brochures/corrosion­resistant­alloys/brochures/c­276.pdf.
[48] Crystran, https://www.crystran.co.uk/optical­materials/magnesium­oxide­mgo.
[49] K Konstantopoulou and Y H Shi and A R Dennis and J H Durrell and J Y Pastor and
D A Cardwell, Mechanical characterization of GdBCO/Ag and YBCO single grains fab­
ricated by top­seeded melt growth at 77 and 300 K, Superconductor Science and Tech­
nology, Volume 27, page 115011, Oct. 2014, DOI: 10.1088/0953­2048/27/11/115011,
https://doi.org/10.1088/0953­2048/27/11/115011.
[50] Walch, EBT, Roos, C. Measurement of the mechanical properties of silver and
enamel thick films using nanoindentation. Int J Appl Glass Sci. 2020; 11: 195– 206.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ijag.13875.
[51] L.B. Freund, S. Suresh. Thin Film Materials: Stress, Defect Formation, and Surface
Evolution (2003).
[52] MakeItFrom,
ISO
Solder
Alloy
711,
https://www.makeitfrom.com/material­
properties/ISO­Solder­Alloy­711­IEC­A30C5­Sn96.5Ag3Cu0.5.
60
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:69==
6
Annex
6.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Figure 6.1: Top view of etched CC samples after 5 mm radius bending (SEM).
Figure 6.2: Top view of etched CC sample after 3.5 mmradius bending (SEM) with a 45◦
protrusion line visible.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.3: Close­up of a zone where the top superconducting layer was etched away
and the MgO layer was left exposed and EDX analysis of the distribution of Mg, Gd and
Ba.
Figure 6.4: Scaled­up SEM image of the the close­up on a zone where the top supercon­
ducting layer was etched away and the MgO layer was left exposed.
62
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.5: Zoom on the bending area where the superconducting area was partially
removed leaving exposed cracks where the MgO substrate layer is left visible (clear white
areas).
Figure 6.6: Close­up of the striation cross section where the top superconducting layer
was laser ablated and the MgO layer was left exposed and EDX analysis of the distribution
of Mg, O and Ag.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.7: Top view of the striations before copper deposition showing a trench that was
measured at 30 μm.
64
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:73==
6.2
Bending Measurements
Figure 6.8: Scatter plot of the critical current as a function of the radius for the CC tapes.
Figure 6.9: Scatter plot of the critical current as a function of the radius for the laminated
tapes.
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 6.10: I­V plot of the critical current as a function of the radius for the CC tapes with
confidence intervals.
Figure 6.11: I­V plot of the critical current as a function of the radius for the LAM tapes
with confidence intervals.
66
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
==PAGE:75==
6.3
Tape Striation and Modelling
Figure 6.12: Critical current Tapestar profile for the tape segment measured and then
used for resistive measurements.
6.3.1
Critical current calculation for a non striated tape
The linear behavior of Expression 4.6 can be approximated by a Taylor expansion around
the center of one of the slopes of the profile. In order to prove the linear behavior of the
profile the following simplified expression was taken:
f(y) = ln(1 + y2) −1/2(ln(1 + y2 + 2y + 1) + ln(1 + y2 −2y + 1))
(6.1)
The Taylor expansion is performed around y = 0.6 for this function, as it is taken the center
of the linear section, the latter being taken between [0, 1.2] in Figure ??.
Figure 6.13: Plot of function f taken as proportion to function B in Equation 4.6. The red
line corresponds to the coordinate y = 0.6 where the Taylor expansion is performed.
The expansion yields for y −0.6 ≪1:
f(y) = −0.402 + 0.777(y −0.6) + O(y2)
(6.2)
Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Laser Cut HTS Tapes
67
==PAGE:76==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 301
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
