==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Study of the concept of Mobility as a Ser-
vice (MaaS) and its possible application
on the Ile de France region
Camille Babin (s202235)
Supervisors :
Anders Fjendbo Jensen
Mikkel Thorhauge
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
Mail info@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
To offer eﬀicient and seamless travel to individuals throughout the complexity of the
offer, new concepts have emerged during the last 20 years. Mobility as a Service is
one of them and aims to re-frame the organisation of transport on the customer and
his needs. Mobility as a Service or MaaS is presented as an integrated concept that
combines different transportation modes into a common seamless service to provide
a customized mobility solution that meets the travel needs of users. The impact of
MaaS on mobility behaviour is non negligible and needs to be considered in traﬀic
models.
This report presents the work done to assess how MaaS will impact travel behav-
iors and how these changes can be modelled and included in the traﬀic model of Ile de
France region in France. More specifically, the goal of this study is to clearly identify
the characteristics and mobility schemes of people likely to have a MaaS subscription
and to understand how the possession of such a subscription can influence their mo-
bility in terms of number of trips and mode/route choice.
To do so, two phases were run. The first phase consisted of organizing 3 focus
groups to see the perception and understanding of the MaaS concept but also to have
a first insight on how the MaaS could impact travel habits of specific groups and what
are the levers for changes in practice. This phase underlined an easy understanding
of the concept if presented from the journey planning application point of view. As
for the mobility behaviour change, a strong inertia has been emphasized. However, a
potential demotorization and modal shift from the classic travel modes (personal car
and public transport) to new alternatives appeared in the background. Some levers
evoked are the accessibility of the app, the customization of the subscription to the
user need and the clearness of the traﬀic and any complementary information.
The second phase was composed of a stated-preference survey with a sample of
3000 responses. This report only presents the work done to build the SP survey. The
respondent, confronted to 3 potential MaaS subscriptions, has to declare which one he
prefers and if he would buy it if available on the market. Through two mobility surveys
described in this report, one based on the current scheme and one in a hypothetical
situation where the respondent would be in possession of one of the subscriptions, the
potential impact of MaaS on mobility behaviors can be assessed.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Technology, Management and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark with the collaboration of Explain
Consultancy, in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree in Trans-
port and Logistics.
The thesis contents represent 35 ECTS points. The work in relation to the thesis has
been conducted in the period March 2022 to September 2022.
Kongens Lyngby, September 4, 2022
Camille Babin (s202235)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This project, like many others, would not have be possible without the contribution
and support of a lot of people.
In the first place, I would like to thank my two thesis supervisors, Assistant Profes-
sor Mikkel Thorhauge and Professor Anders Fjendbo Jensen, for their guidance and
their help during this work despite the geographical distance. More particularly, I
would to than them for orientating me during this project through the vast subject of
Mobility as a service, for opening new perspectives thanks to their questions and for
their availability, especially during summer vacation, to answer the tiniest question
or to enhance the project with the tiniest discussion.
I would also like to express my deepest gratitude to Explain Consultancy for offering
me to work on this subject with them. I am grateful to the team based in Lyon for
their kind welcome and support during this work. I also could not have undertaken
this journey without Lorène Honoré. I would like to thank her for her support, her
guidance and the Wednesday meetings which were always a pleasant way to start the
day.
Last but not the least, I would like to thank my family and friends, especially Katell
for proofreading. I am grateful for their support during this project but also during
all the previous years.
And to anyone reading my work, I hope you will find it interesting.
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
IDFM Île de France Mobilités
MaaS
Mobility as a Service
MNL
Multinominal logit model
P+R
Park-and-ride
PAYG Pay as you go
PT
Public Transport
RP
Reavealed Preference
SP
Stated Preference
VoT
Value of Time
WTP
Willingness to pay
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
List of Tables
vii
List of Figures
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
General introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Mobility as a Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Île de France mobility situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Context and objectives of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Focus group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Stated Preference survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Discrete Choice Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Literature review
13
3.1
The concept of Mobility as a Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Building a MaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Experimentation of the MaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Stated Preference and MaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Investigation goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Focus Groups
23
4.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Practical info . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Stated Preferences Survey
39
5.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Building the SP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Validation of the SP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Conclusion
47
A
Specific question asked in the SP survey
49
A.1 Socio-demographic survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Mobility survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.3 Reporting of modal changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B
Python Biogeme script
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Example of a full factorial design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.1
Initial set of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Evaluation of the final design against the prior parameters . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Level values used in the final design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.1 Socio-demographic questions and answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Adjectives displayed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
List of Figures
1.1
Number of transport operators (public and private) in cities [1] . . . . . .
1
1.2
Whim interface [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Île de France map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Non exhaustive summary of the different transport modes available in Paris
and their operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Ranking of European cities by the number of shared vehicles for 10 000
inhabitants in 2017 [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Topology of MaaS into 4 levels and examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Results of the mobility portrait exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Results of the MaaS definition exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Results of the mode choice exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Results of the subscription choice exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Results of the behavior change arrow exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Figures
5.1
Introductory text used to present the MaaS in the London SP [11] . . . .
40
5.2
Example of a possible visual for the SP survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
General introduction
This study focuses on the potential impact of the Mobility as a Service on mode share
and mobility of the residents of the Ile-de-France region in France.
1.2
Mobility as a Service
Urban population is constantly growing and spreading geographically. Throughout
this development, simultaneous with improvement of technology, a diversification and
multiplication of the transport services have been observed in most of the cities. The
blooming of shared mobility as bike, car or scooter sharing in cities as well as personal
service (Taxi or Uber for instance) have diversified the transport offer to the individual
but at the same time, complicate the use of public transport (compared to private
cars). Consequently, major cities throughout the world have from 5 to 9 different
transport operators with each their own booking and payment system (single trip,
season tickets ect..) as shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Number of transport operators (public and private) in cities [1]
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
To offer eﬀicient and seamless travel to individuals throughout the complexity of
the offer, new concepts have emerged during the last 20 years. Mobility as a Service
is one of them that aims to re-frame the organisation of transport on the customer
and his needs. Hence, MaaS focuses on passengers and not on operators, providing
multi-operator customer based services.
The concept has been developed first in the Nordic countries in 2014, defined at
first as ”a system, in which a comprehensive range of mobility services are provided to
customers by mobility operators” [2]. Since 2014, MaaS has received much attention
within and around the transportation industry, leading to an evolution of the MaaS
definition. Proponents argue that MaaS will become the new transport paradigm
since it addresses many of society’s grand challenges in transport, promising improve-
ments in terms of environmental sustainability, reduced congestion and improved
accessibility. It can now be defined as ”an integrative concept that bundles different
transport modalities into joint, seamless service offerings, in order to provide tailored
mobility solutions that cater for users’ travel needs” [3].
Figure 1.2: Whim interface [4]
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Île de France mobility situation
3
Sweden (SE) and Finland (FI) have so far served as global pioneers of MaaS. For
instance, the 2014 pilot of UbiGo in Gothenburg (SE) is often referred as the first in
real-life conditions, while Whim, launched in Helsinki (FI) in 2016, drew international
recognition to the concept, as presented in Figure 1.2.
Nowadays, several major
cities have launched experimentation of MaaS, as Madrid, Sydney, Antwrep, Aarhus,
Vienna, London or Stockholm.
1.3
Île de France mobility situation
1.3.1
Île de France geography
The Île de France region is the most populated area of the thirteen regions of France.
Organized around Paris, the capital city, it is located in the north-central part of the
country. Île-de-France region is densely populated and retains a prime economic posi-
tion on the national stage: though it covers only 12,012 km2 (about 2% of metropoli-
tan French territory), it concentrates nearly 20% of the French population (12,21
millions inhabitants in 2018). It is composed of 8 French counties: Paris (75), Hauts-
de-Seine (92), Seine-Seint-Denis (93), Val-de-Marne (94), Seine-et-Marne (77), Yve-
lines (78), Essonne (91) and Val d’Oise (95). The region is divided into 3 categories:
the city of Paris itself, the inner ring - the zone located between Paris ring road and
the A86 motorway, mainly composed of the 92, 93 and 94 - and the outer ring -
beyond the A86 motorway, composed of the 77, 78, 91 and 95, as shown in Figure
1.3.
Figure 1.3: Île de France map
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.3.2
Travelling in Île de France
Paris and Île de France region have multiple transport operators [5].
The main ones are RATP, Keolis, SNCF and Transdev, operating public trans-
ports through the region. Furthermore, several small scale local coach companies also
operate some public lines [6]. The different transport companies operating in the Île
de France region are controlled and coordinated by Île de France Mobilités (IDFM),
a public organisation authority. Hence, the public transport offer and fares are coor-
dinated throughout the region, making the PT offer more readable in Île de France.
In Paris itself, 3 shared kick scooters operators (Lime, Tier and Dott) and 4 shared
bike operators (Velib - owned by the Greater Paris Metropolis, composed of 131
municipalities, including Paris - as well as Lime, Dott and Getapony) also offer their
service. For motorized mode, the city disposes of 3 frefloating car sharing operators
(Sharenow, Zity and Free2move) as well as fixed car sharing operator (Mobilib’ - co-
managed by Communauto, Getaround and Ubeeqo), and 4 motorized scooter sharing
(Troopy, Cityscoot, Yego and Cooltra). Finally, car service as cabs (more than 3500
registered)[7] and ride-sharing (as Uber or Kaptain) operate in the city.
A non-
exhaustive summary is presented in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: Non exhaustive summary of the different transport modes available in
Paris and their operators
Hence, in 2017, with all the different transport service offers through the city and
its region, Paris was the city with the most shared transport in Europe, with 128
self-service bikes, cars and scooters for 10 000 inhabitants (cf Figure 1.5).
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Context and objectives of the study
5
Figure 1.5: Ranking of European cities by the number of shared vehicles for 10 000
inhabitants in 2017 [8]
With all the different service offers and mobility modes available in Île de France
region, a global vision of mobility is now essential to make life easier for travellers
and offer the best service, fitting their needs.
1.4
Context and objectives of the study
The rising concept of MaaS has caught IDFM’s attention. Two IDFM departments
are currently addressing the issue: a MaaS team that is looking into developing a
MaaS service, and a prospective team who is not interested by the conception of
a MaaS solution but seeks to understand the impact of MaaS on the mobility of
Parisians and Ile-de-France inhabitants. To do so, they base their work on traﬀic
analysis done through a model called Antonin.
The Antonin model is a multimodal model covering the whole Île de France re-
gion developed by IDFM. The demand model is a disaggregated one. Travel patterns
are determined based on individual characteristics for the whole journey loop, which
distinguishes it from the more classical 4-step transport models. Then travel demand
is assigned on the different public transport networks to estimate ridership.
With the rise of MaaS, it becomes more and more interesting and relevant to
consider behavior changes and upgrade the Antonin model to include MaaS.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
The main goal of the study is to assess how MaaS will impact travel behaviors
and how these changes can be modelled and included in the Antonin model. We an-
ticipate that the integration of MaaS will take place at the generation stage as part of
the individual characteristics, and then obviously during mode choice, impacting the
service levels, the route choice and therefore the destination choice (as Antonin has a
combined distribution and mode choice module). More specifically, the objective of
this study is not to actually modify the model but to clearly identify the character-
istics of people likely to have a MaaS subscription in terms of age, gender, revenue,
home location, car possession, etc, and to understand how the possession of such a
subscription can influence their mobility in terms of number of trips and mode/route
choice.
To do so, the study is composed of 2 phases:
• A first phase of preparation composed of a literature review and 3 focus groups
that will provide guideline to develop the SP survey ;
• A second phase corresponding to the realization of the SP survey (objective of
3000 questionnaires). Recommendation for the Antonin model will be derived
from the analysis of the survey and conclude the study.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Focus group
A focus group is a research method that brings together a small group of people
to answer questions in a moderated setting. The group is chosen due to predefined
demographic traits, and the questions are designed to shed light on a topic of interest.
Focus groups are hence a type of qualitative research. Observations of the group’s
dynamic, their answers to focus group questions, and even their body language can
guide future research on consumer decisions, products and services, or controversial
topics. It is then possible to understand the positions taken in interaction with one
another and not in isolation. In this perspective, they allow the analysis of shared
representations, access to common sense, cultural models and norms.
Focus groups are often used in marketing, library science, social science, and user
research disciplines. They can provide more nuanced and natural feedback than indi-
vidual interviews and are easier to organize than experiments or large-scale surveys.
2.2
Stated Preference survey
2.2.1
SP methods
Stated preference (SP) surveys are commonly used to collect behavior data about an
hypothetical situation (product or service that are not yet available in the market).
In discrete choice SP experiment, the respondent choose between hypothetical alter-
natives, defined by a set of attributes - where each attribute can take two or more
levels. Hence, each alternative will differ from one to another by the combination
of the attributes’ levels. The main advantage of SP survey, compared to Reavealed
Preference (RP) survey, is that it allows the flexibility to choose which attributes and
characteristics to include, giving significant details on the impact of the attributes
and characteristics on the respondent’s decision. Moreover, the SP survey enables
multiple observations as the respondent can be confronted to multiple choice scenar-
ios with changing attribute levels [9]. This asset makes the SP experiment an ideal
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
technique to use for a theoretical concept, as MaaS.
The other side of the coin of this method is that the choice is hypothetical. Hence,
the answer might differ from reality due to, for instance, constraints not covered by
the SP survey or biased choice. Indeed, as the respondent doesn’t have to ”face”
his choice, he can make his choice for social desirability - I answer that I will take
my bike to go to work (instead of my car in reality) because it is perceived better
by relatives for instance - or to influence policy decisions - I answer that I will go
by foot to my workplace in order to improve the sidewalk even if I usually take the bus.
For a SP experiment to go well, it is important to keep the number of attributes
low in order to not overwhelm the respondent while making realistic assumptions on
them. To do so, different methods [10] can be applied while building the SP survey:
• Realistic level values related to the respondent’s environment: PT ticket, fuel,
parking, toll ;
• Customization: use characteristics of previous trips made by the respondent or
the respondent ownership to personalize the alternatives ;
• Contextualization: put the respondent in a specific scenario, as going to work
or groceries.
In usual SP experiments, each respondent is confronted to a choice set defined
by alternatives through a combination of attribute levels from the same finite and
only has to choose his preferred option. In the context of MaaS, this classic format
might not be suﬀicient, especially due to the flexibility of MaaS ad its subscription
possibilities [11].
Studies based on customized product bundles usually use menu
based survey designs to determine consumers’ preferences [12]. Hence the respondent
can choose their own attribute level e.g. fixed composition of pizza and ”make your
own pizza” option in a pizzeria.
2.2.2
Building a SP survey
In SP surveys, the respondent is confronted to several alternatives composed of differ-
ent attributes and levels, which vary between scenarios. The attributes and levels are
drawn from an underlying experimental design to construct the hypothetical choice
situations. The SP survey is thus based on a matrix of values that describes which
levels and attributes are shown in which situation. The attributes are represented as
columns, the scenarios as rows and the levels are the matrix values. The non-random
assignment of values within the matrix is intended to increase the statistical signifi-
cance of the entire experiment. The rest of this section is largely based on [13].
Several design types can be considered to build a SP experiment. A full factorial
design consider all the possible combination of levels. Hence, for instance, for a two
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Stated Preference survey
9
attributes (A and B) design with three levels each, this design would lead to a 9
choice scenarios, as shown in Table 2.1.
s
A
B
1
-1
-1
2
-1
0
3
-1
1
4
0
-1
5
0
0
6
0
1
7
1
-1
8
1
0
9
1
1
Table 2.1: Example of a full factorial design
While this design appears to be the easiest to build, it is generally not feasible
as the number of alternatives will shoot up with increasing number of attributes and
levels. For example, a SP experiment designed with a full factorial design with 11
attributes with each 5 levels will lead to 511 = 48828125 choice scenarios.
The fractional factorial design avoids this problem by only showing a subset of S
choice scenarios to the respondent, choosing the subset randomly or in order. How-
ever, both possibilities can lead to biased outcomes, as the respondent can be con-
fronted to only low or only high levels of certain attributes. The bias could however
be avoided by choosing the subsets in such a way that attribute level balance is satis-
fied. Orthogonal designs and eﬀicient designs select subsets in a more structured way.
Orthogonal designs have traditionally been the primary method for building SP
fractional factorial designs. A design is orthogonal if the attribute’s levels are balanced
and all the attributes in the design are uncorrelated, i.e.
the parameters can be
estimated independently. Orthogonal design is mostly used due to its simplicity to
construct as well as its property of ensuring that linear regression models will not
suffer from multicollinearity. In recent years, a new design technique called eﬀicient
design has gained popularity. The goal of eﬀicient design is to minimize the standard
error.
This improves the robustness of the parameter estimation, measuring the
”goodness” of the design.
2.2.3
Validation of a SP survey through simulation
In order to validate the SP survey, two methods can be used: the first is to run a
pilot to see if the responses are coherent with what is expected and the second is to
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
estimate plausible parameters for the model, generate some artificial data mimicking
real responses, put them across the SP and see if the model recovers the parameters
assumed. As a 6 month period is too short to implement the two phases of the study,
the SP validation is done trough simulation (pilot will be held in October).
The design is hence verified through an iterative process composed of 5 steps [14]:
• Define initial parameters for the model
• Generate the design
• Simulate hypothetical choice sets using the model and the initial parameters
• Estimate the model parameters using the synthetic data set
• Evaluate the design by comparing the estimated parameters to the prior param-
eters
– If the prior parameter can be recuperated, the process can be stop
– Else, adjust the prior parameters and iterate the process
To compare the estimated and prior parameters, few steps have to be taken. First,
models are usually expressed in its scaled form and thus the estimated parameters
are actually estimates of the “original” coeﬀicients divided by the scale parameter
[15].
As here the data is generated in a controlled environment where the ”true”
parameters and the scale is known, the estimated parameters have to be re-scaled in
order to be compared with the prior parameters (which are assumed to be the ”true”
parameters). To compare the re-scaled estimated parameters to the prior parameters,
two methods can be applied and are complementary: one can simply compute the
ratio or a t-test (cf 2.3.3.1) can be run. If the ratio is around 1 or/and the t-test
value is between [-1.96;1.96], then the model can recover the prior parameters and
the design is consistent with what it expected.
In order to define the prior parameters, different strategies can be applied. As
several models on MaaS have been estimated in literature, the prior parameters are
assumed based on them.
2.3
Discrete Choice Models
The following section presents the different mathematical methods used for the model
estimation and analysis. This section is sourced from various papers [16] [17] [18].
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Discrete Choice Models
11
2.3.1
Random Utility Maximisation
The random utility function Un,i is used to assess the gain for an individual n from
choosing alternative i. It can be decomposed as the sum of a the systematic utility
Vn,i and a error term ϵn,i such as Un,i = Vn,i + ϵn,i. The systematic utility is linear
in parameters as well as in attributes such as presented in Equation 2.1:
Vn,i =
∑
k
βi,k · xn,i,k
(2.1)
where k is the set of attributes x and β the coeﬀicient, describing the relationship
between the choice alternatives and the resulting utility.
The coeﬀicients can be estimated in various ways. Here, the maximum likelihood
estimation is used. The log-likelihood function is shown in Equation 2.2:
LL =
∑
n
∑
j
dn,j · log(P(Un|xn, β))
(2.2)
where xn is the set of variables for the individual n and dn,j a binary variable
equals to 1 if the alternative j is chosen.
The method consist of finding ˆβ (the
estimated vector of coeﬀicient) maximizing the log-likelihood as presented in Equation
2.3.
ˆβ = argmaxβLL(β) and LL(β) =
∑
n
ln(P(Un|Xn, β)
(2.3)
2.3.2
Multinominal Logit Model
The multinominal logit model (MNL) is one of the simplest logit model. The prob-
ability for the individual n of choosing the alternative i is express as presented in
Equation 2.4:
Pn,i =
exp(Vn,i)
∑
j exp(Vn,j)
(2.4)
where j is the number of alternatives. The main propriety of the MNL model is
the independence of irrelevant alternatives: the ratio between the probabilities of two
alternatives is independent of any other alternatives.
2.3.3
Statistical Tests
The t-test can be used when assessing a model.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
2.3.3.1
T-Test
The t-test is a statistical test used to check if the mean µ of a stochastic variable is
actually significantly different from a given value µx. To do so, two hypothesis can
be formulated as presented in Equations 2.5 and 2.6:
H0 : µ = µx
(2.5)
H1 : µ ̸= µx
(2.6)
To test the hypothesis, the following value is estimated using Equation 2.7:
t = µ −µx
σ
∼N(0, 12)
(2.7)
where σ is the estimated standard deviation.
The t-test can be specifically used to check the significance of a variable. Hence the
hypothesis become as shown in Equations 2.8 and 2.9:
H0 : µ = 0
(2.8)
H1 : µ ̸= 0
(2.9)
To test the hypothesis, the following value is estimated, as presented in Equation
2.10:
t = ˆµ
ˆσ ∼N(0, 12)
(2.10)
where ˆµ is the estimate of µ in the set of k estimators and ˆσ is the estimated standard
deviation.
Here, the significance level is set at 5%. Hence the variable is significant (ie the
H0 hypothesis is rejected) if |t| > 1.96.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Literature review
This literature review presents the different findings from various studies previously
done on the MaaS subject. The aim is to first have a clear definition of the MaaS
concept as well as the different frameworks for a MaaS application. Furthermore,
some applications have been led throughout the world and conclusion can be draught
from those experiments.
3.1
The concept of Mobility as a Service
The concept of Mobility as a Service (MaaS) was first evoked under the denomina-
tion of ”intelligent information assistant” [19] in 1996 to answer the problematic of
informing the travelers and tourism services in an eﬀicient way with the growing part
of internet in the daily life. Hence, the aim was to refocus the transport structure
into a customer-oriented development of travel.
The concept has evolved a lot through the last 20 years and MaaS could currently
be defined as a concept gathering different transport modes and services under a
multi-modal mobility in order to fulfill eﬀiciently the individual‘s mobility needs [20]
throughout a single platform integrating transport services with information, payment
and ticketing. To be more specific, the ’core’ of the MaaS concept comprises [21]:
• Information services and multi-modal travel information ;
• Booking and payment.
However the concept can also include:
• Booking or ticketing for the whole trip (e.g.
‘smartcard’ as Oyster card in
London or Rejsekort in Copenhagen) ;
• Organisational integration between different transport providers (car, bike-sharing,
taxi, public transports, train, etc.) ;
• Bundling (e.g. a subscription to trips with different modes).
The topology of the MaaS concept can be presented in 4 levels as shown in Figure
3.1:
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Literature review
Figure 3.1: Topology of MaaS into 4 levels and examples
However, several blocking points are underlined for MaaS: laws and regulations
not evolving fast enough, the need for transport-related investments as well as the
reluctance of public transport (PT) operators to share their data, platform, system
and service to third parties [22] [23]. Hence, in order to build a successful application
of MaaS, trust and cooperation between MaaS actors are key enablers in most of the
areas.
3.2
Building a MaaS
3.2.1
Legal and structural frame
Involving public and private operators, the MaaS needs to find an equilibrium between
the cooperation and competition of its actors in order to capture value. Throughout
the study of a potential application of a MaaS in three different city (Budapest,
Manchester and Luxembourg city), public transport authorities have been identified
as key actors and the most suitable to act as the MaaS operators [23]. Indeed, in
the case of a potential MaaS application in London, the feasibility study underlined
that the concept could work in the city if the PT operators take the leader ship and
other operators are willing to cooperate and adjust their business plan to fit the MaaS
plan [24]. However, in most of the cases, public transport authorities are not in a
position to take such a role, due to structural and resources constraints. Hence, some
operators will have to make short term sacrifices but with long term benefits and
increased ridership.
Some insights on building a MaaS can be drawn from Sweden and Finland, pio-
neers in the field, having held multiple trials [25]. The UbiGo experiment [26] showed
that there is a demand for MaaS although a specification of the type of the MaaS
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Building a MaaS
15
wanted needs to be done. Indeed, only a deep business research would lead to a cus-
tomize offer that can improve individual mobility but also enable behavior changes.
In Sweden, the Ubigo pilot results launched a work group from the public transport
operators on their implication and position in a potential MaaS. It has been decided
that third parties should take the role of MaaS operators and that the public trans-
port coalition will make a selected range of tickets available for third-party resale and
will participate in other MaaS pilots.
In Finland, two parallel developments have taken place, one legal and the other
business-related. The Finnish government started a ”Transport Revolution” program
to develop a new approach for transport policies and their implementation. This led
to a new regulation, adopted in 2017, lowering permit requirement, tearing down
separation between transport markets through deregulation and enhancing the use of
open and inter-operable data interfaces. On the commercial side, multiple MaaS com-
panies and pilots were created since 2015. In 2016, MaaS Global publicly launched its
first service, Whim, in Helsinki. Whim customers access regional PT, car rentals and
taxis via different subscription packages: Pay-as-you-go (PAYG), ”Whim Urban” -
an accessible package offering unlimited use of PT and a money balance for taxi and
car rental - and “Whim Unlimited” - a package offering unlimited use of PT, car
rental and taxi (PT access was enabled through a business agreement allowing MaaS
Global to resell their single tickets).
3.2.2
Composition of MaaS
The application of MaaS varies greatly depending on the location and the operators.
Most of the current applications include the proposal of a subscription and some a
”smart” ticketing system with a smart card [24]. The MaaS application in Sydney
used an incremental strategy to offer a new plan each month after a period of famil-
iarization with a pay-as-you-go system [27]. Thus, subscriptions can be based on the
analysis of the user’s activity and his responses to the proposed subscriptions. Several
commercial axes are hence developed to see the reaction of the users and to determine
which sector is more relevant (the goal being to make users switch from PAYG to
a subscription and not to attract users who already have a subscription to change)[28].
In general, the Sydney trial has underlined the need for MaaS operators to consider
the variability of the user’s travel need from a week/month to another when designing
the subscription packages in order to attract as many people as possible [29]. In a
post-Covid-19 context, this casual link can be considered in the design of monthly
bundles as home oﬀice is developing quickly.
It is therefore relevant to take into
account the users’ need for flexibility. For example, a 30% overestimation of ”just in
case” car sharing credit was found in the Ubigo trial in Gothenburg (SE) [30].
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Literature review
3.3
Experimentation of the MaaS
Since the 2014 pilot of UbiGo in Gothenburg (SE), several trials of a MaaS have been
made throughout of the world. Three different axes are developed in this literature
review from the trials and experimentation of MaaS: the profile of people interested
in MaaS, the impact of MaaS and the subscription system on mobility and the impact
of MaaS and the subscription system on mode choice.
3.3.1
Profile of people interested in MaaS
Some specificities of the interested people depend on the location and the proposed mo-
bility offer (e.g. the city of Sydney where free floating bikes are not very widespread).
However, a typical profile can be assessed from the various studies.
Characteristics and typical profile
The main self-characteristics affecting MaaS enrolment are: age, education, em-
ployment, number of children, location of residence, attitude towards multimodality,
and value of personal ownership [30][31][32][33][34]. External factors are the service’s
culture of the country or city and the supply, travel time, cost (of travel, parking) or
number of connection during a trip. It is not the price per se, but the combination of
subscription cost and discounts for the different modes within a specific bundle that
mainly influences the increase or decrease in the use of a specific mode included in a
MaaS bundle [35].
A typical profile emerges from the various studies. The early adopter is a man
with a high level of education and a high salary (25-60 years old) without children
in the household (either no children or children who have left the household). He is
less attached to individual ownership than the average and is more in favor of using
shared modes [32].
General impact of the characteristics
The overall impact of some characteristics can be measured without linkage to the
specificity of the study site’s offer.
Regarding the specific characteristics of individuals, middle-aged people are much
more likely to use MaaS than older retired people [33]. If the person has more than
two young children, MaaS is of less interest to them.
On another level, the more the environment where the person lives is urban, the
more attractive the MaaS offer is [30]. For instance, the demand for MaaS can be
low in rich, car-dependent suburban neighborhoods and, on the contrary, high in
inner city neighborhoods [33]. This criterion is indirectly related to an external fac-
tor: transportation offer. Indeed, although the correlation is not complete, the more
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Experimentation of the MaaS
17
urban the environment is, the more dense the transport offer is. People with low
incomes tend to prefer offers including public transport, with a lower willingness to
pay (WTP) and a greater willingness to accept the increased travel time involved in
using buses, explaining a higher interest in MaaS from low-income suburban neigh-
borhoods that rely heavily on the public transport system to satisfy their mobility
needs [33]. People over 65 years of age have a lower preference for subscriptions that
include bike-sharing or cabs than other age groups [36]. Finally, the multimodal at-
titude has a significant and positive effect on the subscription to MaaS [31].
On the perception of MaaS, MaaS appears as if it will offer more flexibility in
their daily mobility, remove some of the diﬀiculties in commuting and improve the
quality of daily commuting according to a majority of respondents [37].
On the
comparison between PAYG and subscription in relation to characteristics, PAYG is
a preferred option for many, particularly those with variable travel needs. However,
multi-modal subscriptions appeal to the majority (preferably composed of two to four
modes) if they include attractive financial benefits [28]. Hence, the variability of user
travel needs from week to week/month to month should be taken into account when
designing subscription packages, in order to attract as many people as possible [29].
Impact of studies’ location-specific characteristics
Different results are obtained depending on the location and the mobility offer (e.g.
the city of Sydney where free-floating bicycles are not very widespread). As the ge-
ography and transport offer vary a lot troughout the Ile-de-France region, a parallel
can be done between the location’s impact of the different studies and the possible
impact of the living area of the residents in the Ile-de-France region.
In Sydney, the transport offer is constructed on PT and personal cars. The spe-
cific impacts of the location are that PT users are only partially interested in a MaaS
system if it only includes PT and car mobility (cab or car sharing). On the contrary,
occasional car users are the most likely to adopt a MaaS including only PT and car
sharing [38]. Another finding was that the main reason for not choosing MaaS is the
personal car and its usage (3/4 of respondents have daily access to a car) [39].
In London, where a large PT offer is completed by different shared services, it
was found that non-car users are most likely to subscribe to MaaS plans, while occa-
sional car users are more likely to choose PAYG. The share of MaaS decreases as the
frequency of car use increases and, reciprocally, the more frequently respondents use
public transport, the more likely they are to purchase MaaS offers. The main reason
in London for not choosing MaaS is the economic cost (e.g. transport of children) [39].
Indeed, 43% of people would be interested in MaaS for financial reasons (percentage
that rises above 55% for those under 30) [37].
Finally, in Gothenburg, where the study involved an incentive to give up car use
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Literature review
in exchange for financial compensation, 52% of those aged 40 or + feel uncomfortable
with the multiple features of subscription services and are hesitant to commit to a
MaaS subscription [30]. The vast majority of Ubigo users has a driver’s license but
does not have permanent access to a car. Participating households had fairly high
transportation costs when they decided to become Ubigo customers. Customers are
generally curious by nature (first reason for using the app) - they are either looking
for a new digital solution to get around or are following the recommendations of their
friends and family to test it. Environmental considerations are also a reason to try
Ubigo for households with children (however, none of these families with children
state that the main motivation is convenience). Ownership of a personal car does not
seem to affect the use of MaaS in Gothenburg [32].
3.3.2
Impact of MaaS and the subscription system on mobility
Few studies focus on this issue, as the major interest of MaaS is the modal shift.
However, some information can be found.
Regarding the reason for using MaaS, in Australia, 40% indicate that they would
use MaaS for social purposes (going to restaurants, bars, movies), followed by com-
muting, seeing friends and/or family at home or shopping [33].
In Vienna, 48% says their behavior has changed with the MaaS application, in-
cluding taking faster routes, combining different modes of transport and subscribing
to new mobility offers [30].
Regarding the impact of MaaS-related subscriptions on mobility, the PAYG sys-
tem leads to less active days, as a monthly subscription represents a larger commit-
ment, showing a link between the lack of anticipation of regular trips and the PAYG
system [28].
3.3.3
Impact of MaaS and the subscription system on mode
choice
As with the characteristics, some of the results are global (little influenced by the
mobility offer of the study location) and others are specific to the study location.
General impacts
Adapting to the user is essential to promote mode shift [30] and MaaS subscription
is a good way to introduce new mobilities to individuals, by including them in a sub-
scription and allowing users to test.
The use of a specific mode before the application of MaaS has an impact on the
choice of subscription: the person will tend to prefer a subscription including his
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Experimentation of the MaaS
19
preferred mode (e.g. frequent cab users - using cabs more than once a week - will
tend to prefer a subscription with cab hours included compared to those using cabs
very little) [36].
Impact on public transport
Public transport is one of the most favored modes when choosing subscriptions
[35][33], it even has a positive coeﬀicient in the London model [36]. This highlights
the importance of PT as the backbone of MaaS and the positive perception of PT.
Among current London PT users, 28% say they would use PT more with MaaS,
23% say it would not change anything, 14% say they would use free-floating bicycles
more, 12% say they would replace part of their PT trips with car-sharing (and 2%
with cabs) [37]. In Stockholm, 1/3 of the users claimed using public transport more.
It is 48% of SMILE users in Vienna and almost all participants in Gothenburg that
reported the same increase in public transport use [30].
Monthly passes can encourage the use of public transport.
Indeed, while the
PAYG system can be used as a complement with a conservation of travel habits, the
pass commits the user to the use of public transport and thus promotes this mode
of transport [39]. For those who took a pass, 50% (Sydney) to 60% (Tyneside) of
the users reported an increase in their PT use. For the PAYG system, 10% (S) to
40% (T) of the users declared to have increased their use of public transport, while
more than 50% (S) and 30% (T) declared that it will have no impact on their use of
public transport. This greater interest in Tyneside is explained by the fact that pub-
lic transport is managed by many operators, and that MaaS would make it easier to
plan a multi-operator public transport trip (in contrast, the Sydney public transport
network is managed by a single operator) [39].
Thus, PT is not attractive everywhere (for economic reasons in Sydney or because
improvements are needed such as seating for all or places to work on trains) but
remains an important player in MaaS with a possible increase in ridership if a MaaS
application takes place [30].
Impact on shared modes
Although users do not specifically prefer to have shared modes in their bundle, most
are willing to take a subscription including shared modes. In London, more than 60%
of those people said they would like to try out these new shared modes of transport
that they do not know about, underlining the impact of the composition of the MaaS
subscription on the introduction of the new mobility offer to users. Thus, only 8.6%
of the people who declared wanting to buy a MaaS subscription chose a subscription
with no shared mode whereas 83.5% of the selected subscriptions included shared
cars and 46% free-floating bicycles [36]. In Gothenburg, just over half considered an
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Literature review
increase of their carpooling service use [32].
In an environment where free-floating bicycles are widespread (e.g. London), they
are among the preferred modes, along with public transport [35]. However, if it is
only marginally popular (e.g. Sydney), free-floating bike service is among the least
preferred and used modes [33].
Impact on the personal car
In general, the personal car is declining in the context of MaaS. Indeed, in Stock-
holm, half of the participants consider reducing the number of cars in their household
[32]. In Vienna, with SMILE, 21% have reduced the use of their car and 44% with
Ubigo in Gothenburg [30]. Specifically, in Gothenburg, the analysis of car use is done
by user category. Thus, 95% of people having a car but considering it expensive,
inconvenient and polluting reduced their car use, 37% of people thinking about buy-
ing a personal car but hesitating for the same reasons reduced their car use, 20% of
people wanting a smarter way to manage multiple mobility services reduced their use,
and 53% of people considering MaaS as a cost-saving opportunity reduced their car
use [30]. Thus, with MaaS, participants are less likely to use the car and more likely
to use alternative modes.
However, the private car remains the main mode, being more convenient for those
who own one - MaaS is thus better marketed as a substitute for a second car rather
than as a replacement for the main one [39].
In Belgium in particular, most re-
spondents were willing to explore MaaS services (especially public transport and
carpooling services), but a clear reduction in personal car use remained diﬀicult in a
real-world context. Participants encountered considerable diﬀiculties in doing without
their personal cars, especially for leisure (non-repetitive) trips. MaaS could therefore
be seen as a complement - rather than a substitute - for private car use in the near
future [40].
Modal change and multimodality
MaaS implies many modal changes and a new multimodality.
A gradual shift from private car to shared modes is observed, but it is not clear
whether this depends on the specific packages offered or whether it is simply a gen-
eral effect of the MaaS application [29]. Thus, in London, of those who currently use
their personal car, 35% would use more public transport [30]. More specifically, 33%
declare that they would replace the car by public transport, 13% declare that MaaS
would not change anything to their mobility, 17% declare that they would replace
their car trips by bicycle and 11% by cab if it were available on MaaS [37]. In Stock-
holm, 1/3 are thinking about changing their mode of transportation for commuting
(using public transport or rented, free-floating or personal bikes instead of their per-
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Stated Preference and MaaS
21
sonal car) [32].
For London PT, if the following modes are available in the subscriptions, 14%
of PT users would replace part of their PT trip by free-floating bicycle, 12% by car
sharing and 2% by cab. Thus, a possible loss of PT modal shares can occur with a
MaaS application [30].
Regarding multimodality, 55% of SMILE users in Vienna state that they combine
several modes of transport: car + PT and bicycle + PT (26% for each) [30]. The
same combination is expressed in Tyneside where, although the WTP of the year of
the study showed that British people are not willing to pay for free-floating bicycles
as such, 40% of the respondents would use free-floating bicycles to access PT if this
mode is included in their season tickets [39].
3.4
Stated Preference and MaaS
As the MaaS is currently a concept without a clear application, an eﬀicient way to
test it is to use a stated-preference survey. Many of the studies cited above use a SP
to study the impact of MaaS on individuals’ mobility. The principle of this section
is to present them exhaustively in order to base the future SP of this project on them.
The SP used in the Sydney-based study is composed of 6 parts [39]:
• A 2-minute video introduction to MaaS (non accessible) ;
• A socio-demographic questionnaire including standard information as well as
driving ability, disabilities, daily access to the car, market value and age of the
vehicle, smartphone ownership, Internet use, shared car service membership
(and distance from the shared car to home) ;
• A questionnaire on the mobility pattern: number of one-way trips made by
different modes (PT, taxi/Uber and car) for each day of the week, daily PT
fare, daily taxi/Uber cost, daily car distance and time, daily parking cost, and
typical access mode and access time if public transport is used ;
• A scenario in the MaaS application: 4 scenarios with four options each time,
including two monthly plans customized for each respondent, PAYG and a
status quo option. For each scenario, the respondent has to state which option
he would choose ;
• A ”create your own subscription” situation ;
• A declaration of the impact of MaaS on their mobility: one of the MaaS bundles
that the person said they wanted to buy is randomly selected and they are asked
how it would change their travel habits in terms of transport use.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Literature review
The SP construction used study carried out in the Netherlands [35] is very little
presented but it is underlined that it is carried out with a skimming of the respon-
dents according to their interest in the MaaS. The processing of the data obtained
with the SP is carried out using an Error Component Logit model (details of the util-
ity function and the estimated parameters are presented). A second study run in the
Netherlands [31] including latent attributes such as personality and values, attitude,
and lifestyle in their model and SP.
The London SP survey is actually composed of 2 SPs [36][11]: the first one is on
the composition of a possible MaaS subscription (similar to the SP used in Sydney),
the second one only for those who indicated that they would buy a subscription to
find out if their mode choices would evolve with a MaaS subscription (included in the
same survey). Some specifications of the SP are: the choice of proposed transport
and levels in the bundles are based on what is currently offered in the vicinity of the
respondent living and working place. The cost presented for the subscription is total
and not divided for each option of the subscription and the scenarios were designed
by randomly choosing a level for each of the attributes, with the precondition that
only 2 ”none” levels were allowed. After running through the 4 scenarios (with the
different choices), the questionnaire asks if the respondent will subscribe: 1 - definitely
subscribe, 2- consider subscribing, 3- use MaaS but in PAYG, 4- not use MaaS. The
study uses after a Mixed MNL model with random coeﬀicients (RC) to analyze
the results. The presentation of the MaaS concept was constructed on the feedback
obtained during focus groups where various presentation methods had been tested.
The details on the constitution and the choices of the RP and SP questionnaires’
attributes (some answers of the RP influence the SP) [11] will be used to build the
SP survey presented in this report.
3.5
Investigation goals
The main investigation goal of this study is to assess how MaaS will impact travel
behaviors and how these changes can be modelled and included in the Antonin model.
More specifically, the objective of this study is not to actually modify the model but
to clearly identify the characteristics of people likely to have a MaaS subscription and
to understand how the possession of such a subscription can influence their mobility
in terms of number of trips and mode/route choice.
To do so, the study is composed of 2 phases:
• A first qualitative composed of 3 focus groups will provide guideline to develop
the SP survey and a first insight on the issue ;
• A second quantitative phase corresponding to the realization of the SP survey
(objective of 3000 questionnaires). Recommendation for the Antonin model will
be derived from the analysis of the survey and conclude the study.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Focus Groups
4.1
Objectives
In 2019, IDFM held three focus groups on the MaaS subject, specifically to try out
their MaaS app called MaaX. Those focus groups were focused on identifying target
audiences and products for a MaaS offer and on the perception of their app and not
so much on mobility behavior. Thus, these 3 focus groups did not provide suﬀicient
insights on the MaaS impact and IDFM has considered relevant to redo focus groups
in the framework of our study.
The first phase of the study consisted in organizing three focus groups. The se-
lected profiles allowed us to offer a complete vision of the challenges of MaaS, on the
user side. We set out to create three groups with varied characteristics. We took
into account criteria such as age, place of residence (Paris, inner ring and outer ring),
social class and preferred transportation mode.
The main objective of the focus groups in general is to reach a consensus on a few
key proposals for improvement or evolution of the subject studied, in this case MaaS.
The debate on the points of agreement and disagreement between participants has an
operational aim, since it is ultimately a matter of formulating concrete orientations
and recommendations for the deployment of MaaS on the scale of the Île de France
region.
The focus groups held in the study hence have 2 main goals. The first is the pre-
sentation of the MaaS concept. Indeed, as the concept of MaaS is new and still little
known by the general public, the focus groups allowed us to test the understanding of
the concept and the presentation of MaaS that will accompany the SP survey. The
second axe is how the MaaS could impact travel habits of specific groups and what
are the levers for changes in practice.
4.2
Target
The framing and targeting for the focus groups were based on the literature review and
two entry points: a geographic entry point, to remain anchored in the Île de France re-
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Focus Groups
gion and its specificities in terms of transport offer and uses, and a socio-demographic
input, to understand the variety of situations (all groups will be composed of as many
men as women). The profile and characteristics of these groups have been chosen to
be consistent with the attributes and variables used in Antonin.
Three specific groups were defined in order to explore diverse axes of the main
topic: the regular user of Parisian public transport living in Paris, the multimodal
user living outside of Paris and the resident of the Paris outer ring.
4.2.1
Regular users of Parisian public transport
The participants from this group live in Paris or the inner ring. As young men from
high socio-professional backgrounds are the core target group for mobility innova-
tions, older users, other socio-professional backgrounds and women will allow us to
identify differences in terms of MaaS adoption and changes in practices. They mainly
use public transport (bus, streetcar, metro), associated with cycling for some of them.
For this group, the specific topics are:
• How does MaaS affect the mobility practices of the core target audience? What
are the levers for other audiences in the dense zone? Consider features that
would be useful for them (loading tickets on the app, integration of other modes
to complete the itinerary) ;
• How could MaaS compensate for the lack of information they receive? MaaS
could allow them to have access to reliable and fast information on traﬀic dis-
ruptions, delays, strikes, renovation works etc. and make their travel by PT
easier, smoother, more comfortable ;
• To what extent could multimodal subscriptions provided by MaaS interest this
public?
Would MaaS lead them to other modes, other mobility behaviors?
These would be subscriptions that include modes such as car-sharing, taxi, car-
pooling, free-floating bikes/kick scooters/scooters.
4.2.2
Multimodal users of the inner and outer rings of Paris
The participants from this group live in the inner and outer ring. They’re from 25
to 50 years old, some households with children and diverse socio-professional back-
grounds.
They are multi-mode users, i.e., they own a car but use mainly public
transport (or sometimes a bicycle) for commuting. For example, an individual who
drives his children to school three times a week by car, and occasionally uses this
same mode to go to work but goes there by bicycle when he is not driving his chil-
dren. Another example can be an individual who lives on the outskirts of Paris and
works in the city center, goes to work by public transport but makes all other trips
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Target
25
(shopping, leisure) by car. Some people have a regular bicycle use.
For this group, the specific topics are:
• How can MaaS transform mobility practices according to motives? Potential
impact of MaaS on constrained travel (home-work, accompaniment) and on
other travel (shopping leisure) ;
• As multi-mode users, what are their expectations of MaaS? Understand what
they expect from MaaS, what MaaS can add to their mobility and what features
it must have to make a difference ;
• How could MaaS backup their travel needs and facilitate multi/intermodality in
the inner and outer rings of Paris ? As residents of the outskirts of the Parisian
agglomeration, they have observed disruptions in alternatives offers to the car ;
• How would MaaS encourage them to stop using the car? The aim here is to eval-
uate the potential for MaaS to change the behavior of people who are convinced
of multimodality but face constraints due to their place of residence. Several
axes can be explored, such as car/public transport intermodality made possible
through park-and-ride facilities whose information, availability and reservation
could be integrated into MaaS.
4.2.3
Residents of the Paris outer ring
The participants from this group all live in the outer ring. They’re of various ages
and socio-professional backgrounds. They travel mainly by car but also by PT. The
goal here is to reflect the constraints of the outer ring of Paris, for example, young
people who only use public transport in the inner suburbs, older motorists etc...
For this group, the specific topics are:
• What are the reasons why they do not use other modes of transport than the
car? Identification of objective (poor public transport service) and subjective
(comfort, safety) factors for car use ;
• How can MaaS meet the needs of motorists in the outer ring? How could MaaS
support a more virtuous use of the car? The idea here is to integrate MaaS into
the use of the car, by proposing more viable solutions: carpooling, intermodality
with park and ride, carsharing, etc ;
• What solutions to integrate the specific profiles of this part of the territory?
What features or mobility services should be integrated into MaaS to encourage
them to change their behavior? They may not be fans of public transport, but
the integration of other modes such as taxi or scooters could convince them, at
least for occasional trips ;
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Focus Groups
• What are their expectations in terms of subscription? The integration of ser-
vices desired by motorists could be part of a package, a subscription, allowing
them to have easy access to a wide range of alternative choices to car use. The
challenge here is to make MaaS a real guarantee: travel without a car must be
guaranteed, there must be no uncertainty.
4.3
Methodology
The methodology of the focus groups is composed of 3 parts: an ice-breaker, an
exercise on the concept of MaaS and one on the associated behavioral changes.
4.3.1
Introduction and ice-breaker
The objective of this first phase is to put the participants at ease. It also aims to set
the framework for the workshop by introducing the theme of mobility. Each partic-
ipant will introduce him/herself through the prism of his/her mobility by putting a
sticker on his/her starting point on a large map of the IDF. The color of the sticker
varies according to the mode used.
At this stage, we know more about the mobility of the participants, who present
themselves through the description of the modes of transport used. The follow-ups
clarify certain points, such as the frequency and reasons for use. It is also an opportu-
nity to find out how the participants see the new mobilities and the vocabulary they
use.
4.3.2
Theme 1: Getting to grips with the concept of MaaS
The objective here is to co-construct a definition of MaaS by understanding what it
allows, to which services it gives access, through their and our words. To do so, the
participants have to project themselves in a role-playing game: they don’t know Paris
and have to go from point A to point B using one of the two modes possible, the sub-
way or the Velib’. The only tool they have is a smartphone with a unique application.
No map, no ticket oﬀice, no ticket booth, no interactions. The respondents have to
think about the functionalities that must be present in the application for each of
the trip stages: before using the mode, while and after. After this exercise, a clear
definition of the MaaS is given.
At the end of this exercise, a definition from the user’s point of view was obtained.
This exercise also allowed us to see how the respondent perceive our presentation of
the MaaS concept.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Practical info
27
4.3.3
Theme 2: Behavior Change
4.3.3.1
Content and objective
The objective here is to identify how MaaS can support the change in mobility behav-
ior. The main idea is to first build an ideal MaaS and then try to evaluate the possible
impacts. This exercise will allow us to identify the MaaS modes and formats that
best fit the group and why, and also to highlight the changes in practices envisaged
by the participants with regard to MaaS, both in terms of pricing and modes.
First the participants have to choose the modes included in this MaaS. Public
transport is the common denominator of all MaaS, identified as the back bone of the
concept. For the other modes, they can vote by choosing up to 4 modes that they
would wish to have in their MaaS. The modes presented are: Velib, velobox (a close
and secure place to park your bike), free-floating bikes and kick scooters, free-floating
scooters, car sharing, carpooling, car rental, parking (park-and-ride, on-street and
indoor), taxi (cabs and ride-sharing companies as Uber). The modes with the most
stickers are retained and we move on to the next step. To anticipate the design of
the SP survey, participants are also asked here about the best way to represent the
transportation modes: do they find it more understandable to see a pictogram of the
mode or a brand logo.
For the subscription, three types of subscriptions are proposed, including the previ-
ous modes chosen: pay as you go for PT and other modes, unlimited public transport
+ pay as you go for other modes and unlimited public transport + 10 trips/tokens
for each of the other modes selected before. A moving debate is organized on the
choice of subscription. The advantage of this format is that it allows participants
to change their position (and therefore their opinion) according to the discussions.
As the price is a significant variable for choosing the subscription, the subscription
will be presented with a number of $ symbol next to it, to represent the range of price.
Finally, to measure the impacts that MaaS have on mobility behaviors, partici-
pants answer the issue of behavioral changes enabled by the MaaS by placing a lego
on an arrow scaling qualitatively the change.
4.4
Practical info
The three focus groups were held in Paris the 22nd, 23rd and 28th of June from 6:30
pm to 9 pm. The groups were theoretically composed of 10 individuals (at the end,
26 people participated in the focus groups) living in Île de France with a variety of
age, gender, socio-professional background and mobility practices.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Focus Groups
4.5
Results
4.5.1
Introduction and ice-breaker
Depending on the group, mobility practices vary, as shown in Figure 4.1:
• In the first group, public transport is over-represented as the main mode of
transportation along with shared soft modes. Only one participant has a car
(which he uses only on weekends if he need it to go outside of Paris). All of the
participants come from Paris itself ;
• In the second group, public transport is also very well represented, with par-
ticipants living mainly in the inner suburbs and the outer suburbs, meaning
longer journeys. They mainly use PT for commuting and exclusively use their
car on weekends to travel within the suburbs, to do groceries, drive their kids,
see friends etc... ;
• In the third group, two different mobility profiles are observed. One part of
the group uses mainly PT to commute and their car or their bike within the
suburbs on weekends (similar profile to group 2) and the other part use PT in
combination with carpooling both for commuting and on weekends. They all
live in the outer suburbs.
Figure 4.1: Results of the mobility portrait exercise
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Results
29
As for the new mobilities (free-floating bikes and kick scooters, free-floating scoot-
ers, car sharing), in all of the three groups, most of them are familiar with them.
Several participants use these modes a few times a month, for non-routine trips and
the further away the participants live from Paris, the less they use or have tried it.
4.5.2
Theme 1: Getting to grips with the concept of MaaS
4.5.2.1
Building the concept
The participants mention almost all the features of MaaS and go into great details.
They are inventive and prefigure an application that best meets the user’s needs. The
result synthesis is presented in Figure 4.2.
General features
For both modes, participants noted the importance of a qualitative GPS to first
locate themselves but also to inform them about possible disruptions and recalculate
the route if necessary. Payment and unlocking/validation directly from the phone
is also an element cited by both participants working on the Vélib’ and the metro.
The integration and booking of other modes than the metro and the Velib’ is evoked,
especially carpooling, which would interesting to integrate into the route recalculation
in case of public transport failure: in the territories where the participants of some
groups live, cycling or walking is not always a credible alternative to public transport,
while carpooling can be.
Features related to the Velib’
In the case of Vélib’, the fact of having a voice assistant on the GPS was mentioned
several times. The idea of knowing the quality of the bicycle route also came up
several times as well as the possibility of knowing the availability of the bikes and
their condition. Indeed some participants have never used Velib’ or rarely and don’t
know all the points to check before choosing a bike to be sure that it is in a good
condition, restraining their desire to use this mode.
They hence seem to find it
interesting to be able to get assistance in case of problems: to find a solution if the
bike is defective, to be informed in advance of the condition of the bike, etc. The
idea of a community where users can share the condition of the bikes or disruptions
on bicycle lanes was evoked.
Features related to the metro
For the metro, the notion of live information was also evoked: knowing how busy
it is, where to position oneself in the train according to the attendance levels (or
according to the best place to continue one’s route). The fact that the application
can be used offline was noted by several participants, especially for the metro, since
there is not always an Internet connection. This feature is particularly useful in case
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Focus Groups
of disruption in order first to be informed (e.g. location and schedule of substitute
buses when the subway is undergoing work) and also to find an alternative route.
An application built on the user needs and interacting with them
Participants also mentioned the possibility of customizing the proposed route ac-
cording to the user’s desires and conditions. If in most cases, the route calculator
often proposes the fastest route, it could also detail an accessible, pleasant, sustain-
able, sporty route, etc. The idea to customize the propositions depending on the
weather and the season was also evoked.
The question of the app accessibility for people comes up several times and brings
up the idea of customizing not only the trip but also the application by the users.
Some participants insist on the fact that not everyone needs nor wants the same in-
formation.
The idea of ”challenges” integrated into the application comes up in all three
groups: knowing how many steps are taken, how many calories are burned, how
much CO2 is emitted, etc. The application would congratulate the most athletic or
ecological people (as the application We Ward - which rewards users who walk a lot)
or users that give feedback on the vehicle condition that they’ve just used.
Other features non-related to travel
Apart from transportation, access to other services was highlighted by participants:
obtaining information about the destination (schedules, prices, crowds) and even
booking/buying a ticket for a movie, theater or other event.
Figure 4.2: Results of the MaaS definition exercise
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Results
31
4.5.2.2
Taming the concept of MaaS
Very quickly, at the beginning of the exercise, the participants of the different groups
established the link between the exercise and the existing mobility applications: Citymap-
per, the IDFM application, google maps, waze... Participants claim that they use
several of them for very specific needs: RATP for travel advisory, Google maps for
walking, Citymapper for PT ect. Hence being able to centralize everything is of some
interest. This link enables them to understand very quickly the concept of MaaS
itself as some of them consider it as a merge of several existing journey planning
applications and more.
This exercise helped us to understand how they perceive the MaaS, how they relate
to it and how we can present the MaaS in the SP survey to be easily understandable
and clear.
4.5.3
Theme 2: Behavior Change
4.5.3.1
Choice and subscription choice
Mode representation
To anticipate the design of the SP survey, participants were asked about the best
way to represent the transportation modes. Indeed, we seek to understand what is the
clearest and easiest to understand for participants as the SP is a self-administrated
survey.
The focus group showed that the answer depends on the mode. For example, for
ride-sharing, the logo of Uber or G7 is the most understandable, and for public trans-
port, the logo of RATP is most telling. But then a biais can appear if the RATP logo
is used. Given that RATP operates mainly the PT in Paris itself (metro, streetcar,
bus) and some suburbs train-lines (called RER as regional express network) and other
suburbs train-lines (called transilien) are operated by SNCF , the national french rail-
way company, some participants, that mainly use transilien to travel, weren’t sure if
their PT lines were included in the representation through RATP logo.
On the other hand, for free-floating scooters or car-sharing, some participants
find that the pictogram is more meaningful. Indeed, as the modes are little known
to the general public, the participants don’t know the name or the logo of companies
proposing the offer and understand more easily the mode through a pictogram.
Hence, for modes well know and identify, the logo is the most telling whereas for
modes little known, the best representation is the pictogram. Some participant met
halfway claiming that the drawings and the logos go together and should be used
together.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Focus Groups
General results
The results vary by group:
• The first group selected Velib’, taxi, free-floating bike and kick scooter and
velobox. In terms of subscriptions, the majority chose a subscription offering
unlimited public transport and PAYG for the other selected modes ;
• The second group chose five modes, namely Velib’, taxi, free-floating bike and
kick scooter, parking and park-and-ride and traditional car rental. The choice of
subscription was not unanimous, but a part of the group opted for subscription
1, i.e. unlimited public transport and a fixed price of 10 journeys for the other
modes selected ;
• The third group was oriented towards carpooling, parking and P+R as well
as secure bicycle parking. In terms of subscriptions, the participants oscillated
between the one including unlimited public transport completed by PAYG (sub-
scription 2) and subscription 3, i.e. PAYG for everything.
Mode choice
No single mode is chosen by all three groups, indicating a real variety of mobility
experiences, as shown in Figure 4.3. Their perceptions are not the same depending
on the territory in which they live.
Figure 4.3: Results of the mode choice exercise
The integration of cab services into MaaS elicits several reactions: groups 1 and
2 see the usefulness, to go home late in the night when there is no more PT running,
while participants in group 3 almost ignore them. Nevertheless, we note a certain
reserve of those who choose cab services: already satisfied with the application, they
do not necessarily see the point of merging it with MaaS, especially as when they use
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Results
33
this mode, it is to complete the whole travel, not to do multimodality. A certain fear
regarding the after-sales service and biased price is also expressed. Hence, for modes
such as cab services, some of the participants explain that they would prefer a simple
referral with an automatic filling of the travel info to a real integration or a tool to
compare fares on a given route.
Vélib’ integrated into MaaS appears to be relevant in a logic of centralization in
a single application. The participants in group 2, who tend to be occasional users of
the service, could intensify their use if this mode was integrated into MaaS. On the
other hand, almost all of the participants in group 3, who live in the outer suburbs,
are not interested in this service: we can observe in this group a certain mistrust of
cycling in Paris (road safety, pollution). However, the availability in the subscription
could push them into regaining confidence in the mode and use it on weekends in
Paris, were the traﬀic is lower.
Free-floating bikes and kick scooters are of interest to participants in groups 1
and 2. None of the participants in group 3 mentioned them. It seems that the MaaS
would accompany in this case a rather occasional use, focused on leisure. The MaaS
could also be a entry point on free-floating modes as some participants mentioned
the possibility to try it if included in the bundle.
Secure bicycle parking was retained by groups 1 and 3 but mentioned by partici-
pants in all groups. They see it as a way to protect their bike against theft/damage,
to reach PT stations more conveniently and, at the end, to encourage a more intensive
use of bike.
The way of approaching traditional car rental varies according to the groups.
Group 1, composed of Parisians, finds its integration into MaaS less essential than
group 2, for example. In this group, composed of residents of the inner and outer
suburbs, rental is seen as an alternative to the individual car, a mode that is anchored
in their practices.
In the same logic, parking and P+R are not mentioned by the participants in the
first group, while they are of great interest to the participants in the other two groups,
residents of the inner and outer suburbs. Although, a difference can be noted between
group 2 and 3: group 2, living in the inner suburbs, would be more interested by a
park solution next to their destination whereas group 3 showed more interest in P+R
to reach PT stations. As they live closer to Paris, group 2 has a better proximity to
PT stations and no real use of P+R solutions.
Carpooling also underlines the disparities between the groups. The first group is
not at all interested by this solution, as they don’t see the use to travel with a car in
Paris. Group 2 and 3 are on the other hand see the relevance of this mode, especially
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Focus Groups
to commute and reach PT stations.
Finally, car-sharing and free-floating scooter are modes little known of participants
and hence don’t interest them.
Subscription choice
The participants’ subscription choice is presented in Figure 4.4. The most selected
bundle is the second subscription (unlimited PT and PAYG for the other mode). The
first is chosen only by participants of the second group.
Figure 4.4: Results of the subscription choice exercise
The inflexibility of subscription 1 leads some participants not to choose it. They
express the fear that it does not fit their lifestyles and mobility needs. Indeed the
first bundle raises questions: is this ”batch of tokens” transferable to the following
month if it is not used in full? To the next quarter? What does it represent ?
Many insisted on the importance of accumulating ”tokens” from one month to the
next so as not to be forced to use them. When the facilitators presented them with the
idea that this transfer would be possible, opinions changed and the formula became
more attractive. Group 3 participants also consider the possibility of transferring
these tokens to other members of their family, like a Netflix subscription. The idea
of adapting the number of tokens to the consumption of each person and proposing a
truly personalized balance also emerged. All this possibilities could bring the partici-
pants to change their minds from choosing bundle 2 to bundle 1 (2 to 3 participants
in group 2 for instance).
Beyond the kitty system, some of the participants in group 2 see an interest in
subscription 1, considering subscription 2 as basically already accessible (just by sev-
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Results
35
eral apps). The fact of having a fixed amount to pay each month (and not a variable
one) is the principal element that convinces a part of group 2, even if there might be
some possible loss. Finally, there is an incentive effect towards other modes where
people would be interested into trying new modes if they would have tokens to use
it.
As for the quantification, it appears that the participants perceive better the bal-
ance if it is on hour rather than on unit (especially as the question of ”is my trip
worth an unit” can rise) or kilometers.
Unlimited public transportation (bundles 1 and 2) is a priority for some partici-
pants who financially benefit of it and use it daily, which explain the majority voting
for bundle 2. Moreover, the Navigo subscription (unlimited access to PT) is an entry
point to have access to free carpooling and secure bike parking for participants in
group 3, essential for their mobility.
Some participants are hesitant in the choice of the subscription: for example, the
choice between subscription 2 (unlimited public transport and PAYG for other modes)
and subscription 3 (PAYG for everything) is not clear. PAYG (subscription 3) offers a
form of freedom, an ”à la carte” mobility that convinces several participants. Several
participants mentioned the interest of switching to a subscription when the pay-per-
use price is higher than the subscription price for PT (already set up for the weekly
and daily subscription in the IDFM network). This could encourage participants to
diversify their travel modes and try soft modes.
It is particularly in group 2 that the participants think and calculate the most: sev-
eral claim to do complicated calculations to always have the optimal situation. Thus,
being able to pay per use and switch to the subscription price when it is reached
convinces some of them.
Finally, we notice that it is the question of subscription more than the question of
the modes that rises the most thought: they are afraid of paying for services they do
not use. The search for the best rate motivates several participants, especially those
who would be ready to switch to pay-per-use if a switch to never pay more than the
subscription fee is put in place. Only in group 3 participants raised the issue of the
employer’s contribution to the proposed subscriptions (the employer is legally obliged
to pay at least 50% of the employee PT subscription in France), claiming that this
would be game changer in the bundle choice if the employee pay 50% of the first
subscription.
4.5.3.2
Impacts that MaaS have on mobility behaviors
After choosing the modes and bundles, participants reflected on the potential impact
that MaaS would have on their mobility practices. The results of the arrow of change
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Focus Groups
exercise show that most participants would change a little their mobility behaviors,
as shown in Figure 4.5. However, some of them mentioned no change and only one
person evoked a real change. The different discussions enable to outline the possible
impact of MaaS could have.
Figure 4.5: Results of the behavior change arrow exercise
Understanding the inertia of mobility behavior
A total of ten participants explained that MaaS would have no impact on their
mobility. In the end, most individuals are satisfied with their travel routines. This is
particularly the case for Parisians (group 1) who are familiar with the public transport
network they use frequently and satisfied of it. Moreover, almost all their trips can
be done through PT, as they pay for unlimited access, they don’t see the relevance
of using other modes.
Similarly, people living in the inner and outer suburbs are mainly satisfied of
their travel patterns and habits, they usually travel from suburb to suburb by car or
by bicycle without encountering any problems. The most problematic part is often
going to Paris by car, for home- work trips, which explains why none of them do it.
Therefore, the mention of including parking in MaaS causes a strong reaction and
really interests this audience.
Including parking: an ambivalent measure
The question of parking included in MaaS is double-edged. On one hand, for peo-
ple who own cars and live outside Paris (groups 2 and 3), this represents an entry
point to MaaS: they see it as a real opportunity. They could become MaaS users,
and perhaps evolve towards more sustainable mobility practices, for example through
a more rational use of the car (use of park-and-ride facilities, leaving the car at the
station to go on vacation by train, etc.).
On the other hand, the discussions highlight that if parking were included in the
MaaS, and in particular in the subscriptions, this would encourage them to take the
car even more. Respondents in group 2 who chose the 10 parking ”tokens” package
are quickly tempted to project a more intensive use of the car since parking is included
and appears ”free”.
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Results
37
The potential demotorization impact of MaaS
While it is clear that a MaaS that includes parking could encourage the use of cars,
especially to come to Paris, this observation can be qualified.
Indeed, the integration of car rental in MaaS is attractive for a part of the respon-
dents (especially group 2) who are mostly car owners. They have mobility practices
that depend on the car: even if they go to work most of the time by PT, the car is
used for leisure or vacations. Thus, being able to easily reserve and pay for a rental
car appears to them as a solution to meet their car mobility needs and perhaps aban-
don their personal cars. An interesting fact is that the participants in group 2 are
more interested in traditional car rental instead of car-sharing system, as they are
afraid of not finding a car-sharing station near their home or their destination.
To be noted that this demotorization is not based on the will of the participants,
but on the constraints of traﬀic control policies.
A modal shift towards alternatives to public transport
A possible modal shift induced by MaaS would be towards free-floating or shared
modes (bicycles, scooters, cars) or even carpooling. MaaS would make them more
accessible, in terms of information, understanding how it works, reservation and pay-
ment. Some participants in group 3 explain that they sometimes give up a trip when
it is too restrictive to do it by PT: an offer of alternatives on the application could
make them change their mind.
The ability to park one’s bike in a secure manner would also encourage trips made
by this mode. Most of the participants know what secure bicycle parking facilities
are but do not know how they work, they have simply identified them in the public
space. The added value of MaaS would be to allow them to ”take the plunge” by
giving them easy and supervised access.
It is conceivable that such a shift would not be beneficial to PT and may mean
less revenue.
MaaS, a travel facilitator for public transport users
The participants in the third group are used to the constraints of public transport:
low frequency, few alternatives, disruptions and construction/maintenance work. The
assurance of getting reliable live information about their routes is a key element to
make their mobility easier and more enjoyable. The idea of an application that would
allow people to know where to position themselves in the train to find a seat is a sign
of a desire for comfort in travel.
What particularly interests the participants is the eﬀiciency of the route recalcu-
lation, the fact that they can rely on the application to find a reliable alternative
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Focus Groups
in case of public transport failure. In the end, it is more a change in the mobility
experience than a change in mobility behavior.
A powerful and eﬀicient application as a condition of use
Finally, participants in all groups emphasized the need for an application that
works optimally and has a good ergonomic design. The idea of a premium or ”VIP”
application was mentioned.
4.5.3.3
Topics not mentioned by participants
While many themes were covered by the different groups, others were completely
omitted by all or some groups.
First of all, none of the groups mentioned the link between mobility and the en-
vironment: one could have imagined that some of the participants would mention
the need to reduce their car journeys, or would mention changes in their vacation
practices (travelling less far). But such considerations did not emerge. On the other
hand, the abandonment of the car is understood under the prism of constraint - the
idea that they are being forced to do so. Finally, in the first group, some participants
mention the integration of the plane into the MaaS.
The question of demotorization is also hardly mentioned: group 2 is the only one
to talk about it when the subject of traditional car rental is raised. They do not talk
about it as something they would like to do but rather as something that would be
imposed on them. This point is consistent with our observations about the lack of
environmental thinking, as none of the participants would consider giving up their
cars for environmental reasons.
Car-sharing was not chosen by any of the groups and was generally unknown to
the participants. Some mentioned Autolib’ as an example but were not familiar with
the services that exist today in Ile-de-France.
Finally, although the participants were very aware of the various fares and often
expressed the desire to save as much as possible on their transport budget, very few
mentioned the employer’s contribution to transport. In group 2, it is understood that
the calculation of what is paid each month is done without taking this contribution
into account. Group 3 is the only one to raise the question of whether this contribution
is taken into account in the subscriptions offered.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Stated Preferences
Survey
5.1
Objectives
After a first qualitative insight on how MaaS could impact mobilities in the Ile-de-
France with the focus groups, a stated preference survey is implement to have a more
quantitative insight on the subject. As it is a self administrate survey, it will enable
us to have a more diversified and representative panel of the population of Île de
France.
5.2
Framework
Usually, in a transport SP survey, the respondent is put in a specific travel context
[10] to present the travel times and costs of the alternatives to which he/she can relate
(e.g. home-work trip). It enables to put more realism in a hypothetical context of
the SP survey and to have a better investment of the respondent.
Here, no specific travel context is presented to the respondent because we want
to capture the general mobility with the benefits of MaaS and monthly subscriptions,
which is not possible with a specific context (e.g. for home-work trip which is usually
a fixed habit). Furthermore, the other MaaS SP surveys choose to keep a general
context and the results enabled to capture the potential impact of MaaS, without a
specific context.
The survey conceived here is composed of an introduction and 4 different parts:
• An introduction to the concept of MaaS, little known by the general public ;
• A socio-demographic survey to capture the social and economical characteristics
of the respondent ;
• A mobility survey to have some insights on the current mobility pattern on the
respondent. This part has 3 mains goals: to quantify the impact of MaaS by
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Stated Preferences Survey
comparing the responses to the declaration of modal changes, to have insights on
others secondary issues and to customize the SP part of the survey by pivoting
around the current respondent mode usage ;
• Role-play scenarios where the SP will take place and the respondent will be put
in a hypothetical context and will have to choose between different subscriptions
;
• A mobility behaviour change statement where the respondent will be put in the
hypothetical context where he possesses a MaaS subscription and will have to
answer to several questions in order to capture the potential change.
5.2.1
Introduction to MaaS
Diverse solutions were used in the previous MaaS SP studies: a short and playful
video or a brief text with a strong contextualization. For instance, the London MaaS
study [11] presented the MaaS through a brief text, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Introductory text used to present the MaaS in the London SP [11]
Here, the wording was contextualized - everything was worded using London ter-
minology and analogies after noticing that a general wording did not resonate with
the respondents. The description was framed from the perspective of the route cal-
culation function, as this is one of the easiest features of the service to understand.
This approach significantly improved the overall understanding of the MaaS concept
and its relevance to the user.
To facilitate the understanding of the MaaS concept, and because of the strong
link between MaaS and journey planning applications such as Citymapper made by
the focus groups’ participants, it was decided to introduce MaaS through a clear and
concise explanatory text with a strong context. The text is the following:
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Framework
41
MaaS, a concept that will make your travel easier
This new service gives you access to a multitude of modes of transportation through
a single application. Whether it is public transport, Vélib’, free-floating scooters and
bikes, cabs or car-sharing and car-pooling, the application allows you to plan your
trips, know the availability, unlock vehicles, get real-time traﬀic information, pay for
your trips and much more. No more messing around with 15 applications on your
smartphone to make a 20-minute trip! MaaS also allows you to subscribe to monthly
plans with several modes.
5.2.2
Socio-demographic survey
The purpose of this section is to obtain the various socio-demographic information
of the respondent. The variables covered are: gender, age, education level, employ-
ment category, household income and composition, city of residence, home oﬀice
opportunities, health conditions/disabilities, car licence. The overall characteristics
of individuals and their segmentation are based on the parameters of Antonin model.
The specific details of this section can be found in appendix A.1.
5.2.3
Mobility survey
The purpose of this section is to obtain the different information about the mobility
scheme of the respondent. The answers will be used in the design of the subscriptions.
The transport options considered are: personal car, PT, personal bike, bike sharing
services as Vélib’, walking, carpooling, cab, free-floating bike and kick scooter, free-
floating scooter and secure bike parking.
To do so, the respondent has to quantify their use of the different modes. Details
on PT (type of PT - subway, rail, bus -, type of subscription and mode of access)
as well as specification on car use (number of car/company car, fuel used, parking
situation) are also asked.
Finally a section on journey planning applications and new mobility modes is
presented. For the journey planning applications, the respondent is asked about the
frequency of use, for which mode and their opinion on different existing applications
(by saying on a scale if they would recommend this app). As for the perception of
new mobilities, for each mode (free-floating bike and kick-scooter, Velib’, self-service
scooter, shared car), the respondent has to identify 3 adjectives that they find most
appropriate to qualify each mode of transport in a list. The details on the questions
of this section can be found in appendix A.2.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Stated Preferences Survey
5.2.4
Scenarios
The respondent is now confronted with 4 different scenarios, each composed of 3 po-
tential subscriptions. The subscriptions change in each scenario where the participant
will have to declare which of the 3 choices is the preferred option. The respondent
will have to answer after each choice whether or not they would buy this subscription
if it were available through a binary answer.
In the pilot, in order to test the respondents’ reaction to the subscriptions, it is
relevant to offer the possibility of the status quo (”none of the proposals are convenient
for me”) for half of the sample. However, the status quo option is not consider for
the final version of the survey.
Subscription building
In order to build the alternatives and simplify the construction of the survey, the
attributes that make up the alternatives and the composition of the subscriptions are
predefined. The subscriptions are composed of 2 to 4 modes [28]. Depending on the
results of the focus groups and IDFM’s assessment, restrictions on the appearance of
modes in the subscriptions are set up. Hence, public transport will appear minimum
8 time out of the 12 subscriptions and maximum 10 time out of the 12 subscriptions,
car-sharing will appear maximum 4 time out of the 12 subscriptions, etc.
Visual presentation
For the visual presentation, the three subscriptions are presented side to side to
the respondent. A strip on the side reminds each time what the pictograms represent.
The chosen visualization option is to present the modes with pictograms and evoke
the name of companies in the definition on the side. An example, unrepresentative
of the choice experiment, is presented in Figure 5.2.
Attributes
The attributes are mainly travel modes: public transport, free-floating bike and
kick scooter, Vélib’, secure bike parking, cab and ridesharing. It is relevant not to
select all of the modes presented in the focus groups in order to simplify the sur-
vey and due to lack of relevance, especially those that are not often mentioned such
as car-sharing or traditional car rental. Private parking is not a mode of transport
as such and is not very relevant as it encourages the use of the car from start to finish.
The only attribute that is not a mode is the possibility of transferring credits from
one month to another. This option has been evoked by many participants of the focus
groups and appeared as an adoption leverage of MaaS, thus it appears relevant to
include this option as an attribute to the MaaS plans.
No brand effect is considered here. Thus the free-floating scooter attribute repre-
sents all free-floating scooter brands and no distinction is made.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Framework
43
Figure 5.2: Example of a possible visual for the SP survey
Attributes’ levels
Some attributes have only two levels as their access are unlimited. Hence for PT,
Vélib’, secure bike parking and credit transfer, their levels are none and unlimited.
The other attributes, which values are fixed balanced, have 5 levels, pivoting around
the current mobility pattern of the respondent. To pivot around, the 5 levels are
percentages of change of the current respondent’s consumption of the mode.
For fixed balances, the unit is in hours, which is more easily perceived and ap-
proached by the respondent. Only the cab balance is in kilometers, which is more
perceptible by individuals and more logical in view of the diﬀiculty of Parisian traﬀic.
The attributes with a fixed balance therefore have an hourly rate based on the current
offer. In order to calculate the price of the different subscriptions according to the
levels, the different costs per mode have been searched.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Stated Preferences Survey
5.2.5
Reporting of modal changes
The purpose of this section is to capture the potential mobility behaviour change
of the respondents. To do so, one of the subscription chosen by the respondent is
randomly selected and the respondent has to answer the questions in a context where
he possesses the subscription. For each mode, he has to declare if he would use it
more, less or no change will happen. Afterwards, more specific details are asked on
the evolution of the travel eﬀiciency and flexibility. Finally, the respondent has to
answer if the possession of such a subscription will encourage the respondent to do
new trips and for what motives. Details can be found in appendix A.3.
5.3
Building the SP
In order to build the SP survey, the software Ngene will be used. Due to delay prob-
lems with the use of the software, the work presented here is only a first draft of the
SP building and the general idea was implemented through excel.
The design is composed of three unlabeled alternatives A, B and C, each composed
of all the 6 attributes. For each mode xxx having more than 2 levels, there are two
variables:
• xxxDummy: which is a binary on/off-variable indicating if the mode is included
in the subscription package for that alternative ;
• xxxLevels: which defines the levels values for that variable. If the xxxDummy
is set to 0, this variable isn’t relevant.
The constraints of the design, which control how many times each of the modes
can be presented across all the alternatives, can be done with a reject-statement in
Ngene. Hence, for each mode, if the sum of the dummy-variables is larger than a
certain threshold, the choice task is rejected:
2 ≤altA.PTDummy + altB.PTDummy + altC.PTDummy ≤3
The main drawback of this design is that the level balance is not guaranteed as
the levels will only be activated if the dummy-variable is toggled on. As the design
has a significant size, it might not be an issue, it should however be kept in mind
when evaluating the design.
5.4
Validation of the SP
To validate the design of the SP survey, a simulation has been set. Indeed, a method
to corroborate the built of a SP survey is to estimate plausible parameters for the
model, generate some artificial data mimicking real responses, put them across the
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Validation of the SP
45
SP and see if the model recovers the parameters assumed (as presented in 2.2.3).
The model set is a multinominal logit model, as shown in Equation 5.1.
The
respondent being confronted to three different potential subscription choices, the
model has 3 alternatives with the following utility function for subscription i:
Vi = βSCSCi + βD_P T D_PTi + βD_V LD_V Li + βD_V LP KD_V LPKi
+ βD_F F SD_FFSi + βF F SFFSi + βD_CT D_CTi
+ βD_CABD_CABi + βCABCABi
(5.1)
With SCi the subscription cost, D_PTi a dummy representing whether unlim-
ited access to PT is included, D_V L a dummy representing whether unlimited ac-
cess to Vélib’ is included, D_FFSi a dummy representing whether free-floating bike
and scooter is included and FFSi the continuous variable representing the number
of minute included, D_CABi a dummy representing whether cab is included and
CABi the continuous variable representing the number of kilometers included. Fi-
nally, D_CTi is a dummy representing if the user can transfer credit from a month to
another one. As the model is an unlabelled model, no alternative-specific constants
were considered in the utility function.
The prior parameters are inspired by the Matyas and Kamargianni model [36].
The subscription cost coeﬀicient was set to -1 and the other ones were based on the
ratio between the subscription cost and the coeﬀicient found in the Matyas and Ka-
margianni estimation, as shown in Table 5.1.
Name
Coeﬀicient
βSC
-1
βD_P T
1.294
βD_V L
-0.944
βD_V LP K
-0.944
βD_F F S
-1.258
βF F S
-0.54
βD_CAB
-1.258
βCAB
-1.68
βD_CT *
10
*this parameter wasn’t included in the Matyas and
Kamargianni model, an arbitrarily value was input
Table 5.1: Initial set of parameters
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Stated Preferences Survey
The data was simulated using excel and the model was estimated using Python-
Biogeme (cf appendix B). The restrictions and the levels pivoting on the respondent’s
consumption were implemented on excel.
After testing different levels adjustments, the estimated parameters have almost
reached the prior parameters. Table 5.2 shows the evaluation of the final designs
against the priors, while Table 5.3 shows the level values used in the designs. To be
noted that the estimated parameters have sizable standard deviations, which would
come from the inaccuracy of the implemented of excel.
Estimation results
Scaled
Prior
t-test
Parameters
Coeﬀicient
Std. dev.
t-test
parameters
parameters
Ratio
against β
βSC
-1,31
3,99
-0,327
-1,023
-1
0,977
0,006
βD_P T
3,45
19,02
0.182
2,695
1.294
0,48
-0,012
βD_V L
-1,35
19,9
-0,068
-1,055
-0.944
0,895
0,005
βD_V LP K
-1,53
39,8
-0,039
-1,195
-0.944
0,79
0,006
βD_F F S
-2,31
3,71
-0,624
-1,805
-1.258
0,697
0,147
βF F S
-0,662
1,92
-0,345
-0,517
-0.54
1,034
-0,009
βD_CAB
-2,04
9,35
-0,218
-1,594
-1.258
0.536
0,036
βCAB
-2,35
7,97
-0,294
-1,836
-1.68
0,914
0,02
βD_CT
12,7
59,7
0,212
9,922
10
1,01
0,001
Table 5.2: Evaluation of the final design against the prior parameters
Attribute
Unit
Levels
1
2
3
4
5
Public transport
Binary
0
1
–
–
–
Vélib’
Binary
0
1
–
–
–
Secure bike parking
Binary
0
1
–
–
–
Credit transfer
Binary
0
1
–
–
–
Free-floating bike and scooter
%
−50%
−25%
0%
25%
50%
Cab
%
−50%
−25%
0%
25%
50%
Table 5.3: Level values used in the final design
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This work presents the first steps of a wide project to consider the spread of the
concept of MaaS and its impact in Île de France. In order to assess it and integrate
it into the Antonin model’s traﬀic processing, two research tools were used: focus
groups and a stated preference survey.
Global conclusion
The focus groups enabled to have a first qualitative insight on
how the general public comprehends this concept and how it could impact their mo-
bility behavior. The main insight is the ease of comprehension of the MaaS concept
by the general public. They are aware of trip planning applications and perceive the
MaaS has a more complete and upgradeable version of those applications, enabling
multi-modality, a concept already promoted by trip planning applications in the last
few years . However, the impacts of MaaS are limited, due to the inertia of mobility
behavior. Most of the participants are already satisfied with their travel routine and
don’t seek new modes or new way of travelling, thus they don’t see how their day-to-
day travels would change. The MaaS still has an impact on mobility behaviour with
the potential to attract users to public transport and a potential modal shift from
public transport and car to new alternative modes with a better accessibility of the
new modes and more constrained use of car in the region. The main levers identified
are the customization of MaaS subscriptions and display, the credit transfer from one
month to another and the accessibility of the solution.
The survey implemented in this work is composed of 4 distinct parts. The two
first parts inquire on the respondent’s social background and mobility pattern. The
third part is a choice experiment composed of 4 scenarios where, in each scenario, the
respondent has to declare the preferred option among 3 potential MaaS subscription
and if he would purchase it if available on the market. Finally, the respondent has to
declare if, being in possession of one of subscription selected in the choice experiment,
he would change his mode choice and mobility pattern. A first validation through
modelling has been run, attesting to the proper SP design.
Future work
The future development of the project is first composed of the real-
isation of the pilot to validate the stated preference survey, planned mid-September.
As the validation through modelling was a success, we expect the pilot to proceed as
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Conclusion
planned and give us a second feedback and a second validation on the SP, built in
this paper. The the SP survey will be conducted at the beginning of November, after
the All Saints holiday, with a goal of 3000 responses.
The second future step of this project, after conducting the survey, is to analysis
the results, using a multinominal logit model. As correlation might appear as respon-
dents are confronted to 4 scenarios and hence four different observations are made
by the same individual, it is foreseen that the mixed logit model will be the most
adapted to model the results.
Finally, based on the analysis, recommendations will be made to include the po-
tential impacts of MaaS in the Antonin 4-stage model. The results will also be food
for thought on the potential MaaS format that IDFM could market.
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
Specific question
asked in the SP survey
A.1
Socio-demographic survey
The different questions and possible answers for the socio-demographic part of the
survey are presented in Table A.1.
Question
Possible answers
Sex
Male, female, other
Age
Drop down menu to select age
Level of education
No diploma, CAP*, Bac*, Bac+2, Bac+3, Bac+5 or
more
Category of employ-
ment
Farmer; craftsman, merchant and company manager;
executive and higher intellectual profession; interme-
diate profession; employee; worker; retired; not pro-
fessionally active
Income per year
[0; 10 000], [10 000; 20 000], [20 000; 30 000], [30 000;
50 000], 50 000 and more
Home oﬀice
None, 1-2 days, 3-4 days, all week
Relationship status
Single, couple
Number of children
in the household
Drop down menu to select the number
City of residence
Incoming box to enter the postal code
Licence
None, AM license (scooter), A license (motorcycle),
B license (car)
Disability
None, physical disability, mental disability
Table A.1: Socio-demographic questions and answers
*: the Bac (or baccalauréat) is the degree testifying the end of french high school.
==PAGE:60==
50
A Specific question asked in the SP survey
The denomination ”Bac+” refers to the number of year spent studying after high
school graduation, each representing a degree (Bac+3 is thus a bachelor, Bac+5 a
master ect...). The CAP is a worker certification that doesn’t imply to have the Bac.
A.2
Mobility survey
In order to have information on the respondent mobility behaviour and pivot the SP
around it, the following questions are asked.
A.2.1
Usage frequency of the modes
To know which mode the respondent uses and how much, the respondent has to select
the modes he has ever used and enter the amount of time or kilometer spent in this
mode. For modes having only two levels (as PT, Vélib and secure bike parking), no
amount needs to be specified by the respondent.
A.2.2
Details on PT usage
If the respondent has declared that he has used at least one time PT, several specific
questions on PT usage are presented. The questions are:
• How do you pay for your PT journey? Navigo, Imagine R, Liberté +, paper
ticket, other ;
• How do you access the PT in the morning? Walk, bike, car, shared mode, other
;
• Rank the types of public transportation by usage (1st = most used): Bus/tram,
metro, RER/Transilien ;
• Do you combine different types of public transportation? If so, which ones?
Yes, no / if yes: Bus/tram, metro, RER/Transilien.
A.2.3
Motorization
• Do you own a bicycle? If yes, what type? Yes, no / If yes: city, road, mountain
bike, electric ;
• How many cars does your household currently own? (Including company cars)
0, 1, 2, 3 or more ;
• Among these cars, how many are company cars? 0, 1, 2, 3 or more ;
==PAGE:61==
A.2 Mobility survey
51
• What is the type of motorization of the car(s) in your household? For each car,
answer the question (for households with more than three cars, please consider
only the three most used cars) Gasoline, diesel, electric, hybrid, other, don’t
know ;
• Most of the time, when you are not using your vehicle (e.g. at night), where do
you park your household car(s) (including any company cars)? (for households
with more than three cars, please consider only the three most used cars) In
a private parking space (building parking, private garage, private box), on the
public road (on the street), in a public paying parking, in a free parking (e.g.
shopping center parking), don’t know.
A.2.4
Perception on trip planning application
To have the perception of the respondent on travel planning application, the respon-
dent has to answer the following questions:
• How often do you currently use trip planning applications? Every day or almost
every day, several times/week, several times/month, less often, never ;
• For which mode do you currently use trip planning applications? Public trans-
port, VTC/Taxi, private car, personal bike, shared car, carpooling, free-floating
bike and kick scooter, vélib’ , walking, self-service scooter.
For the different travel planning applications, the respondent has to declare if he would
recommend it on the following scale: strongly agree, somewhat agree, somewhat
disagree, strongly disagree, I don’t know / I don’t use this application. The trip
applications are: Citymapper, Maps, RAPT, Ile-de-France Mobilités, Waze, Mappy,
Moovit, SNCF connect, SNCF Assistant, Blablacar, Geobike.
A.2.5
Perception of new mobilities
For each new mobility mode, the respondent has to select three adjectives that he
thinks best describe it, shown in Table A.2. The modes are: free-floating bicycle and
kick scooter, Velib’, self-service scooter, car-sharing, car-pooling.
==PAGE:62==
52
A Specific question asked in the SP survey
1
Quick
13
Slow
2
Cheap / economical
14
Expensive
3
Practical
15
Not practical
4
Ecological
16
Pollutant
5
Safe
17
Dangerous
6
Comfortable, pleasant
18
Uncomfortable, unpleasant
7
Make independent
19
Limiting
8
Silent
20
Noisy
9
Relaxing
21
Tiring
10
Useful
22
Useless
11
Indispensable / vital / necessary
30
Other
12
Sporting / leisure / healthy
Table A.2: Adjectives displayed
A.3
Reporting of modal changes
For each mode evoked in the usage frequency of the modes section (cf.A.2.1), the
respondent has to declare if he would use it more or less or if nothing would change.
For more specific details on the evolution of their mobility behavior, the respondent
has to answer if he strongly agrees, somewhat agrees, somewhat disagrees, strongly
disagrees or he’s neutral on the following declaration:
• My travel practices will evolve to be more eﬀicient (limit changes, avoid conges-
tion) ;
• I will consider using several different modes in a row to shorten my commute ;
• My trips will be more flexible (departure time, modes) ;
• I would move more often ;
– To make trips for leisure (sport, outing, restaurant...) ;
– To carry out personal journeys (shopping, visiting family...) ;
– To carry out professional trips (customer visits, presence in companies...).
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX B
Python Biogeme script
1 # In[1]:
2 import sys
3 import pandas as pd
4 import biogeme.database as db
5 import biogeme.biogeme as bio
6 import biogeme.models as models
7 import biogeme.results as res
8 from biogeme.expressions import Beta, DefineVariable
9
10 # In[2]:
11 df = pd.read_csv('SP_choice_simulation_MaaS.csv',sep=";")
12 database = db.Database("MaaS",df)
13
14 globals().update(database.variables)
15
16 # In[3]:
17 #Parameters to be estimated
18 B_SC = Beta('B_SC',0,None,None,0)
19 B_D_PT = Beta('B_D_PT',0,None,None,0)
20 B_D_VL = Beta('B_D_VL',0,None,None,0)
21 B_D_VLPK= Beta('B_D_VLPK',0,None,None,0)
22 B_D_FFS = Beta('B_D_FFS',0,None,None,0)
23 B_FFS = Beta('B_FFS',0,None,None,0)
24 B_D_CD = Beta('B_CD',0,None,None,0)
25 B_D_CAB = Beta('B_D_CAB',0,None,None,0)
26 B_CAB = Beta('B_CAB',0,None,None,0)
27
28
29
30 # In[4]:
31 # Utility functions
32
33 V1 =
B_SC * x_SC1 + B_D_PT * x_D_PT1 + B_D_VL * x_D_VL1 + B_D_VLPK *
x_D_VLPK1 + \
34
B_D_FFS * x_D_FFS1 + B_FFS * x_FFS1 + B_D_CD * x_D_CD1 + \
35
B_D_CAB * x_D_CAB1 + B_CAB * x_CAB1
36
37 V2 = B_SC * x_SC2 + B_D_PT * x_D_PT2 + B_D_VL * x_D_VL2 + B_D_VLPK *
x_D_VLPK2 + \
38
B_D_FFS * x_D_FFS2 + B_FFS * x_FFS2 + B_D_CD * x_D_CD2 + \
39
B_D_CAB * x_D_CAB2 + B_CAB * x_CAB2
40
==PAGE:64==
54
B Python Biogeme script
41 V3 = B_SC * x_SC3 + B_D_PT * x_D_PT3 + B_D_VL * x_D_VL3 + B_D_VLPK *
x_D_VLPK3 + \
42
B_D_FFS * x_D_FFS3 + B_FFS * x_FFS3 + B_D_CD * x_D_CD3 + \
43
B_D_CAB * x_D_CAB3 + B_CAB * x_CAB3
44
45
46 # In[5]:
47 # Associate utility functions with the numbering of alternatives
48 V = {1: V1,
49
2: V2,
50
3: V3}
51
52 av = {1: 1,
53
2: 1,
54
3: 1}
55
56 # In[6]:
57
58 # Definition of the model. This is the contribution of each
59 # observation to the log likelihood function.
60 logprob = models.loglogit(V,av,Choice)
61
62 # In[7]:
63 # Define level of verbosity
64 import biogeme.messaging as msg
65 logger = msg.bioMessage()
66 logger.setDebug()
67 #logger.setWarning()
68 #logger.setGeneral()
69 #logger.setDetailed()
70
71 # Create the Biogeme object
72 biogeme
= bio.BIOGEME(database,logprob,numberOfThreads=1)
73 biogeme.modelName = "test_mnl_3alt"
74
75 # Estimate the parameters
76 #results = biogeme.estimate(saveIterations=True)
77 results = biogeme.estimate()
78 biogeme.createLogFile()
79 #print(results.getEstimatedParameters)
80
81 # Print the estimated values
82 betas = results.getBetaValues()
83 print(betas)
84 for k,v in betas.items():
85
print(f"{k:10}=\t{v:.3g}")
86
87 print(betas)
88 # Get the results in a pandas table
89 pandasResults = results.getEstimatedParameters()
90 print(pandasResults)
appendices/MNL_estimation.py
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
D Arias-Molinares and JC García-Palomares. “Shared mobility development as
key for prompting mobility as a service (MaaS) in urban areas: The case of
Madrid.” In: Case Studies on Transport Policy 8 (2020), pp. 846–859.
[2]
S. Heikkilä. Mobility as a Service - A Proposal for Action for the Public Ad-
ministration, Case Helsinki (Master Thesis). 2014. url: https://aaltodoc.
aalto.fi/handle/123456789/13133 (visited on Mar. 18, 2022).
[3]
D. Mukhtar-Landgren, M. Karlsson, and T. Koglin. Institutional conditions for
integrated mobility services (IMS): Towards a framework for analysis. 2016.
url: http://www.k2centrum.se/sites/default/files/institutional_
conditions_for_integrated_mobility_services_ims_wp_2016-16_1.pdf
(visited on Mar. 18, 2022).
[4]
Whim. How it work. 2022. url: https://whimapp.com/helsinki/en/how-it-
works/ (visited on Mar. 18, 2022).
[5]
Ville de Paris. Véhicules partagés. 2022. url: https://www.paris.fr/pages/
vehicules-partages-4541 (visited on Mar. 23, 2022).
[6]
Île de France Mobilité. Transporteurs. 2019. url: https://www.iledefrance-
mobilites.fr/decouvrir/transporteurs (visited on Mar. 23, 2022).
[7]
Ville de Paris. Taxi. 2022. url: https://www.paris.fr/pages/taxis-511
(visited on Mar. 23, 2022).
[8]
Shopalike. Les transports en libre-service en Europe. 2017. url: https://www.
shopalike.fr/les-transports-en-libre-service-en-europe#no (visited
on Mar. 23, 2022).
[9]
T. Fowkes and M. Wardman. “The design of stated preference travel choice
experiments.” In: Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 22 (1988), pp. 27–
44.
[10]
D. Pearmain, J. Swanson, and E. Kroes. Stated preference techniques: a guide
to practice. Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy Series. Hague Consulting Group,
1991. isbn: 095157261x and 9780951572610.
[11]
M. Matyas and M. Kamargianni. “Survey design for exploring demand for Mo-
bility as a Service plans.” In: Transportation 46 (2019), pp. 1525–1558.
[12]
W.A. Kamakura and K. Kwak. “Menu-choice modeling.” In: Work paper (2012).
==PAGE:66==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13]
C. Metrics. Ngene 1.2 User Manual Reference Guide. 2018.
[14]
M. Thorhauge, E. Cherchi, and J. Rich. “Building eﬀicient stated choice design
for departure time choices using the scheduling model: Theoretical consider-
ations and practical implementations.” In: Trafikdage på Aalborg Universitet
(2014).
[15]
K. Train. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press,
2009.
[16]
J. Rich. Transport Models: From Theory to Practice. Technical University of
Denmark, 2016.
[17]
A. F. Jensen. Quantitative modelling of behaviour. Technical University of Den-
mark, 2021.
[18]
S. E. Mabit. Transport system analysis - demand and planning. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, 2020.
[19]
N Tschanz and HD Zimmermann. “The Electronic Mall Bodensee as Platform
for the Development of Travel Services.” In: Information and Communication
Technologies in Tourism (1996), pp. 200–210.
[20]
R Utriainen and M Pöllänen. “Review on mobility as a service in scientific
publications.” In: Research in Transportation Business Management 27 (2018),
pp. 15–23.
[21]
J Sochhor and H Arby. “A topological approach to Mobility as a Service: A
proposed tool for understanding requirements and effects, and for aiding the in-
tegration of societal goals.” In: Research Transportation Business Management
27 (2018), pp. 3–14.
[22]
X. Zhao et al. “Potential values of maas impacts in future scenarios.” In: Journal
of Urban Mobility 1 (2021), p. 100005.
[23]
A Polydoropouloua and I Pagonia. “Prototype business models for Mobility-as-
a-Service.” In: Transportation Research Part A 131 (2020), pp. 149–162.
[24]
M. Kamargianni et al. “Feasibility Study for “Mobility as a Service” concept in
London.” In: DfT Transport Technology Research Innovations Grant (2015).
[25]
G Smith and J Sochor. “Mobility as a service: Comparing developments in
Sweden and Finland.” In: Research in Transportation Business
Management
27 (2018), pp. 36–45.
[26]
J. Sochor, I. Karlsson, and H. Strömberg. “Trying out Mobility as a Service:
Experiences from a Field Trial and Implications for Understanding demand.”
In: Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board 2542 (2016), pp. 57–64.
[27]
C. Q. Ho et al. “MaaS bundle design and implementation: Lessons from the
Sydney MaaS trial.” In: Transportation Research Part A 149 (2021), pp. 339–
376.
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[28]
C. Q. Ho, D. Hensher, and J Reck. “Drivers of participant’s choices of monthly
mobility bundles: Key behavioral findings from the Sydney Mobility as a Service
(MaaS) trial.” In: Transportation Research Part C 124 (2021), p. 102932.
[29]
D. Hensher, C. Q. Ho, and J. Reck. “Mobility as a service and private car use:
Evidence from the Sydney MaaS trial.” In: Transportation Research Part A 145
(2021), pp. 17–33.
[30]
A. Durand and L. Harms. “Mobility-as-a-Service and changes in travel prefer-
ences and travel behaviour: a literature review.” In: KiM Netherlands Institute
for Transport Policy Analysis (2018).
[31]
S. Kim and S. Rasouli. “The influence of latent lifestyle on acceptance of
Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS): A hierarchical latent variable and latent class
approach.” In: Transportation Research Part A 159 (2022), pp. 304–319.
[32]
City of Stockholm. “Evaluation of UbiGo Stockholm.” In: (2020).
[33]
A. Vija and S. Ryand. “Consumer preferences for Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS)
in Australia.” In: Transportation Research Part C 117 (2020), p. 102699.
[34]
P. Jittrapirom, V. Marchau, and R. van der Heijden. “Future implementation
of mobility as a service (MaaS): Results of an international Delphi study.” In:
Travel Behaviour and Society 21 (2020), pp. 281–294.
[35]
A.M. Feneri, S. Rasouli, and H. Timmermans. “Modeling the effect of Mobility-
as-a-Service on mode choice decisions.” In: Transportation Letters (2020).
[36]
M. Matyas and M. Kamargianni. “The potential of mobility as a service bundle
as a mobility management tool.” In: Transportation 46 (2019), pp. 1951–1968.
[37]
M. Kamargianni et al. “Londoners’ attitudes towards car-ownership and Mobility-
as-a-Service: Impact assessment and opportunities that lie ahead.” In: MaaSLab
- UCL Energy Institute Report, Prepared for Transport for London (2018).
[38]
C. Q. Ho et al. “Potential uptake and willingness-to-pay for Mobility as a Service
(MaaS): A stated choice study.” In: Transportation Research Part A 117 (2018),
pp. 302–318.
[39]
C. Q. Ho, C. Mulley, and D. Hensher. “Public preferences for mobility as a
service: Insights from stated preference surveys.” In: Transportation Research
Part A 131 (2020), pp. 70–90.
[40]
T. Storme, J. De Vos, and L. De Paepe. “Limitations to the car-substitution
effect of MaaS. Findings from a Belgian pilot study.” In: Transportation Research
Part C 131 (2020), pp. 196–205.
==PAGE:68==
