==PAGE:1==
PLATFORMS IN THE
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
- A case study of platforms for multiple actors in the construction industry
Author
Frederik Mørup Carlsson - s164345
August 22, 2022
==PAGE:2==
PLATFORMS IN THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
- A case study of platforms for multiple actors in the construction industry
Master Thesis
22 August 2022
By
Frederik Mørup Carlsson
Supervisor
Christian Thuesen, Associate Professor
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary biblio-
graphic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
i
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis constitutes the final project and is submitted in partial fulfilment of the
requirement for the degree Master of Science in Industrial Engineering and Management
The project accounts for 30 ECTS and has been prepared throughout the duration of
March 1st to August 22nd at the Department of Technology, Management, and Economics,
at the Technical University of Denmark.
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Christian Thuesen for his assistance and en-
thusiasm as a supervisor, with the guidance he provided having aided significantly in the
development of this thesis. Furthermore I would like to extend my thanks to Claes See-
hausen Lindtofte who provided sparring and guidance throughout the project.
In similar fashion I would like to thank the industry contacts who also were a part of
the project; Ebbe Naamansen, Niels Jakubiak Andersen, Lars Thøgersen, Kåre
Stokholm Poulsgaard, Anders Sørensen, Michael Nielsen, and Lin Kjerulf. With-
out them offering their time and insight it would have been impossible to produce this thesis.
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my family that has supported me
greatly throughout the process, particularly; My parents Bjarke and Lisette, my brother
Simon and my grandmother Ulla.
A final thanks to the people that helped bring me to the point I am today and able to
deliver this thesis. Thank you Ole, Esben, Casper, and Oscar.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Climate change is a continually growing issue, and to continue to develop more sustain-
able practices circular economy has grown in prevalence as an alternative to the existing
linear value chain and take-make-waste paradigm. Despite this only limited incorporation
of circular economy is seen within the construction industry, an industry where significant
change is necessary to achieve sustainability goals.
This thesis is a part of an ongoing research project investigating the transition towards
circular economy through the use of platform thinking. Previous research has hypothesized
platform thinking as an enabler to solve the challenges seen within the transition to circular
economy, and this thesis builds upon that body of knowledge to further accelerate the tran-
sition.
This thesis gains insight about platforms and the state of them within the construction
industry through a case study of four industry collaborators: RGS Nordic, Næste, GXN,
and Enemærke & Petersen. An overarching workshop framework was set up to perform
data collection on a series of topics believed relevant to platform thinking, this has been
supplemented with additional interviews with the companies both during and following the
completion of the workshop framework. Based upon the observations from these each com-
pany has been described from the perspective of platforms, and in particular the repetitions
within their companies has been investigated.
With reference to literature, it is suggested that repetition is the initial stages of plat-
form design and a pivotal aspect of understanding platforms. This perspective alongside
the data collected materialized to become the archetypal platform framework. A framework
used to divide areas of repetition within platforms into categories, and these categories into
specific domains of repetition. This framework has been used to analyze the four companies
participating in the research, the result of which defined the developing platforms of the
firms through their repetition. The framework furthermore discerned between existing and
targeted areas of repetition, providing an overview of the current state of platforms and
platform development for the companies.
The research contributes to literature and practice by investigating the topic of platforms
within the construction industry through a set of specific companies, a topic that has only
seen scarce research. By combining existing theory with practice, this research helps validate
platform thinking theory within the construction industry. Validation that potentially can
support the continued transition toward circular economy practices within the construction
industry.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope and problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Unique characteristics of the construction industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Archetypes in the construction industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Circular economy, linear and reverse value chains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Platforms, product platforms, and platform thinking
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
CircOp and Circular Construction Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Approach to analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Details regarding data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Case descriptions
26
4.1
Case companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
RGS Nordic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Næste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.3
GXN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Distinguished elements of repetition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.1
RGS Nordic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
Næste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.3
GXN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Identified challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1
RGS Nordic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.2
Næste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.3
GXN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Enemærke & Petersen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Analysis
53
5.1
Archetypal platform design and performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
5.2.1
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.2
Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2.3
Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2.4
People & Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Analysis with the framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3.1
RGS Nordic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3.2
Næste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3.3
GXN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3.4
Enemærke & Petersen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.4
Unique traits and commonalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Discussion
71
6.1
Validation of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.2
Discussion of frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2.1
Exploratory workshop framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2.2
Framework for archetypal platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.4
Additional further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7
Conclusion
79
7.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Appendix
82
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
This section will cover the introductory segments of this thesis. The report structure will
be presented, followed by the background for the thesis. Finally the scope and research
questions will be described
Page 1
==PAGE:9==
1.1. Report structure
1.1
Report structure
This thesis is divided seven chapters that have been structured chronologically. Each
chapter builds upon details laid out in the previous one, and as such it is suggested this
chronological order is followed for optimal comprehension. Furthermore some knowledge of
the construction industry is required.
In Chapter 1 the background for this thesis is laid out, followed by an introduction of
the research questions. In Chapter 2 the theoretical framework is set up with the necessary
theory and background knowledge to understand the context and content of the thesis.
Chapter 3 details the approach towards data collection and the framework for collecting it.
In Chapter 4 the data collected is displayed and the different participating companies has
their unique situations displayed. Chapter 5 contains the analysis of the collected data and
introduces the archetypal platform framework and then uses it to analyse the collaborating
industry partners. Chapter 6 discusses and reflects upon the frameworks used in the thesis,
as well as limitations and future research. Chapter 7 is the conclusion and summarizes the
findings and key points of the thesis.
Figure 1.1: A visualization of the report structure
Page 2
==PAGE:10==
1.2. Background
1.2
Background
The construction industry is one of the largest sectors in the worldwide economy, em-
ploying around 7% of the worldwide working age population and accounting for more than
10 trillion USD (13% of global GDP) (Barbosa et al., 2017). At the same time, the con-
struction industry is responsible for 37% of the energy-related CO2 emissions(UNEP, 2021),
with energy-related CO2 emissions making up more than 70% of the total global CO2
emissions(Hannah Ritchie & Rosado, 2020).
In terms of resources, the construction in-
dustry is also the largest consumer of material resources accounting for 50% of the global
resource consumption (IRP & OPN, 2021). The use of material resources is forecasted to
double by 2060, with a third of this doubling coming from the construction industry (UNEP,
2021) The construction industry is also the most significant waste stream. It accounts for
30% of the waste generated in the EU (EC, 2019).
These facts make the construction industry a significant avenue for sustainability im-
provements, with significant scale emissions, resource usage, and the trend of urbanization
continuing, expected to grow 13% from 55% to 68% by 2050(UN, 2018). To achieve these
sustainability improvements, the European Commission has proposed a Circular Economy
Action Plan, as well as seeing circular economy initiatives as a prerequisite for achieving
the EU’s 2050 sustainability targets (EC, 2020). Among the sectors highlighted for the high
potential within circularity is the construction industry.
CircOp is a research project with the ambition of accelerating the construction industry’s
transformation towards circularity. The project is aligned with transitioning away from the
take-make-waste paradigm the European Commission sets out in its action plan. CircOp
aims to accelerate this transition through circular platforms based on reversed, coordinated,
and integrated value chains. This thesis expands upon existing work and the direction the
CircOp projects set out. With a base on the preliminary work of the research project, this
thesis begins the practical work of real-world data collection and execution of theoretical
principles.
Page 3
==PAGE:11==
1.3. Scope and problem statement
1.3
Scope and problem statement
In accordance with the research project this thesis is a part of, the purpose of this thesis
will be to provide further insights into the topic of circular platforms as drivers and acceler-
ators of circular transformation in the construction industry. Basing itself on prior theory,
this thesis will take a more practical approach to the topic of circular platforms. This thesis
sets out to do so by answering the following two research questions:
How can platforms be understood in the broader context of the construction
industry?
This will be the foundational question to answer, in order to continue developing the
research project. The ambition is to provide a shared understanding of the framework of
platforms in the construction industry, that then can be developed and iterated upon to
frame the understanding of circular platforms.
What is the current level of platform thinking in the construction industry?
The next step then will be to use this understanding of platforms in the construction
industry to investigate how companies are currently integrating these principles into their
business.
Page 4
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
The following chapter describes and emphasizes relevant theory to the later analysis. The
theoretical foundation of the research project and thesis will be presented, alongside
necessary context.
Page 5
==PAGE:13==
2.1. Unique characteristics of the construction industry
2.1
Unique characteristics of the construction industry
The construction industry is enormous on a global scale, yet even the scale of a sin-
gle project is impressive. Numerous tasks must be performed to deliver a single project,
and various stakeholders are included.
This makes partaking in the industry a complex
undertaking and the industry as a whole even more complicated.
In a Ph.D. thesis by
Bariş Bekdik, various reasons for this complexity are given, including discontinuity across
projects, uniqueness of structures, and the number of individual work tasks necessary for
each project(Bekdik, 2017). This perspective of the construction industry having unique
characteristics that present challenges for those partaking in it is not new, and some refer to
these as ’construction peculiarities’ (Koskela, 1992). Of these construction peculiarities de-
scribed particularly, two of the four are interesting for this context: the one-of-a-kind nature
of projects and the temporary multi-organization. With some of the common characteristics
of the construction industry highlighted, the following section will describe another central
to the thesis. Namely, the fragmentation of the industry.
G. Stigler proposed that firms will begin to specialize as industries grow to achieve higher
returns. Given sufficient demand, a new sector will then rise to supply the needs of the spe-
cialized firm. This process can repeat as often as the economics behind it is feasible(Stigler,
1951). This description seems fitting for the evolution the construction industry has seen
as modern descriptions of the construction industry describe it as such: The construction
industry functions with separate independent actors within the industry taking on specific
roles and labor tasks in inter-firm collaborations, typically lasting only the duration of the
project (Koch & Thuesen, 2013). The construction industry is a fragmented industry, of
independent actors taking on specialized tasks and forming temporary multi-organizations
to work on one-of-a-kind projects continuously.
This fragmentation is described as happening along three distinct axes; Horizontal,
vertical, and longitudinal. The horizontal axis discerns the unique disciplines within the
industry, like structural or electrical. The vertical axis differentiates between the different
stages of a project’s life cycle, like planning and construction(Sheffer & Levitt, 2010). The
longitudinal axis then expands this two-dimensional horizontal and vertical fragmentation
across the many unique project(Barfoed & Rohdin, 2022).
Despite this fragmentation, a state of homogeneity within it has emerged in the con-
struction industry as it has continued to mature, where many specialized firms compete to
offer the same service or product through defined roles (Koch & Thuesen, 2013).
Page 6
==PAGE:14==
2.2. Archetypes in the construction industry
2.2
Archetypes in the construction industry
This unique fragmented industry still has some overarching coherence to it. A study set
out to try to group the actors within it and, through analyzing business models, managed
to do so. This has resulted in ’archetypes’ and are split between four different roles(Berg,
Thuesen, Ernstsen, & Jensen, 2021). There are the architects that specialize in designing;
entrepreneurs focused on building what has been designed; suppliers focused on supplying,
and consultants providing expert technical knowledge. The construction industry has ho-
mogenized towards niches where individual companies can specialize and find profit.
A study from 2019 analyzed the construction industry value chain through an analyti-
cal framework of observing value proposition, resources, profit formula, and processes (Berg
et al., 2021). This analysis resulted in four archetypes within the construction industry:
The architect, the engineer or consultant, the contractor, and the supplier. Each of these
archetypes encompasses hundreds of companies, but maintained across them is a similar
business model, and homogeneity on the parameters mentioned previously.
Figure 2.1: Examples of differences of the archetypes in construction - adapted from Berg
et al., 2021
Each of these archetypes is made distinct by how the companies grouped within them
all share a unique combination of traits within the four categories: value proposition, profit
formula, resources, and processes. While some archetypes have similarities, they are each
their specific niche. The above visualization provides a significantly reduced example of the
whole framework.
Page 7
==PAGE:15==
2.3. Circular economy, linear and reverse value chains
2.3
Circular economy, linear and reverse value chains
The linear model of value creation has been dominant for a long time, with a take-
make-waste paradigm as a consequence (McKinsey, 2016). Circular economy stands as a
new perspective on the process of value creation and the life cycle of products, extending
the use and efficiency of the extracted resources through initiatives like reuse, refurbishment,
and recycling(EP, 2022).
With the scope of this thesis, the subject will be limited to looking at the circular
economy from the construction industry’s perspective.
The circular economy within the
construction industry is still ramping up, with the limited adoption primarily revolving
around waste reduction and recycling (Adams, Osmani, Thorpe, & Thornback, 2016).
Figure 2.2: Map of the circular value chain in construction - adapted from the Danish
Transport and Construction Authority
The circular economy within the construction industry has seen an increase in interest
in the last years, seeing significant growth in the number of publications published on the
topic (Benachio, do Carmo Duarte Freitas, & Tavares, 2020). Furthermore, the potential
economic benefits have been proposed to be massive (Adams et al., 2016)(EC, 2022), yet
still, the adoption is limited. As a part of the CircOp project, a paper investigated potential
reasons for this, and by determining challenges to adopting circular economy practices in
the construction industry, five challenges were highlighted(Thuesen et al., 2022):
• High variance, low volume
• Short-term project-based optimizations
Page 8
==PAGE:16==
2.3. Circular economy, linear and reverse value chains
• Price competition
• Industry fragmentation
• Lacking documentation of material flows and performance
These challenges will be further investigated later in the context of platforms.
A helpful tool to understand the circular economy, what constitutes waste, and what can
be done to transition from linear value chains to circular value chains, the waste hierarchy
is highlighted (EC, 2022).
Figure 2.3: The waste hierarchy - adapted from European Commission
The waste hierarchy defines the priority of waste reduction and prevention initiatives
(EP, 2008) and represents the priorities of initiatives that should be developed regarding
waste. The top priority in terms of waste and reduction is waste prevention. With initiatives
like increasing the life cycle and discarding practices like planned obsolescence commonly
seen in the linear value chain (EP, 2022). In descending order of priority, the waste hierarchy
ends with disposal, which is meant to exclusively only be for materials that cannot in any
way be utilized otherwise.
Page 9
==PAGE:17==
2.4. Platforms, product platforms, and platform thinking
2.4
Platforms, product platforms, and platform thinking
A platform is a term that is not easily defined. This uncertainty regarding the definition
of the term comes from two distinct perspectives applied to the term. The technical perspec-
tive, commonly associated with the manufacturing industry, and the ecosystem perspective,
also known as digital ecosystem platforms observed with businesses like Airbnb, Apple, and
Google (Thuesen et al., 2022). For this thesis, the ecosystem perspective will be considered
out of scope, and the focus will be on the technical perspective.
The technical perspective on platforms with its roots within manufacturing is commonly
associated with the product platform, but there will be a distinction between the two in this
thesis. Robertson & Ulrich define a platform as the collection of assets shared by a set of
products and divide these assets into four categories: Components, Processes, Knowledge,
and People and relationships (Robertson & Ulrich, 1998). The Product Platform Rulebook
expands on this definition by including the above as ’low variety common assets’ and adding
three additional standard features of platforms, namely a complimentary set of peripheral
components, a stable interface linking the common and peripheral components, as well as
rules and standards that govern how to integrate components into the platform (CIH, Re-
search, & UKRI, 2022). Baldwin & Woodard define platforms similarly as a set of stable
components that support variety and evolvability in a system by constraining the linkages
among the other components (Baldwin, Woodard, & Baldwin, 2008)
Page 10
==PAGE:18==
2.4. Platforms, product platforms, and platform thinking
Figure 2.4: The terminology and architecture of platforms- adapted from The Product Plat-
form Rulebook (2022)
A product platform is defined in the Product Platform Rulebook as (CIH et al., 2022):
• The kit of parts, associated production processes, knowledge, people, and relationships
required to deliver all or part of a construction projects using a platform approach.
• A product platform provides a stable core which is configured and combined with
complementary components (via defined interfaces) to suit a particular object.
• A product platform also includes the processes, tools, and equipment required for
assembly.
This definition, alongside the above visualization adopted from the same source, sees
product platforms as an element within the overarching platform. By this definition, mul-
tiple product platforms could exist within one platform. This perspective is rather detailed
but describes product platforms as an element within an overarching platform. Product
platforms will not be investigated within this thesis but have been defined to avoid uncer-
tainty and provide clarity on terms. This detailed definition within the Product Platform
Rulebook is also seen as restrictive for this thesis, and the definition by Baldwin & Woodard
as well as Robertson & Ulrich are the ones that will be used within this thesis.
The above definitions of platforms and product platforms are essential, but a constitu-
tional element that isn’t explicitly stated in the above is the notion of repeatability. While
it fits within the description of low variety common assets, the term repeatability deserves
Page 11
==PAGE:19==
2.4. Platforms, product platforms, and platform thinking
specific highlighting due to its importance. Repeatability, or repetitions, is the central en-
abling element of platforms. Repetitions are what define the platform; it is what enables
platforms to scale (Ansar & Flyvbjerg, 2022). The repetitions at the core of the platform
are what is built upon with the high variety components. This importance of repetitions is
echoed in a recent study, where repeatability was determined as one of four distinguishing
characteristics of platforms (Ansar & Flyvbjerg, 2022). The repetitions within the platform
are what constitutes the commonality across projects and make it possible to attain benefits
such as mitigating repeat work, economies of scale, and continuous improvement (CIH et
al., 2022) (Gottlieb, Christoffer, & Haugbølle, 2010).
Platform thinking, for this thesis, will be seen as the abstraction of platforms and
product platforms. It takes this core ideal of repetition and extrapolates it to a broader
understanding. In this thesis, the definition of platform thinking will be this mindset of
repetitions as drivers for the benefits of platforms and purposefully seeking out arenas for
repetition to create a stable core of assets.
Page 12
==PAGE:20==
2.5. CircOp and Circular Construction Platforms
2.5
CircOp and Circular Construction Platforms
CircOp is a research project funded partially by RealDania. It encompasses collabo-
rating companies and industry participants in RGS Nordic, Næste, GXN, and Enemærke &
Petersen. Alongside the industry participants is an academic unit consisting, among oth-
ers, of Christian Thuesen, Associate professor at DTU, and Ph.D. student Claes Seehausen
Lindtofte. Further supporting the project on the academic side are a variety of students
and thesis projects investigating and collecting data on the topic. The project aims to ac-
celerate the circular transformation in the construction industry, particularly by utilizing
platforms and platform thinking. This has given way to a framework of circular economy
in the construction industry through utilizing platforms coined Circular Construction Plat-
forms (CCP).
Circular Construction Platforms are founded on five hypotheses that highlight the en-
abling effects of platforms against the challenges seen with the transition to a circular econ-
omy in construction. These hypotheses are as follows (Thuesen et al., 2022):
1. Platforms enable variance of circular solutions and secondary materials.
2. Platforms enable the development of circular solutions that are relevant through time
3. Platforms enable productivity development of circular solutions.
4. Platforms enable organizational specialization towards complex circular solutions.
5. Platforms enable detailed documentation of circular practices and solutions.
Based on this hypothesis, the framework of Circular Construction Platforms is still in
development, with this thesis contributing to the body of knowledge that shapes its eventual
final design.
Circular Construction Platforms’ ambition is to provide a new perspective on how to
model businesses within the construction industry. This will be done by using platforms
to address the shortcomings of the existing paradigm and smoothing the transition towards
circularity in the construction industry through effective and efficient re-envisioning of what
a business looks like in the industry. With intermediate benefits for the individual companies
as described in the hypotheses above.
Alongside this new perspective, the ambition is to provide the toolbox necessary for
the industry to apply the learnings to their own business. As such, the collaboration with
industry and the practical experience derived from attempting to implement the theory is
a vital component of the CircOp project. This further results in the current state of the
research being exploratory, as the process of determining the correct approach toward this
topic is being developed with the industry collaborators.
Page 13
==PAGE:21==
2.5. CircOp and Circular Construction Platforms
The Circular Construction Platform framework is, as mentioned, still developing and
evolving, and the goal of this thesis is not to finalize it. Instead, the ambition is to add to
the body of knowledge that can be worked off of in tandem with the CircOp collaborators
and eventually provide a framework for the industry as a whole.
Page 14
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
This section will go into detail with the methodology surrounding the data collection and
the framework set up to perform it.
Page 15
==PAGE:23==
3.1. Approach to analysis
3.1
Approach to analysis
This thesis takes on a deductive iterative approach to the analysis within it, but the
same iterative perspective has been a common thread throughout every stage. The nature
of the current research project stage this thesis is a part of meant that a very exploratory
approach had to be taken. Collaborating with industry partners and discovering the most
relevant areas of analysis and inquiry in unison.
Based upon previous work within the CircOp project, the exploratory study seeks to
validate the hypothesis with empirical evidence from the collaborating partners. With offset
in theory presented and previous work, the framework for data collection and workshops were
set up to extract data to underline the theory. This data collection was analyzed through
the perspective of the theory progressively and the analysis developed alongside the data
collection.
The research is based on the findings of a case study for four industry collaborators,
RGS Nordic, Næste, GXN, and Enemærke & Petersen. Where platforms within the construc-
tion industry were explored through a theoretical lens targeting repetitions, this resulted in a
qualitative study guided by a combination of semi-structured workshops and semi-structured
interviews with participants from the companies above.
This approach was determined collaboratively with the academic unit of the CircOp
project, building off of previous experience in researching this field. Miro’s online visual
collaboration platform was used to facilitate the data collection and analysis. This Miro
board can be found in the appendix.
Page 16
==PAGE:24==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
3.2
Framework for data collection, interviews, and work-
shops
The research project of CircOp was determined to spend the first part of the project
collecting information and gaining a deeper understanding of the participants. To do this,
a framework for exploring different topics relevant to the general theme of platforms in the
construction industry was set up. A wealth of existing models and topics were considered
and discussed throughout a set of meetings early in the project, but ultimately the decision
was made to settle on a broad framework encompassing different aspects of a business. This
approach was primarily inspired and influenced by previous work done by the participating
academic personnel of CircOp, and perhaps best described through the theoretical frame-
work for understanding business models in the construction industry proposed in 2021 (Berg
et al., 2021).
This business model framework fragments business models into four key components.
Value proposition, Resources, Profit formula, and Processes. Through this understanding
of business models, the path for companies to create value for their customers and business
for themselves is by a combination of these four components. In other words, these compo-
nents are the cornerstones of how a business gets and keeps ahead. In order to explore how
companies fare with platforms and how to transform them in the future, exploring how they
provide and capture value was deemed fitting.
The framework for learning about the companies had to contain the wide variety be-
tween the companies, and to do so, an additional topic of the general market that the com-
panies serviced was included. Combining this with knowledge of platforms, as the definition
mentioned earlier of Components, Processes, Knowledge, and People and relationships, the
framework for the exploratory project was initially set up as such.
The framework would revolve around five key topics. Circular construction, Market,
Value proposition, processes, and Organization and partnerships. These five topics would
each be the center of an exploratory workshop with a duration between two and four hours
each. In preparation for the workshops, the participating companies were sent a set of topic-
related questions to answer. This approach was deemed unfitting following the first workshop
due to variances in understanding the material. Instead, the research team would interview
the participating companies between the workshops to extract the relevant information for
analysis that could then be presented and discussed at the workshop. A visualization of the
framework can be seen below.
Page 17
==PAGE:25==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
Figure 3.1: The framework for data collection
The body of analysis presented at these workshops had a high degree of variability, and
the intention behind it was not to produce in-depth analysis as much as it was to spark
conversation. As such, it will not be a point of interest in this thesis and the analysis. The
tools for analysis and the questions that framed them for each workshop will be presented,
but only as a tool to provide perspective on the topics of the workshops.
Before the workshops mentioned above, an introductory workshop would be held where
the companies could get introduced to each other, the project, and how everything would
proceed. Expectation alignment could happen, and the first steps toward efficient collabo-
ration laid down.
The second workshop would be the starting point of discussion. The core topic of cir-
cularity in the construction industry was the central theme. The participating businesses
would get the opportunity to share their visions, identified challenges, and current progress.
This was to help gain a shared idea of the vision, challenge beliefs, and provide a reference
point in the discussion. The questions that framed the conversation, and as such, the re-
search team set out to get answers on, were as follows:
• Position in the circular construction chain:
– What is your current position in the circular construction chain?
– How are you dependent on others in the industry in the chain?
Page 18
==PAGE:26==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
– Who are the other important players in the circular construction chain?
• Strategy for circular solutions:
– What are your (current) goals for circular solutions? Does a plan back it up?
– What are your current challenges in delivering circular solutions?
– What are your envisioned solutions?
• Expectations to CircOp:
– What would you like to know from the other CircOp members?
The third workshop was focused on markets and the differences and similarities found
in their specific sub-markets within the broader context of the construction industry. For
this, an interview was set up with the participating companies to extract data necessary to
facilitate using the tool Porters Five Forces(Porter, 1979) to help stimulate the discussion.
The results are visualized in the figure below:
Figure 3.2: Different companies ranking the relative strength of different market forces
Furthermore, a set of questions were provided for the companies to internally discuss
and attempt to find answers for the following workshop. These questions were as follows:
• In what markets does your company operate?
• How much of your turnover/profit is generated by the traditional/circular markets?
– Amounts?
– Percentage share?
– Margins?
Page 19
==PAGE:27==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
• What potentials does the CE market possess?
– Economical?
– Environmental?
– Social?
• How will your company manage to win the CE market/market share?
– What trends shape the market?
– What are the risks?
The fourth workshop focused on the topic of value proposition, with the intention behind
it being to find the key aspects of the value proposition that set the business apart and
discuss it. An interview was performed in preparation in order to present a draft of a value
proposition canvas (Osterwalder & Pigneur, 2010).
Figure 3.3: Value proposition canvas for Næste
Furthermore, for the case of RGS Nordic, a dual-sided ABC analysis was performed on
the product portfolio and customer portfolio (Hvam, 2014).
Page 20
==PAGE:28==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
Figure 3.4: ABC analysis for RGS Nordic
the questions for this workshop were as follows:
• Data to present:
– Present existing top 3 products/services (revenue)
– Present circular economy top 3 products/services (revenue)
– Present the top 3 customers for each product
• Customer segments:
– Customer Jobs: What is the customer’s purpose and job (in the value chain)?
– Gains: What are the outcomes or benefits the customer tries to achieve?
– Pains: What are the obstacles, risks or disbenefit related to the customer jobs?
• The value proposition for each product
– Products and services: What are the main elements of the value proposition?
– Gains creators: How does your products/service create gains or benefits for your
customer?
– Pain relievers: How does your products/service alleviate customer pains?
• The Cost structure
– What resources are utilized? What is the cost?
– What components are applied? What is the cost?
– What other cost drivers does your product consist of?
Page 21
==PAGE:29==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
For the fifth workshop, the topic of processes was explored. For this, the tool value
stream mapping (Plutora, 2022) was utilized to understand better the critical processes of
how the value proposition was delivered to customers.
Figure 3.5: Value stream map for RGS Nordic
The intention was not to map out the processes in full detail to make them more effi-
cient; instead, the value stream map was used as a boundary object to spark discussion that
could lead to identifying relevant areas of repetition from which a platform can be built.
The questions that framed the discussion were as follows:
• What are direct and indirectly value creating activities?
• Define for each activity:
– What materials are consumed by the activities?
– What are the people/competences needed?
– What equipment (software) is required?
– What information is required?
– What is the duration of the activity and inventory?
• How much of the activities are repeated? where?
• How will circular economy transform your value stream. New activities, resources,
equipment etc. ?
The sixth workshop revolved around organization, knowledge, and people and relationships.
In interviews, the value stream mapping was used as the foundation for adding on these
additional elements of the processes where knowledge transfer was important or key personnel
were needed.
Page 22
==PAGE:30==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
Figure 3.6: Map of process and information flow for RGS Nordic and Næste
For Næste, an organizational hierarchy was also created to further elaborate on the
structure. The intention was to identify common pathways of information or repetitive el-
ements in the organization that did not fall within the category of materials or machinery,
and the questions to add perspective to the discussion were as follows:
• What are the central people driving the circular solutions? How are they organized
throughout the organization?
• What knowledge is needed, and when?
– What knowledge is insourced / outsourced?
– What are the missing knowledge areas?
• What are the interfaces between CircOp partners in the circular construction process?
• What (information) systems support the platform (including standard operating pro-
cedures)
– Any ERP, SCM, HR, CRM, QMS, BIM, Management systems?
• Link the information and knowledge to the VSM analysis from the last workshop
Following the workshops, the data collected were the foundation of another round of inter-
views with the participating companies. These interviews rounded off the majority of data
Page 23
==PAGE:31==
3.2. Framework for data collection, interviews, and workshops
collection and provided further perspective on the sentiments shared during the workshops.
Specific areas of interest relevant to the responses and discussions from the workshops were
the foundation of interview guides for semi-structured follow-up interviews. Unfortunately,
due to circumstances, it was not possible to perform a follow-up interview with GXN. There
was, however, a large body of work relevant to the upcycling section of their business due to
another thesis being written on the topic.
Page 24
==PAGE:32==
3.3. Details regarding data collection
3.3
Details regarding data collection
This section will briefly detail the data collection and describe the actors interviewed.
The majority of the data collection was split between three distinct types of data col-
lection.
• Workshops (Approximately 15 hours)
• In-between workshop interviews (Approximately 8 hours)
• Post-workshop interviews (Approximately 3 hours)
There were a few additional meetings between researchers and industry collaborators,
like onboarding new industry actors, but these did not produce substantial data.
In addition to the above data collection, a presentation of the intermediate results from
this thesis was performed with the industry actors to achieve validation with a duration of
approximately 2 hours.
The industry actors participating in the workshops and interviews are as follows:
• RGS Nordic:
– Ebbe Naamansen, Head of Group Sustainability.
– Claes Seehausen Lindtofte, Industrial Ph.D.
• Næste:
– Niels Jakubiak Andersen, CEO & founder.
– Lars Thøgersen, Co-founder.
• GXN:
– Kåre Stokholm Poulsgaard, Partner, Head of Innovation GXN.
– Lasse Lind, Partner at GXN.
• Enemærke & Petersen
– Anders Sørensen, Head of Sustainability.
– Michael Nielsen, Business Developer.
– Lin Kjerulf, Industrial Ph.D.
Not every person on this list participated in every workshop, but the vast majority of
the workshops had representation from each company. The in-between and post-workshop
interviews had at least one of the above present, although most commonly the majority. In
addition to the industry actors, Christian Thuesen, Associate Professor at The Technical
University of Denmark, facilitated the workshops. The author performed the in-between
workshop interviews and post-workshop interviews.
Page 25
==PAGE:33==
4
Case descriptions
The following sections will provide the shared data collection from the first stint of the
CircOp research project. The four companies participating will have their businesses
described, unique elements of their platforms highlighted, as well as identified challenges
expressed.
Page 26
==PAGE:34==
4.1. Case companies
4.1
Case companies
In this section, the four companies: Eneærke & Petersen, GXN, RGS Nordic, and Næste,
will be described. This initial section will provide an overview of the data collection that
provides insight into the different companies and their characteristics in line with the frame-
work for data collection. As such, details pertaining to market, value proposition, processes
and knowledge and organization will be highlighted for each of the companies. Furthermore
information relevant to their participation in CircOp like their intended roles in the value
chain as Circular Chain Operators (CCO’s), ambitions with circularity. Here details that
is not directly relevant or inhibiting their platforms, but provide a deeper understanding of
their position and role will be described.
It should be noted that due to different happenstances it has been infeasible to commit a
data collection as in depth for Enemærke & Petersen as for the remainder of the companies.
As such the aforementioned approach will only be applicable for the three companies of RGS
Nordic, Næste, and GXN. Enemærke & Petersen will be discussed at the end of the chapter,
where the available information has been summarized.
4.1.1
RGS Nordic
RGS Nordic is a Danish company founded in 1990. The company works with the han-
dling of various types of waste, construction waste included. At present, RGS Nordic operate
over 35 waste management and treatment plants in Denmark and Sweden. Within the linear
construction industry, that makes RGS Nordic the last link in the chain. The destination for
construction waste and excess materials to end its life. As a circular chain operator, RGS
Nordic needs to undergo an evolution. For the circular construction industry to come to
fruition, connecting the end of life for construction materials back to the beginning of the
loop is essential. In CircOp, RGS Nordic will be seen as occupying the construction industry
archetype of the supplier. Handling waste, and turning it into secondary materials or recy-
cled raw material for a second life. As a Circular Chain Operator, RGS Nordic will work to
develop a platform as a resource provider of sustainable / recycled construction materials.
The ambitions of RGS Nordic for the CircOp project is split four ways, between climate,
resource, value and social. RGS Nordic aims to save 300.000 tons of CO2-eq by 2030, save
400.000 tons of primary materials within 5 years, increase their revenue by 15-30 million
DKK within 5 years, and to create 30-50 new jobs directly or indirectly within 5 years.
These aspirations are directly tied to their participation in CircOp and the transformation
they intend to undergo.
Page 27
==PAGE:35==
4.1. Case companies
Figure 4.1: Map of circular processes RGS Nordic participate in
RGS Nordic has positioned themselves to become the link in the circular value chain
that connects end of life back towards reuse. As such their processes concern themselves with
the collection of waste, potentially waste or other recovery, potentially recycling processes
to prepare the materials for a second life, or stocking materials for reuse.
“There is one customer coming in with the waste that is treated and handled.
Then there is the customer that buys recycled materials.” - Ebbe Naamansen,
Workshop 4
One of the most unique aspects of RGS Nordic is the transformation ahead of them. As
a CCO, and as part of their transformation towards CCPs, RGS Nordic is looking to add an
entirely new element to their business. In previous years, RGS Nordic has in many aspects
acted akin to the final stop for excess building materials and construction waste. The space
demolishers could send off what they had no need for any longer, where resources went to
become waste. The primary goal of RGS Nordic has thus been to get rid of this waste,
in order to have the space to take in more and keep their business going. In the future,
RGS Nordic is looking to be more than just the final resting place for resources, and instead
become a supplier offering these materials back into the resource stream.
This shift in business does not imply a significant change when looking from the outside.
Their internal processes will still revolve around taking in materials, and having them leave
their facilities again. What does change drastically however, is the inclusion of a whole new
market into their business strategy. RGS Nordic faces a transformation where they have not
one, but two primary markets. Their tradional market, the demolishers, as well as their new
Page 28
==PAGE:36==
4.1. Case companies
market (CE market). This new market is still in immature and not fully developed, and as
such it is impossible to provide a definite description of it. As will be described later, RGS
Nordic is refining their value proposition and developing their processes to serve this new
market, but equally so they are in a process of defining what market to serve.
For RGS Nordic, the process of finding a market to serve as a resource supplier is not
as easy as simply choosing which of their materials has the adequate supply and quality to
be sold on. This is an effect of the unique two-pronged market approach they intend to fill,
as the only materials which RGS Nordic can sell are the ones that they in turn receive from
their traditional market. This puts RGS Nordic in an unique situation. Their future busi-
ness model is reliant on achieving an equilibrium between intake and sales. The company
is therefore looking to balance two distinct value propositions for two mostly independent
markets in order to successfully operate. These two customers will be defined as their tradi-
tional customers, and their CE customers.
The value proposition for their traditional customers is well solidified, they have been
operating a business for years and have insight into what it is their customer needs and
provides value to them. The primary jobs of their customers is split between three major
categories, being new constructions, renovation and demolitions. For these customers, the
issue of leftover material, construction waste or just general waste is nothing but a nuisance.
As such, their value proposition for the traditional markets revolve almost exclusively around
smoothening out this process of getting rid of their waste. RGS Nordic operate many sites,
allowing for a lower degree of transportation from the customer, they ensure that customers
can get rid of their waste when they need to by having long opening hours matching those
of the average construction site. They receive various types of waste at their different sites
to further make it easy on the customer, as well as making the process of unloading it as
smooth as possible. These are identified as the major drivers for the customers to choose
them, although competitive cost is still described to be the most important. There is an-
other more minor aspect of their value proposition, however, which had seen growth in recent
years. The issue of sustainable practices revolving around waste. While not described as a
competitive parameter, RGS Nordic made it clear that more and more of their customers
are starting to inquire about proper handling of their waste, recovery and re-use, and other
such environmental and social issues with regards to the waste they hand off.
Unlike for their markets and value proposition, RGS Nordic has homogeneity in the way
they intend to operate their processes. While the processes are not fully developed yet, its
intention is to serve as the connecting tissue between their two markets and value proposi-
tions. The ambition is simple, albeit tricky. Their traditional business model has focused on
handling waste, taking in construction waste and excess materials, and figuring out what to
do with it. The broad strokes of how they aspire to run their business in the future could
be defined the same way, it is merely the underlying processes which change. RGS Nordic
described how 23% of the material they take in will get re-used in some fashion, while 1%
will be sent to landfills and the remainder finding a new purpose outside of re-use. With
reference to the waste hierarchy from Chapter 2 it is logical to suggest that RGS Nordic
Page 29
==PAGE:37==
4.1. Case companies
at best can reach the stage of recycle. Their core business revolves around what cannot be
prevented, and what cannot be reduced. Recycling then, is the most sustainable process
which RGS Nordic can aspire to perform and by 2030 RGS has set a target of 80% of the
material they take in to be recycled.
This target is what creates the connection between their two markets, as improving the
processes to recycle more of the material they take in, allows them in turn to offer more to
their CE customers as a supplier. Developing their processes is thus vital to running their
business. One example of this attempt to develop processes for recycling material, is the
project RGS Nordic is running with Næste. RGS Nordic supplies wood that they receive
from their traditional customers to Næste who uses it as secondary building materials to
erect sheds. This project is invaluable to highlight the challenges that RGS Nordic currently
do not have the processes in place to overcome on a larger scale.
Despite this collaboration, RGS Nordic’s general need for information sharing and trans-
fer is interesting. To run their day to day operation, both for their traditional customers and
their CE customers, a meager degree of information is needed from the customer. Unlike a
process like constructing or renovating a building, RGS Nordic’s process would optimally be
simple. There are not a wealth of stakeholders that need to coordinate, and in its essence
RGS Nordic would simply be offering a product that customers can buy. Traditional cus-
tomers can come hand off their waste at one of their sites, and CE customers can put in
an order for the materials they require. This stands in stark contrast to their collaboration
with Næste, where much information regarding what Næste needs and what RGS Nordic
can provide is necessary. This introduces a sort of information requirement split within the
organization, where innovation partnerships like with Næste differs significantly from day-
to-day operation.
Page 30
==PAGE:38==
4.1. Case companies
4.1.2
Næste
Næste is a startup founded in 2019 with roots in circular construction. With an am-
bition of drastically altering the current approach to resources and resource consumption,
Næste offers secondary construction made from reused materials. Their primary offering at
present consists of sheds targeting waste handling in the Danish market. By design, Næste
as a company does not participate in the linear construction industry. Instead their business
is focused around the circular construction industry by reusing materials and giving them a
second life. Due to their nature as a startup and the size of their company, it is improper
to label them using the archetype system of actors within the construction industry, but
in time it is possible that they will grow to fill the role of a contractor.
As a Circular
Chain Operator Næste will mature the market for resused materials and facilitate the re-
versed value chain on the supply side by incurring demand of the materials. Their ambitions
through the CircOp project is split fourways, climate, resource, value and social. Næste
aims to save 155 tons of CO2-eq, save 150 tons of virgin materials, increase their revenue by
40-50 million DKK within 5 years, and indirectly or directly create 40-50 jobs within 5 years.
Figure 4.2: Map of circular processes Næste participate in
Næste participates within a few select processes in the circular value chain recycling or
reusing materials, transforming them into their sheds and erecting them for the customer.
Throughout the workshops markets have not been the focus area of Næste. They are
operating in a niche market, delivering sheds, and have focused their attention on larger cus-
tomers like housing organizations. Their status as a startup, and the niche use-case of their
Page 31
==PAGE:39==
4.1. Case companies
singular product makes the topic of markets a lot more narrow than the other participating
companies.
The market itself still have some interesting aspects to it, in part because sustainability
directly influences it. Sheds have existed for a long time, but as Næste describes it, new
legislation with regards to sorting trash from households influences the market for sheds.
While sheds traditionally might have mostly been for those needing additional storage, and
to some extent still is, the legislation that has been implemented has caused an additional
demand. The legislation has required a significant increase in the fractions of waste that
households sort their trash in, leading to an increase in trash bins.
This increase in trash bins have caused an additional demand for sheds, as a shed has
some benefits compared to just leaving the bins out in the open.
Some of which is the
visual, or aesthetic benefit and shielding those sorting their trash from the weather as they
sort it. The interesting aspect of this is how sustainability legislation influences the market.
In Denmark, there has been talk of a variety of different ways to go about sustainability
legislation. Some of these suggestions, are things like CO2 taxation, or CO2 budgets.
While Næste do not have a lot of their focus on the market they service, there is still
trends within it that shape the context they operate within. For now, however, they are
satisfied with their position in the market and the customers that they serve. Their focus is
instead focused on other aspects of their business that facilitates growth.
The value proposition for Næste is mainly independent of the circular economy aspect
of their business. This is interesting as in all other aspects circular economy permeates the
business. Næste is a startup whose entire identity revolves around circularity, yet the value
proposition that they offer their customers has a significant overlap with the value proposi-
tion that those operating in less circular fashion offer.
Næste’s product is a wooden shed, a secondary building. A structure most commonly
used to act as storage. As such, a shed and the purchasing of such is rarely the most essential
thing on a customer’s agenda. Customers range from housing associations and institutions
like schools and libraries. All customers with primary jobs that are only minimally impacted
by a shed. If a shed is needed, it is rarely the thought of ‘we need a shed’, but instead
another issue like ‘we are out of storage space’. There is not a big market of ‘shed buyers’,
but instead there is a market of people who may need a shed.
The primary driver of Næste’s value proposition is therefore addressing the need in the
market, a frame or housing for waste separation. To compliment this issue for the customer,
Næste offers to facilitate the entire process in a turn-key fashion. This ensures that all the
trouble surrounding the process of erecting a new shed is kept minimal for the customer.
This includes things like building approval and lighting, which are nuisances that the cus-
tomer might not have considered themselves.
Page 32
==PAGE:40==
4.1. Case companies
“They are not willing to pay more for sustainability, not yet. They are willing to
pay for more overall value. They will not buy just because it is reused materials.
They like that, they like the story, but it is other drivers that make purchase
decisions.” - Niels Jakubiak Andersen, Workshop 4
The part where Næste’s value proposition separates itself drastically from the compe-
tition, is the circularity engrained in their business. Næste offers a sustainable alternative,
with a lower carbon footprint. This aspect of their value proposition does not solve any pain
points for their customers at present, as there is not any legislation requiring the customers
they serve to monitor the sustainability of purchases like sheds. It does, however, offer a
potential value for the customers in two ways. The first of which is those purchasing the
shed having a good conscience about having made a sustainable choice. The second is the
potential branding value which is derived from having a sustainable flagship project.
This aspect of their value proposition is not purely positive however, as Næste described
how some customers have a perspective on the materials they use which is lowering their
perceived value of the product. Due to circular nature of Næste, and the wood that they
reuse, some customers believe that Næste get these materials for free. That the company
receives them for free, or for a massively reduced cost. As such, they are unwilling to pay
the same price for the product as a shed made from virgin materials.
The processes of Næste is influenced by their startup status, as well as their innovation
in terms of use of materials. Working with reused materials introduces an element of vari-
ability that is not seen in virgin materials. This variability needs to be handled within their
processes in order to deliver their product. Furthermore Næste is a company in growth,
developing and improving their processes to handle a higher throughput. In combination
these two describe the growth and flexibility within the processes of Næste. They need to
be able to be flexible enough to handle whatever materials they are able to procure, while
ensuring to develop their processes further to facilitate growth.
With the limited portfolio of products that Næste has, and the small size of their
organization, there is not a big necessity for a complex internal information flow.
The
information that is relevant to them instead, is the knowledge which they lack that they
can find outside their organization. Information of this nature could be understanding the
legislation that will be enacted, or information that might better strengthen their value
proposition. An example of the latter would be an updated LCA analysis.
Page 33
==PAGE:41==
4.1. Case companies
4.1.3
GXN
GXN was established in 2007 as an offshoot of 3XN Architects. The core of GXN was to
be innovative, and utilize the newest in technology and knowledge. At present GXN exists as
a daughter company of 3XN. Their areas of expertise lie within innovation, consulting for the
construction industry as well as research. As a company focused on innovation, and mainly
due to their projects having a significant emphasis on circular economy and upcycling, GXN
does not participate in the linear construction industry. Their services instead is a part of
the circular construction industry, by facilitating processes and projects within the sphere
of circular economy. Within the archetypes in the construction industry framework, GXN
occupies the role of the consultant. As a Circular Chain Operator, GXN will aim to develop
a platform for upcycling and circular design. Their ambitions within the CircOp project is
split between climate, resource, value and social. They aspire to save 15.000 tons of CO2-eq
by 2030, to save 100.000 tons of primary material by 2030, increase their revenue by 15-30
million DKK within 5 years, as well as directly or indirectly create 10-20 new jobs within 5
years.
Figure 4.3: Map of circular processes GXN participate in
GXN works with the majority of the circular value chain, as it was observed that their
projects encompass the demolition of an existing building, the reuse or recycling of materials
and upcycling through the construction phase. As a consultant GXN is not as hands on
throughout the different processes as some of the other companies, but are participating for
a majority of processes.
Page 34
==PAGE:42==
4.1. Case companies
There is a distinct element of uniqueness of the practices of GXN when compared to
the other partner companies of RGS Nordic, Nand Eneærke Petersen. This comes from the
difference in geographical location of the market that they service, because while the other
companies are all focused on the Danish market, GXN are focused on the London market
for the part of their business that will be investigated in this thesis. This difference in ge-
ographical location is the source of uniqueness in the market, when compared to the other
companies. One way of describing the context of markets is to divide the context into areas
of note (Osterwalder & Pigneur, 2010), and for GXN the area of note that was highlighted
was the trends within the market. Specifically the regulatory trends were described to differ
significantly from the Danish market.
While RGS Nordic, Næste and Enemærke
Petersen are Danish companies based in
Denmark, GXN does a large share of their business in the city of London in England. The
regulatory landscape is different there, and that reflects in the market needs within the con-
struction industry. Providing an exhaustive overlook of every change between the city of
London and the country of Denmark is not seen as productive, and instead this single key
difference is what will be highlighted. GXN describes how the London market has different
needs due to this difference in legislation, and that upcycling in particular is getting a lot
more attention.
The municipality of London has stricter requirements for construction and demolition
within the city, leading to a demand for businesses to fill the gap this new legislation has
created. The specifics were not discussed in detail, but the essence of the legislation is that
the city is setting stricter requirements for developers. Particularly the way that developers
preserve resources when they take over a plot of land was highlighted as a area to contend
with that developers previously did not have to. With an emphasis on embodied carbon,
GXN is confident that to redevelop something within the city, it is necessary to address this
new challenge.
This introduces an interesting market situation, as unlike other markets, like the ones
for RGS Nordic and Næste, where the companies either attempt to service a market with
little existing demand or service a market with seemingly fulfilled demand, GXN services
a market with few to no existing players from novelty while at the same time having high
demand. It is an intensely favorable position for the company, when legislation continues to
increase the demand for the service GXN sells, while few are capable of providing it.
This unique position within their local market of London, also provides them an advan-
tageous first mover position that they can utilize to expand their business. This can also
be seen with GXN starting projects in other countries around the world, potentially earning
these projects through the experience the demand in London facilitated for them. While
their market position is a tremendous boon, it is one that they will have to defend going
forward. GXN does not have a patent, or any other sort of security or protection of their
market position other than their experience and internal processes. This means they need
to drive themselves forward and continue to carve out this spot they take up currently, or
Page 35
==PAGE:43==
4.1. Case companies
risk having somebody else come in and swoop up the market. While the threat of competi-
tors exist, GXN highlighted that there did not seem to be any big competitors on the horizon.
When discussing the market, it was made clear that a lot of the value that GXN provide
is helping solve an emergent problem in a market. As GXN puts it themselves in one of the
workshops:
“There is a lot of people that are unable to continue to develop, and we can help
them get over that hurdle.” - Kåre Stokholm Poulsgaard, Workshop 4
When discussing the legislation, GXN described how it was constantly changing and
evolving. By extrapolation, it is easy to assume that developers, contractors and other ac-
tors in the construction industry who is day to day is not revolving around sustainability
and carbon emissions, are not necessarily 100% sure of the same jobs that GXN performs.
What they are confident of, is that GXN can solve the issues that they themselves cannot.
In terms of the value they provide, GXN describes it as not providing a specific service.
Instead the job they do is connecting the different actors and providing them with the infor-
mation needed to sign off on the project. There are other aspects to the value they provide,
such as the expertise they have with upcycling, legislation, and sustainability, but from their
perspective they see this as the most significant value. It is possible that this will change,
and as people get used to legislation and what it entails, then the customer will have a higher
focus on other aspects of the value provided. Aspects of value that could be the amount of
sustainability or upcycling they can perform, and their efficiency with the resources available.
It was described how the customers primary goal is to develop, and not face time over-
runs doing so. What GXN provides allows them to continue to do so, as well as acting
as future-proofing for any future regulatory change. The workshops highlighted how sus-
tainability is an issue for developers to solve, it is not an ideology. GXN can provide the
necessary sustainability to the project. With the mindset of sustainability being a hurdle to
overcome, GXN emphasizes how time is still the most critical factor. They stress how they
cannot add time to a project, or it would be tough to get the other actors on board.
GXN’s processes to deliver on their value proposition is an iterative creative process.
It involves things like design, research, communication, stakeholder management, and much
more. Instead of focusing on the individual processes, the focus will be put on the general
approach towards it. The general approach of GXN in this context covering things like a
general framework, and how their processes fit into the market.
It was mentioned in the previously that GXN relies on their ability to gather knowledge
in order to succeed. That then makes GXN’s information system that much more critical.
If the extraction of information, handling of the flow, and communication of information is
a success parameter, the way that GXN performs its information-related activities is vital.
This inclusion of handling information properly was also highlighted during the workshops
Page 36
==PAGE:44==
4.1. Case companies
and interviews, as well as another master thesis revolving around the processes of the upcy-
cling business having run alongside the project. There was a throughline of emphasis on the
importance of these processes and developing a framework to structure their processes, it
was, however, also found that at present they lack the volume of finished projects to define
this framework.
Page 37
==PAGE:45==
4.2. Distinguished elements of repetition
4.2
Distinguished elements of repetition
The following section will focus on the areas of repetition that was observed throughout
the data collection. The intention is to highlight the areas that already see repetition, or
areas of repetition that the companies are targeting for the future.
4.2.1
RGS Nordic
The investigation of RGS Nordic as a company identified their existing areas of repe-
tition. One area of their business where they have frequent repetitions is their materials.
In the niche they conduct their business, they have a limited selection of materials that
they allow their traditional customers and in turn have a limited selection of materials that
they can offer at the other end of their business. Perhaps more interesting is the revela-
tion that the products or service that they offer, and intend to offer in the future, also
has repetitions. For their traditional customers. The customers RGS Nordic traditionally
serve pay to get their waste handled, and only the waste that RGS Nordic allow them to
deliver. At the other end of their business with their CE customers, this sentiment is echoed.
“Let us say 50% of the concrete we get it we can use again, but the full market of
fill material is only 30%. So what do we do with the remaining percentages? We
might need to make new partnerships, because we are not going to be developing
new products.” - Claes Seehausen Lindtofte, post-workshop interview
For the foreseeable future, RGS Nordic wishes to emphasize and grow their position as
a supplier, as well as approaching having products indistinguishable from virgin materials.
A decision that they in turn also believe to be beneficial for their traditional business.
"We look into now, products that do not differ from existing products except for
it being recycled materials." - Ebbe Naamansen, Workshop 2
“The better we are at selling or managing circular products, the more attractive
we are towards the traditional customers. Because they want to have this service
of knowing their waste is being re-used.” - Claes Seehausen Lindtofte, workshop
4
This in turn brings up another area of repetition for RGS Nordic. For their traditional
business that is successfully running, the processes of servicing their traditional customers
has much repetition. Taking in waste from customers and handling it at their sites is a repet-
itive process. This mindset of repetitive processes is also one that they wish to transition
over to their CE business.
“The products are simple, we know how to handle them. Then we have a long list
of products we are not fit to handle right now. There will be a lot more focus on
Page 38
==PAGE:46==
4.2. Distinguished elements of repetition
developing new solutions for new products after summer.” - Ebbe Naamansen,
Workshop 5
“The whole process is not rocket science, but it is important how we develop the
product that has the demand and price. To scale, it is important to find the right
processes and products.” - Ebbe Naamansen, Workshop 2
While RGS Nordic acknowledges that they have not developed the processes yet, they
are looking into developing processes that they can repeat to handle their materials. A fact
that is in full accordance with their ambition of having repeatability in the product that they
offer. These processes also all happen on the same site. Different sites handle different types
of materials, but the sites always handle the same materials. As such there is an element of
repeatability in the physical artefact of the site they perform their processes on. This also
means that there is a high degree of repetition in the personnel, as from the interviews there
was no indication that there was a high degree of turnover or personnel moving between sites.
Throughout the workshops there was also talks of RGS Nordic implementing another
layer of repetition through having an order tracking system, or other communication inter-
face. While this is not a feature within their organization at present, it is an area of repetition
they are targeting for the future. The repetition of this feature being within the knowledge
present and the pathways of communication. An exciting area of potential repetition that
RGS Nordic highlighted is in their customers. From the interviews it seems that the exact
approach towards customers is undetermined as of present, as RGS Nordic is still figuring
out their approach.
“So sometimes it ends up like, even if you want to, even if you can see a demand.
Getting there and making it work is a long bumpy ride. It is because it always
ends up being partnerships, and maybe that is how it needs to be. We scale by
adding on many partners. However, if it keeps being so specific, it is for Næste,
it is for somebody working with concrete etc. Then the scaling becomes difficult
and slow, because you always have to go out and find specific solutions for these
partnerships. Perhaps if we said, like with wood, we talk to a supplier and we
clean up wood and sell it. That might be the easiest way, because we have a known
quality and people know what we are working with.” - Claes Seehausen Lindtofte,
post-workshop interview
It is possible that the business of RGS Nordic will have a high degree of repetition with
their customers, if they establish a series of partnerships like they have with Næste. It is also
possible that they focus their process development on getting as close to delivering reused
materials with the same quality of virgin materials, and offer it broadly to the market like a
traditional material supplier would.
Page 39
==PAGE:47==
4.2. Distinguished elements of repetition
4.2.2
Næste
With the current state of the collaboration between Næste and RGS Nordic, Næste does
not recieve anything that could be called standard. The dimensions of the limited available
material is significantly varying, pushing the burden onto Næste’s internal processes to han-
dle and transform these differing dimensions. This enforces a need for flexibility early in
the process for Næste. Unlike their competition that can draw out the specifications of a
shed, make a bill of materials and have everything ready before the wood ever comes on site,
Næste needs to know what they will be receiving before they start transforming it. Despite
this necessary flexibility and variance in the materials they receive, there is repetition in the
material that they receive. Næste primarily works with wood, and even more specifically
reused wood. This focus on a single material is a point of repetition.
Næste delivers a customized shed to every customer, but not only does the final design
differ, so does the quality and dimensions of the wood that it is made of. A solution that
Næste is utilizing to solve this challenge has been to develop a physical framework where
these differently sized materials can be put together to make one standard sizing. This physi-
cal framework is called the mounting table, and exists as the primary step of standardization
for Næste.
The mounting table essentially acts as a tool to create sub-assemblies of the final shed,
by providing a physical framework for the differently sized wood to be placed within. This
is inherently an area of repetition, as the wildly varying materials are given standardization.
Through this physical artefact, the sub-assembly that is created is made repeatable. This
decision drastically reduces the time needed for designing, as instead of handling every indi-
vidual piece of wood, the designers only have to worry about the sub-assemblies of full sized
‘wall sections’. While it does institute a level of repetition, it does not automate the process.
It is still needed to ‘solve the puzzle’ of making the pieces of wood fit within the frame and
rework the materials to fit.
This element of repetition naturally leads to two more areas of repetition within the
company. The production facility of Næste is a constant, and as such there is a degree of
repeatability in this physical artefact of the production facility. Furthermore there is an
intended element of repeatability in the design of the processes they perform. Through the
inclusion the mounting table, and intending to invest in other machinery, Næste is target-
ing to create an element of repetition within their processes. From the workshops it came
across as the intention was to create a flexible but well-defined production facility, utilizing
repeatable processes to increase productivity and throughput.
In similar fashion to their production facility constituting an element of repeatability, so
does the personnel working the facility. With the same personnel working on manufacturing
the sheds that sell, there is a definite element of repetition within this human resource.
An interesting area of potential repetition is that of the suppliers that provide the reused
wood that they transform. At present they are dependent on their partnership with RGS
Page 40
==PAGE:48==
4.2. Distinguished elements of repetition
Nordic to procure the material, and if this partnership were to scale that would introduce
an area of repetition within this partnership.
It is, however, also possible for Næste to
approach the challenge of material procurement differently. Instead of a singular partnerships
the business could establish a broader range of suppliers, drastically reducing the effect of
repetition within this arena.
Page 41
==PAGE:49==
4.2. Distinguished elements of repetition
4.2.3
GXN
GXN has described throughout the workshops that there is a lack of standardization
in terms of materials. More specifically GXN highlighted how they lack information with
regards to the specifics of the material fractions that they will be working with before begin-
ning a project. These claims are valid, as the exact quantities and qualities of the materials
they will be working with on a specific project change from project to project. The validity
of this claim does not prevent an area of repetition from being present within this arena, as
despite the uncertainty of the specifics GXN will predominantly be working with the same
material fractions. There might be uncertainty with regards to quality and quantity, but
the material fractions are mostly homogenous when looking at the fractions with the highest
volume. This highlights a point of repetition within their business, as there is a commonality
within the materials they are most likely to be working with.
“If you have a product that relies on secondary materials, you have a supply
challenge. We have another challenge, we do not know what material fractions
we are working with before we begin. ” - Kåre Stokholm Poulsgaard, Workshop 2
“We are trying to create a loop on the side, which comes with other types of
challenges. We are not working with fixed material fractions. We do not know
if we have steel or glass or timber for example. So that whole way of dealing
with the secondary materials is an interesting one.” - Kåre Stokholm Poulsgaard,
Workshop 2
It has previously been highlighted that the processes of gathering information and per-
forming the service at the core of GXN’s value proposition has been a frequent topic during
the workshops. This particular area is one that GXN themselves target for repetitions, par-
ticularly with the ongoing thesis project that has run parallel to this thesis. While they have
not solidified on the framework that they aim to utilize, this area has been targeted as a
critical area for repetition. With this in many ways being the core of their business, it makes
sense for GXN to have an ambition to obtain the benefits of repetition within this arena.
In similar fashion to the previously highlighted potential area of repetition, part of the
value that GXN provides comes from the expert knowledge that they hold. Select key skills
that they utilize are repetitive across projects, for example their knowledge of legislation,
upcycling, and circularity. This commonality in the knowledge required to fulfill their value
proposition presents another avenue for repeatability.
From the areas of repeatability discussed previously, one potentiality presents itself as
particularly interesting. GXN has made their intention to formalize and standardize the
framework of the process they perform on every project, and it has been proposed that there
is an avenue for further repetitions within their expert knowledge. These in combination
presents a further avenue for repeatability within the process of providing their service. It
has been mentioned previously that information gathering was a vital process in performing
Page 42
==PAGE:50==
4.2. Distinguished elements of repetition
their service, and with a standardization of both process and knowledge there is the potential
to standardize the information as well. Throughout the workshops GXN made it apparent
that specific packages of information, like a pre-demolition audit, is a necessary transfer of
information that needs to happen in order for GXN to provide their service. Leaning on
the process of the framework that GXN is building, as well as their expert knowledge, there
is a potential to standardize select packages of information that can simplify their service.
Creating a portfolio of information packages that needs to be gathered, communicated, or
created, GXN has another avenue for repetition within this arena.
GXN has described how their limited size allows for a high degree of commonality in
the human resources working on the different projects. This presents another opportunity
for repetition, as these same people can obtain the benefits of repeatability with time given
it is recognized and nurtured. This area of repetition seems to be already functioning based
on observation, so perhaps more vital for GXN is to ensure that the benefits attained from
this is kept over time. With the potential for growth within the company and team, GXN
must ensure that this area of repetition is kept.
The final area of repetition of note, is one that GXN themselves have highlighted as an
area with an ambition to reach in the future. One of the jobs that GXN performs is to act as
the connecting element between many actors, and some of these actors are sub-contractors.
GXN sub-contracts tasks like the manufacturing of different upcycled products, providing
the pre-demolition audit and more. Building on these relationships is something GXN has
noted as an area where they wish to grow in the future. One potential vision of the future
that they shared was being a board, where other actors could be ‘plugged in’ as needed.
This institutes a potential area of repetition within these companies that they collaborate
with. Building relationships and processes together that will enable this plug-in as needed
ambition.
Page 43
==PAGE:51==
4.3. Identified challenges
4.3
Identified challenges
The following section will highlight the challenges observed throughout the data collec-
tion. The challenges related to platforms are especially relevant, and will be the primary
source of attention, however key challenges that otherwise relate to the future success of the
business can be highlighted as well. The ambition of this chapter is to detail the observations
of challenges within the individual companies, to ascertain patterns or unique aspects that
might be shared between companies.
4.3.1
RGS Nordic
One of the challenges for RGS Nordic to enable repetition across their business is the
design of the platform itself. Due to the nature of how it is designed, RGS Nordic is depen-
dent on attaining a steady state between the materials they take in from their traditional
customers, and the materials they sell to their CE customers. Their traditional customers
supply them with materials, and their CE customers help them get rid of their inventory so
they in turn can take in more from their traditional customers.
“We cannot tell the demolition companies that we will re-use their materials,
without having Næste on board” - Ebbe Naamansen, Workshop 6
“We really rely on companies developing products using recycled materials.” - Ebbe
Naamansen, Workshop 6
“We can only receive what the customer brings in.” (Traditional customers) -
Ebbe Naamansen, Workshop 2
This heavy dependency on their customers in both ends of their business might act as
a barrier if they do not handle it properly. They are dependent on CE customers developing
products that use the materials they can offer, in order to communicate to their traditional
customers that their processes are sustainable and the materials are being recycled or reused
to the best degree. If they cannot establish ways to sell their materials to CE customers,
their value proposition for their traditional customers will weaken as the growing trend of
sustainability continues. This could result in a reduction of traditional customers willing to
work with them, and thus fewer materials to offer to potential CE customers.
Another challenge that RGS Nordic needs to solve is the uncertainty regarding their
customers.
“We need to have a customer. For many of the materials, we do not have a
customer.” - Ebbe Naamansen, Workshop 1
Without customers, RGS Nordic is unable to sell their CE products and thus incapable of
running their platform and becoming the connecting link.
Page 44
==PAGE:52==
4.3. Identified challenges
“If we act too slowly, we might lose market share to competition, but still it
will be limited by how far customers are willing to transport the waste.” - Claes
Seehausen Lindtofte, post-workshop interview
While the threat is not an immediate one, it is still a significant barrier to overcome.
Without solving this, it might be challenging to achieve the equilibrium between the two
parts of their business that allows it to thrive. One challenge that might result in an im-
mediate threat to their business, is that of regulation and legislation. Should governmental
interference with the market result in new legislation requiring a more significant fraction of
materials being reused than RGS Nordic is currently doing, the company will be in a trou-
blesome spot. While they are still able to take in materials from their traditional customers,
they will be unable to get these materials off the site again in the way they traditionally
did. In time this will result in sites reaching the maximum capacity in terms of inventory,
and RGS Nordic being unable to continue business with their traditional customers. The
end result is similar to the challenge of being unable to identify customers for the CE part
of their business, but the timeframe is reduced by the introduction of new legislation.
Another challenge for their platforms and enactment of repetitions is the threat of other
actors in the value chains finding solutions that does not include RGS Nordic. Demolish-
ioners participating in take-back solutions, or similar, might cut out RGS Nordic from the
value chain or drastically reduce the quantity and quality of the materials that they can
receive.
“It is always the chicken or the egg with this, it always comes back to that. But
the thing is, you have to be able to compete with the market.” - Claes Seehausen
Lindtofte, post-workshop interview
This chicken and the egg methaphor was often used to describe the deadlock in the
market currently, of there being little supply, and little demand. No supplier wants to spend
the resources to be able to supply materials with no demand, and in turn few customers have
a demand as the market for materials does not exist. Together with the previously mentioned
challenge, this exacerbates the difficulty for RGS Nordic. If the emphasis continues to be on
the economical, other actors might develop new solutions. By the time there is a demand for
somebody to offer these recycled materials, RGS Nordic might be unable to ensure a steady
stream from their traditional customers as these would already have been removed from the
resource stream at that point.
Page 45
==PAGE:53==
4.3. Identified challenges
4.3.2
Næste
A challenge that Næste generally has experienced is that while customers think sustain-
ability is good, they are unwilling to pay for it. There are no budget posts for sustainability
in their customers budget, and when the alternative is an entirely new shed it is challenging
to convince customers to choose a more expensive shed using reused wood. To combat this,
Næste offers their shed at a high quality, raising the overall price the customer is willing to
pay for it. It does still highlight the shift in mentality and culture that needs to occur for
Næste to operate successfully. If the perspective of reused materials being lesser than virgin
materials continues it could act as a massive inhibitor for Næste’s growth.
“We begin with the demand side. We need to create a demand for products made
with upcycled materials. Need to make it attractive for the customer to choose
upcycled materials.” - Niels Jakubiak Andersen, Workshop 2
Næste is a startup and that introduces many elements of uncertainty that could con-
stitute as challenges. There are challenges like achieving funding, growing the organization,
securing talent and expanding the portfolio that all can act as barriers.
For this thesis
however, these will not be investigated and it will be assumed that Næste is capable of suc-
cessfully navigating the journey from startup to established business.
Two of the biggest challenges that can act as barriers, exists within their processes and
are the issue of variability and standardization, and the challenge of ensuring a continuous
material stream. These challenges can be seen as having varying degrees of co-dependence,
but regardless of this they are both challenges that need to be solved for Næste to scale into
a larger business. Næste is utilizing material that is not commonly available, which provides
the basis for the challenge with regards to material streams. There are few to no suppliers of
pre-used wood. They are engaged in a project with RGS Nordic, where RGS Nordic acts as a
supplier of this pre-used wood and thusly provides them the material stream which they need.
If this partnership cannot scale with the growth of their business, Næste will face an-
other challenge, as they will need to procure a material that there is little supply of. The
material stream, and lack of existing infrastructure within this material could therefore act
as a barrier for Næste. This introduces the second challenge, the variability of the materials
they receive, and where to standardize their processes.
Næste has a goal of manufacturing a shed a day, and this ambition constitutes efficiency
increases in their processes of manufacturing. This aspiration exacerbates the previous po-
tential challenge of an insufficient material stream. The efficiency increases that they are
targeting comes from standardization, yet standardization might limit the potential resources
that they can utilize. Another potentiality is that they keep high degree of flexibility within
their processes, allowing themselves to utilize more resources, but increase the lead time of
their processes to accommodate this. This two-pronged challenge might act as a barrier to
Page 46
==PAGE:54==
4.3. Identified challenges
the platform and scaling, if they are unable to find a solution.
Page 47
==PAGE:55==
4.3. Identified challenges
4.3.3
GXN
One of the most apparent challenges that was observed during the data collection is
the role within the collaboration that GXN takes on. Despite having high importance in
terms of fulfilling regulatory criteria, GXN described how they often were late additions to
the project team. Oftentimes only coming onboard the project after a contractor has been
chosen. This severely reduces their ability to impact the planning of the project, and its
timeline. During the workshops it was made clear by GXN that one intensely important
aspect of these projects was time, and that no matter what GXN did they could not add
time to a project. This makes them being a late addition to the project team a challenge
to running the project in accordance with their own framework, as they are bound by the
temporal restrictions set up before they entered the project.
“Well, we cannot choose the contractor. Our influence in projects this side is
very limited. Usually when we get on board there will already be a contractor on.
”. - Kåre Stokholm Poulsgaard, Workshop 6
In order to have repeatability within their framework and across projects, this might be
one of their biggest challenges to overcome, as it limits what they can do and their impact.
This perhaps can be contributed to the novelty of this type of service within the industry,
as other actors are not used to having to involve GXN at an earlier stage, but remains a
challenge to solve.
“We have not really done this many times yet. In that sense, we do not really
know yet. Some solutions are all about volume. It does not matter where you
apply it. Others are all about communication and storytelling.”. - Kåre Stokholm
Poulsgaard, Workshop 4
Another challenge for them is the novelty of what GXN is providing. GXN are still on
some of their first projects. As such, the sample size of what to do and what not to do,
simple does not exist. With their ambition to create a framework to induce repeatability,
growing this sample size while ensuring they remain within the scope of the service they aim
to provide is a balance they need to strike.
An interesting challenge for GXN comes from the company engaging in a creative iter-
ative process. A framework, or some sort of forced repeated element, perhaps clashes with
the general cognition of such processes. GXN must figure out how to structure their process,
without killing creativity and reducing the quality of their work. GXN must identify where
they can commit to repetition, and where they need to keep their processes flexible. This
challenge of striking a balance between repeatability and flexibility is critical to solve in
order for them to successfully structure their platform, and attain the benefits of platforms
while still being able to provide the service their customers need.
Page 48
==PAGE:56==
4.3. Identified challenges
Another challenge for GXN comes from working with a service that is inherently de-
pendent on human resources. With knowledge, information gathering and facilitating the
process being essential jobs for them, transforming it into a framework or structure is a chal-
lenge. GXN highlighted that there will always be difficulty bringing a new person on board
to helm the project from the side of GXN, and that they are not looking into developing
frameworks that allow for people to take over a project easily but instead develop frameworks
and structure that create repetition across projects. This dependency on the human element
can pose a challenge should there be turnover within the company, or a rapid growth of
projects, and represents an avenue for them to continue developing upon completion of their
initial framework. Undergoing the challenge of transforming human-bound information into
organization-wide learning would futureproof themselves and help them stay experts within
the field even if talent within the organization would leave.
Page 49
==PAGE:57==
4.4. Enemærke & Petersen
4.4
Enemærke & Petersen
Enemærke Petersen is a contracting company established in 1975. Within the context
of the Danish market they are market leaders within renovation of public housing, and are
heavily engaged in strategic partnerships. As a contractor Enemærke Petersen engages with
a wide array of processes in order to deliver to their customers, but due to its relevance to
the thesis and for simplicity this thesis will primarily observe the unique characteristics of
Enemærke Petersen’s engagement in strategic partnerships. Within the linear construction
industry Enemærke Petersen represents the middle segment. With virgin material as input,
Enemærke Petersen renovates existing housing. As a Circular Chain Operator, Enemærke
Petersen will contribute in a variety of fashions. Through the refurbishment process they
engage in, Enemærke Petersen has access to a material stream of potentially reusable ma-
terials. Their ambition within the CircOp project is split between value and social, with the
ambition to obtain a contract value of 7 billion DKK on 30-40 projects, as well as creating
5-10.000 apartments with 15-20.000 tenants.
Figure 4.4: Map of circular processes Enemærke & Petersen participate in
Enemærke & Petersen participate in the circular value chain to a large extent, with their
refurbishment services both acting as new construction and demolition of old construction.
Refurbishment furthermore act as an extension of the use phase before eventual complete
demolition.
“TRUST is interesting because we address some of these things. There are things
Page 50
==PAGE:58==
4.4. Enemærke & Petersen
that are not in the original tender we can look at because we work together.”. -
Anders Sørensen, Workshop 3
Throughout the workshops it was described how this engagement in strategic partner-
ships provided interesting new avenue for value creation. Specifically it was highlighted how
strategic partnerships promote closer collaboration with the customer that in turn allows for
a deeper and better understanding of what it is that creates value. This is interesting, as
when value proposition were discussed the subject of homogeneity within value propositions
came up. It was described how on a surface level there was little difference between indi-
vidual contractors, but through a strategic partnership that value proposition could develop
and better serve the customer’s needs.
This is an interesting avenue for a company filling the role of contractor, that tradi-
tionally bid on projects with many companies capable of fulfilling the same jobs vying for
the project. Instead of having a unique aspect in what they can produce, or the method of
which they do it, they can instead offer the value of better understanding the value creation
process and adding value through understanding the specifics of what the customer needs.
With the projects that Enemærke Petersen takes on, there is a large degree of com-
monality in the materials that are used. This is a consequence of the common use of certain
materials within the construction industry, that makes materials like tree, glass, and con-
crete take up a majority of the materials worked with. While each refurbishment project
has a different construction of common materials, Enemærke Petersen is still working with
a portfolio of materials that are common across their project.
An element of repetition that Enemærke
Petersen is looking into developing for the
future what they describe as ‘value packages’. Common elements that they can deliver,
and customize to suit the needs of their customers. This is akin to the processes seen in
manufacturing, and is particularly interesting for Enemærke
Petersen as when observing
their areas of repetition there is a low degree of repeatability in the areas concerning their
internal processes and products. An inclusion of repetition within their business that allows
for them to standardize their offerings to an extent across their projects seems to be one of
the most promising avenues for Enemærke Petersen to continue to develop their platform
and attain benefits.
Areas of repetition that are already fully defined are those seen as a product of their
strategic partnerships. Through participating in these, the client, project team, as well as
external partners are all repeated across the different projects undertaken within the strate-
gic project. The result of this is a high degree of repeatability within their collaborative
partners. While also highlighted within the workshops, this repetition in actors allows for
the partnership to develop over time, and was also mentioned to facilitate growing the scope
of what can be done. It was also highlighted as an opportunity for including more sustain-
ability within the projects.
Page 51
==PAGE:59==
4.4. Enemærke & Petersen
The existence of the strategic partnerships puts Enemærke & Petersen helps lessen the
severity of many challenges. As a consequence of this, the most considerable challenge for
Enemærke & Petersen might be the continued development of their company and platform
as a whole. In order to continue to secure their presence within strategic partnerships, they
need to continue to deliver on projects, and continue to focus on obtaining the benefits that
strategic partnerships offer not just them, but the other partners as well.
While not as much as challenge as a potential missed opportunity, the repeatability
seen within the company largely stems from the strategic partnerships. As also noted, this
leaves a significant degree of repetition unutilized within their own processes. On a large
enough time frame, failure to obtain these benefits of repetition and continue to improve
their processes might hurt their ability to deliver projects on a time and cost frame that
makes it feasible for them to attain future strategic partnerships.
Page 52
==PAGE:60==
5
Analysis
The following section will compile the data from the previous section and use them to set
up the framework for archetypal platforms, that then will be used to analyze each of the
collaborating business.
Page 53
==PAGE:61==
5.1. Archetypal platform design and performance
5.1
Archetypal platform design and performance
This section will focus on combining existing platform literature with the observation
from the case description section. For the analysis, a framework for archetypal platform
design will be proposed, and each participating company will be described using this frame-
work. Each company will also have the current state of its platform described with this
framework.
The framework for archetypical platforms in the construction industry draws inspiration
from the earlier definitions of platforms. In particular, a platform as a collection of assets
within the four categories of components, processes, knowledge, and people and relationships
by Robertson and Ulrich. Furthermore, it utilizes the knowledge of the fragmentation of the
construction industry and the business model archetypes highlighted in Chapter 2. The dif-
ferent domains that make up the categories are taken from areas of repetition found within
the case description in Chapter 4 and refined with the literature highlighted in Chapter 2
The framework for this analysis will focus on defining platforms for the companies by the
domains of repetition within their business by these four categories. As such, the ambition
for the archetypal framework is to be viewed from the same perspective as the business model
archetypes. This aims to provide clearly defined areas of repetition to design the individual
platforms of the different archetypes within the construction industry. In other words, it can
be described as a blueprint for where the benefits of the platform thinking mindset are to be
gained and where industry actors should focus their development of repetition. Furthermore,
it also describes where variability is expected and accepted from the domains of repetition
not fitting with their archetype.
Through this lens of platform design, the intention is to provide a simplified approach to
the skeleton of a platform that would function for the majority of actors in the construction
industry that fit within the archetypes presented. As mentioned previously, it is based on the
platform definition of Robertson and Ulrich, and each of the domains within each category
will be presented below.
Page 54
==PAGE:62==
5.1. Archetypal platform design and performance
Figure 5.1: A visualization of the archetypal framework for platforms in the construction
industry
It is important to note that while all of these domains are potential areas of repetition
that can lay the foundation for a successful platform, the intention here is to generalize the
results found through the workshops and interviews in a way that will provide value, not
just to the participating companies but the industry as a whole. These domains thus should
not be seen as the blueprint for a business model or a successful business. Instead, they
should be seen as a foundation for a platform. With the perspective of seeing the company
and business as a platform, these domains constitute what would be called common low-
variety assets in platform literature. These domains are where the business should focus on
repetition, learning, and consolidating experience, while the rest of the business contains the
high variety peripheral assets that constitute the unique value proposition of the individual
business.
Page 55
==PAGE:63==
5.2. Categories
5.2
Categories
This section will go through the four categories of components, processes, knowledge,
and people & relationships. The categories will have the domains of repetition held within
them defined and described.
5.2.1
Components
The component category is defined within the physical space.
This category holds
domains of repetition related to the physical artifacts produced to deliver a value proposition.
This category lends its differentiation from the manufacturing industry to separate domains
of repetition by the decoupling point of standardization.
Material
The domain of material is defined by repetition with the materials utilized to deliver
on the value proposition. There is no exact boundary defined for the maximum amount
of materials that can repeatedly be utilized while still fulfilling the criteria of repetition,
but a subjective definition of being limited to a few key materials for the majority of value
delivery. An example of this domain can be seen for GXN, as their upcycling primarily
revolves around the material fractions with enough volume to be salvaged and upcycled into
a new and better usage for the material. Material fractions that are further naturally limited
by the most common building materials.
Sub-assembly
The domain of sub-assembly is defined by repetition within the delivery of value where
materials are processed initially to a standardized component to be customized later. This
domain of repetition is similar to what is seen within manufacturing, with product con-
figuration, product families, and modularity. An example of this can be seen for Næste
that utilizes standard sub-assemblies to manufacture sections of walls, while the final design
included door placement and other features customized for the individual shed.
Product
The domain of product is defined by repetition in what is delivered to create value for the
customer. Similarly to the domain of material, there is no exact numeration of the maximum
amount of products a business can deliver while still fulfilling the criteria for this domain.
Again a subjective approach is utilized to weigh the size of the product portfolio against
the size of the company, the resources available to deliver the product, and the frequency
of delivering the different products. An example of this can be seen for RGS Nordic with
their traditional customers, where a pre-defined offering is available for their customers to
pay for. In this case, delivering different types of waste to handling facilities. Also, for RGS
Nordic, the intention to deliver the same type and quality of material to their CE customers
has been made clear.
Page 56
==PAGE:64==
5.2. Categories
5.2.2
Processes
The processes category is defined by the internal facilitation of bringing value to the
customer. This category holds domains of repetition related to the tangible assets assisting
in delivering the value proposition. This category takes inspiration from the manufacturing
industry and the field of industrial engineering to define its domains.
Machinery / Plant / Site
The domain of machinery / plant / site is a broad definition, as the name implies, but
defines the geographical location where the value is created. There is no objective boundary
for when this domain is seen as existing; instead, a subjective assessment of whether or not
the same geographical space is used to create the majority of value repeatedly. An example
of this can be seen for RGS Nordic, whose waste collection sites would be processing the
waste at the same geographical location every time.
Process design
The domain of process design is defined by repetitions facilitated by a set of predeter-
mined processes with predetermined outcomes. A subjective approach is utilized to deter-
mine whether or not a majority of the processes facilitating the value creation is happening
utilizing a process designed with predetermined outcomes. This domain takes inspiration
from manufacturing and its classical mass production principles, as well as areas of indus-
trial engineering like facility planning and design. An example of this can be seen for RGS
Nordic, where waste would be collected from a traditional customer and then undergo a
predetermined set of processes to become a predetermined product to be sold on to a CE
customer.
Process framework
The domain of process framework is defined by repetitions facilitated by a set of prede-
termined processes with indeterminate outcomes. With similar inspirations to the domain
of process design, a subjective approach is also taken when weighing whether the majority of
value creation is facilitated through predetermined processes with indeterminate outcomes
or not. An example of this can be seen with GXN, which is trying to develop a structured
approach and set of processes to perform repeatedly to create a potentially unique outcome.
Page 57
==PAGE:65==
5.2. Categories
5.2.3
Knowledge
The knowledge category is defined by the intangible assets that assist the value creation
and delivery process.
This category holds domains of repetition related to the abstract
concept of learning, capabilities, and data that enables value creation and delivery.
Expert capabilities
The domain of expert capabilities is defined by repetitions within non-standard capa-
bilities obtained through experience, studies, etc., used to facilitate, create, and otherwise
deliver on the value proposition. A subjective approach is utilized to determine whether
a specific capability is non-standard and repetitive across value deliveries. An example of
this can be seen for GXN, where the same skill-set of legislation and regulatory expertise,
facilitation, and stakeholder management is repeated across projects.
Information pathways
The domain of information pathways is defined by repetitions in the transfer of intan-
gible assets. A broad definition covering a variety of potential information interfaces, from
repeated scheduled information transfers like meetings to technological solutions creating
permanent information pathways like ERP systems. It is subjectively evaluated if a business
repetitively uses a few essential information pathways to transfer the majority of informa-
tion necessary to create and deliver value. An example of this can be seen for RGS Nordic,
where the intention is to create an information-sharing system that can interface with its
customers.
Information packages
The domain of information packages is defined by repetitions in the transferred intangi-
ble assets. A subjective evaluation is utilized to determine whether a package of information
constitutes as repeatable, either across projects or throughout a single project. An example
of this can be seen for GXN, where specific packages of information are necessary across
projects, like a pre-demolition audit.
Page 58
==PAGE:66==
5.2. Categories
5.2.4
People & Relationships
The people & relationship category is defined by the human element existing in parallel
to individual occurrences of value creation. This category holds domains of repetition related
to the human resources and relationships influencing value creation or delivery. This category
primarily finds inspiration within contemporary management.
Internal team / Personnel / Project team
The domain of internal team / personnel / project team is a broad definition that defines
the human resources creating the value. There is no objective evaluation of the percentage
of a team or personnel that would need to be repeated to fulfill this domain. Instead, it is
subjectively evaluated whether most human resources are repeatedly used throughout mul-
tiple value creations. An example of this can be seen for Næste where both the nature of
their product and their nature as a startup naturally causes repetitions in the personnel
manufacturing their sheds.
External partners
The domain of external partners is defined by repetitions in the external collaborators
assisting in the value creation or value delivery process. It is subjectively weighed whether a
partner is repeatedly collaborating to deliver and create value or not. An example of this can
be seen for Enemærke & Petersen, where the strategic partnerships they partake in establish
clusters of collaboration that deliver a multitude of deliverables.
Sub-market
The domain of sub-market is defined by repetition in the jobs and pain points of the
customers.
While this domain primarily occurs between existing niches in one market,
this definition has the flexibility to accommodate more uniquely occurring sub-markets. A
subjective approach is taken to evaluate if most customers fall within this definition. An
example of this can be seen for Næste, and their customers primarily consisting of public-
housing associations.
Customer / Client
The domain of customer / client is defined by repetition in the individual or organiza-
tion’s purchasing value. A subjective approach determines if a customer is repeated enough
to earn this domain. An example of this can be seen for Enemærke & Petersen, where their
strategic partnerships form long-term partnerships to service one customer with multiple
deliverables.
Page 59
==PAGE:67==
5.2. Categories
Sub-contractors
The domain of sub-contractors is defined by repetition in the external actors where
goods or services are purchased. It is subjectively evaluated whether a sub-contractor is
repeated across one project or multiple. An example of this can be seen for GXN, where the
intention is to establish relationships with sub-contractors locally to repeatedly utilize their
offerings throughout separate projects.
Page 60
==PAGE:68==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
5.3
Analysis with the framework
This section will utilize the framework set up on the four collaborating businesses. The
areas of repetition that have been observed will be placed within the framework and will
be differentiated between existing domains of repetition and targeted domains of repetition.
This distinction will not attempt to rate how successfully any existing domains of repeti-
tion have been implemented, nor to which degree the proposed benefits of repetitions have
been realized. It will only discern whether a domain of repetition exists within one of the
collaborating businesses, is targeted as an area of future development and thus targeted for
repetitions in the future, or is a domain where there neither is existing repetition nor ambi-
tion to have that in the future.
This differentiation between existing and targeted is a subjective evaluation of the col-
lected data based primarily on whether a domain of repetition is functioning in a state it
will continue to do so for the foreseeable future or if it is a domain where the collaborating
business has expressed interest in developing or is currently developing it towards the end
state. The possibility for continually developing existing domains of repetition exists and is
perhaps necessary in order to fully realize the benefits of repetitions. However, the distinc-
tion will be made here to determine the existing levels of repetitions within the collaborating
businesses and their future ambitions for repetitions.
In the visualizations in the following sections, a fully colored domain is made to represent
an existing domain of repetition, whereas a half-colored domain represents a targeted domain
for repetition.
Figure 5.2: An example of how the distinction between existing, targeted, and neither is
visualized
Page 61
==PAGE:69==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
5.3.1
RGS Nordic
Taking the observations from RGS Nordic and applying them to the above framework
results in a mix of defined and currently functioning areas of repetition and areas targeted
for repetition.
Figure 5.3: A visualization of the archetypal framework for RGS Nordic
With reference to the data collection, it was clear that RGS Nordic had a high degree of
repetition within the domain of materials. It can be debated whether they currently realize
the benefits of this repetition, but the repetition cannot be disputed. An area where there
is some uncertainty regarding the results from the figure is in the product domain, which
partially depends on the customer / client domain. This uncertainty is a product of the lack
of clarity regarding how RGS Nordic’s CE business will eventually look.
The company has displayed interest in providing the same portfolio of assets to a range
of customers but also highlighted that there may be difficulty in scaling in this fashion. The
alternative would be having repeatability in the customers they serve, at the cost of needing
to specialize their offerings to the individual customers. While uncertainty exists on the
exact shape the business will take, both areas have been highlighted as areas to target for
repetition. The argument that both product and the customer / client domain can work in
tandem can even be made given select large customers within individual material fractions.
This uncertainty, therefore, should not be seen as a decision point where RGS Nordic has to
choose one or the other. Instead, it highlights that both areas need further development.
Similarly to materials, the existence of repetition within the machinery / plant / site
domain is apparent and will not be discussed much further. Instead, the domain of process
design will be highlighted as interesting. While their existing processes would fulfill the cri-
teria for this domain, the fact that RGS Nordic need to transition these processes to fit with
their ambitions with reuse and circularity makes it so this area of repetition is only seen as
Page 62
==PAGE:70==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
targeted. Unlike the previous areas of product and customer / client, the process design is
not latent with uncertainty. The ambition of how to operate the repetitions is clear from
RGS Nordic, but the reason that it is not fully functioning yet is that the products have yet
to be developed, and as such, the processes are not developed yet.
Remaining is information pathways, a topic RGS Nordic highlighted as an area for future
repetitions, but is not yet fully functioning, as well as internal team / personnel / project
team, which overlaps in reasoning with machinery / plant / site. Both are potential areas
of repetition but do not represent particularly interesting challenges outside of realizing the
benefits of said repetitions.
Page 63
==PAGE:71==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
5.3.2
Næste
In a similar fashion to RGS Nordic, Næste exhibits a combination of already existing
areas of repetition functioning within the company and areas targeted for future repetition.
Figure 5.4: A visualization of the archetypal framework for Næste
There is a clear area of repetition within the domain of the material that Næste utilizes,
and while there exist differences in dimensions and quality the company is using wood as
their primary material. Næste has already mentioned how they believe they can better uti-
lize more significant fractions of the wood than other actors, which might point to learning
from the frequent use of the same material.
Another area of repetition that is already pre-existing and functioning for Næste is the
domain of sub-assembly. Within their production Næste has added an element of standard-
ization that allows them to repeatedly manufacture the same sub-assembly of a whole shed
and construct the shed from those. This method provides the standardization they see nec-
essary but also functions as an area of repetitions.
With only one production facility currently, Næste utilizes the same machinery / plan
/ site to provide sheds to their customers. This leads naturally to a targeted area of repe-
titions, namely process design. While the existing processes at Næste could qualify for this
domain, the fact that they are continually improving and developing their processes to reach
their goal of manufacturing a shed a day puts this domain in the targeted for repetitions
category. This is because their current processes are not seen as efficient enough to reach
their goals internally, so further development in this area of repetitions is needed.
Similarly to the machinery / plant / site domain, the company’s size and its startup
nature influence the domain of internal team / personnel / project team. With limited staff,
Page 64
==PAGE:72==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
it is natural for the personnel to have a high degree of repetition.
While Næste is still growing their market and business, it is not easy to assess whether
this trend will continue, but from observations, Næste found a sub-market within the gen-
eral market of supplying their sheds to public housing associations. Having the same type
of customer with the same needs is an avenue for repeatability that they could pursue the
benefits of, as the value proposition for this type of customer in the market likely has overlap.
The final area of repetition highlighted is the targeted area of repetition of sub-contractors.
This refers explicitly to suppliers, as at present, Næste is working with one repetitive sup-
plier, RGS Nordic. Næste has, however, expressed interest in broadening their supply of
material, and as such, this area is only targeted for repetition as these new suppliers have
yet to be established. There even is the possibility of this no longer being an area of repe-
tition should their number of suppliers and the timing of them providing material to Næste
becomes irregular.
Page 65
==PAGE:73==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
5.3.3
GXN
In contrast to the previous two companies, utilizing the framework on the observations
regarding GXN led to a clear majority of targeted but not currently established areas of
repetition.
Figure 5.5: A visualization of the archetypal framework for GXN
The domain of materials is the first of the targeted areas for repetition for GXN. While
GXN has made it clear that they are uncertain of the quantities, the material fractions that
they target for their upcycling processes show signs of repeatability across the projects. As
such, targeting these material fractions that seem to be repeated across projects, like con-
crete and glass, is a candidate for a targeted area of repetition,
A existing area of repetition for GXN is within the domain of machinery / plant / site,
as their offices act as a common geographical location where work repeatedly is done.
As discussed in the case description chapter, the process framework is an area of repe-
tition that GXN is actively targeting for repetition, with it being one of their main targets
for repeatability. It has not yet been developed and, as such, is a targeted area of repetition
even though the company is actively working on creating it.
Another targeted area of repetition is the domain of expert capabilities. The obser-
vations have shown that there is a degree of repetition within the expert knowledge and
facilitation skills that GXN brings to projects, but similarly to the process framework, it is
still in early stages and has yet to mature fully.
Information packages is the fourth targeted area for repetition for GXN. Similar to the
domain of expert capabilities and process framework, this is an area of repetition GXN can
Page 66
==PAGE:74==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
target as they mature their processes and become more aware of the distinct information
packages that can be transferred during a project. Some already exist, like the pre-demolition
audit, but there was no indication that there is benefit realization of the repetition of this
occurring across projects.
Internal team / personnel / project team is the sole defined and existing domain of
repetition for GXN. This can partially be seen as a consequence of the size of their internal
team, but from observations, it was made clear that the benefits from this were seemingly
realized, at least to an extent.
The final targeted area of repetition is sub-contractors, where GXN have expressed
interest in further developing their relationships with sub-contractors to achieve the benefits
of such relationships. In a similar fashion to many of their other domains of repetition, this
is seen as targeted as they are still developing and have not yet matured the relationships
fully.
Page 67
==PAGE:75==
5.3. Analysis with the framework
5.3.4
Enemærke & Petersen
In contrast to GXN, Enemærke & Petersen has a majority of defined and existing areas
of repetition.
Figure 5.6: A visualization of the archetypal framework for Enemærke & Petersen
The first defined and existing area of repetition for Enemærke & Petersen is the domain
of materials. Similarly to other companies, there is an overlap of common material fractions
in the work that Enemærke & Petersen do. With Enemærke & Petersen being an established
company with much experience and nothing to indicate otherwise, this area is seen as an
existing area of repetition within the company.
The only targeted area of repetition for Enemærke & Petersen is the domain of sub-
assembly. While the observations for Enemærke & Petersen have focused on the strategic
partnerships, the potentiality for incorporating repetitions within their processes through
including what they termed as value packages or beta products is the base for this targeted
area. This is primarily based on intent, but the intent observed was to standardize certain
aspects of the products they deliver to later customize them in a fashion that is in accordance
with the sub-assembly domain.
Within the domain of people & relationships, Enemærke & Petersen have defined and
existing areas of repetition within every domain. This is a product of their strategic part-
nerships that facilitate precisely that. By creating these strategic partnerships, the different
domains are made into areas of repetition, providing the opportunity to realize the benefits
of the repetitions. The observations made provided no reason to believe this ambition is not
being fulfilled.
Page 68
==PAGE:76==
5.4. Unique traits and commonalities
5.4
Unique traits and commonalities
An interesting commonality that can be observed from utilizing this framework is the
number of domains of repetition, whether defined and existing or targeted. All four com-
panies qualifies for seven domains either existing or targeted. This might indicate that a
platform functions best when constructed from such a number of domains, as more could
reduce flexibility and less could reduce the attained benefits.
Another commonality exists between two sets of two companies, namely RGS Nordic
and Næste, and GXN and Enemærke & Petersen. Both RGS Nordic and Næste have the ma-
jority of their domains of repetition within the categories of components and processes, while
both GXN and Enemærke & Petersen have the majority of their domains in the knowledge
and people & relationship categories. For the former two, it perhaps lends itself to compar-
ison with the manufacturing industry, as to some extent, both can be seen as suppliers of
goods in a similar fashion to a manufacturer. Hence the majority of their repetition being
within the inherently inwards facing categories of components and processes would make
much sense.
For GXN and Enemærke & Petersen, their most repetitive categories were knowledge
and, people & relationships. For Enemærke & Petersen, some of this might be explained
by the focus on strategic partnerships. However, nothing in the data collection would indi-
cate that the majority of their repetitions being found between the knowledge and people &
relationships categories would change given another focus. Unsurprisingly, the majority of
repetitions for Enemærke & Petersen are found within the people & relationships category
alone, as this has been highlighted as one of the benefits of strategic partnerships.
GXN has a more even split between the categories of knowledge and people & relation-
ships and has the unique trait of being the company with the fewest existing domains of
repetition present in the framework. This might be a product of the service they deliver
and the flexibility latent in such a process. Perhaps more interesting is that despite this
flexibility, GXN has the same quantity domains of repetition as the average. Indicating that
even the role they fill can have significant domains of repetition.
A commonality shared between all four companies is that the domain of materials is an
area of repetition for all of them. This is perhaps an indicator of a limited set of material
fractions constituting the vast majority of materials used in the construction industry. How-
ever, this being shared across all four companies might be an avenue for repetition across
the circular construction chain and not just within the particular company.
Another commonality between all four companies is the fact that each company has at
least two domains of repetition within the category of people & relationships. It is the only
category where this is the case, and while it might partially be a product of the fact that the
category has five domains as opposed to the three every other category has, it does highlight
the potential for repeatability within this category. This might make it possible for the
Page 69
==PAGE:77==
5.4. Unique traits and commonalities
companies collaborating in CircOp to target this specific category as an area for knowledge
sharing and sparring due to its commonality.
A fascinating uniqueness is the fact that the category of knowledge has the least col-
lective domains of repetition across the companies. This might indicate that the framework
does not adequately handle the repetitions within knowledge or that knowledge is a neglected
area of repetition for these companies. Both possibilities provide grounds for further inves-
tigation into the subject to determine whether it is underutilized or what is being missed by
the framework.
Page 70
==PAGE:78==
6
Discussion
This section will discuss the framework for data collection as well as the framework for
archetypal platforms. Following this limitations as well as potential future research will be
highlighted.
Page 71
==PAGE:79==
6.1. Validation of results
6.1
Validation of results
As a part of the CircOp project, another workshop were held late in the process of this
thesis. This workshop was designed to summarize the project up to that point, as well as
provide an opportunity to validate the intermediate results.
At this workshop, the industry participants had the chance to provide their input on the
design of the framework for archetypal platform design as well as the analysis that had been
performed on the company they represent. The intention was to also collect information
regarding the process of data collection as well, but the discussion primarily centered around
the results presented.
The analysis of each company utilizing the framework was presented and was received
positively. The general consensus was that the framework represented the areas of repeti-
tion within their business, although it was not particularly detailed. It was agreed that the
framework could be beneficial as a shared boundary object for communication and future
work at a higher level of detail within the individual companies.
This workshop provided a degree of validation to the framework analyzing their busi-
ness, as well as the framework for data collection. With the positive reception, it can be
determined that the framework for analysis functions as a method to describe their business
at a low level of detail, as well as the framework for data collection functioning to extract
the necessary detail to perform such analysis.
Page 72
==PAGE:80==
6.2. Discussion of frameworks
6.2
Discussion of frameworks
The following sections will discuss the two main frameworks throughout this report;
the framework for data collection and the archetypal platform framework. The success with
regards to what they set out to do will be discussed, as well as other areas of interest observed
through the use of the frameworks.
6.2.1
Exploratory workshop framework
The framework for conducting the workshops and general data collection that laid the
foundation for this thesis was initially set out, but was subject to several corrections along
the way. Additions like interviews before the workshops, follow up interviews after the initial
set of workshops, all displayed that there was a lack of data retrieval during the initial set of
workshops. There can be several reasons for this, one of which is the amount of participants,
a lack of structure during the workshops, or the workshops being cut drastically in time from
initially four hours to two hours.
Regardless of the reasoning behind it, it is displayed that the initial framework for data
collection was not functioning to retrieve the necessary data. One likely reason for this was
the lack of preparation on the side of the collaborating companies. This resulted in the
research team needing to take further steps to extract data, resulting in further interviews.
It is recognized that the framework set out to be exploratory, and as such there was an
intentional lack of structure to the discussions within the workshops. The combination of
lack of structure, and lack of preparation on the part of the companies however resulted in
a lack of detail in general. With companies unable to provide questions to central answers,
as well as data to back up their claims, it became difficult to facilitate data collection at a
level deeper than surface level.
From this, it becomes difficult to validate whether or not the framework was success-
ful in extracting the data relevant for the eventual analysis, as much of the data that the
framework sought to discover was never revealed. Not because the framework wasn’t trying
to, but because the collaborating parties being unable to provide the data. In general, the
participating companies were positive towards the framework and described it as a natu-
ral way to cover the topics necessary for discussion. As such it would not appear that the
collaborating parties found the framework to be without merit, and that other factors has
influenced the lack of availability of data.
Despite these difficulties, the additions made to the framework did facilitate the collec-
tion of data seen in this thesis. As such it can be determined that the framework functions
to collect the data displayed in this thesis. In order to collect more detailed data, there
might need to be made changes to the framework or the nature of the collaboration with
partners. As it stands, the framework proved a viable approach towards collecting data and
facilitating discussions of several topics relevant to platforms, circular economy and transi-
tioning towards circular economy within the construction industry through platforms. The
Page 73
==PAGE:81==
6.2. Discussion of frameworks
level of detail in this data can be seen as insufficient, but as a starting point it fulfilled its
purpose.
For the future, approaching the data collection in more structured fashion may allow
for more detailed data collection. One thing the collaborating partners highlighted was the
potential for more one-on-one interviews between the individual company and the research
team, and a larger emphasis on these interviews and following analysis over the workshops.
It is uncertain whether such a change would be successful if the partners continue to be un-
able to provide the necessary data. It does highlight that the expected benefits from sharing
discussions across companies and learning from each other might not be realized, and the
format of the workshops need to be reworked to achieve this.
Page 74
==PAGE:82==
6.2. Discussion of frameworks
6.2.2
Framework for archetypal platforms
The ambition of the framework was to build upon the existing business model archetypes
within construction and provide a shared language between actors in the construction indus-
try to use when developing platforms. The validation performed shows that this ambition has
at least been partially fulfilled, as the industry collaborators acknowledged the framework
to function as a facilitator for platform discussions. It is uncertain whether the framework
can continue to be effective in facilitating discussions regarding platforms at a higher level
of detail, but from the perspective of seeing it as a starting point it appears to fulfill its role.
With regards to building upon the existing business model archetypes, there were ob-
servable differences when using the framework on the four different industry collaborators.
Commonalities like those seen between RGS Nordic and Næste might indicate that there are
patterns that certain business model archetypes would fall within. Should this be the case,
there is a potentially a case to be made for a high degree of overlap between business model
archetypes and the platform archetypes.
If the above can be proven, the combination of the business model archetypes and plat-
form archetypes can provide an easy overview for actors in the construction industry to
identify areas within their business to develop in order to transition towards platforms. A
transition that as described in Chapter 2 is hypothesized to enable circular practices within
the industry.
The framework was developed based on an extensive case study as described in Chap-
ter 4, but the data used to develop it is still insignificant in comparison to the size of the
industry. While the framework functions for the four participating industry actors, there is
a likelihood that other companies within the construction industry does not have the same
degree of matching with the framework. As such there is reason to continue to develop and
validate the framework, to ensure that the domains and categories fit with the reality of the
industry.
In particular the distinction between existing and targeted is highlighted as an area
where further degrees of nuance might positively effect the framework. At present the dis-
tinctions offer some information with regards to the state of platforms, but it does little
to discern what areas of repetitions are most important. This might potentially be further
developed with further data, allowing for certain areas of high importance to be found for
distinct archetypes. There is also a case to be made for developing these distinctions to allow
for degrees of fulfilling a domain of repetition, as to easier discern how much work there is
still to be done within a specific domain.
In extension of the discussion regarding the framework for data collection, it is hy-
pothesized that the framework for archetypal platforms can act as a boundary object for
discussion and serve as a facilitation tool should a similar study to this be made.
This
use case could allow industry actors to identify areas of repetition through interfacing with
Page 75
==PAGE:83==
6.2. Discussion of frameworks
the framework, and effectivise data collection by honing in on important areas from the start.
In summation the framework is seen as successful in answering the research questions,
with it acting both as a boundary object for the industry to understand and start discussions
regarding platforms with, as well as a tool that allows for identifying the current level of
platform thinking in the construction industry.
Page 76
==PAGE:84==
6.3. Limitations
6.3
Limitations
This thesis is underlined several few limitations. The first and perhaps most striking
limitation is the scope of what it sets out to do. With an ambition to not only look into
this new theoretical aspect, but also provide insights into it from a practical perspective
from four separate companies. Combining this with the existing research project of CircOp
also provided an additional layer of complexity. Having four collaborative partners all with
their own unique businesses provided a challenge in terms of finding commonalities. As such
there might be avenues relevant for analysis that has not been approached with the necessary
depth to reach a level of adequate highlighting.
Another limitation is the different companies and their unique situations. Due to the
nature of the thesis it was not feasible to deep dive into each and every company, and instead
all the companies were treated to the same framework of data collection. This means that
there are potential unique aspects that are not found or questioned in the correct fashion to
valuable data. Furthermore the limitation of time also influences this, as with the limited
time available the ambition was to perform analysis for all the companies in similar fashion.
Another limitation is the inherent reliance on human correspondence as opposed to data.
The attention to data was attempted to be weaved into the framework and the questions,
but when working with a field as new as this there are definite areas of uncertainty where
the data to back up sentiment simply does not exist yet. As such the response and the basis
of the analysis is based a lot on industry experience and observations in trend and market,
while little is based on numerical data. While this does open up an avenue for future research
it also stands a a significant limitation.
With this described human element comes another limitation. While some companies
provided multiple representatives, the broad nature of the scope and the many participating
companies meant that the workshop and interview responses came from a small sample size.
It is therefore possible that bias and human preference play a large role in the data collected.
This too provides an avenue for future research as the existing body of work can be expanded
with more interviews and data from within the companies.
Page 77
==PAGE:85==
6.4. Additional further research
6.4
Additional further research
Due to the breadth of the topic of this thesis, there are many identified areas of further
research. Many of these are specific to the companies themselves, as opposed to the exact
topic of the thesis. With the level of detail that was feasible, it has been decided to not
focus extensively on these areas of further research for the individual companies. Others like
those pertaining to the frameworks used have been highlighted within their discussions.
One area that has been mostly neglected throughout this thesis is the realization of the
benefits of repetitions and platforms. Throughout the thesis it has been described how sev-
eral companies are transitioning towards a more platform and repetition oriented business,
but the focus has been on enabling these repetitions and platforms. This does mean that
there is a lack of investigation made into whether these repetitions are actually causing the
benefits that the theory would indicate. With the shared language established for platforms
within this thesis, an area of future research is within benefit realization of platforms and
the difference between theory following this practical investigation of the transition towards
platforms.
Page 78
==PAGE:86==
7
Conclusion
This section contains the conclusion of the thesis and summarize the key points throughout.
Page 79
==PAGE:87==
7.1. Conclusion
7.1
Conclusion
This research aimed to continue the developing understanding of platforms as enablers
for circular transition within the construction industry. This has been done by building
upon an existing body of knowledge within the CircOp project, and continuing to add to
this through empirical evidence collected through a case study.
To do this a set of research questions were set up to explore the design of platforms and
the state of them within the construction industry. A framework for data collection was set
up with the academic unit of the CircOp team as described in Chapter 3, and the collection
of data was carried out and synthesized in Chapter 4. This data collection was then ana-
lyzed and developed into the framework proposed, the archetypal platform framework, in
Chapter 5. The archetypal platform framework answers the research question by providing
a homogeneous view of platforms for several actors within the construction industry filling
different roles as determined by the business model archetypes. This provides grounds for a
unified perspective on platforms for the industry, answering the first research question.
The second research question set out to investigate the current state of platforms within
the construction industry, and was partially answered in Chapter 4 and in further detail in
Chapter 5. The case descriptions of the individual companies provide an in-depth explo-
ration of the current state of the business, while the analysis uses the theoretical framing
to describe their platforms through the perspective of repetitions. The archetypal platform
framework then incorporates this and provides a visualization of the existing and targeted
domains of repetition to answer the research question.
Through the answering of the research questions this thesis contributes to theory by pro-
viding a framework for discussing platforms within the construction industry. Furthermore it
contributes to the practice through the descriptions of the existing platform development for
multiple industry actors. As such it has added to the body of knowledge supporting the am-
bition of platforms as enablers for the transition to circular economy within the construction
industry.
Page 80
==PAGE:88==
References
References
Adams, K. T., Osmani, M., Thorpe, T., & Thornback, J. (2016). Circular economy in
construction: current awareness, challenges and enablers. Waste and Resource Man-
agement, 170, 15-24.
Ansar, A., & Flyvbjerg, B. (2022). How to solve big problems: Bespoke versus platform
strategies.
Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0022169422004942.
Baldwin, Y., Woodard, C. J., & Baldwin, C. Y. (2008). The architecture of platforms:
A unified view. Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=1265155https://ssrn
.com/abstract=1265155
Barbosa, F., Woetzel, J., Mischke, J., Ribeirinho, M. J., Sridhar, M., Parsons, M., . . . Brown,
S. (2017). Reinventing construction: A route to higher productivity.
Barfoed, A. O., & Rohdin, T. B. (2022). Platforms in circular construction a study of how
platform thinking can enable circular economy at a danish contractor . Retrieved from
www.man.dtu.dk
Bekdik, B. (2017). Improving productivity in building construction - by repetitions in prod-
ucts, processes, and organisations .
Benachio, G. L. F., do Carmo Duarte Freitas, M., & Tavares, S. F. (2020, 7). Circular
economy in the construction industry: A systematic literature review.
Journal of
Cleaner Production, 260. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121046
Berg, J. B., Thuesen, C., Ernstsen, S. K., & Jensen, P. A. (2021). Reconfiguring the con-
struction value chain: analysing key sources of friction in the business model archetypes
of aec companies in strategic partnerships. Construction Management and Economics,
39, 533-548. doi: 10.1080/01446193.2021.1925134
CIH, C. I. H., Research, U., & UKRI, I. (2022). The product platform rulebook.
EC, E. C. (2019). Eu construction sector: in transition towards a circular economy european
construction sector observatory trend paper series.
Retrieved from http://appsso
.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?lang=en&dataset=env_wasgen
EC, E. C. (2020). A new circular economy action plan. Retrieved from https://www.un
.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-consumption-production/
EC, E. C.
(2022).
Waste prevention and management.
Retrieved from https://
ec.europa.eu/environment/green-growth/waste-prevention-and-management/
index_en.htm
EP, E. P. (2008). B directive 2008/98/ec of the european parliament and of the council of
19 november 2008 on waste and repealing certain directives.
EP,
E.
P.
(2022).
Circular
economy:
definition,
importance
and
benefits.
Retrieved from https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/economy/
20151201STO05603/circular-economy-definition-importance-and-benefits.
Gottlieb, S., Christoffer, ., & Haugbølle, K. (2010). The repetition effect in building and
construction works a literature review.
Hannah Ritchie, M. R., & Rosado, P. (2020). Co and greenhouse gas emissions. Our World
in Data. (https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-other-greenhouse-gas-emissions)
Hvam, L. (2014). Complexity reduction based on the quantification of complexity costs.
Page 81
==PAGE:89==
References
IRP, I. R. P., & OPN, O. P. N. (2021). Catalysing science-based policy action on scp analysis
of the construction value chain.
Koch, C., & Thuesen, C. (2013). Knowledge sharing in construction partnering projects -
redundancy, boundary objects and brokers. International Journal of Project Organi-
sation and Management, 5, 156-175. doi: 10.1504/IJPOM.2013.053150
Koskela, L. (1992). Application of the new production philosophy to construction.
McKinsey. (2016). The circular economy: Moving from theory to practice mckinsey center
for business and environment special edition.
Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2010). Business model generation: a handbook for vision-
aries, game changers, and challengers (Vol. 1). John Wiley & Sons.
Plutora. (2022). What is value stream mapping (vsm), benefits, process and value. Retrieved
from https://www.plutora.com/blog/value-stream-mapping
Porter, M. E. (1979). How competitive forces shape strategy.
Robertson, D., & Ulrich, K. (1998). Planning for product platforms (Vol. 39). Retrieved
from
https://repository.upenn.edu/oid_papers31.Retrievedfromhttps://
repository.upenn.edu/oid_papers/266
Sheffer, D. A., & Levitt, R. E. (2010). How industry structure retards diffusion of innovations
in construction: Challenges and opportunities..
Stigler, G. J. (1951). The division of labor is limited by the extent of the market (Vol. 59).
Thuesen, C., Lindtofte, C. S., Führer, S., Barfoed, A. O., Rohdin, T. B., & Raja, J. (2022).
Circular construction platforms - a systematic literature review.
UN, U. N. (2018). World urbanization prospects the 2018 revision.
UNEP, U. N. E. P. (2021). 2021 global status report for buildings and construction towards
a zero-emissions, efficient and resilient buildings and construction sector. Retrieved
from www.globalabc.org.
Page 82
==PAGE:90==
Appendix
Appendix A:
83
==PAGE:91==
Circular 
construction?
Processes
(value-​chain 
/ supply- 
chain)
Value 
propositions
(projects / 
products / 
services
Organization 
and 
partnerships
Markets
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Why?
Whom?
What?
How?
Who?
Data 
requirements
As-​is?
To-​
be?
Roadmap?
Different 
models for 
different 
companies?
market 
segments
market 
drivers
Position
Strategy
Value 
propositions 
as-​is
Value 
propositions 
to-​be
1. Overall framework: time 
horizons
2. Positions - strategy: 
connect all workshop 
inputs back to that
3. In beginning of each 
workshop: get an overview 
of the last sessions 
mapping of all companies
The linear 
construction 
industry
Circular 
construction 
industry
The 
transformational 
phase
Circular 
construction?
Processes
(value-​chain 
/ supply- 
chain)
Value 
propositions
(projects / 
products / 
services
Organization 
and 
partnerships
Markets
Materials
84
==PAGE:92==
How are you dependent on others in the industry in the chain?
Who are the other important players in the circular construction chain?
Strategy for circular solutions:
What are your (current) goals for circular solutions? Does a plan back it up?
What are your current challenges in delivering circular solutions?
What are your envisioned solutions?
Expectations to CircOp:
What would you like to know from the other CircOp members?
H1: Platforms enable variance of circular solutions and secondary materials.
H2: Platforms enable the development of circular solutions that are relevant through time.
H3: Platforms enable productivity development of circular solutions.
H4: Platforms enable organizational specialization towards complex circular solutions.
H5: Platforms enable detailed documentation of circular practices and solutions.
Circular chain 
operator, maturing 
the market. Creating 
reverse value chains 
on the supply side.
We begin with the demand 
side. We need to create a 
demand for products made 
with upcycled materials. 
Need to make it attractive 
for the customer to choose 
upcycled materials.
How do we make 
sure that 80-90% of 
the wood that 'we' 
source is recycled 
(In different qualities 
and catagories)
Collaborating with 
strategic design. 
Two groups looking 
into 'sheds as a 
service'. As well as 
value creation on 
site.
The designer need 
to determine / 
invent new products 
/ ways to use lower 
quality materials etc.
We also want to focus on 
what we call the 'life 
around the shed'.. The 
functionality for the shed is 
increassed demand on how 
we sort garbage. That 
means that the social 
housing corporations need 
to frame the containers.
'How do we make a 
circular business 
despite all the 
obstacles'. Referring 
to demlotion 
happening 'fat and 
furious'
Have found that the 
pricing of demolition 
can vary by a factor 
of 8. Depending on 
the context of the 
demolition, not the 
material.
Sheds lead to 
better sorting 
of garbage.
Also 
investigating 
other market 
applications
Working intensely with 
the reversed value 
chain. Looking 
upstream and 
understanding 
demolition companies 
perspective.
How could Næste 
incorporate some 
communication 
on how to behave 
in terms of waste 
management.
Highlights that 
construction 
sistes produces a 
lot of waste (more 
than 50% in DK)
We are right now at 
the bottom, of first 
graph to the right. 
90% of our materials 
is leaving the circle 
stream.
Everybody listens 
when you talk 
about carbon. 
Carbon is the 
important driver.
We are dependent. Our 
customers our primary 
customers are the 
customers that produce 
waste. Public waste 
collecctions, demolition 
companies, construction 
companies..
Comment (Næste): 
This may be a 
platform, but it's 
very much an 
industrial platform. 
It is not tech, it is 
dirt and nails etc.
The business with Næste is 
interesting because they 
are in another position. As 
a supplier of materials 
forNæste. That is how they 
veiw themselves in the 
future, as a supplier.
Also looking 
into the thing 
of embodied 
carbon.
What is the 
improvement of 
recycling instead 
of recover. 
(Academic might 
be able to help)
We have to ask that 
companies that 
deliver materials to 
us, are of a certain 
quality. Or we can 
upgrade it to the 
standard needed.
We focus on materials we 
have in huge volumes. 
Focus on huge waste 
streams, concrete, 
masonry, asphalt and 
wood. These are more than 
90% of the materials they 
have in  their stream.
We are looking for 
cooperation for 
how to recycle the 
materials inxstead 
of recover.
To achieve the 
recycling of materials is 
a hard thing. What Kåre 
manages to do, is very 
hard for them and may 
be able to work 
together to overcome.
Processes are 
key. As is 
working with 
manufacturers.
Focus on carbon. 
For publicly listed 
developers there 
are targets they 
need to live up to.
'Stage 4' is where 
everything gets 
messy, because 
everyone has to 
work together.
Upcycling with 
a focus on 
making things 
'pop' for 
awareness.
Arguing for the 
right to come with 
'our material 
palette' and 
design using that.
British land has 
specific targets for 
waste 
management and 
sustainability. 
2030 brief.
GXN creates 
the alternative 
solutions to 
the baseline
If we are creating 
a product that can 
slot in, how do we 
match that with 
architechts
Usually there is a 
building on the side. 
Question is: How 
much can we take 
from the building 
and use in the new 
one.
Primarily 
working with 
'finishes' 
(Uncertain?)
Like for like = 
Taking a thing 
and swapping it 
out for 
something else
The one thing we 
cannot do is add 
time to the 
construction 
program. 
(Statement)
We lack 
scaling
Demolition wants 
to demolish and 
leave it at the 
curb-​side. It is 
needed to take it 
and move it.
How do we 
capture the 
carbon 
savings.
Formalization of the 
process that we are 
using on our 
commercial processes. 
Understanding it better 
and formulating tools.
Developing 
formalized 
workflow
We need to be 
very up close with 
the architechts (If 
we are gone for 2 
weeks they freak 
out.)
3xn works with 
an executive 
architechts who 
takes care of all 
of the detailing.
"Who pays" The 
story of someone 
using up-​cycled 
materials from 
the old building is 
a good 'story'.
Question: 
Where is the 
platform? 
Looks very 
project based.
The platform is going to be 
localized in london through 
our relationships with the 
companies we work with 
during these projects. It's 
about develioping the 
relationships, and 
developing the tools that 
allows us to plug them in.
Less about a 
specific 
material, more 
about the 
processes.
There will always be a need 
for the audit, there will 
always be a need for 
concept development 
(statement) That is 
applicable across other 
countries.
Comment: You're coupling 
things with existing 
buildings, but could do the 
same with existing waste 
streams. If you saw what 
we had of waste streams, 
you could do a lot.
If we can find out the 
drivers, that is an 
interesting one. But it's all 
about making sure that 
those taking the decision, 
can take the decision. So 
thinking out what their 
incentive is, is important.
You can't look at 
engineering purely 
from an engineering 
perspective, you have 
to consider the value of 
the story, and the value 
creation.
There's a product 
based approach 
and a project 
based approach. 
Both could work.
The platform can also just 
be based on the 
collaborators tat you have, 
and the processes you go 
through. Doesn't have to 
be product based ( 
Christian)
Næste: We 
are trying 
to make 
you sexy
'This is not 
sexy. This is 
not a sexy 
business'.
RGSNordic is not 
made to be a 
supplier, so there is 
a transition to make 
in order to become 
a supplier.
Christian remarks 
on customers on 
both ends of the 
value stream. 
Interesting 
business model.
Issue of 
standardization 
and quality 
control.
"We can only receive what the 
customer brings in.". We need to 
understand better whatare the 
materials we can expect to come 
from cities in the future. What 
are the materials from 
demotions and constructions 
sites in the future.
We know the amounts, and 
how we categorize the 
amounts, We don't know 
the overall quality We 
cannot 100% say we will 
have enough of X' kind of 
material.
When you look at 
the long run, there 
might be production 
as well. But the first 
step is supplying 
and figuring out the 
amounts.
Comment: It sounds 
like you need the 
resource audit so 
yoou can identify 
the resource catalog 
and the 
opportunities.
Securing the correct 
quality at present 
sometimes requires 
going further up the 
value chain.
Sophie highlights 
another project: Roche. 
Primary focus is sell all 
of the parts first to 
others, instead of using 
them for their own 
buildings.
Comment næste: 
You're going to be 
some sort of filter, 
determining 
quality.
To be in this business 
we have to improve as 
well. ('We only get 
materials if they have 
no better option but to 
deliver them to us')
Sourcing 
components for 'the 
broader market' is 
difficult because 
there is no certainty 
of what quality 
material is needed
We have to deal 
with 'the sins of the 
past' and many 
vastly different 
types of materials 
with different issues.
Wants to work 
closer together with 
demolition group in 
order to help de-​
couple the 'intended 
use' from the raw 
material.
Floorboards 
doesn't have 
to become 
floorboards 
again.
Demolition is super important. 
(Claes). It's difficult to set up a 
supply chain when you do not 
know what your materials will 
cost. There is education needed 
in order to hcange the 
demolitioners approach from 
'demolitioners' to 'separators'
Wood is particularly 
difficult because the 
visual aspect of the 
material influences 
whether it's useable
Quality is 
subjective 
for the 
application
A lot of issues can 
be solved with very 
simple tools. 
Imagines that this 
could help build the 
platform (GXN)
Christian: 
Central part of 
circop will be 
designing these 
interaces.
Imagines we will 
find much more 
diverse methods of 
displayin what 
secondary materials 
is available.
We should try to 
endeavour to find 
methodologies for what we 
do. It's important we keep 
it open for very long on 
how we handle things. 
Certainly need to prototype 
with the market.
Plus
Delta
guided 
(company) 
tour
The tour on 
DTU
The 
willingness to 
discuss and 
dive into detail
Miro and 
zoom as a 
system workd 
well for 
sharing
more structured 
and guided 
workshop (e.g. 
2-3 specific 
parts)
More structured 
approach 
ensuring 
answers to the 
questions
Preparation 
by 
companies
Company 
preperation and 
more detailed 
description of 
each company
Integration of 
outcomes in 
3 horizon 
model
Clearer 
guidelines for 
format of 
expected work
something to 
work with ( 
model(s) to 
populate)
Facilitate 
more 'cross-​
pollination'
Encourage actual 
deliverables, or 
another form of 
concrete data 
collection
Have clearer 
guidelines for what 
is expected to be 
presented, then 
allow for facilitated 
open discussion
IT systems could 
have been 
better prepared, 
i.e Teams, miro, 
filesharing
Good energy 
from the 
participants
Inclusion of an 
individual element 
(like a 10 minute 
brainstorm), to 
break up the 
collective think
Participants 
seemed well 
prepared
Participants 
seemed open 
to theory and 
frameworks
Missing one 
company?
Preparation 
by 
companies
Prepared 
format for site 
visit? What is 
the purpose?
85
==PAGE:93==
H1: Platforms enable variance of circular solutions and secondary materials.
H2: Platforms enable the development of circular solutions that are relevant through time.
H3: Platforms enable productivity development of circular solutions.
H4: Platforms enable organizational specialization towards complex circular solutions.
H5: Platforms enable detailed documentation of circular practices and solutions.
86
==PAGE:94==
Position in the circular construction chain:
What is your current position in the circular construction chain?
How are you dependent on others in the industry in the chain?
Who are the other important players in the circular construction chain?
Strategy for circular solutions:
What are your (current) goals for circular solutions? Does a plan back it up?
What are your current challenges in delivering circular solutions?
What are your envisioned solutions?
Expectations to CircOp:
What would you like to know from the other CircOp members?
Circular chain 
operator, maturing 
the market. Creating 
reverse value chains 
on the supply side.
We begin with the demand 
side. We need to create a 
demand for products made 
with upcycled materials. 
Need to make it attractive 
for the customer to choose 
upcycled materials.
How do we make 
sure that 80-90% of 
the wood that 'we' 
source is recycled 
(In different qualities 
and catagories)
Collaborating with 
strategic design. 
Two groups looking 
into 'sheds as a 
service'. As well as 
value creation on 
site.
The designer need 
to determine / 
invent new products 
/ ways to use lower 
quality materials etc.
We also want to focus on 
what we call the 'life 
around the shed'.. The 
functionality for the shed is 
increassed demand on how 
we sort garbage. That 
means that the social 
housing corporations need 
to frame the containers.
'How do we make a 
circular business 
despite all the 
obstacles'. Referring 
to demlotion 
happening 'fat and 
furious'
Have found that the 
pricing of demolition 
can vary by a factor 
of 8. Depending on 
the context of the 
demolition, not the 
material.
Sheds lead to 
better sorting 
of garbage.
Also 
investigating 
other market 
applications
Working intensely with 
the reversed value 
chain. Looking 
upstream and 
understanding 
demolition companies 
perspective.
How could Næste 
incorporate some 
communication 
on how to behave 
in terms of waste 
management.
Highlights that 
construction 
sistes produces a 
lot of waste (more 
than 50% in DK)
We are right now at 
the bottom, of first 
graph to the right. 
90% of our materials 
is leaving the circle 
stream.
Everybody listens 
when you talk 
about carbon. 
Carbon is the 
important driver.
We are dependent. Our 
customers our primary 
customers are the 
customers that produce 
waste. Public waste 
collecctions, demolition 
companies, construction 
companies..
Comment (Næste): 
This may be a 
platform, but it's 
very much an 
industrial platform. 
It is not tech, it is 
dirt and nails etc.
The business with Næste is 
interesting because they 
are in another position. As 
a supplier of materials 
forNæste. That is how they 
veiw themselves in the 
future, as a supplier.
Also looking 
into the thing 
of embodied 
carbon.
What is the 
improvement of 
recycling instead 
of recover. 
(Academic might 
be able to help)
We have to ask that 
companies that 
deliver materials to 
us, are of a certain 
quality. Or we can 
upgrade it to the 
standard needed.
We focus on materials we 
have in huge volumes. 
Focus on huge waste 
streams, concrete, 
masonry, asphalt and 
wood. These are more than 
90% of the materials they 
have in  their stream.
We are looking for 
cooperation for 
how to recycle the 
materials inxstead 
of recover.
To achieve the 
recycling of materials is 
a hard thing. What Kåre 
manages to do, is very 
hard for them and may 
be able to work 
together to overcome.
Processes are 
key. As is 
working with 
manufacturers.
Focus on carbon. 
For publicly listed 
developers there 
are targets they 
need to live up to.
'Stage 4' is where 
everything gets 
messy, because 
everyone has to 
work together.
Upcycling with 
a focus on 
making things 
'pop' for 
awareness.
Arguing for the 
right to come with 
'our material 
palette' and 
design using that.
British land has 
specific targets for 
waste 
management and 
sustainability. 
2030 brief.
GXN creates 
the alternative 
solutions to 
the baseline
If we are creating 
a product that can 
slot in, how do we 
match that with 
architechts
Usually there is a 
building on the side. 
Question is: How 
much can we take 
from the building 
and use in the new 
one.
Primarily 
working with 
'finishes' 
(Uncertain?)
Like for like = 
Taking a thing 
and swapping it 
out for 
something else
The one thing we 
cannot do is add 
time to the 
construction 
program. 
(Statement)
Demolition wants 
to demolish and 
leave it at the 
curb-​side. It is 
needed to take it 
and move it.
How do we 
capture the 
carbon 
savings.
Formalization of the 
process that we are 
using on our 
commercial processes. 
Understanding it better 
and formulating tools.
Developing 
formalized 
workflow
We need to be 
very up close with 
the architechts (If 
we are gone for 2 
weeks they freak 
out.)
3xn works with 
an executive 
architechts who 
takes care of all 
of the detailing.
"Who pays" The 
story of someone 
using up-​cycled 
materials from 
the old building is 
a good 'story'.
Question: 
Where is the 
platform? 
Looks very 
project based.
The platform is going to be 
localized in london through 
our relationships with the 
companies we work with 
during these projects. It's 
about develioping the 
relationships, and 
developing the tools that 
allows us to plug them in.
Less about a 
specific 
material, more 
about the 
processes.
There will always be a need 
for the audit, there will 
always be a need for 
concept development 
(statement) That is 
applicable across other 
countries.
Comment: You're coupling 
things with existing 
buildings, but could do the 
same with existing waste 
streams. If you saw what 
we had of waste streams, 
you could do a lot.
If we can find out the 
drivers, that is an 
interesting one. But it's all 
about making sure that 
those taking the decision, 
can take the decision. So 
thinking out what their 
incentive is, is important.
You can't look at 
engineering purely 
from an engineering 
perspective, you have 
to consider the value of 
the story, and the value 
creation.
There's a product 
based approach 
and a project 
based approach. 
Both could work.
The platform can also just 
be based on the 
collaborators tat you have, 
and the processes you go 
through. Doesn't have to 
be product based ( 
Christian)
Næste: We 
are trying 
to make 
you sexy
'This is not 
sexy. This is 
not a sexy 
business'.
RGSNordic is not 
made to be a 
supplier, so there is 
a transition to make 
in order to become 
a supplier.
Christian remarks 
on customers on 
both ends of the 
value stream. 
Interesting 
business model.
Issue of 
standardization 
and quality 
control.
"We can only receive what the 
customer brings in.". We need to 
understand better whatare the 
materials we can expect to come 
from cities in the future. What 
are the materials from 
demotions and constructions 
sites in the future.
We know the amounts, and 
how we categorize the 
amounts, We don't know 
the overall quality We 
cannot 100% say we will 
have enough of X' kind of 
material.
When you look at 
the long run, there 
might be production 
as well. But the first 
step is supplying 
and figuring out the 
amounts.
Comment: It sounds 
like you need the 
resource audit so 
yoou can identify 
the resource catalog 
and the 
opportunities.
Securing the correct 
quality at present 
sometimes requires 
going further up the 
value chain.
Sophie highlights 
another project: Roche. 
Primary focus is sell all 
of the parts first to 
others, instead of using 
them for their own 
buildings.
Comment næste: 
You're going to be 
some sort of filter, 
determining 
quality.
To be in this business 
we have to improve as 
well. ('We only get 
materials if they have 
no better option but to 
deliver them to us')
Sourcing 
components for 'the 
broader market' is 
difficult because 
there is no certainty 
of what quality 
material is needed
We have to deal 
with 'the sins of the 
past' and many 
vastly different 
types of materials 
with different issues.
Wants to work 
closer together with 
demolition group in 
order to help de-​
couple the 'intended 
use' from the raw 
material.
Floorboards 
doesn't have 
to become 
floorboards 
again.
Demolition is super important. 
(Claes). It's difficult to set up a 
supply chain when you do not 
know what your materials will 
cost. There is education needed 
in order to hcange the 
demolitioners approach from 
'demolitioners' to 'separators'
Wood is particularly 
difficult because the 
visual aspect of the 
material influences 
whether it's useable
Quality is 
subjective 
for the 
application
A lot of issues can 
be solved with very 
simple tools. 
Imagines that this 
could help build the 
platform (GXN)
Christian: 
Central part of 
circop will be 
designing these 
interaces.
Imagines we will 
find much more 
diverse methods of 
displayin what 
secondary materials 
is available.
We should try to 
endeavour to find 
methodologies for what we 
do. It's important we keep 
it open for very long on 
how we handle things. 
Certainly need to prototype 
with the market.
87
==PAGE:95==
Plus
Delta
guided 
(company) 
tour
The tour on 
DTU
The 
willingness to 
discuss and 
dive into detail
Miro and 
zoom as a 
system workd 
well for 
sharing
more structured 
and guided 
workshop (e.g. 
2-3 specific 
parts)
More structured 
approach 
ensuring 
answers to the 
questions
Preparation 
by 
companies
Company 
preperation and 
more detailed 
description of 
each company
Integration of 
outcomes in 
3 horizon 
model
Clearer 
guidelines for 
format of 
expected work
something to 
work with ( 
model(s) to 
populate)
Facilitate 
more 'cross-​
pollination'
Encourage actual 
deliverables, or 
another form of 
concrete data 
collection
Have clearer 
guidelines for what 
is expected to be 
presented, then 
allow for facilitated 
open discussion
IT systems could 
have been 
better prepared, 
i.e Teams, miro, 
filesharing
Good energy 
from the 
participants
Inclusion of an 
individual element 
(like a 10 minute 
brainstorm), to 
break up the 
collective think
Participants 
seemed well 
prepared
Participants 
seemed open 
to theory and 
frameworks
Missing one 
company?
Preparation 
by 
companies
Prepared 
format for site 
visit? What is 
the purpose?
88
==PAGE:96==
In what markets do your company operate?
How much of your turnover/profit is generated by the traditional/circular markets?
Amounts
Percentage share
Margins
What potentials does the CE market possess?
Economical
Environmental
Social
How will your company manage to win the CE market/market share?
What trends shape the market?
What are the risks?
Agenda
News round the table
Collaboration agreement
Site visit
Market analysis and presentation
+ & delta
next meetings
Plus
Delta
Collaboration 
with another 
project 
together 
Home.earth
Coordination 
with bloxhub
Major 
reorganization 
at DTU
89
==PAGE:97==
Agenda
News round the table
Collaboration agreement
Site visit
Market analysis and presentation
+ & delta
next meetings
Collaboration 
with another 
project 
together 
Home.earth
Coordination 
with bloxhub
Major 
reorganization 
at DTU
90
==PAGE:98==
In what markets do your company operate?
How much of your turnover/profit is generated by the traditional/circular markets?
Amounts
Percentage share
Margins
What potentials does the CE market possess?
Economical
Environmental
Social
How will your company manage to win the CE market/market share?
What trends shape the market?
What are the risks?
91
==PAGE:99==
Plus
Delta
Is there a 
reason that 
we are doing 
it in english?
Agenda
Frederik
Frederik
Christian
Introduction to the theme. Why are we doing this?
Who are your most important customers?
What value are you providing them?
9:05
9:40
Claes
RGS Nordic: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
ABC Analysis
9:10
9:00
Christian
Welcome
10:40
Christian
WrapUp:
+ & delta
Next meeting
Claes
Næste: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
10:00
E&P: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
10:20
GxN: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
Data :
Present existing top 3 products/services (revenue)
Present circular economy top 3 products/services (revenue)
Present the top 3 customers for each product
Questions to define:
The Customer segments
Customer Jobs: What is the customer’s purpose and job (in the value chain)?
Gains: What are the outcomes or benefits the customer tries to achieve?
Pains: What are the obstacles, risks or disbenefit related to the customer jobs?
The value proposition for each product
Products and services: What are the main elements of the value proposition?
Gains creators: How does your products/service create gains or benefits for your 
customer?
Pain relievers: How does your products/service alleviate customer pains?
The Cost structure (nice to have)
What resources are utilized? What is the cost?
What components are applied? What is the cost?
What other cost drivers does your product consist of?
92
==PAGE:100==
Plus
Delta
Is there a 
reason that 
we are doing 
it in english?
Agenda
Frederik
Frederik
Christian
Introduction to the theme. Why are we doing this?
Who are your most important customers?
What value are you providing them?
9:05
9:40
Claes
RGS Nordic: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
ABC Analysis
9:10
9:00
Christian
Welcome
10:40
Christian
WrapUp:
+ & delta
Next meeting
Claes
Næste: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
10:00
E&P: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
10:20
GxN: Presentation and discussion
Value proposition
93
==PAGE:101==
Data :
Present existing top 3 products/services (revenue)
Present circular economy top 3 products/services (revenue)
Present the top 3 customers for each product
Questions to define:
The Customer segments
Customer Jobs: What is the customer’s purpose and job (in the value chain)?
Gains: What are the outcomes or benefits the customer tries to achieve?
Pains: What are the obstacles, risks or disbenefit related to the customer jobs?
The value proposition for each product
Products and services: What are the main elements of the value proposition?
Gains creators: How does your products/service create gains or benefits for your 
customer?
Pain relievers: How does your products/service alleviate customer pains?
The Cost structure (nice to have)
What resources are utilized? What is the cost?
What components are applied? What is the cost?
What other cost drivers does your product consist of?
94
==PAGE:102==
95
==PAGE:103==
96
==PAGE:104==
97
==PAGE:105==
98
==PAGE:106==
Plus
Delta
Agenda
10:55
Christian
Practicalities
Collaboration agreement / funding plan
Press strategy
10:40
Frederik
Frederik
Christian
Introduction to the theme. How are you realizing the 
value propositions ?
What are the core activities?
Who much are repeated?
9:05
9:40
Claes
RGS Nordic: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
9:10
9:00
Christian
Welcome
Time
Christian
WrapUp:
+ & delta
Next meeting
Topic
Presenter
Claes
Næste: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
10:00
E&P: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
10:20
GxN: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
Dear CircOp partners,
Based on the value propositions identified and analyzed for that last workshop, the 
upcoming workshop will focus the value creation process. We want to analyze your 
processes by conducting a value stream map (VSM) for one or two of your value 
propositions.
If you don’t know what VSM is you can check out the following website and videos:
-https://www.plutora.com/blog/value-​stream-​mapping (website with nice 7:43 introduction 
video)
-https://www.youtube.com/watch?​v=gg5u9kn0Bzo (extended video 13:24)
Claes, Gaute, Frederik, will reach out to you to collect data covering your value stream for 
one or two selected value propositions. Depending on the complexity of your product you 
might need to make the scope a bit smaller. At best it would include a workshop where you 
collectively can sketch the activities of the process e.g. by using MIRO.
During the workshop they will help you identify current core activities realizing the value 
proposition. This includes questions like:
What are direct and indirectly value creating activities?
For each activity you should define:
What materials are consumed by the activities?
What are the people/competences needed?
What equipment (software) is required?
What information is required?
What is the duration of the activity and inventory?
How much of the activities are repeated? where?
How will circular economy transform your value stream. New activities, resources, 
equipment etc. ?
We hope you will have time to talk to the next week. Then we can prepare the analysis 
before the workshop Tuesday, May 23rd at E&P.
The workshop will also feature a tour and introduction to E&P production processes
Have an awesome weekend 😊
1.
2.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
3.
4.
Se fabrikken i et 
lean perspektiv
Gennemgang 
emd deres 
produktions chef
Wood
Concrete

vaerdibyg.dk
Gense webinar: Der er
produktivitetsgevinster
at hente inden for
renovering - Værdibyg
Byggeriet bliver mere og mere
komplekst, og områder som
bæredygtighed, digitalisering, nye
samarbejdsformer og produktivitet
fylder mere og mere. Værdibyg ønsker
derfor i en møderække at invitere en
række forskere inden for, for at give
byggeriets prakt…
Todo
Invite for at 
meeting for a 
new realdania 
application
optimizing / 
transforming 
the 
demolishing 
process
Evaluation of 
last half years 
process 
(meetings)
Explore the 
possibilities 
regarding 
CO2 ladder
99
==PAGE:107==
Plus
Delta
Agenda
10:55
Christian
Practicalities
Collaboration agreement / funding plan
Press strategy
10:40
Frederik
Frederik
Christian
Introduction to the theme. How are you realizing the 
value propositions ?
What are the core activities?
Who much are repeated?
9:05
9:40
Claes
RGS Nordic: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
9:10
9:00
Christian
Welcome
Time
Christian
WrapUp:
+ & delta
Next meeting
Topic
Presenter
Claes
Næste: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
10:00
E&P: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
10:20
GxN: Presentation and discussion
Value stream mapping
Se fabrikken i et 
lean perspektiv
Gennemgang 
emd deres 
produktions chef

vaerdibyg.dk
Gense webinar: Der er
produktivitetsgevinster
at hente inden for
renovering - Værdibyg
Byggeriet bliver mere og mere
komplekst, og områder som
bæredygtighed, digitalisering, nye
samarbejdsformer og produktivitet
fylder mere og mere. Værdibyg ønsker
derfor i en møderække at invitere en
række forskere inden for, for at give
byggeriets prakt…
Todo
Invite for at 
meeting for a 
new realdania 
application
optimizing / 
transforming 
the 
demolishing 
process
Evaluation of 
last half years 
process 
(meetings)
Explore the 
possibilities 
regarding 
CO2 ladder
100
==PAGE:108==
Dear CircOp partners,
Based on the value propositions identified and analyzed for that last workshop, the 
upcoming workshop will focus the value creation process. We want to analyze your 
processes by conducting a value stream map (VSM) for one or two of your value 
propositions.
If you don’t know what VSM is you can check out the following website and videos:
-https://www.plutora.com/blog/value-​stream-​mapping (website with nice 7:43 introduction 
video)
-https://www.youtube.com/watch?​v=gg5u9kn0Bzo (extended video 13:24)
Claes, Gaute, Frederik, will reach out to you to collect data covering your value stream for 
one or two selected value propositions. Depending on the complexity of your product you 
might need to make the scope a bit smaller. At best it would include a workshop where you 
collectively can sketch the activities of the process e.g. by using MIRO.
During the workshop they will help you identify current core activities realizing the value 
proposition. This includes questions like:
What are direct and indirectly value creating activities?
For each activity you should define:
What materials are consumed by the activities?
What are the people/competences needed?
What equipment (software) is required?
What information is required?
What is the duration of the activity and inventory?
How much of the activities are repeated? where?
How will circular economy transform your value stream. New activities, resources, 
equipment etc. ?
We hope you will have time to talk to the next week. Then we can prepare the analysis 
before the workshop Tuesday, May 23rd at E&P.
The workshop will also feature a tour and introduction to E&P production processes
Have an awesome weekend 😊
1.
2.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
3.
4.
101
==PAGE:109==
Wood
Concrete
102
==PAGE:110==
103
==PAGE:111==
104
==PAGE:112==
105
==PAGE:113==
Plus
Delta
Agenda
10:55
Christian
Practicalities
Collaboration agreement / funding plan
Press strategy
10:40
Frederik
Frederik
Christian
Introduction to the theme. What are the most important 
knowledge and relations?
9:05
9:40
Claes
RGS Nordic: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
9:10
9:00
Christian
Welcome
Time
Christian
WrapUp:
+ & delta
Next meeting
Topic
Presenter
Claes
Næste: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
10:00
E&P: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
10:20
GxN: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
Dear CircOp partners,
In the next and final workshop before the summer, we will explore the organization of 
knowledge and relations of your platform for the design and delivery of circular solutions.
The questions we would like you to answer are:
What are the central people driving the circular solutions? How are they organized 
throughout the organization?
What knowledge is needed, and when?
What knowledge is insourced / outsourced?
What are the missing knowledge areas?
What are the interfaces between CircOp partners in the circular construction process?
What (information) systems support the platform (including standard operating 
procedures)
ERP, SCM, HR, CRM,       QMS, BIM, Management systems...
Link the information and knowledge to the VSM analysis from the last workshop.
Claes, Gaute & Frederik will reach out to you to collect the relevant data so we can prepare 
an initial analysis before the workshop.
Since my daughter has her final (student) exam just after the workshop, I will have to leave 
a little earlier. Thus, I also hope it is OK to meet at DTU. I am also working on getting a 
presentation from Professor Lisbeth Ottosen, who chairs the “Business reuse” project 
funded by Innovationsfonden and Realdania. I will update the invitation with an updated 
program and details on the specific location at the beginning of next week.
All the best
Christian
Todo
Invite for at 
meeting for a 
new realdania 
application
optimizing / 
transforming 
the 
demolishing 
process
Evaluation of 
last half years 
process 
(meetings)
Explore the 
possibilities 
regarding 
CO2 ladder
106
==PAGE:114==
Plus
Delta
Agenda
10:55
Christian
Practicalities
Collaboration agreement / funding plan
Press strategy
10:40
Frederik
Frederik
Christian
Introduction to the theme. What are the most important 
knowledge and relations?
9:05
9:40
Claes
RGS Nordic: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
9:10
9:00
Christian
Welcome
Time
Christian
WrapUp:
+ & delta
Next meeting
Topic
Presenter
Claes
Næste: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
10:00
E&P: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
10:20
GxN: Presentation and discussion
Knowledge and relations
Todo
Invite for at 
meeting for a 
new realdania 
application
optimizing / 
transforming 
the 
demolishing 
process
Evaluation of 
last half years 
process 
(meetings)
Explore the 
possibilities 
regarding 
CO2 ladder
107
==PAGE:115==
Dear CircOp partners,
In the next and final workshop before the summer, we will explore the organization of 
knowledge and relations of your platform for the design and delivery of circular solutions.
The questions we would like you to answer are:
What are the central people driving the circular solutions? How are they organized 
throughout the organization?
What knowledge is needed, and when?
What knowledge is insourced / outsourced?
What are the missing knowledge areas?
What are the interfaces between CircOp partners in the circular construction process?
What (information) systems support the platform (including standard operating 
procedures)
ERP, SCM, HR, CRM,       QMS, BIM, Management systems...
Link the information and knowledge to the VSM analysis from the last workshop.
Claes, Gaute & Frederik will reach out to you to collect the relevant data so we can prepare 
an initial analysis before the workshop.
Since my daughter has her final (student) exam just after the workshop, I will have to leave 
a little earlier. Thus, I also hope it is OK to meet at DTU. I am also working on getting a 
presentation from Professor Lisbeth Ottosen, who chairs the “Business reuse” project 
funded by Innovationsfonden and Realdania. I will update the invitation with an updated 
program and details on the specific location at the beginning of next week.
All the best
Christian
108
==PAGE:116==
109
==PAGE:117==
110
==PAGE:118==
111
==PAGE:119==
112
