==PAGE:1==
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase sep­
aration for non­invasive real­time fermenta­
tion monitoring devices
Master Thesis
Department of Electrical & Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fer­
mentation monitoring devices
Master Thesis
1 September, 2022
By
Karol Maciej Kubala
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical & Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads,
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.elektro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was written at the Department of Electrical & Photonics Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark, and Zymoscope ApS, in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. in Autonomous Systems.
Karol Maciej Kubala ­ s202440
Signature
Date
ii
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The fermentation process is used in many industries ­ primarily in the food industry, man­
ufacturing products useful for humans. This makes it a valuable process for constant
monitoring and optimization. One of the important challenges faced by industrial monitor­
ing of this process is the occurrence of condensation on the surface of sensors gathering
the data in real­time. This Master Thesis presents three different approaches to solv­
ing that problem ­ Cyclone Separator, 2­point Flushing System and Automated Spunding
Valve developed in cooperation with Zymoscope Aps. The solutions were tested either
theoretically or practically validating their usability. Finally, the best solution based on the
validated performance is proposed.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Prof. Xinxin Zhang and
Mads Andersen, for advice, support and for joint work which results in the following thesis.
Prof. Xinxin Zhang, your detailed feedback, valuable advice and insights lead to the writ­
ing of this project. I am extremely thankful for your contribution to make this work.
I also could not have undertaken this journey without Mads. Thank you for being a true
mentor ­ your patience, guidance and support have taught me a lot for the future. Your
meticulous editing, range of ideas and work ethics were truly inspiring.
Additionally, I would like to thank Zymoscope ApS for the opportunity to work together
during these 6 months, for guidance and allowing me to test and solve the real­life prob­
lem.
And finally, thanks to my parents, who always offered understanding, support and valuable
engineering advice throughout the entire project.
iv
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background & Theory
6
2.1
Industrial fermentation process in brewing industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Condensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Gas­Liquid flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Control systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.5
Traditional condensation solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Condensation removal solutions
23
3.1
The assumptions & requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Cyclone Separator ­ Centrifugal separation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
2­point Flushing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.4
Automated Spunding Valve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4
Industrial experiments & Results
45
4.1
Cyclone Separator ­ efficiency simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.2
2­point Flushing System ­ Condensation experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.3
System analysis based on process reaction tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.4
Automated Spunding Valve ­ Condensation experiments . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5
Conclusions
60
Bibliography
61
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A 2­point filter
64
B PI algorithm
68
B.1 pi_valve.h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
B.2 pi_valve.c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Overview
Beer brewing has accompanied mankind since the dawn of time. Many stages of the
brewing process must be supervised and measured constantly for the beer to be of good
quality. The basic division of the measurement type used in the industry is invasive and
non­invasive. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages that directly affect
the quality of the supervised process. Companies with a vision of changing the way the
food and beverage industry sees and utilizes fermentation process as the most interesting
factor in the brewing process. Their vision is based on non­invasive devices that keep an
eye on fermentation as a combination of modern sensor technology and smart algorithms.
The IoT technology usage is getting more and more common and in this case, it is used
to collect and use data to monitor the fermentation process in real time. This approach
enables less wasteful production processes. Usually devices are attached to fermentation
tank’s pipeline ­ however, the system may be burdened with errors resulting from exposing
it to unwanted phenomena occurring in the system. The main goal of companies using
the above approach to data acquisition is to remove these unwanted phenomena and
thus minimize measurement inaccuracy. The above­mentioned problems can be defined
as:
• Overflow/Krausen – by mixing malt, hops, and barley in water (at specific temper­
atures), liquid known as wort is created. During the fermentation process, yeast
ferments the sugars in the wort and turns them into alcohol and carbon dioxide.
In this process “Krausen” is formed ­ a foamy byproduct consisting of both living
and dead yeast cells as well as proteins and other compounds from the beer. This
clogging mass, if flowing through the monitoring device, causes measurement inac­
curacy and can even destroy gas sensors permanently.
• Condensation – when the off­gas from a fermenting liquid has a greater temper­
ature compared to room temperature, gases (mainly water vapor) will change the
state of matter from gas to liquid. The greater this temperature difference is, the
more condensation will be formed. While exiting the fermentation tank, the gas
passes through stainless steel tubes which also accelerates the level of condensa­
tion due to surface contact. The condensation will accumulate and give rise to a
mixed liquid and gas flow. High liquid content can also cause measurement inac­
curacy and permanent sensor damage.
Errors resulting from these problems have accompanied the non­invasive measurement
approach for a very long time. Condensation has a much greater impact on incorrect mea­
surements carried out by non­invasive devices ­ it occurs much more often than overflow,
especially in autumn and winter, where the difference between the process temperature
and the ambient temperature is higher than in spring and summer. Interested in the sub­
ject, wanting to explore it fully and solve the real­life problem faced by the industry, I
decided to take up the condensation challenge. Therefore, the aim of this Master Thesis
is to create an intelligent phase separating (liquid and gas) solution for non­invasive mea­
surements of fermentation process in brewing industry as a novel approach to solving the
condensation problem.
2
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:9==
In order to do that, 3 different approaches are presented ­ a mechanical approach using
a cyclone separator and two approaches to flushing system based on valve control: Two­
point Flushing System and Automated Spunding Valve.
Valve­based solutions use an IoT­enchanced control system consisting of an smart algo­
rithm. The idea is based on actuator control with real­time control loop and data monitor­
ing of pressure and gas flow. To develop a successful control architecture, a significant
amount of time must be invested into process understanding. By acquiring theoretical
knowledge from various literary sources, and on the other hand, experimental work in an
industrial environment ­ it allowed for an in­depth research into the subject matter.
1.1.1
What’s innovative?
The solutions presented in this Master Thesis are unique due to the revelatory approach
to solving the topic ­ using IoT, data­driven, allowing for a simple and relatively cheap
way to solve the problem that has accompanied the industry for a long time. The solu­
tions considered are able to separate the gas­liquid mixture and remove moisture from the
system. The presented study adresses condensation problems in the non­invasive mea­
surements market and comes to a solution that improves the performance of optimized
unit. The three methods of condensation removal under consideration are currently not
used on the market, and the method which this work will evaluate as the best will be added
in the future as a feature to the solution of Zymoscope company ­ a Copenhagen based
company with a vision of changing the way the food and beverage industry monitors fer­
mentation process. The thesis was written in close cooperation with Zymoscope, thus the
evaluated solutions were enriched with real­life data and experiments in a real industrial
environment.
1.2
Structure of the Thesis
Delving more and more into the subject of brewing fermentation, the processes taking
place in it and the problems faced by the industry, the structure of the work was deter­
mined. It has been divided into five main parts, which are discussed below:
1. Introduction ­ Familiarizing the reader with the issues, short presentation of the work
and approach to solving the problem. The work structure description is introduced.
2. Background & Theory ­ The second part of the thesis introduces the background,
field of research and describes in detail the problems associated with carrying out
real­time non­invasive measurements in the fermentation process. This chapter
presents the knowledge needed to understand the problem and come up with a so­
lution. Going into the details of the problems, the scope of this work is defined ­ fo­
cused on reducing the impact of unwanted phenomena occurring during the process
and current state of industrial practices. Then, the knowledge of systems control is
presented, the control algorithm used and traditional solutions to the condensation
problem while doing literature review research.
3. Condensation removal solutions ­ The next part of thesis takes into account the as­
sumptions and requirements of the system given by the industry standards and pro­
poses three new approaches to solving the condensation problem. Firstly, purely
mechanical approach with introduction of Cyclone Separator that passively sepa­
rates mixture of two phases. Then, two different ways of flushing the accumulated
moisture: 2­point Flushing System using solenoid valve that cooperates with filter­
ing algorithm and Automated Spunding Valve which upgrades the 2­point Flushing
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
3
==PAGE:10==
System idea by changing the actuator type which results in removing its disadvan­
tages and offering additional benefits. A designed prototypes are described with the
process of meeting the requirements needed for the solution and prepared for later
experiments.
4. Industrial Experiments & Results ­ the conducted experiments (theoretical and prac­
tical) are introduced. The tests are aimed at checking the performance ­ each so­
lution is validated on the basis of the effectiveness of condensation removal. A
theoretical simulation of the separation efficiency of 10 μm water droplets from a
gas­liquid mixture by a Cyclone Separator is performed. Then the system analysis
and controller tuning is performed on the basis of the generated process reaction
curve. Lastly, 2­point Flushing System and Automated Spunding Valve are pre­
sented in an industrial environment and in­door environment, respectively.
5. Conclusions ­ Strengths and weaknesses of the proposed solutions are described,
future improvements are explained and evaluations are made in relation to the per­
formance.
4
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:11==
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
5
==PAGE:12==
2
Background & Theory
All the background knowledge and theory was gathered through Danmarks Tekniske Uni­
versitet library database by looking for references. The scope of the review was mostly
condensation removal solutions. The conducted literature review was not burdened with
any limitations in the years of publication ­ patents, conference articles and books read
were searched in English and Polish. Keywords including moisture removal, moisture
trap, condensation, spunding valve, industrial fermentation, control systems, PID control
were searched.
2.1
Industrial fermentation process in brewing industry
Fermentation is one of the most important stage in the production of beer ­ the selection
of the right yeast strain, setting the right amount, oxygenation, and appropriate fermenta­
tion conditions are the key issues in obtaining an outstanding beer. Fermentation is the
process, where sugars are converted into alcohol, carbon dioxide and heat by yeast ­ it
has been practiced and upgraded over many thousands of years as a common feature
of practically all civilizations throughout history [1]. The alcoholic fermentation process
follows the equation:
Glucose
yeast
−−−→Ethanol + Carbondioxide
(2.1)
A suitable yeast strain is added to a properly oxygenated wort [2]. Fermentation is carried
out in open fermentation vats or tank fermenters, also known as unitanks. The former
can often be found in old or smaller breweries. During fermentation in such vats, the
beer is in direct contact with the air, therefore there is a risk of contamination of the beer
with airborne microorganisms. Rooms in which fermentation takes place should be well
cooled and have a good ventilation system due to the amount of CO2 produced. Cur­
rently, especially in large breweries, cylindrical­conical tanks are used. They are made of
stainless steel, closed at the bottom with a cone with the base turned upside down. This
allows the yeast to be removed more easily after the fermentation process. In such tanks
it is required to leave 20­25% of free space for foam after pouring the wort. Such tanks
often have a cooling plant, process control devices, and for managing the fermentation
process conditions. Fermentation in unitanks takes 5­7 days, depending on the tempera­
tures used. Throughout the fermentation process, carbon dioxide is collected and stored.
At a later stage, it is used for the carbonization of beer.
During fermentation, the temperature is constant, appropriate for a given strain of yeast.
The reduction in temperature in the fermentation process encourages the yeast to leave
work prematurely and settle down. A sudden drop in temperature ­ above 5°C per day is
especially dangerous, but this phenomenon can be used to accelerate the clarification of
beer, when we are sure that the fermentation is finished. The entire fermentation process
takes 2­5 weeks. Fermentation is the second of the three principal stages in the beer
brewing process:
1. Preparation and boiling the wort,
2. Fermentation,
3. Filtration and bottling.
6
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:13==
A fermentation is influenced by numerous factors such as: temperature, pH, dissolved
oxygen and carbon dioxide, operational schemes (e.g., batch, fed­batch, continuous).
Variations in these factors has a direct effect on the product spectrum and yield and the
properties of the end­product such as taste, smell and texture [3].
2.1.1
Current state of Industrial practices
IoT (Internet of Things) term describes systems of electronic devices that can automat­
ically communicate with each other and exchange data on the network automatically.
These systems are made up of sensors, software, or data exchange or control technolo­
gies that together form smart devices. The combination of these devices provides many
new possibilities and simplifications previously unavailable. One of the possibilities that
IoT has provided is easy real­time access to smart devices and data monitoring provided
by them. This allowed for the development of IoT­based measurements in industrial solu­
tions. Current state of industrial practices draws from both invasive and non­invasive data
acquisition solutions and some of the most important solutions currently on the market are
presented below.
One of the best rated solution currently on the market is Alcolyzer by Anton Paar com­
pany based in Austria. Their solution is an invasive, highly accurate laboratory instrument
allowing for the entire production process monitoring (from wort to finished beer) and al­
cohol selection (beer, wine and spirits) based on direct sampling. It gives the possibility
to monitor over 30 industry­specific parameters in highly accurate manner, but it is very
expensive. Their next product, Fermentation Monitor 5100, is a device that allows contin­
uous in­tank fermentation monitoring of beer, wine, or spirits. It’s advantage is based on
a one­time installation approach and real­time progress tracking.
Another highly rated solution is called BeerFoss provided by Foss company based in
Denmark. It offers reliable and accurate measurement of the whole brewing process in­
cluding alcohol measurement, density and pH, in invasive manner by examining samples
of given mixture (with accuracy of 0.001 g/ml on density) by FTIR (Fourier Transform
Infrared) analysis. One of the advantages is easy operation of the device, but its’ high
cost.
Moving on to startups that benefit from IoT solutions, one of the solutions presented by
Plaato based in Norway is PLAATO Pro. Their technology is based on resonating tuning­
fork density meter by energizing the probe to its own resonating frequency ­ which is
proportional to the density of the measured liquid. This invasive approach measures in
direct contact with the fermenting liquid through a 1.5” Tri Clamp port on the fermentation
vessel (Food Graded & made of waterproof material). The divice is able to conenct to
WiFi via WiFi module. This solution is cheaper than solutions mentioned before, but in
terms of accuracy is less accurate (Temperature: ± 0.1 °C, Density: ±0.50 °Plato).
Last solution offered by Precision Fermentation company based in England and their so­
lution called The BrewMonitor Sensor Hub. It consists of IoT device, connected to each
existing fermentation tank that via group of sensors monitors fermentation parameters in
an invasive way directly on mixture. It is very accurate due to high­sampling rate and is
able to report real­time data via cloud and internet connection. However, thanks to the
wide range of possibilities this solution is also expensive.
As presented above, the market at present lacks cheap, high accuracy and reliable so­
lutions in the food industry. The development of IoT technology allows for cost­effective
operation and better business opportunities, however, in order to take full advantage of its
capabilities, problems faced by companies must be solved. One of them is condensation
accumulated on the sensors.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
7
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Condensation
Condensation is defined as the change in the state of matter from the gas phase into
the liquid phase. Phase transformations assume deviations from thermal or mechanical
equilibrium. If the temperature of a wall surface is lower than the saturation temperature
of the vapor, then there is no prevailing thermal equilibrium and the vapor is liquefied. As
the wall surface is subcooled, condensate is formed. The condensation is associated with
mass transfer, where the vapor flows to the phase interface and converts into the liquid
phase [4].
The entire condensation process can be divided into several stages. In the first stage, as
a result of convective and diffusion transport, vapor reaches the interface. The vapor then
condenses on a cool surface and in the final stage, the specific thermal resistances of the
gas phase, gas to liquid transition and liquid phase, must be overcome. Condensation of
water vapor on the internal surface occurs when the partition surface has a temperature
lower than the dew point of the air near the obstacle. The dew point is the temperature
of an element at which moisture in the air begins to condense. The value of this point
depends on the air temperature and its humidity.
During the process, condensation occurs in a closed space (pipeline) by reducing the
distance between the molecules of the substance. The drop in temperature causes the
particles to move more slowly. The forces of interaction between them increase until a new
state of equilibrium is achieved. The water vapor transmission rate depends on material
type, its thickness, vapor pressure across the material and relative humidity on both sides.
The condensation rate on the surface m can be calculated using the following equation:
m = heff ∗As ∗(Tdew −Ts)
hfg
(2.2)
where:
• heff is the effective heat transfer coefficient,
• As is the surface area exposed to the ambient water vapor,
• Tdew is the ambient dew point temperature,
• Ts is the surface (or sensor) temperature,
• hfg is the specific enthalpy of the saturated vapor.
The condensation of water vapor from the air on the sensor’s surface is the result of the
temperature on the inside of the housing dropping below the dew point temperature. If,
at a given temperature and pressure value, the air is gradually cooled, the condensation
of water will eventually occur (after changing its state from water vapor present in the
air to liquid form). It has no fixed value ­ the more moisture (i.e. the more gas­like wa­
ter molecules in the air), the easier it can condense, i.e. the dew point temperature is
relatively high.
This Master Thesis aims to improve reliability of sensors used in industrial fermentation
process and in this case, the main type of sensors are the mass flow sensors. They are
used in monitoring or controlling mass­related processes where flow measurements are
critical ­ primarily gases, flowing laminarly through pipes and ducts. Using the mass flow
sensor as a non­invasive measurement component in the beer industry, one can measure
important process parameters such as:
8
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:15==
• Alcohol By Volume (ABV),
• Specific Gravity (SG),
• Dissolved CO2 (DCO2),
• Fermentation Activity (FA).
The initial idea was to use MEMS flow sensors ­ Micro Electro­Mechanical System based
on chip technology. By detecting the temperature difference manifested by the difference
of electromotive forces generated by thermopiles (the component that converts thermal
energy into electrical energy), it is possible to measure the mass flow rate. These sensors
are very cheap, accurate and have a fast response time (of 1­2 ms). All these features
make this technology the perfect candidate for IoT solutions. However, they also have
disadvantages. Their very fragile chip structure makes them susceptible to physical dam­
age and, when working in a fermentation environment ­ to condensation. Any changes on
the surface of the MEMS sensor affect its’ life span and accuracy. Damage to the sensor
structure caused by condensation and surface burn­through is visible in the microscope
photo shown below.
Figure 2.1: Condensation effect on MEMS sensor
To avoid potential damage to the sensor, the design of the sensors has been changed
from MEMS to Stainless Steel sensors, which have a very robust housing and design.
They are resistant to physical damage, chemicals, high temperature and pressure and
are generally standard in industrial applications ­ primarily in the food industry. Their
resilient design also takes up more space and generally increases the cost of the sensor
itself. These types of sensors, compared to MEMS sensors, have lower measurement
accuracy and slower response time, which makes them a slightly worse choice for IoT
applications.
As the MEMS sensors are not reliable enough to freely use them in this type of application,
a Stainless Steel sensor was chosen. Condensation does not damage these sensors, but
it definitely reduces their accuracy. This makes, regardless of the sensor design chosen,
condensation is a serious problem. Solving this problem would allow to increase the accu­
racy of Stainless Steel sensors, but also to use MEMS sensors in this type of application.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
9
==PAGE:16==
The visualization MEMS­based mass flow sensor placed on the pipeline of fermentation
vessel has been presented below.
Figure 2.2: MEMS­based mass flow sensor placed on the pipeline of fermentation vessel
One of the important features of the system used by non­invasive measurements is the
fact that when measuring pressure during fermentation, flowrate is very likely to follow
pressures’ profile. This allows to reduce the necessary sensors in the system and reduce
operating costs. Example of flow following pressure profile can be seen on figure below
presenting real­life data obtained during fermentation process. The scales on the chart
are: pressure, temperature, flowrate, respectively.
Figure 2.3: Flow and pressure profile example
However, the sensor elements could get contaminated or damaged by condensed liquid
on it. Condensation is always present in the fermenting environment. The liquid droplets
accumulates on the sensors, causing erroneous data readings which is most often mani­
fested as fallacy spikes in the data. Example of measurement bias caused by condensa­
10
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:17==
tion on can be seen on figure below. The scales on the chart are: pressure, temperature,
flowrate, respectively. The condensation here occurs due to the fact that in May the tem­
perature outside (in the brewery from which the data was collected) is around + 5°C to
the average temperature of the measured gas presented on the plot (in this case around
20°C).
Figure 2.4: Example of condensation bias on measurements
This happens in particular when fermenting gas temperature is higher than surrounding
temperature ­ the greater the difference, the greater the accumulation of droplets on the
surface of the devices. The water vapor transmission rate through material is not only
dependent on that particular material and its thickness, but also on the vapor pressure
acting across the material or, assuming equal temperature, on the relative humidity on
both sides of the material [5].
2.3
Gas­Liquid flow
The non­invasive measurement method consists in examining the carbon dioxide escap­
ing through the pipes from the fermentation tank during the fermentation process. These
pipes are called CIP­arms (Cleaning In Place) ­ used for easy vessel cleanup by using
sprayball and to release off­gas. Off­gas from fermentation process is considered a two­
phase of gas and liquid. Pressure drops and heat transfer coefficients depend on the
local flow structure, and thus understanding and determining which type of pattern we
are dealing with in this process is important primarily in the mechanical solution of the
condensation problem.
As a result of the condensation, two phases in flow are mixed: the gas phase and the
liquid phase. From one of the four types of Two­Phase Flows: Gas­Liquid, Gas­Solid,
Liquid­Liquid and Liquid­Solid ­ Gas­Liquid flow is the most complex due to the lack of
elasticity of both centers which is discussed by Hewitt [6], Whalley [7], and Brennen [8].
The dispersed phase is most often formed as a result of mechanical fragmentation. Parti­
cles, droplets and bubbles are formed from a solid, liquid or gas substance. Fog consists
of liquid droplets suspended in a gas and is formed by vapor condensation or mechani­
cal action (rupturing of streams or films of liquid). In the nomenclature, particles smaller
than 10 µm are called mist and particles larger than 10 µm are called fog. The gas­liquid
interfacial distribution can take any form. However, these forms can be broken down into
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: Sketches of flow regimes for two­phase flow in a vertical pipe. Adapted from
Brennen (2005).
specific flow patterns. Flow patterns exist in vertical and horizontal flows. The vertical
ones include:
• Bubbly flow ­ the liquid is continuous, bubble dispersion occurs,
• Slug flow ­ small gas bubbles fold into large, close to the diameter of the pipe,
• Churn flow ­ flow bubbles become unstable and collapse, resulting in a highly tur­
bulent flow pattern with both phases dispersed,
• Annular flow ­ the liquid flows along the wall of the tube in the form of a film (with a
certain amount of liquid entrained in the core), and the gas flows in the middle.
• Disperse flow ­ Occurs at very high gas flow rates when liquid particles are sus­
pended in a continuous gas phase.
At low vapor flow rate and constant liquid flow rate the mixture of gas and liquid tends
to spread into small bubbles ­ increasing gas fraction results in occurrence of plugs and
slugs. Increasing the number of voids leads to annular patterns on the wall surface. In­
creasing the number of voids leads to annular patterns on the wall surface. The pictured
patterns are shown in the figure 2.5.
In the case of horizontal flow, gravity acts on the direction of the flow, which causes its
separation to stratified flow. In some cases gravitational force is overcome by kinetic force
at high flow rate which results in annular flow rate or in the entrainment of the liquid part in
such a way that the droplets reach the gaseous phase. Here the breakdown is as follows:
• Plug flow ­ Develops as the flow rate is increased whilst vapor flow is maintained at
a low amount. Plugs of gas in liquid phase which are ’bullet shaped’ bubbles flow
intermittently through the pipe in the upper portion of the pipe due to buoyancy force,
• Stratified flow ­ where gravity separation is complete.Most common in horizontal or
slightly inclined pipelines,
• Wavy flow ­ waves appear due to perturbations when gas velocity is increased.
The pictured patterns are shown in the figure 2.6.
12
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: Sketches of flow regimes for two­phase flow in a horizontal pipe. Adapted
from Brennen (2005).
The structure of liquid­gas systems may vary with the length and cross­section of the
conduit and with the passage of time. It is influenced by:
• volumetric flow of each phase,
• density and viscosity of each phase as well as liquid surface tension,
• the angle of the conduit,
• flow direction,
• pressure,
• diameter of the conduit,
• longitudinal conduit,
• conduit inlet length.
In practice, two­phase flows are three­dimensional and transient. The creation and solu­
tion of such a model is extremely difficult, therefore one­dimensional, stationary solutions
are sought, using many simplifications.
2.4
Control systems
2.4.1
Closed loop systems
A control system regulates the behaviour of the devices or systems in the processes with a
desired manner by the usage of control loops. There are two types of control loops: closed
control loop and open control loop. The difference between these two is the occurrence
of feedback from measuring devices in closed loop, which is used to modify and adjust
the output to achieve the desired output. A system compares a command input with the
output response ­ the difference between them add up to an error or actuating signal (input
to the control unit). To reduce the original error control elements alter the conditions in
the plant ­ to compensate the influence of disturbances of the output signal.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.7: The basic control loop sketched using DigiKey
The figure presented above shows the basic control loop in control system. A feedback
control system consists of five components: Command input r(t), Plant (process), Output
c(t), Sensors and Controller with actuator. Actuators are devices whose output is mechan­
ical motion ­ electrical, hydraulic or pneumatic. They are used to manipulate the controlled
process or plant. Controllers task is to modify the system output, create actuating signal
and give the required characteristics. On the figure the disturbance in the plant is present
which is unwanted signals entering into a feedback control system.
The idea of negative feedback has several benefits such as disturbances and nonlin­
earities reduction. Big advantage of feedback control architecture is ability to analyze the
output of the system and make unstable process stabilize ­ without the necessity of know­
ing the mathematical model of the process. Additionally, one is able to track the system’s
overall performance by observing the output. To be successful, the control system must
meet certain criteria [9]:
1. Reduction in effect of disturbance signal.
2. Reduction in steady­state errors.
3. Transient response and frequency response performance.
4. Sensitivity to parameter changes.
Closed loop systems are used in vast amounts of industries today ­ nuclear power plants,
agriculture, food production are one of the many in which these systems are used. They
enable automatic approach to regulate processes like supervisory control and data ac­
quisition. Feedback loop systems are much more preferable since they are sensitive to
changes and are able to adjust themselves.
2.4.2
PI controller
Process controllers are components in control circuit that correct and adjust the error
signal in required signal and feedback signal. The control system is designed to achieve
the setpoint in the shortest possible time, without overshoot and oscillation around it. PI
controllers have two adjustable terms: Proportional and Integral term merged together. By
merging two terms together the produced control signal is more efficient and deprived of
the disadvantages that characterize each of them. It uses gain value for each parameter ­
proportional gain referred as Kp and integral gain Ki. Equation of PI controller is presented
below:
u(t) = Kp ∗e(t) + Ki ∗
∫
e(t)
(2.3)
14
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:21==
Proportional term produces signal proportional to error value e(t) multiplied by the Kp gain.
The constant Kp describes how much the response will change in regard to the error value
­ its high value will be associated with a large output change, which may cause overshoot
above the setpoint level. Changing the Kp value also affects the response time ­ high
values will result in a faster response time, and low values in a slow one. Selecting too
high values may result in system instability and the occurrence of undamped oscillations.
Integral term produces signal proportional to the integral of the error e(t) in time multiplied
by the Ki gain. The integral of the error is the total area under error­time curve ­ it is the
summation of the error signal over some time. It takes into account the history of the error
­ how far process variable is from the setpoint in time. Adding this term to the proportional
one allows you to increase the precision of the controller. This allows the mean error
value to be calculated, which then multiplied by the Ki allows the proportional term offset
to be corrected and the system output to be equalized to the desired setpoint level. As
with proportional term, high values of the constant (Ki) will result in a fast response time,
however overshoot with oscillations can occur. The ideal Ki constant will be fast response
time and setting time, with slight overshoot or none depending on the type of application.
PI controller stops the system from oscillating, and integral part enables system to hit
desired setpoint by eliminating offset. The block diagram of the PI controller is shown in
the figure below.
Figure 2.8: The block diagram of the PI controller sketched in DigiKey
As respective terms have different affect on performance, they need to be fine­tuned in
order to work correctly. Tuning in this case is treated as a process of searching for the most
optimal constant values. The choice of specific Kp/Ki values will have a different effect on
the response of the system. The most standard method of tuning values for controllers is
the Ziegler­Nichols method. In this approach it is assumed that the mathematical model
does not have to be known. The algorithm is as follows:
1. A regulator is attached to the control object.
2. Depending on the controller type, the integral and derivative action of the controller
is switched off and, for a step input, the Kp constant is being gradually increased,
until it reaches the stability limit.
3. In undamped oscillations period Tosc and the value of the gain coefficient kkr at which
these oscillations occur are measured.
4. The obtained value of kkr is described by the relation Kp = 0.5 kkr. This value is
taken as the target value.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
15
==PAGE:22==
5. Depending on the type of controller, the values of constants should be assumed.
For the PI controller ­ Kp = 0.45kkr, Ti = Tosc/1.2
The described Ziegler­Nichols method is used to easily determine the values of the con­
troller constants to ensure the stability of the system. It is not a precise method, but it
does not require the identification of the dynamics of the object.
Another method used for tuning parameters is called the process reaction method ­ based
on using the results from open­loop tests. In this method, process reaction curve is gener­
ated as the system response to step input when steady state is achieved. Generating this
graph is needed to determine the values of Kp and Ki. After achieving that, the process
parameters can be obtained:
1. Lag L [min] ­ the delay from when the measured process variable (PV) first begins
to respond to step input,
2. Time constant T [min] ­ time required for the signal to attain 63.2% of steady state
value,
3. Step input r(t) [%]
4. Process variable change ∆Cp [%],
5. Reaction rate N = ∆Cp/T [%/min],
6. Lag ratio R [­].
Process reaction curve is presented on the figure below.
Figure 2.9: Process reaction curve
The algorithm is given below:
1. Apply small step change to the actuator and record system response.
2. Wait until the process variable reaches to the new steady­state value.
3. Determine reaction rate and lag ratio
4. Calculate the constant values of the controller: Kc = 0.9 r(t)/NL, Ti = 3.33 L
16
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:23==
As PI controllers provide a good tradeoff in complexity and precision, it makes them one
of the most used controllers in the industry.
2.5
Traditional condensation solutions
In this chapter, I will introduce established industrial solutions to this problem and consider
their strengths / weaknesses. Removal of liquids from gaseous mixtures can be done by
several techniques including gravity separator, centrifugal separator. The types of sepa­
rators will be described in greater detail, their limitations and characteristics mentioned.
Three widely used mechanisms are [10]:
• Separation by gravity — the gravitational force acting on the mass of the drop is
greater than the drag force generated by the flowing gas.
• Separation by temperature ­ the usage of temperature to remove condensation is
based on heating the cool surface to a temperature that is greater than the dewpoint
of the air (dewpoint control).
• Centrifugal separation — centrifugal force acting on the mass of the drop is greater
than the drag force generated by the flowing gas. This approach is more efficient
owing to the magnitude of centrifugal force several times more than that of gravita­
tional force.
2.5.1
Separation by gravity
The simplest separator is the gravity separator ­ based on the principle of gravity settling.
A device used in industrial applications is called a vapor–liquid separator. The construc­
tion of these type of separator is often inclined pipe where the two­phase mixture enters
at the bottom and travels to the upper part. The separation using vapor­liquid separator
occurs in three stages:
• Stage 1 ­ the largest droplets of liquid entrained in the vapor hit the inlet diverter and
fall under the force of gravity.
• Stage 2 ­ as the vapor flows further into the disengagement area, smaller droplets
are subject to secondary gravity separation.
• Stage 3 ­ Mist elimination of the smallest droplets.
The separation of liquid droplets from vapor phase can be explained with the help of
following equation for terminal velocity of liquid droplets.
Vt =
√
4 ∗g ∗Dp ∗(ρL −ρG)
3 ∗ρG ∗C′
(2.4)
where:
• Vt ­ Terminal / critical velocity of gas so that a liquid droplet of size Dp can settle out
of the gaseous stream [m2/s],
• Dp ­ Liquid droplet diameter [m],
• ρL ­ Liquid phase density [kg/m3],
• ρG ­ Vapor phase density [kg/m3],
• C′ ­ Drag coefficient [­],
• g ­ Gravitational acceleration [m/s2].
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
17
==PAGE:24==
The selection of internal components of the separator is aimed at increasing its efficiency.
The most frequently used elements are Demister Pads, Vane packs, Multicyclones or swirl
decks. The parameter determining the selection of a specific element or set of elements
for the system is the diameter of the droplets present in the system. The diameter of the
inlet pipe should be chosen to avoid dispersed, annular or mist flow. To approximate the
diameter of the droplets, the formula given below is used:
dmax = 4.5 ∗D ∗(
σ
ρv ∗v2v ∗D)0.6(ρv
ρl
)0.4
(2.5)
where:
• d ­ Drop diameter [m],
• D ­ pipeline internal diameter [m],
• σ ­ surface tension [N/m],
• ρv ­ Vapor phase density [kg/m3],
• ρl ­ Liquid phase density [kg/m3],
• vv ­ velocity of Vapor phase [m/s].
Knowing the volumetric flow of vapor and liquid from the drum, its diameter can be calcu­
lated. In order to do that, the Souder’s­Brown equation presented below is used:
vmax = k ∗
√
(ρl −ρv)
ρv
(2.6)
where:
• k is Souder’s Brown proportionality constant [m/s] ­ value of the proportionality con­
stant k varies based on orientation of the separator and gauge pressure in vessel.
By calculating the maximum allowable vapor velocity in the drum with the above equation,
next step is to determine the cross­sectional area of the drum (A):
A = vmax
vv
(2.7)
Lastly, to calculate the diameter:
D =
√
4A
π
(2.8)
Demister pads are widely used in industrial production ­ from chemical and pharmaceutical
to metallurgy and others. In order to boost up filtering efficiency, demister pads are used
in industrial systems as a passive separation factor. They are usually placed at the top of
the vessel. The principle of operation of this filter is as follows: the mist (composed of gas
and liquid), rising at a constant speed, collides with the wire mesh and sticks to it due to
the inertia effect. Then it will be dispersed over the surface of the mesh and a drop of water
will remain on it. The drop will grow until the force of gravity exceeds the value of the gas
rising force and the force of the surface tension of the liquid ­ then it will fall to the bottom
of the tank. The gas, on the other hand, will continue to pass through the demister pad.
18
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:25==
The material used for their construction is mainly stainless steel. Metal demister pads
have high corrosion and rust resistance, so they can be used in high corrosive industrial
applications.
The usage of demister pads as a passive separation filter has its strengths as they have
large surface area and high separating efficiency, they are easy to install, operate and
maintain and by having high porosity there are less pressure drops. However, a significant
disadvantage is their tendency to clog themselves over time, which results in an increase
in pressure drop. If the cross­section is clogged the fermentation process is likely to be
adversely affected by a pressure buildup. The buildup might grow to such extent that the
created pressure could destroy the entire batch of fermented mixture. Thus maintenance
is a key task to keep in mind.
Liquid ­ gas separation can vastly improve operating conditions of the industrial compo­
nents by reducing the corrosion and hence, extend it’s life cycle. Gravity separators are
designed for the removal of droplets more than 400 µm. This approach removes a sig­
nificant portion of the entrained liquid. However, very small droplets are carried forward
for all flow rates. This approach was rejected when designing the system of condensa­
tion removal due to the need to maintain the cleanliness of some elements and the lack
of reliable separation of smaller droplets which occurred more frequently in the studied
environment than larger droplets.
2.5.2
Separation by temperature ­ The dew point control
As gas hits the sensor surface with temperature below the dew point, the condensation
will occur. Therefore, the strategy of making sure that the temperature of the sensor
is above the dew point is used. One of them is sensor­heating technology divided into
upstream­heating technology and self­heating sensors.
Upstream­heating technology idea is based on heating the pipeline surface at a distance
of X cm from the sensor (e.g. mass flow sensor) ­ thanks to this, the gas is heated up,
which reduces the temperature difference between the gas and the surface and minimizes
the occurrence of condensation. This design results in a heat wrap on the pipe that pre­
vents condensation. A device used for this purpose is a Peltier Module ­ an active thermal
control module which uses electrical current (I) to refrigerate / heat up in the junction by
utilizing Peltier effect. The direction of the current defines the type of action of the module.
One part is connected to the heat sink to dissipate heat, and the thermoelectric part can
be cooled or heated [11]. A thermoelectric module is an element composed of two thin
ceramic plates between which there are (thanks to metallic tracks on the internal surfaces
of the ceramic housing plates) semiconductors arranged in series. The diagram of the
thermoelectric module is presented below.
The cooling capacity with Peltier cells can be easily increased by bringing two or more
cells together with the ”hot” sides of one module to the ”cold” side of the next. Depend­
ing on the number of elements connected in this way, ever lower temperatures can be
achieved [12]. The strengths of this solution are simplicity,exceptional durability, rela­
tively low weight, noiseless and maintenance­free operation, as well as reliable operation
associated with the lack of any moving parts, however, it generates additional energy
consumption for the system, and in the case of cooling, the ratio of energy consumption
to cooling achieved is unsatisfactory. Forcing heat transport requires a large supply of
power, which at low voltage (usually 12,..,24 V) requires the supply with high current.
Upstream­heating technology is considered a good solution in increasing humidity envi­
ronments. Devices with the Peltier system are not suitable for drying large surfaces due
to high amount of power required to operate correctly.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.10: Peltier Module ­ both modes
Self­heating sensors operate in high heating values of the sensor element (e.g. probe).
This design shunts moisture and water droplets from the sensor surface while maintaining
an accurate measurement. Sometimes the measuring elements are heated to extreme
values like 300°C to make sure that condensation will not have a negative effect on the
measured variable. However, applying such a high heat source into the operating area of
the sensor may create an unsafe condition, consumes much more energy, and may result
in shortened operating life­cycle, accelerated aging or premature failure of the sensors.
Another approach that prevents liquid to be condensed on the sensor surface is reduction
of the relative humidity of the gas. Relative humidity is ratio of measured moisture in the
air to maximum moisture that air can hold at that temperature and pressure. One method
of dehumidification is to sub­cool and reheat.
The gas is directed through heat exchanger where the cooling process takes place and
reduces it’s temperature to predefined value. Gas can be cooled with cold water from a
chiller ­ the water heats up and the gas cools down. After cooling, the gas is saturated with
water vapor (with lower moisture content than before). In order to lower relative humidity,
the gas must be heated again since gas after cooling has near 100% relative humidity. To
heat up the gas, two techniques are used:
1. heat exchanger with heating medium ­ e.g. warm water,
2. gas compressor ­ the compression will heat up the gas.
Condensation reduction with the use of temperature change was not used in the following
project, mainly due to additional energy consumption and non­applicability of the Peltier
module in the case of heating the optimized sensor. Additionally, the usage of heat ex­
changer or gas compressor would vastly increase the complexity of the system and in­
crease the cost price. Dew point control is a simple solution, but besides winter period it
generates too much additional energy which prevailed against the usage of this technol­
ogy.
2.5.3
Centrifugal separation
Air flowing through a pipeline containing condensed vapor or other particles is directed
through the inlet to the vessel. It consists of an upper cylindrical part referred to as the
20
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:27==
barrel and a lower conical part referred to as cone. Gas particles will move along the wall
of the barrel, and the heavier particles will be separated and fall down to the cone, where
they will be stored, eventually being removed from the system.
The idea is to transform the inertia force of gas particle flows to a centrifugal force by
means of a vortex generated in the cyclone body. When the particle laden air stream
enters tangentially at the top of the barrel, the outer vortex is being created by downward
movement into the cone part of the separator [13]. The particle separation is obtained by
the increasing air velocity in the outer vortex. The Cyclone separator operation combines
two physical forces: centrifugal force and gravity. The specially designed geometry pro­
duces enough centrifugal force to separate particles around 10 micrometers. Then, the
separated liquid is accumulated on the separators’ wall. Gravity forces the separated par­
ticles adhering to the vessel to head towards the drain. The gas flow travels through the
inlet and at the exit the liquid rotates (by centrifugal force). The separation is dependent
on the vessel radius (radius of rotation). The liquid droplets moving between the inlet and
the vessel wall are exposed to clean gas, which leads to friction of liquid particles against
gas particles and to occurrence of microheating phenomena which may worsen the sep­
aration efficiency [14]. Separators’ dimensions determines the liquid removal rate, which
will increase with the size of the separator.
A decisive advantage of the cyclone separator is its lack of maintenance due to the lack
of moving parts ­ purely mechanical design with the possibility of industrial cleaning.
Cyclone separators are most often used in steam systems, where the deposition of con­
densate may result in deterioration of the system performance. Another branch of industry
is the petrochemical industry, where the product is separated under certain process con­
ditions.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:29==
3
Condensation removal solutions
3.1
The assumptions & requirements
When designing a liquid and gas phase separation system in the case of the food industry
(to which brewing belongs), one should bear in mind not only how to solve the problem,
but also all the restrictions and rules prevailing in this industry. For this project, one of the
main objectives was to maintain a purely electrically powered solution with no external
inlets, CIP (Clean­In­Place) ready and possibly with food grade certificate. With all this
in mind, a closed loop control system (with feedback from sensor measuring process
variable) was proposed that enables the separation of two phases.
Solving the control problem will generally involve following steps [9]:
1. Choice of feedback sensor(s) to get a measure of the controlled output.
2. Choice of actuator to drive (manipulate) the plant like opening or closing a valve,
adjusting the excitation or armature voltage of a motor.
3. Developing mathematical models of plant, sensor and actuator.
4. Controller design based on models developed in step 3 and the specified criteria.
5. Simulating system performance and fine tuning.
6. Iterate the above steps, if necessary.
7. Building the system or its prototype and testing.
The basic design requirements that were crucial for electing the system components were:
• Material: Stainless steel 304/316,
• Connection type: Tri­clamp 1.5”,
• IP rating: IP67,
• Supply voltage: 5­24 Vdc,
• Control type: automated (if necessary),
• Medium compatibility: Gas (CO2),
• Temperature range: 5­40 °C,
• Flow range: 0­100 L / min,
• Pressure range: 0­3 barG.
304/316 stainless steel is characterized by strong resistance to heat, abrasion and corro­
sion due to the high concentration of chromium (minimum 11%). As a result, it appears
in a wide range of industries where metal is exposed to harsh environmental conditions ­
one of the main ones being the food industry. In the food industry, stainless steel is ex­
posed to heat, water, and harsh cleaning chemicals. Specifically, in the brewing industry,
an important aspect of material selection is CIP readiness ­ automated cleaning method
without major disassembly.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
23
==PAGE:30==
Tri­clamp connection is widely used in the food and beverage industries as it provides
sanitary fitting for pipe connections. This type of connection consists of flange, gasket
and clamp. IP Code (Ingress Protection Code) provides a guideline to the degree of pro­
tection provided by mechanical casings and electrical enclosures against intrusion, dust,
accidental contact, and water. As we deal with fluids in the designed system, reliability is
required and in the event of any leakages, the fluid cannot get to the control box or the
actuator. For this reason, the highest possible IP rating is preferred.
Another important points that had to be taken into account are the process variables.
Medium type, temperature, flow and pressure range depend on the type of supervised
process. In the case of fermentation, it is most often from 5 to 40 degrees Celsius, gas
flow of 0­100 SLPM (Standard Litres Per Minute) and 0­3 bar of gauge pressure (pres­
sure measured relative to the ambient atmospheric pressure). As we work directly with
gaseous media (CO2), it is very important to select component that is compatible with it
to prevent any leakages (which may result in information bias or loss of information).
As the aim is to use smart solution which does not involve human interaction with the
system, both passive and automated approach is considered. Adding passive compo­
nent able to separate gas and liquid does not require human to operate it and automatic
approach allows for more precise control of the actuator, 24/7 non­stop operation, saving
money and optimizing the workflow.
The last assumption is the limit of the supply voltage ­ 5­24VDC, which the PCB is able
to produce with its current design.
After the conducted research, it was decided to explore 3 solutions:
1. Cyclone Separator ­ Centrifugal separation,
2. 2­point Flushing System,
3. Automated Spunding Valve.
All of those solutions has been validated either theoretically or practically. Based on re­
quirements of the system, the performance of the given solutions was examined and an
evaluation was carried out. Every considered solution will be presented in detail later in
this chapter.
3.2
Cyclone Separator ­ Centrifugal separation
3.2.1
Solution idea
One of the considered approaches to solving the condensation problem was the use of a
Cyclone Separator and centrifugal force allowing for reliable separation of two phases. In
this case, the approach is purely mechanical, where one is able to observe directly how
separation of gas­liquid mixture occurs. Placing this mechanical structure on the CIP­arm
allows for passive phase division. Once the object is placed in the pipeline, the design
allows for easy cleaning and the maintanace of the accumulated liquid on the bottom of
the separator can be removed using a valve or by connecting the output to drain.
The three main types of cyclones are as follows :
24
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.1: Cyclone Separator types (Reprinted from [15])
• (a) type shows a cyclone with a tangential entry ­ widely used in power and cement
plants, feed mills and many other process industries,
• (b) type shows the axial entry cyclones, the gas enter parallel to the axis of the
cyclone body. Axial entry units are commonly used in multi cyclone configuration,
as these units provide higher efficiencies,
• (c) type is often used after wet scrubbers to trap particulate matter entrained in water
droplets. Large water droplets are forced against the walls and are removed the air
stream.
Type (a) was selected to solve the condensation problem, due to the reliability of the
structure and the possibility of easy manipulation of the control dimensions [16].
Cyclone efficiency will decrease with increases in the parameters such as:
• gas viscosity;
• cyclone body diameter;
• gas exit diameter;
• gas inlet duct area;
• gas density;
• leakage of air into the dust outlet.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
25
==PAGE:32==
Reducing the cyclone diameter increases the centrifugal force and thus efficiency. As
the viscosity decreases, the yield increases. This is due to a reduction in the drag force
with a decrease in viscosity. The decrease in temperature will increase the gas density.
One might be tempted to say that this will increase the yield as the viscosity decreases.
But an increase in temperature also reduces the volumetric flow and thus decreasing
performance.
A well designed separator must be properly proportioned to provide sufficient removal
efficiency of particles and droplets around 10 μm. The inside walls must have well­chosen
diameters to collect and carry away unwanted particles so that they wouldn’t re­enter into
the moving gas flow.
Cyclone separators can be designed for many applications and they are typically cat­
egorized as: high efficiency, conventional (medium efficiency), or high throughput (low
efficiency). Each of these three cyclone types have the same basic design, but the differ­
ence is due to mechanical design ­ it is assumed that conventional is marked with 2D2D
& high efficiency 1D3D. The D means the diameter of the barrel part of cyclone separator
and the numbers preceding the D’s relate to the length of the barrel and cone sections,
respectively. High efficiency cyclones has the highest­pressure drops, while high through­
put cyclones are used to work with large volumes of gas with a low pressure drop. When
examining the approach with the use of a separator to get rid of the condensation on
the sensor in an industrial environment, all calculations were aimed at obtaining feasible
dimensions of the component and answering the following questions:
1. Does the usage of separator make sense?
2. Which type is more effective in this case?
3. What is the effect of D (barrel diameter)?
4. What is the effect of Q (flow rate)?
By carrying out the calculations and then testing the effectiveness of the solution, the
answers to the above questions were obtained. Calculations were made for two types of
separators: conventional (2D2D) & high efficiency (1D3D). All calculations were made by
the author. Diagram of cyclone dimensions created using Autodesk Fusion360 software
has been presented below.
26
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.2: Schematic diagram of cyclone dimensions
The tables below show the dimensions for the 1D3D and 2D2D separator in accordance
with the design assumptions ­ Table 1 for 1D3D and Table 2 for 2D2D.
Cyclone separator dimensions (1D3D high efficiency)
Name
Sign
Ratio
Value [m]
Diameter of Barrel
D
D
0.109
Length of the Body
Lb
1.5D
0.163
Length of the Cone
Lc
2.5D
0.272
Height of the Inlet
H
D/2
0.0545
Width of the Inlet
W
D/5
0.0218
Diameter of inlet Pipe
d
A = πr2
0.009
Diameter of Gas Exit
De
D/2
0.054
Diameter of Drain outlet
Dd
0.375D
0.041
Length of vortex Finder
S
0.5D
0.0545
Length of Sc
Sc
D/8
0.014
Total length of cyclone
Lb+Lc
4D
0.436
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
27
==PAGE:34==
Cyclone separator dimensions (2D2D conventional)
Name
Sign
Ratio
Value [m]
Diameter of Barrel
D
D
0.109
Length of the Body
Lb
2D
0.218
Length of the Cone
Lc
2D
0.218
Height of the Inlet
H
D/2
0.0545
Width of the Inlet
W
D/4
0.02725
Diameter of inlet Pipe
d
A = πr2
0.009
Diameter of Gas Exit
De
D/2
0.0545
Diameter of Drain outlet
Dd
D/4
0.027
Length of vortex Finder
S
0.625D
0.068
Length of Sc
Sc
D/8
0.014
Total length of cyclone
Lb+Lc
4D
0.436
The table of constants in the system is presented in Table 3.
Table of constants in the system
Name
Sign
Value
Volumetric flow rate of Blower [m3/s]
Q
0.0006666667
Temperature [°C]
T
20
Temperature [K]
Tk
293.15
Pressure [Pa]
p
20000
Molar mass for CO2 [g/mol]
M
44
Universal gas constant [m3 ∗Pa ∗K−1 ∗mol−1]
R
8.314
CO2 Viscosity [Pa∙s] = [kg/m*s]
µ
0.000014800
Gas density [kg/m3]
pgas
1.98
Particle density [kg/m3]
ppar
1000
Particle diameter [m]
pp
0.00001
For proper design, the basic parameters of the cyclone need be calculated:
• Root mean square Velocity of CO2:
v =
√
3RT
M
(3.1)
• Velocity of Air inlet Duct:
Vi =
Q
WH
(3.2)
• Dynamic Pressure:
P = 1
2 ∗pgas ∗V 2
(3.3)
• Number of Effective turns ­ the number of revolutions the gas spins while passing
through the cyclone outer vortex:
Ne = 1
H [Lb + 1/2 ∗Lc]
(3.4)
• Gas Residence time ­ the amount of time that the gas travels in the outer vortex:
∆t = πDNe
Vi
(3.5)
28
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:35==
• Particle Drift Velocity ­ The terminal velocity that will just allow a particle initially at
distance W away from the wall to be collected in time is:
Vd = W
∆t
(3.6)
• Terminal Drift Transverse Velocity:
Vt = (ppar −pgas)d2
pV 2
i
9µD
(3.7)
• Cut point Diameter ­ diameter of the smallest particle that will be collected by the
cyclone with 50% efficiency. As the cut­point diameter increases, the collection
efficiency decreases:
d50 =
√
9 ∗µ ∗W
2 ∗π ∗N ∗Vi ∗(ppar −pgas)
(3.8)
• Static Pressure Drop:
∆P = Hv ∗pgas ∗V 2
i /2
(3.9)
• Power Requirements:
Wf = Q∆P
(3.10)
• Outlet Gas Velocity:
Vo = Q
πr2
i
(3.11)
• Collection Efficiency:
nj =
1
1 + (d50/dpj)2
(3.12)
• Inlet velocity heads (where K­factor depends on operating conditions):
Hv = KHW
D2e
(3.13)
The calculation results for both types of separators are presented in Table 4 below.
Calculated parameters of the cyclone
Name
2D2D
(conven­
tional)
1D3D (high effi­
ciency)
Root mean square Velocity of CO2 [m/s]
12.89
12.89
Velocity of Air inlet Duct [m/s]
0.449
0.561
Dynamic Pressure [Pa]
0.199
0.312
Number of Effective turn [­]
6
5.5
Gas Residence time [s]
4.575
3.355
Particle Drift Velocity [m/s]
0.006
0.0065
Terminal Drift Transverse Velocity [m/s]
0.001
0.002
Cut point Diameter [m]
0.00001
0.00001
Static Pressure Drop [Pa]
1.596
1.995
Power Requirement [J/s]
0.0004
0.0003
Outlet Gas Velocity [m/s]
0.286
0.447
Inlet velocity heads [­]
8.0000
6.4
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
29
==PAGE:36==
Making a cyclone is expensive and difficult. The purpose of the performed calculations
was to simulate the potential dimensions of the solution and make sure that it is feasible
and reliably separates the two phases. The calculated dimensions had a direct impact on
the efficiency of the solution, which was calculated and simulated in the next chapter to
evaluate the performance.
3.3
2­point Flushing System
3.3.1
Solution idea
In this case, the approach changed from purely mechanical to a combination of hardware
and software ­ there is an actuator controlled by a control algorithm, which results in a
proactive approach to the condensation problem. The idea behind the system is to con­
trol the actuator using a PWM (Pulse­Width Modulation) signal which drives it to expected
position based on pulse duration. The actuator in this case is solenoid valve used to re­
lease the moist accumulated in the system via 2­point control (on / off control). Proactivity
occurs by assuming that the accumulated moisture in the system will be removed every
hour by opening the valve fully for one second.
A PWM signal is a pseudo­analog digital signal that changes between ON and OFF de­
pending on the switching frequency and duty cycle. Switching frequency controls how
fast the switch occurs and duty cycle controls the fraction of one period when a signal is
active. As the actuator uses 2­point control, the valve only has two positions ­ fully open
(100% duty cycle) and fully closed (0% duty cycle).
In the brewing industry, manual spunding valves are mainly used in the fermentation pro­
cess. They are mounted on a fermentation vessel, which allows manual pressure setting
to a predetermined level. When the pressures too high; the spunding valve allows the
excess CO2 to escape the tanks. Usually it is paired with pressure gauge and the whole
setup is called airlock. Spunding valve used in this setup is presented on the figure below.
30
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.3: Spunding valve
This solution offers manual pressure control via airlock with addition of condensation re­
moval by solenoid valve and thus, real­time pressure and gas flow monitoring. The con­
trol algorithm in this case is starting the valve opening and closing it fully after a second.
However, it was noticed that the sudden opening and closing of the valve is burdened with
noise in the data reading on the monitoring platform. For this purpose, a filter is needed
that will get rid of the events created by the solenoid valve visible on the pressure and gas
flow plot in the form of short peaks.
The designed system has been divided into two parts: hardware part and software part.
Hardware part consists of: reference sensors, 2­point control actuator (solenoid valve)
and control box with microcontroller. Software part consists of data­handling (filtering)
algorithm.
• The reference sensors in this case are: a pressure sensor used to collect pressure
measurements and send them to monitoring platform and a mass flow sensor ­
non­invasive thermal dispersion flow sensor whose condensation bias are to be
minimized.
• The 2­point control actuator is aforementioned solenoid valve that flushes the sys­
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
31
==PAGE:38==
tem.
• The microcontroller capable of remote access, fast, reliable. The ”brain” of the entire
system, processing data (sending it to monitoring platform) and managing subse­
quent actions.
Following the above­mentioned assumptions, a meticulous selection of the components
that make up the system of 2­point Flushing System, was carried out.
3.3.2
Selected components
The components used to build the system are real products available on the market ­
during the selection, the lead time between placing an order and receiving a given com­
ponent was also taken into account, since the time to make and test the system was of
importance in this case. The components that make up the 2­point Flushing System setup
are as follows:
• ESP32 PICO V3 based board,
• Supmea SUP­P350K Pressure sensor,
• COVNA HK0018 Series Tri Clamp Food Grade Sanitary Solenoid Valve,
• Infineon N­Channel, MOSFET, 50 A 30 V, IPP055N03L
• Resistors: 56, 6.8k, 10k,
• Fluid Component International (FCI) FS10A mass flow sensor.
ESP32 PICO V3­based board was used because the entire system is based on remote
access and remote control since it provides Wi­Fi and Bluetooth connectivity to embed­
ded devices. As stated before, the approach of this project is to create smart industrial
device, which makes ESP32 a perfect microcontroller fit for IoT application. The board
has a power output that allows you to connect a 24VDC power supply element and GPIO
(General­Purpose Input/Output) pins, which in this case will be the control outputs.
32
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.4: ESP32­based board
The pressure sensor serves as a reference device that continuously measures the pres­
sure in the vessel (which is changing due to the specificity of the fermentation process).
The selected Supmea pressure sensor was chosen because it meets all the requirements
set for the system components ­ it is suitable for working with gas, mounted using tri­
clamps, is powered by 24VDC, has a compact design with SS316 diaphragm and has an
output signal that can be connected to the microcontroller via RS485 serial communica­
tion.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.5: Pressure sensor
The selected actuator is the COVNA 2/2 HK0018 Solenoid Valve due to its parameters
meeting the system requirements. COVNA HK0018 has a pressure range of 0­10bar, is
made of stainless steel, can work in the range [­5°C ­ 80°C], adapted to tri­clamp connec­
tion type, 24VDC supply voltage and air medium compatible. Its advantage is also the
food grade certificate, which ensures that the selected component is suitable for use in a
food production environment. The only disadvantage of this component in this case is its
relatively high weight (about 5 kg), because we want to avoid too big weight of the entire
system.
34
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.6: Covna 2/2 HK0018 Solenoid Valve
As these type of actuators cannot be directly controlled from the board using GPIOs,
an electrical system was designed consisting of: a GPIO control output from the board,
a set of resistors (56, 6.8k, 10k) and an N­Channel transistor allowing the valve to be
controlled using a PWM signal from the board pin. Selected MOSFET (Metal–Oxide–
Semiconductor Field­Effect Transistor) works as a switch and boosts up the GPIO signal
from 0­3.3V range (standard voltage level) to 0­10V as the goal is to control high power
electronic device (valve) from low power electronic device (board). The diagram of the
constructed electrical system is presented in the figure below.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.7: Electronic circuit visualization in Falstad simulator
The last component is Fluid Component International (FCI) mass flow sensor ­operating
on the thermal dispersion principle. There are two cooperating elements in it: the heating
element and sensing element. Flow measurement works as follows ­ two probes are
immersed in the center line of the flow. One of them is the temperature sensor, which
measures the gas temperature in the middle of the pipe as reference value (regardless
of the flow velocity). The second is a velocity sensor (heated element) which is heated
continuously by the electrical voltage so that the predefined temperature difference is
kept. As soon as fluid flow begins, heat is drawn from heated velocity sensor via the
gas molecules passing through the element. The heat is dispersed as it is carried off by
the flow. The sensor constantly counts the molecules that flow past, heat up and take
the package of heat away with them, and carry it downstream. Heating current required
to maintain the constant temperature differential between two sensors is proportional to
the cooling effect caused by molecules passing by and therefore is direct measurement
of total gas mass flow rate in the pipe. This mass flow sensor was chosen due to its
operational parameters: SS316, operation at the temperature [­40°C to 71°C] and up
to 10 bar of pressure, 24VDC power supply, possibility of data transmission via RS232
protocol, IP67 rating and ± 0.5% accuracy of reading.
36
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.8: FCI mass flow sensor
Moving on to the software part ­ when testing the valve operation, it was noticed that
opening and closing the valve removing the moisture accumulated in the system leads to
the occurrence of unwanted events visible on the pressure and flow plots on monitoring
platform. These events are spikes resulting from the sudden complete opening and dis­
charge of gas from the system (resulting in a pressure drop) and the valve closing after
a second, which then stabilizes the system after some time. Sudden changes in the gas
system are rarely good ­ in this case, the main problem is the slow response time of the
mass flow sensor which is 30 seconds. Every time there is a sudden spike the accuracy
is lost. Crucially, it causes quite noisy pressure and flowrate plot.
The proposed filter works as follows:
1. Find each datapoint containing a one­second opening (spike).
2. Drop any duplicate events if there are any.
3. Take approximately 4 minutes of datapoints from ”Opened” event and remove them.
4. Interpolate between remaining datapoints.
3.3.3
System assembly
The next step was to completely assemble the system from all selected components.
Firstly, ESP32 board was connected with 24V power, which in this case is the main power
supply. The rest of the hardware components ­ 24VDC solenoid valve and pressure sen­
sor are connected to the PCB voltage outputs. Then, through the GPIO output placed
on the board, electric circuit was connected. The output from electric circuit then got
connected with valve’s input pin.
Electronic subsystems have been closed in a control box adapted to an industrial environ­
ment ­ a plastic waterproof housing with IP67 rating that provide protection for electronics.
Once closed, a control box was attached to the pipeline adapter as can be seen in the
figure below.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.9: Control box
The complete test system consisting of (from the left): manual spunding valve, solenoid
valve, mass flow sensor, pressure sensor with everything connected to control box con­
taining ESP32 control board and electric circuit with MOSFET transistor and resistors,
has been presented on the figure below.
38
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.10: Test setup attached to vessel
After assembling the entire system and programming the controller, the entire setup was
connected to a vessel provided for testing by Copenhagen based brewery ­ Empirical.
Real­time data filtration works continuously from the monitoring platform side. The data
obtained from the experiments will be evaluated in a later chapter.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
39
==PAGE:46==
3.4
Automated Spunding Valve
3.4.1
Solution idea
In the case of this approach, changing the actuator type enables the ”controlled flushing
mode” ­ the ability to control the pressure and flowrate profile to smoothen it out. Thanks
to this, you can get rid of the rapid spikes produced by the solenoid valve and thus remove
filtering part entirely and solve the problem of condensation solely with the control of the
system. In this case, the actuator not only blows through the system in the event of
moisture build­up, but also controls the pressure and gas flow profile in real time via an
intelligent control algorithm. Proportional actuator is an element used for gradual process
control and in this case it is an executive element of de­condensation. This process control
is the manipulation of the valve spindle with a previously set up PWM signal. The name
”Automated Spunding Valve” is to refer to the previously used component that controls the
pressure in the system manually ­ in this case it is replaced with a new, smarter solution.
The duty cycle of the signal directly corresponds to the valve opening level ­ which means
%­valve opening in the range of 0­100%. To properly correct the value of the control vari­
able (in this case PWM duty cycle) depending on changing conditions, closed PI control
loop was proposed ­ adjusting the value of the duty cycle based on the measured feed­
back from the sensor. As fluid control modeling is characterized by a small inertia and the
system is often disturbed, it is not recommended use the derivative component to avoid
enhancing the disturbances effect.[17].
The proportional and derivative components reduce the error between the given the de­
sired setpoint and measured value. The proportional component is the error value multi­
plied by the gain value and the integral component accounts for error over a given time
period. The purpose of the algorithm is to completely reduce the measured error in time
by regulating the control variable. The PI algorithm is used in fluid control processes due
to its simplicity and, with appropriate tuning of the gain values of the components, relia­
bility. The combination of all these components allowed for the creation of an intelligent,
IoT based device ready for use in industrial conditions.
Figure below shows a closed­loop system with ESP32 microprocessor used as the con­
troller. In such system,µC compares digital feedback signal with setpoint value and out­
puts the PWM control signal given the error value.
Figure 3.11: Schematic of applied digital control loop
The microprocessor houses a PI controller to control the pressure in the vessel in real time.
Control loop runs continuously and performs monitoring, using interrupts to blow through
the system when condensation is detected. ESP32 provides interrupt slots for each core
40
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:47==
with specific priority levels. When using interrupts or Interrupt Service Routine (ISR), the
program executes the tasks described in the ISR and then returns to the main loop. In
this case, the program monitors the pressure and when condensation approaches, the
ISR opens the valve and all accumulated moisture is removed from the system.
3.4.2
Selected components
The difference between components from 2­point Flushing System and Automated Spud­
ing Valve is only in the actuator, so the rest of the components remained the same. The
list of components is presented below:
• ESP32 PICO V3 based board,
• Supmea SUP­P350K Pressure sensor,
• 2­way proportional motor globe valve by Bürkert (3280) ­ for controlling the flow rate
of liquid and gaseous media,
• Infineon N­Channel, MOSFET, 50 A 30 V, IPP055N03L
• Resistors: 56, 6.8k, 10k,
• Fluid Component International (FCI) FS10A mass flow sensor.
When looking for a suitable valve, I was primarily guided by the assumptions in section 3.1.
Proportional control capability is crucial here to enable real­time pressure and flowrate
control over the correct range. The selected valve meets all design assumptions: material,
control type, supply, medium, connection type, temperature and flowrate. Much of the
research done in selecting the actuator was the valve type suitable for the project. Due
to the possibility of precise control and small dimensions, the globe valve was chosen.
This is a type of valve primarily used to modulate flow via moveable plug between the
two separate chambers in the valve body. The selected valve is electrically controlled
by a linear stepper motor. An additional advantage is the total weight of the valve ­ 0.7
kg in this type of system allows you not to worry about potential bending stresses. This
particular valve is powered by 24VDC, so it is possible to connect it to the power output
of the ESP board. The device in the Standard Control Valve version is controlled by the
PWM 0­10V signal with a frequency of 800Hz, which allows the use of the desired type
of control. 2­way proportional motor globe valve is presented on the figure below.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.12: Proportional valve in a sealed housing
In this case, it was decided to use the Normally Closed mode in relation to the valve,
because in this type of application, full opening of the valve and a large pressure drop is
highly inadvisable. In addition, the valve has a position detection after a power failure,
which acts as an additional security:
• In the event of a power failure, the current valve position is retained.
• When the voltage is re­applied, the internal electronics automatically detects the
current position.
The final element of the whole system was the implementation of the PI controller on the
microcontroller. The desired operation of the controller is as follows:
1. Pressure sensor measures the pressure in the tank.
2. Measurement signal is produced.
3. Measurement signal is compared to the setpoint.
4. Error signal is computed (error = setpoint ­ measurement).
5. Based on error, actuating signal is sent to the valve.
One of the important issues that should be remembered when implementing PI control is
the windup effect accompanying I term ­ integration is a continual summing of error as long
as error is not equal to zero. As a result, the value of I term rises to high values (positive
or negative). The calculated output exceeds the physical constraints of the actuator so it
remains at the limit regardless of the signal at the process output ­ this causes significant
overshoot. In the case of a fermentation process the principle is as follows:
• Going from X mbar to Y mbar in a certain amount of time: PI starts at 100% but
as the pressure builds slower than PI expects, by the time we hit setpoint value,
integral value will drop too late.
42
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:49==
In order to prevent windup, the solution used in this case is setting up limits on integral
term values. The idea is to stop accumulating other values than in range of 0 to 100% of
duty cycle.
3.4.3
System assembly
Based on the previously assembled 2­point Flushing System setup, the actuator was
replaced with a proportional valve and the testing phase began at Flying Couch ­ brewery
based in Copenhagen.
The complete test system consisting of: proportional valve, mass flow sensor and pres­
sure sensor connected to control box has been presented on the figure below.
Figure 3.13: Automated Spunding Valve test setup
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
43
==PAGE:50==
44
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:51==
4
Industrial experiments & Results
This chapter presents the conducted theoretical and industrial experiments and their re­
sults. They were aimed at understanding the process dynamics and verifying the pro­
posed solutions, their reliability and efficiency in removing condensation. The experi­
ments were conducted in association with two Copenhagen breweries ­ Empirical and
Flying Couch, who provided their equipment and space to make it happen.
In the case of the experiments performed in the chapter below, the main performance eval­
uation criterion was the effectiveness of condensation removal ­ measured either using a
formula or based on gathered data on the monitoring platform. When designing experi­
ments suitable for conducting an evaluation or gaining knowledge about the process, the
question was always asked whether a given test would make it closer to answering the
ultimate question ­ whether a specific solution made sense in an industrial environment.
4.1
Cyclone Separator ­ efficiency simulation
4.1.1
Introduction
The most important calculation in case of Cyclone Separator is the collection efficiency
­ this parameter describes how effective the separator is in separating particles with a
specific size. The first experiment conducted will focus on determining this parameter.
By investigating how effective this solution is, both for conventional and high efficiency
separator type, one will be able to assess whether its use in a real system makes sense.
Equation allowing to calculate efficiency for the j­th particle size range was presented in
equation 3.12:
nj =
1
1 + (d50/dpj)2
where:
• nj ­ collection efficiency for j­th particle size range (in micrometers),
• d50 ­ cut point diameter (in micrometers),
• dpj ­ diameter of the j­th particle size range (in micrometers).
Using the formula above, efficiency in the range [0 ­ 50 µm] will be calculated. The evalu­
ation of the solution will depend on the performance primarily at the 10 µm point, where it
was assumed that water droplets of this size would be in the real system. The procedure
followed is shown below:
1. Calculate the cut point diameter for conventional (2D2D) separator type.
2. Calculate the collection efficiency for the the dpj in range [0 ­ 50 µm].
3. Repeat 1­2 for high efficiency (1D3D) separator type.
As stated in the previous chapter, the conducted efficiency study also aims to answer the
4 questions posed when designing:
1. Does the usage of separator make sense?
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
45
==PAGE:52==
2. Which type is more effective in this case?
3. What is the effect of D (barrel diameter)?
4. What is the effect of Q (flow rate)?
The decision to proceed with this solution and further industrial tests would be made on
the basis of the simulation results ­ if efficiency was good enough for one of the types of
the separators, the next step would be to validate the solution.
4.1.2
Discussion & Results
The results of the calculations performed are presented in the figures below.
Figure 4.1 presents collection efficiency comparison between two types of separators.
The red line on the plot shows the indicator of the range of 10 micrometers we are inter­
ested in.
Figure 4.1: Collection efficiency comparison between two types of separators
This plot answers the first question asked above ­ does it make sense to use a cyclone
separator? Given the above assumption that the water droplets are 10 µm and the barrel
diameter D = 10.9 cm is used, it can easily be seen that there is about 30% of efficiency
for 2D2D type and 40% of efficiency for 1D3D around the point of interest.
Is it good enough? Can we manipulate other system variables? The following considera­
tions present the efficiency obtained when testing changes in diameter D and volumetric
flow rate.
Figure 4.2 and figure 4.3 present how efficiency changes with manipulation of D param­
eter. Figure 4.2 presents doubled value of diameter and figure 4.3 presents halved value
of diameter compared to the original value.
46
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.2: Doubled value of D.
Figure 4.3: Halved value of D.
The next two figures present the study of the influence of flowrate on cyclone efficiency.
The first figure shows twice as much gas flowrate, the second two times less flowrate than
the original.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.4: Doubled value of flow rate.
Figure 4.5: Halved value of flow rate
Based on the research on the efficiency of the cyclone separator for two of its types (1D3D
and 2D2D), the following conclusions can be drawn:
1. The cyclone collection efficiency increases with an increase in the Volumetric
flow rate of Blower and a decrease in the barrel diameter,
2. the cyclone collection efficiency decreases with a decrease in the Volumetric
flow rate of Blower and an increase in the barrel diameter.
With the selected dimensions of the solution, efficiency is not good enough to proceed
with it with industrial tests ­ a minimum of 90% efficiency would make sense, otherwise too
much liquid could be deposited on the sensor surface. Due to the very small dimensions
of the separator corresponding to high efficiency and the cost of production itself, it was
decided to abandon the mechanical solution to the condensation problem. Instead, a
decision was made to change the approach and follow the path of the control system and
combine hardware with software to remove the condensation problem.
48
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:55==
4.2
2­point Flushing System ­ Condensation experiment
4.2.1
Introduction
The validation of the 2­point Flushing System took place in an industrial setting, during the
actual fermentation process at the Empirical brewery based in Copenhagen. The system
was connected to the fermentation vessel and the entire process was monitored. The
main criterion for efficiency was the quality of moisture removal accumulated in the sys­
tem. When examining the data from the plot, one should take into account any actions
carried out by the personnel in the brewery that may affect the analyzed batch ­ any ad­
ditional cooling or manual pressure change by the adjustment of manual spunding valve.
The test procedure was as follows:
1. The system is connected to the fermentation vessel and the fermentation process
is carried out.
2. Every hour the valve opens fully for 1 second and the moisture is removed.
3. The entire process is repeated throughout the fermentation period.
4.2.2
Discussion & Results
In order to plot the data, Plotly ­ Pythons’ graphing library has been used. The data
obtained during the fermentation process in the Empirical brewery is shown in the plot
below.
Figure 4.6: Example of noisy plot caused by valve openings
Since Plotly is capable of interactive zoom in and zoom out in real time, it is easy to
demonstrate the occurrence of these spikes. It is visible that opening event causes spikes.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.7: Zoomed in plot showing spikes
As a result, unwanted spikes are removed and what is visible on the chart is the amount
of condensation noise remaining. Finding specific datapoints and removing them is done
by manipulating the data, while the final interpolation is done using the ’connectgaps =
True’ parameter. Filtered plot is presented below.
Figure 4.8: Previous plot after the usage of filter
Zooming in to previously selected range, it is shown that the occurrence of spikes has
been removed.
50
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.9: Zoomed in plot showing no spikes
The filter works as intended, deletes the events generated by valve operation, and leaves
only system operation data during fermentation. The data show the potential of the ap­
plied solution ­ there are no indications of condensation in the data, visible in the single
spike chart results from the opening of the valve by the working personnel during the fer­
mentation. The conducted experiment should be repeated to make sure that the obtained
data are realistic.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
51
==PAGE:58==
4.3
System analysis based on process reaction tests
4.3.1
Introduction
The purpose of this experiment is to find out how the process responds to controller output.
With this method, one is able to determine the gains of the PI controller. The experiment
described below was carried out at Flying Couch, a Copenhagen based brewery. The
first step is to get the steady state of the system with a specific controller output. Then,
when changing the controller mode to manual, the process variable change is recorded
until the system stabilizes again. By performing process reaction test, one can obtain the
basic characteristics of the system: Process gain, Time constant and Dead Time.
1. Process gain (Kp) ­ describes how much the process variable changes and what is
the direction of the change.
2. Time constant (Tp) ­ describes how fast the process variable moves in response
to the controller output. In gas, liquid or powder applications usually minutes or
seconds are used as an unit.
3. Dead Time (L) ­ describes the delay before the process variable starts to respond
to the controller output.
Controller tuning is performed by substituting the parameters read from the plot:
1. Kc = 0.9 r(t)/NL,
2. Ti = 3.33 L.
as it was presented in chapter 2.4.2. To simulate changing flow in the fermentation pro­
cess, Alicat Mass flow controller was added to the componenets composing the system.
It is not part of the final solution setup, however it is part of the prototype test setup used
in industrial experiment.
In order to perform process reaction test, one has to follow three main steps:
1. Starting at steady state.
2. Controller output moves far enough and fast enough to force a response that clearly
dominates any noise or random error in the measured process variable signal.
3. Finish in another steady state.
An important thing to remember is the selection of the loop sampling time. Rule of thumb
states that it should be at least 10 times per time constant (T ≤0.1Tp). Sampling too slowly
has negative impact on controller performance and may lead to unsafe system operation.
In case of this experiment, loop sampling time was set to 200 ms.
4.3.2
Discussion & Results
The method is performed in manual mode so control loop take no action occurs and the
process response can be isolated. In this experiment, step input corresponds to changing
the duty cycle on the controller output from 100% to 0%. The change in the pressure as
function of time is presented below.
52
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.10: Process reaction curve ­ pressure and controller output
The figure can be described in several phases:
1. In the initial phase between 11:00 and 12:00, there is no gas in the vessel ­ the tank
is completely empty and the valve is 100% closed.
2. In the second phase, at 12:00, the pumping of gas into a vessel with a gas inlet equal
to 50 SLPM began. The gas pumping was completed at 12:17, reaching 1908 mbar,
where for the next 3 minutes the system reached a steady state stopping at 1893
mbar.
3. Phase three begins at 12:20 pm and the valve fully opens (step input with 100% duty
cycle to 0% duty cycle) and for the next 8 minutes all accumulated gas is drained
from the vessel. The system stabilizes at atmospheric pressure (1020 mbar).
4. The fourth phase is to re­pump air with a gas inlet equal to 50 SLPM into the system
and obtain another steady state at 1380 mbar.
It can be seen that this type of process is a self­regulating process. This means that
the controlled variable eventually returns to a stable value (steady­state) without external
intervention.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.11: Process reaction curve characteristics
To determine system characteristics, calculations were made:
• Process variable change was read from the plot, ∆Cp = 100%,
• Lag: In [12:20:20] timestamp controller output changes and in [12:20:25] timestamp
process starts to react, L = 5 sec,
• Time constant was read from the plot, [12:25:25] ­ [12:20:25] Tp = 5 min,
• Reaction rate calculated based on the equation: N =
100
5min = 20 (%min−1),
• Lag ratio calculated based on the equation: R = 0.08min
5min
= 0.016.
The controller settings in this case are:
• Controller gain Kc = 0.9 r(t)/NL = 281.25,
• Controller integral time Ti = 3.33 L = 0.27.
4.4 Automated Spunding Valve Condensation experiments 4.4.1 Introduction The aim of
this experiments is to validate the operation of the Automated Spunding Valve the effec­
tiveness of the solution when condensation occurs. Due to the fact that this Master Thesis
is written in the summer, where condensation is practically nonexistent, the experiments
required to artificially create condensation conditions in the system. The testing setup
was build up in Flying Couch and is presented below. Figure 4.12: Automated Spunding
Valve test setup for condensation experiments The setup consists of: 1. Drawell DLK­
Series Rapid LowTemperature Cooling Circulating Bath, 2. F100 Brewtools 50L Unitank,
3. Brewtools Counterflow Cooler, 4. Conically designed flow channel connected to FCI
mass flow sensor, 5. Automated Spunding Valve setup, 6. Alicat mass flow controller (not
shown on the figure). Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for noninvasive
realtime fermentation monitoring devices 55
54
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:61==
4.4
Automated Spunding Valve ­ Condensation experiments
4.4.1
Introduction
The aim of this experiments is to validate the operation of the Automated Spunding Valve
­ the effectiveness of the solution when condensation occurs. Due to the fact that this
Master Thesis is written in the summer, where condensation is practically non­existent,
the experiments required to artificially create condensation conditions in the system. The
testing setup was build up in Flying Couch and is presented below.
Figure 4.12: Automated Spunding Valve test setup for condensation experiments
The setup consists of:
1. Drawell DLK­Series Rapid Low­Temperature Cooling Circulating Bath,
2. F100 Brewtools 50L Unitank,
3. Brewtools Counterflow Cooler,
4. Conically designed flow channel connected to FCI mass flow sensor,
5. Automated Spunding Valve setup,
6. Alicat mass flow controller (not shown on the figure).
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
55
==PAGE:62==
The above setup allows to simulate the variable flow during fermentation with the Alicat
mass flow controller. The cooling of the gas circulating by the Counterflow Cooler takes
place through pumping the cold water (roughly 2°C) into the wall surrounding the inlet
of this steel spiral structure. Condensation occurs through the temperature difference
between the gas and the cool surface. FCI mass flow sensor was placed at an angle of
45 degrees to the vertical and horizontal planes and by adding conically designed flow
channel to it the accumulation of liquid is prevented (it is able to drip off). The entire
experiment takes 6 hours.
In such artificially induced conditions, where the occurrence of condensation is certain,
the operation of the system and the performance of a controlled flushing with a smooth
pressure and flow profile is tested. Two condensation experiments were carried out using
the described setup.
4.4.2
Discussion and results
The occurrence of condensation is mainly characterized by sudden spikes visible in the
plot, but also makes the sensor drift ­ measured values are overstated. The best outcome
would be to get the same value of the read flow in relation to the reference value from the
mass flow controller.
Figure 4.13: Automated Spunding Valve ­ first condensation experiment
The above figure shows the first experiment ­ data taken from the temperature sensor and
flow sensor during a 6­hour simulation of the variable flow during fermentation. The first
Y axis relates to the flow and temperature range, the second one to the valve opening
percentage. The simulated flow (first ramping up then ramping down) is the reference to
which the measurement will be compared. Two temperature values were measured:
• Off­gas temperature average: 18.32°C,
• Surface temperature: 5°C.
There is a vast temperature difference, so it can be assumed that condensation has oc­
curred. As can be seen, in this experiment, the measured flow practically coincides with
the reference flow. In the case of the Automated Spunding Valve system operation there
are still small spikes ­ this is not related to the occurrence of condensation, but to the
operation of the valve itself, which is confirmed by the valve opening profile. By changing
the data presentation using the averaging function in the case of data aggregation, the
following figure was obtained.
56
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.14: First Automated Spunding Valve experiment ­ averaged values
It can be seen that the measured flow and reference flow practically coincide, which is a
sign of proper system operation. You can see that the accuracy of the sensor has been
improved by the operation of Automated Spunding Valve.
The figure below shows the data from a second experiment performed after 15 hours on
the same experimental setup.
Figure 4.15: Automated Spunding Valve ­ second condensation experiment
In this case, the temperature values were:
• Off­gas temperature average: 16.26°C,
• Surface temperature: 5°C.
Compared to gathered data, in the first experiment, we see less accuracy in the overlap­
ping of the measured flow profile and reference flow, and we can see much larger spikes.
This is due to the accumulation of liquid on the Counterflow Cooler surface after a long
cooling process. After some time, water drops run off the steel spiral and get into the flow
channel, which lowers the measurement accuracy of the sensor. This is a disadvantage of
the test setup itself, not the system under test. Nevertheless, the data obtained from this
experiment is promising and is better than the data from the sensor with the condensation
error. After averaging the data, the following figure was obtained.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
57
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.16: Second Automated Spunding Valve experiment ­ averaged values
The performed experiments proved that the proposed system removed the measurement
noise and improved the accuracy of the tested sensor. The advantage of the Automated
Spunding Valve setup is the ability of putting it vertically ­ unlike the 2­point Flushing Sys­
tem, where putting solenoid valve downward may result in malfunction of the solenoid. In
the future, the test setup would definitely need to be changed to remove the problem of
running water droplets after a long cooling time and to perform more tests to properly vali­
date the reliability of the system as the test setup was designed to ensure that temperature
difference between gas temperature and room temperature simulates winter conditions
(approx. 10­15°C).
58
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:65==
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
59
==PAGE:66==
5
Conclusions
In this Master Thesis, different solutions were proposed to remove the problem of con­
densation from the surface of sensors used in the industrial fermentation process. Metic­
ulous research has been carried out on the process itself, current condensation removal
techniques on the market, control theory and pattern types related to mixing gas­liquid
phases. In cooperation with Zymoscope ApS 3 solutions were developed ­ Cyclone Sep­
arator, 2­point Flushing System and Automated Spunding Valve. These solutions are ei­
ther to remove condensation from the system or passive phase separation. The Cyclone
Separator is a mechanical solution that passively separates phases, the 2­point Flushing
System is a combination of an automated moisture flushing process from the system with
a noise removal filter (from the monitoring platform), and the Automated Spunding Valve
is a upgraded version of the previous solution ­ with fewer weaknesses, less components
and with control system able to manage pressure and flow profile. They were tested and
evaluated based on the effectiveness of condensation removal ­ theoretically, during the
actual fermentation process and in the in­house setup of one of the cooperating brew­
eries. Findings from the experiments along with the collected data has been presented
and discussed ­ at the end, summing up the strengths and weaknesses of the proposed
solutions.
The Cyclone Separator at the selected dimensions does not meet the sufficient efficiency
conditions to be a useful solution. The manipulation of dimensions in the case of in­
creasing the diameter negatively affects the efficiency, while reducing the dimensions to
improve it does not allow this component to be manufactured and used reliably ­ in case of
significant condensation occurence, the amount of separated liquid could clog the system.
The 2­point Flushing System works well as a solution in an industrial environment ­ it
removes condensation reliably, but it has disadvantages. Proactive disposal of mois­
ture from the system still leaves noise to be filtered and assumes the usage of a manual
spunding valve, which is absent compared to the Automated Spunding Valve. In addition,
in case of prolonged usage, the rapid opening and closing of the valve is stressing the
system by sudden pressure drops and spikes in flowrate. It also affects the accuracy of
the solution, as too quick changes to the system may not be registered due to the slow
response of the mass flow sensor (30 seconds for this particular component).
After evaluating all three solutions, the Automated Spunding Valve is a clear favorite, with
the potential to be industrial solution as it has much better performance than the other
two. The 2­point Flushing System proved that this approach to solving the problem of
condensation makes sense. Changing the actuator from solenoid valve to proportional
valve and thus removing the manual spunding valve from the system and the smooth
pressure and flow profile is an additional advantage indicating the superiority of this so­
lution. It has been proven that the proposed system removed the measurement noise
and improved the accuracy of the tested sensor. In the future, in the winter and autumn
months, where the accumulation of condensation is much greater, further validation of
this solution should be carried out.
60
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Quain D Boulton C. Brewing Yeast and Fermentation. Blackwell Publishing Ltd,
2001.
[2]
M. Kanauchi. Brewing Technology. IntechOpen, 2017.
[3]
Tortorello M. L. Batt C. A. Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology: Second Edition. De­
partment of Food Science, Cornell University, 2014.
[4]
K. Stephan. Heat Transfer in Condensation and Boiling. Springer, 1992.
[5]
H. R. Trechsel. Moisture Analysis and Condensation Control in Building Envelopes.
ASTM International, 2001.
[6]
G. F. Hewitt. Handbook of Multiphase Systems. Hemisphere Publishing Corpora­
tion, New York, 1982.
[7]
P. B. Whalley. Boiling and Condensation and Gas­Liquid Flow. Oxford Science Pub­
lication, 1987.
[8]
C.E Brennen. Fundamentals of Multiphase Flows. California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, California, 2005.
[9]
Nagrath I. J. Control Systems Engineering. New Academic Science, 2021.
[10]
M. Ungarish. Hydrodynamics of Suspensions ­ Fundamentals of Centrifugal and
Gravity Separation. Springer­Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1993.
[11]
T.M. Tritt. Thermoelectric Materials: Principles, Structure, Properties, and Applica­
tions. Clemson University, 2011.
[12]
J. Bogusz. “Elektronika Praktyczna”. In: (2014).
[13]
L. Wang. Theoretical study of cyclone design. Texas A&M University, 2004.
[14]
Živković M. A. Batalović V. B Danilović D. Š. “Centrifugal separation of liquid carbon
dioxide from natural gas”. In: (2014).
[15]
K. Bashir. “Design and fabrication of cyclone separator”. In: (2015).
[16]
Mayinger F. Muschelknautz S. “Separation of liquid from vapour upon pressure re­
lief”. In: (1989).
[17]
Popescu D. Process control for Industrial Applications. wiley, 2017.
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
61
==PAGE:68==
62
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:69==
List of Figures
2.1
Condensation effect on MEMS sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
MEMS­based mass flow sensor placed on the pipeline of fermentation vessel 10
2.3
Flow and pressure profile example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Example of condensation bias on measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Sketches of flow regimes for two­phase flow in a vertical pipe. Adapted
from Brennen (2005).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
Sketches of flow regimes for two­phase flow in a horizontal pipe. Adapted
from Brennen (2005).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
The basic control loop sketched using DigiKey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.8
The block diagram of the PI controller sketched in DigiKey . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.9
Process reaction curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.10 Peltier Module ­ both modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1
Cyclone Separator types (Reprinted from [15])
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Schematic diagram of cyclone dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Spunding valve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.4
ESP32­based board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.5
Pressure sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.6
Covna 2/2 HK0018 Solenoid Valve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.7
Electronic circuit visualization in Falstad simulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.8
FCI mass flow sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.9
Control box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.10 Test setup attached to vessel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.11 Schematic of applied digital control loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.12 Proportional valve in a sealed housing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.13 Automated Spunding Valve test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.1
Collection efficiency comparison between two types of separators
. . . . . 46
4.2
Doubled value of D.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.3
Halved value of D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.4
Doubled value of flow rate.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.5
Halved value of flow rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.6
Example of noisy plot caused by valve openings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.7
Zoomed in plot showing spikes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.8
Previous plot after the usage of filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.9
Zoomed in plot showing no spikes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.10 Process reaction curve ­ pressure and controller output
. . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.11 Process reaction curve characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.12 Automated Spunding Valve test setup for condensation experiments . . . . 55
4.13 Automated Spunding Valve ­ first condensation experiment . . . . . . . . . 56
4.14 First Automated Spunding Valve experiment ­ averaged values . . . . . . . 57
4.15 Automated Spunding Valve ­ second condensation experiment . . . . . . . 57
4.16 Second Automated Spunding Valve experiment ­ averaged values . . . . . 58
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
63
==PAGE:70==
A
2­point filter
1
import plotly.graph_objects as go
2
from plotly.subplots import make_subplots
3
import pandas as pd
4
import numpy as np
5
6
7
path = r'C:\PRACA\Zymoscope\Software\Data\SS-Zymometer03.csv'
8
9
#loading and preprocessing the data
10
df = pd.read_csv(path, sep =';')
11
df.columns = ['Timestamp ', 'Closed ', 'Flowrate_avg ', 'Pressure_avg(filtered)',
'Open ']
12
print(df)
13
14
df.info()
15
16
data = pd.read_csv(r'C:\PRACA\Zymoscope\Software\Data\SS-Zymometer03.csv', sep
=';')
17
data.columns = ['Timestamp ', 'Closed ', 'Flowrate_avg ', 'Pressure_avg(filtered)
', 'Open ']
18
19
dates = data['Timestamp ']
20
flowrate = data['Flowrate_avg ']
21
pressure = data['Pressure_avg(filtered)']
22
opened = data['Open']
23
closed = data['Closed ']
24
25
26
fig = go.Figure([go.Scatter(x = dates, y = flowrate , marker_color = 'black',
opacity = 0.6, name = 'Flowrate_avg ', mode = 'lines', connectgaps = True)
])
27
fig.add_traces([go.Scatter(x = dates, y = pressure , marker_color = 'blue',
name = 'Pressure_avg(filtered)', mode = 'lines', connectgaps = True)])
28
fig.add_traces([go.Scatter(x = dates, y = opened , marker_color = 'yellow ',
name = 'Opened', mode = 'markers ')])
29
fig.add_traces([go.Scatter(x = dates, y = closed , marker_color = 'green', name
= 'Closed', mode = 'markers ')])
30
31
32
33
# Add figure title
34
fig.update_layout(title_text = "SS-Zymometer 03 Data")
35
36
# Set x-axis title
37
fig.update_xaxes(title_text = "Timestamps")
38
39
fig.show()
40
41
42
data = pd.read_csv(r'C:\PRACA\Zymoscope\Software\Data\SS-Zymometer03.csv', sep
=';')
43
data.columns = ['Timestamp ', 'Closed ', 'Flowrate_avg ', 'Pressure_avg(filtered)
', 'Open ']
44
45
dates = data['Timestamp ']
46
flowrate = data['Flowrate_avg ']
47
pressure = data['Pressure_avg(filtered)']
48
opened = data['Open']
64
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:71==
49
closed = data['Closed ']
50
51
# Create figure with secondary y-axis
52
fig = make_subplots(specs=[[{"secondary_y": True}]])
53
54
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = flowrate , marker_color = 'black',
opacity = 0.6, name = 'Flowrate_avg ', mode = 'lines', connectgaps = True),
secondary_y = False)
55
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = pressure , marker_color = 'blue', name
= 'Pressure_avg(filtered)', mode = 'lines', connectgaps = True),
secondary_y = True)
56
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = opened , marker_color = 'yellow ', name
= 'Opened', mode = 'markers '), secondary_y = False)
57
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = closed , marker_color = 'green', name =
'Closed', mode = 'markers '), secondary_y = False)
58
59
60
61
# Add figure title
62
fig.update_layout(title_text = "SS-Zymometer 03 Data")
63
64
# Set x-axis title
65
fig.update_xaxes(title_text = "Timestamps")
66
67
# Set y-axes titles
68
fig.update_yaxes(title_text = "<b> Flowrate_avg </b> ", secondary_y=False)
69
fig.update_yaxes(title_text = "<b> Pressure_avg(filtered) </b> ", secondary_y=
True)
70
71
fig.show()
72
73
74
print(data.loc[data['Open'] == 1])
75
print(data.loc[data['Closed '] == 1])
76
77
data['Timestamp '] = pd.to_datetime(data['Timestamp '])
#timestamp object
78
79
data['Timestamp '] = np.where(data['Open'] == 1, data['Timestamp '] + pd.
DateOffset(seconds = -5), data['Timestamp '])# FOR OPEN DATAPOINTS
80
data['Timestamp '] = np.where(data['Closed '] == 1, data['Timestamp '] + pd.
DateOffset(seconds = 30), data['Timestamp '])# FOR CLOSED DATAPOINTS
81
82
print(data.loc[data['Open'] == 1])
83
84
# Create figure with secondary y-axis
85
fig = make_subplots(specs=[[{"secondary_y": True}]])
86
87
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = flowrate , marker_color = 'black',
opacity = 0.6, name = 'Flowrate_avg ', mode = 'lines', connectgaps = True),
secondary_y = False)
88
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = pressure , marker_color = 'blue', name
= 'Pressure_avg(filtered)', mode = 'lines', connectgaps = True),
secondary_y = True)
89
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = opened , marker_color = 'yellow ', name
= 'Opened', mode = 'markers '), secondary_y = False)
90
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = dates, y = closed , marker_color = 'green', name =
'Closed', mode = 'markers '), secondary_y = False)
91
92
93
94
# Add figure title
95
fig.update_layout(title_text = "SS-Zymometer 03 Data")
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
65
==PAGE:72==
96
97
# Set x-axis title
98
fig.update_xaxes(title_text = "Timestamps")
99
100
# Set y-axes titles
101
fig.update_yaxes(title_text = "<b> Flowrate_avg </b> ", secondary_y=False)
102
fig.update_yaxes(title_text = "<b> Pressure_avg(filtered) </b> ", secondary_y=
True)
103
104
fig.show()
105
106
Open_events = list(data[data['Open '] == 1]["Timestamp"].drop_duplicates())
107
108
Timestamps_to_remove = set()
109
110
111
import datetime
112
113
NUM_SECONDS_AHEAD = 60 * 4
114
115
116
for event in Open_events:
117
next_four_mins = [event + datetime.timedelta(seconds=x) for x in range(1,
NUM_SECONDS_AHEAD)]
118
Timestamps_to_remove.update(next_four_mins)
119
120
Timestamps_to_remove_pd = pd.DataFrame(Timestamps_to_remove , columns = ["
Timestamp"])
121
122
data_no_timestamps = data.merge(Timestamps_to_remove_pd , on = "Timestamp", how
= "outer", indicator = True)
123
124
data_no_timestamps = data_no_timestamps[data_no_timestamps['_merge '] == '
left_only ']
125
126
flowrate = data_no_timestamps['Flowrate_avg ']
127
pressure = data_no_timestamps['Pressure_avg(filtered)']
128
opened = data_no_timestamps['Open']
129
closed = data_no_timestamps['Closed ']
130
131
# Create figure with secondary y-axis
132
fig = make_subplots(specs=[[{"secondary_y": True}]])
133
134
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = data_no_timestamps["Timestamp"], y = flowrate ,
marker_color = 'black', opacity = 0.6, name = 'Flowrate_avg ', mode = '
lines', connectgaps = True), secondary_y = False)
135
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = data_no_timestamps["Timestamp"], y = pressure ,
marker_color = 'blue', name = 'Pressure_avg(filtered)', mode = 'lines',
connectgaps = True), secondary_y = True)
136
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = data_no_timestamps["Timestamp"], y = opened ,
marker_color = 'yellow', name = 'Opened', mode = 'markers '), secondary_y =
False)
137
fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x = data_no_timestamps["Timestamp"], y = closed ,
marker_color = 'green', name = 'Closed ', mode = 'markers '), secondary_y =
False)
138
139
140
141
# Add figure title
142
fig.update_layout(title_text = "SS-Zymometer 03 Data no spikes")
143
144
# Set x-axis title
66
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:73==
145
fig.update_xaxes(title_text = "Timestamps")
146
147
# Set y-axes titles
148
fig.update_yaxes(title_text = "<b> Flowrate_avg </b> ", secondary_y=False)
149
fig.update_yaxes(title_text = "<b> Pressure_avg(filtered) </b> ", secondary_y=
True)
150
151
fig.show()
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
67
==PAGE:74==
B
PI algorithm
B.1
pi_valve.h
1
#ifndef PID_CONTROLLER_H
2
#define PID_CONTROLLER_H
3
4
#include "system.h"
5
#include "driver/mcpwm.h"
6
7
extern float pressure_valve;
8
9
10
#define PID_KP 2.0f
11
#define PID_KI 0.5f
12
13
#define PID_LIM_MIN 0.0f
14
#define PID_LIM_MAX 100.0f
15
16
/*
17
#define PID_LIM_MIN_INT -10.0f // deduce proper value
18
#define PID_LIM_MAX_INT 10.0f
// deduce proper value
19
*/
20
21
#define VALVE_GPIO
(2)
// GPIO - MCPWM version (prev 21)
22
23
24
typedef struct PIDController{
25
26
// Gains
27
float Kp;
28
float Ki;
29
30
// Output limits
31
float limMin;
32
float limMax;
33
34
// Controller memory
35
float integrator;
36
float error;
37
38
float proportional;
39
40
// Output signal
41
float out;
42
43
} PIDController;
44
45
void PIDController_Init();
46
float PIDController_Update(PIDController *pid, float setpoint , float
measurement);
47
void pid_task(void *pvParameters);
48
void pid_data_upload_task(void *pvParameters);
49
50
51
#endif
68
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:75==
B.2
pi_valve.c
1
#include "pi_valve.h"
2
3
float pressure_valve = -1; // global variable which this file has access to
4
float sampling_rate = 300;
5
6
void PIDController_Init()
7
{
8
9
if (xTaskCreatePinnedToCore(pid_task , "pid_task", 8192, NULL, 10, NULL,
tskNO_AFFINITY) != pdPASS)
10
{
11
ESP_LOGW("PIDController_Init", "FAILED ALLOCATING pid_task");
12
}
13
if (xTaskCreatePinnedToCore(pid_data_upload_task , "pid_data_upload_task",
8192, NULL, 10, NULL, tskNO_AFFINITY) != pdPASS)
14
{
15
ESP_LOGW("PIDController_Init", "FAILED ALLOCATING pid_data_upload_task
");
16
}
17
}
18
19
float valve_opening_to_pwm(float out)
20
{
21
22
float pwm_value = 100 + out;
23
if (pwm_value > 100)
24
{
25
pwm_value = 100;
26
}
27
if (pwm_value < 0)
28
{
29
pwm_value = 0;
30
}
31
return pwm_value;
32
}
33
34
float PIDController_Update(PIDController *pid, float setpoint , float
measurement)
35
{
36
// Error signal
37
float error = setpoint - measurement;
38
pid->error = error;
39
// Proportional part
40
pid->proportional = pid_kp * error;
41
42
// Integral - previous value from last iteration + new term
43
float new_integrator = pid->integrator + pid_ki * error;
44
45
// Computing output and applying limits
46
pid->out = pid->proportional + new_integrator;
47
48
bool is_saturated = false;
49
if (pid->out > pid->limMax)
50
{
51
pid->out = pid->limMax;
52
if (error > 0)
53
{
54
is_saturated = true;
55
}
56
}
57
else if (pid->out < pid->limMin)
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
69
==PAGE:76==
58
{
59
pid->out = pid->limMin;
60
if (error < 0)
61
{
62
is_saturated = true;
63
}
64
}
65
if (is_saturated == false)
66
{
67
pid->integrator = new_integrator;
68
}
69
return pid->out;
70
}
71
72
struct PIDController pid;
73
struct PIDController *pidptr = &pid;
74
75
void pid_task(void *pvParameters)
76
{
77
pidptr ->proportional = 0;
78
pidptr ->limMin = -100;
79
pidptr ->limMax = 0;
80
pidptr ->integrator = 0;
81
pidptr ->error = 0;
82
pidptr ->out = (float)valve_durty_cycle;
83
84
// wait for setup completion
85
xEventGroupWaitBits(generel_event_group ,
86
SETUP_COMPLETE_BIT ,
87
pdFALSE ,
88
pdFALSE ,
89
portMAX_DELAY);
90
91
/*
-------- MCPWM PART ------------ */
92
// printf("Initializing gpio...\n");
93
mcpwm_gpio_init(MCPWM_UNIT_0 , MCPWM0A , VALVE_GPIO);
94
// printf("Initialization successful.\n");
95
96
mcpwm_config_t pwm_config = {
97
.frequency = 800,
// frequency = 800Hz
98
.cmpr_a = 0,
// duty cycle of PWMxA = 0
99
.counter_mode = MCPWM_UP_COUNTER , // counter going up
100
.duty_mode = MCPWM_DUTY_MODE_0 ,
101
};
102
103
mcpwm_init(MCPWM_UNIT_0 , MCPWM_TIMER_0 , &pwm_config);
104
// printf("Starting PWM.\n");
105
mcpwm_start(MCPWM_UNIT_0 , MCPWM_TIMER_0);
106
107
while (1)
108
{
109
if (pid_enabled == 0)
110
{
111
mcpwm_set_duty(MCPWM_UNIT_0 , MCPWM_TIMER_0 , MCPWM_OPR_A , ((float)
valve_durty_cycle));
112
}
113
else
114
{
115
PIDController_Update(pidptr, pid_setpoint , pressure_valve);
116
// printf("Error value: %f\n Duty cycle:%f\n Pressure reading:%f\n
, Timestamp: %f",pidptr->prevError , pidptr ->out,
pressure_valve , get_time_sec()*1000);
70
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:77==
117
// printf("%f, %f, %f, %lld \n", pidptr ->prevError , pidptr ->out,
pressure_valve , get_time_ms());
118
119
float pwm_value = valve_opening_to_pwm(pidptr ->out);
120
121
mcpwm_set_duty(MCPWM_UNIT_0 , MCPWM_TIMER_0 , MCPWM_OPR_A , pwm_value
);
122
123
printf("TS=%lld, SP=%f, MV=%f, E=%f, U=%f, P=%f, I=%f (k_i=%f, k_p
=%f)\n"
124
, get_time_ms()
125
, pid_setpoint
126
, pressure_valve
127
, pidptr->error
128
, pwm_value
129
, pidptr->proportional
130
, pidptr->integrator
131
, pid_ki
132
, pid_kp
133
);
134
}
135
136
vTaskDelay(sampling_rate / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
137
}
138
139
vTaskDelete(NULL);
140
}
141
142
void pid_data_upload_task(void *pvParameters)
143
{
144
// wait for setup completion
145
xEventGroupWaitBits(generel_event_group ,
146
SETUP_COMPLETE_BIT ,
147
pdFALSE ,
148
pdFALSE ,
149
portMAX_DELAY);
150
151
char str[256];
152
while (1)
153
{
154
printf("%lld, %f, %f, %f, %f, %f\n", get_time_ms(), pressure_valve ,
pidptr->error, pidptr->out, pidptr ->proportional , pidptr ->
integrator);
155
sprintf(str,
156
"{\"pid_error\":%f,\"pid_out\":%f,\"pid_integrator\":%f,\"
pid_proportional\":%f,\"pid_ki\":%f,\"pid_kp\":%f,\"pid_kd
\":0}",
157
pidptr->error, pidptr->out, pidptr ->integrator , pidptr ->
proportional , pidptr->Ki, pidptr ->Kp);
158
159
MQTT_send(str);
160
vTaskDelay(5000 / portTICK_PERIOD_MS);
161
}
162
}
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
71
==PAGE:78==
72
Intelligent control of liquid and gas phase separation for non­invasive real­time fermentation monitoring
devices
==PAGE:79==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.elektro.dtu.dk/
