==PAGE:1==
Citizen science mapping of mussel reefs:
development of a toolbox for local ﬁshermen
Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
Citizen science mapping of mussel reefs:
Development of a toolbox for local ﬁshermen
Master thesis (30 ECTS)
September 11th, 2022
Author:
Michelle Melin (DTU studentnumber s175734)
Main supervisor:
Jon C. Svendsen
Co-supervisors:
Karen Timmermann, Bjarne Stage
& Marie Hartlev Frausing
Published by:
DTU, Institute of Aquatic Resources, Kemitorvet,
Building 202, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Cover photo:
Michelle Melin, 2022. A photo mosaic of
a mussel bed recorded with the ROV.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis has been prepared for the MSc program in Aquatic Science and Tech-
nology at the Danish Technical University. The thesis was designed with the purpose
of testing how a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) could be used as a tool for mapping
biogenic reefs by local citizens.
The ROV was purchased from the danish engineering company EIVA. On a company visit
at EIVA in Skanderborg on 18 May, I attended a demonstration of the ROV to learn it’s
functions and get an introduction to the related ROV software developed by EIVA. I was
greeted by friendly and helpful people and it was exciting to see how the company was
organized. Due to technical problems with the initially purchased positioning system,
EIVA kindly lent me their Wayﬁnder DVL as a temporary solution, which I was very
grateful for. The ROV was received on 15 June and was available for approximately one
month. Thus, all ﬁeldwork and initial testing of the ROV were carried out during this
month, and learnings were made through trial and error. Ideally, more time should have
been used on testing and optimizing the control of the ROV. However, three larger ROV
surveys were successfully conducted in Roskilde Fjord and will be presented as a part
of this thesis. All planning and testing prior to the ﬁeldwork as well as the ﬁeldwork
was carried out fully independently, but with great support from two local ﬁshermen
who also provided boat access. EIVA provided me with an academic licence to their
software, which included access to their e-learning site and access to the ROV control
software NaviSuite Mobula and the NaviModel Producer software for processing of the
data collected with the ROV.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
First of all, a great thanks to my supervisor, Jon C. Svendsen, for the opportunity to
conduct this project, entrust me the responsibility of the ROV and the company contact,
and not at least for constructive comments and inputs at our meetings. I would also like
to thank my co-supervisors. Thanks to Karen Timmermann for her scientiﬁc input to the
data processing and analysis. A great thanks to Bjarne Stage for input and perspective
on the survey strategy and not at least for introducing me to the photo mosaic tool,
StripMaker, which truly has improved the visual presentation of the ROV videos in this
project. Thanks to Marie Hartlev Frausing for introducing me to the project.
In addition, many other people have been very helpful throughout the project. I would
like to thank Flemming Thorbjørn Hansen for the guidance and help with interpolation
in GIS. A great thanks to Aris Thomasberger for conducting the aerial drone footage of
the area - that was very kind of you. And also thanks for your inputs to GIS. Thanks
to Fletcher Thompson for lending me additional ROV equipment and for great inputs. I
would very much like to thank all the people from EIVA for the ROV demonstration in
Skanderborg, remote software installation, general guidance on ROV control and support
throughout the project. Thanks to the ﬁsherman Ib Ivar Dahl for sharing your experience
on mussel reef mapping in Helnæs Bay. The ﬁeldwork could not have been carried out
without help from the two ﬁshermen Kim Lund Jørgensen and Jonn Poulsen - thanks
for all your support, great company, laughter and nice stories about the fjord. Lastly, a
special thanks to my dearest friends, family and partner for loving support throughout
the project.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Blue mussel (Mytilus edulis) beds are important biogenic habitats with high ecological
value in coastal ecosystems. They provide shelter and nursery grounds for several ﬁsh
species, support a range of benthic invertebrates, improves water clarity and have a
stabilizing eﬀect on the sediment. Denmark is according to the EU Habitats Directive
obliged to protect biogenic reefs, if they can be classiﬁed as the habitat "Reefs 1170". In
2018, a Danish deﬁnition of biogenic reefs was published, which presented four criteria for
reef size, degree of coverage, stability and associated species community. Since then, no
biogenic reefs have oﬃcially been mapped and there exist no standard procedure for how
to meet the criteria. This study investigated the previous marine mapping of biogenic
reefs in Danish Natura 2000 sites and tested how a remotely operated vehicle (ROV)
can be used to map and document biogenic reefs in a cost-eﬀective way by involving
local ﬁshermen. The ROV testing was conducted at a minor site in Roskilde Fjord, Selsø
Hage, where blue mussels previously had been registered. Three larger ROV surveys
each covering an area of >2500 m2 were successfully conducted and demonstrated that
it was possible to survey the minimum area required. The video material were processed
in two ways to assess the criterion of coverage: qualitatively as a photo mosaic and
quantitatively by estimating the degree of coverage of the mussels in images exported
at selected intervals. The degree of coverage was interpolated using Inverse Distance
Weighing (IDW). The interpolation of area A revealed a coverage of 59.76 % mussels,
whereas area B had a coverage of 26.88 % and area C had a coverage of 32.11 %. However,
a cross-validation of the interpolation performance showed large uncertainties of area B
and C and the results should be interpreted cautiously.
The mussel beds were more
densely distributed in area A compared to area B and C, where mussels were more
homogeneously distributed in smaller patches. Throughout the ROV testing, emphasis
was placed on clarifying if and how the ROV could be a mapping tool in a conceptualized
citizen science project, and thus be a "tool in a mapping toolbox", where ﬁshermen would
collect data with the ROV. The ﬁeldwork was carried out with voluntary help from local
ﬁshermen, however due to a range of technical complications, it was assessed that the
ROV is not the ideal citizen science mapping tool. Nevertheless, alternative proposals
have been given for how the ﬁshermen can be involved in mapping biogenic reefs. Overall,
based on the ﬁndings of this study it is possible to fulﬁll the criteria of size and coverage
with a ROV, but a combination of mapping tools is recommended to increase eﬃciency
and to assess the remaining criteria of stability and associated species community.
==PAGE:6==
Dansk resumé
Blåmuslingebanker (M. edulis) udgør vigtige biogene levesteder i de kystnære økosystemer.
De biddrager med skjulesteder og som opvækstområde for adskillige ﬁskearter, under-
støtter en række bentiske invertebrater, forbedrer vandkvaliteten og har en stabiliserende
eﬀekt på sedimentet. Danmark er ifølge EU’s habitatdirektiv forpligtet til at beskytte
biogene rev, hvis de kan klassiﬁceres som habitatet "Rev 1170". I 2018 udkom en dansk
deﬁnition af biogene rev, som præsenterede ﬁre kriterier for revstørrelse, dækningsgrad,
stabilitet og tilhørende artssamfund. Siden da er ingen biogene rev oﬃcielt blevet kortlagt,
og der eksisterer ingen standardprocedure for, hvordan man opfylder kriterierne. Dette
studie undersøgte de tidligere marine kortlægninger af biogene rev i danske Natura 2000-
områder og testede, hvordan en undervandsdrone kan bruges til at kortlægge og dok-
umentere biogene rev på en omkostningseﬀektiv måde ved at involvere lokale ﬁskere.
Drone-testningen blev foretaget i Roskilde Fjord ved Selsø Hage, hvor der tidligere er
registreret blåmuslinger. Det lykkedes at udføre tre større drone-kortlægninger, der hver
dækkede et område på >2500 m2, og hvilket betød, at det var muligt at kortlægge det
påkrævede minimumsareal. Videomaterialet blev bearbejdet på to måder for at vurdere
kriteriet for dækningsgrad: kvalitativt med fotomosaik og kvantitativt ved at estimere
dækningsgraden af muslingerne i billeder eksporteret med udvalgte intervaller. Dæknings-
graden blev interpoleret ved brug af Inverse Distance Weighing (IDW). Interpoleringen af
område A viste en dækning på 59,76 % muslinger, hvorimod område B havde en dækning
på 26,88 % og område C havde en dækning på 32,11 %. En krydsvalidering af interpol-
eringen viste imidlertid store usikkerheder for område B og C, og resultaterne bør tolkes
varsomt. Muslingebankerne var tættere fordelt i område A sammenlignet med område B
og C, hvor muslingerne var mere homogent fordelt i noget mindre banker. Undervejs i
drone-testningen blev det vurderet om og hvordan dronen kunne være et kortlægnings-
værktøj i et konceptualiseret borgervidenskabsprojekt, og dermed være et "værktøj i en
kortlægningsværktøjskasse", hvor ﬁskere selv skulle kunne indsamle data med dronen.
Feltarbejdet blev udført med frivillig hjælp fra lokale ﬁskere, men på grund af en række
tekniske udfordringer blev det vurderet, at dronen ikke er det ideelle kortlægningsværktøj
for ﬁskere. På trods af det, er der givet tre alternative forslag til, hvordan ﬁskere kan
inddrages i kortlægningen af biogene rev. Samlet set viste resultaterne i dette studie, at
det muligt at opfylde kriterierne for størrelse og dækningsgrad med en undervandsdrone,
men en kombination af kortlægningsværktøjer anbefales for at øge eﬀektiviteten og for
at vurdere de resterende kriterier for stabilitet og tilhørende artssamfund.
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
ASTA
Autonomous System Test Arena
DVL
Doppler Velocity Logger
GIS
Geographical Information Systems
GPS
Global Position System
HELCOM
Helsinki Commission
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
JNCC
Joint Nature Conservation Committee
LFD
Length Frequency Distribution
MARTA
Marine Shallow Geophysics Database (GEUS)
MESH
Mapping European Seabed Habitats
MST
Danish Environmental Protection Agency (Miljøstyrelsen)
NOVANA
National Surveillance Program for the Aquatic Environment and Nature
OSPAR
Oslo-Paris Commission
pSCI
Proposed Site of Community Importance
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
ROV
Remotely Operated Vehicle
RTK
Real-time Kinematic Positioning
SAC
Special Area of Conservation
SACFOR
Superabundant, Abundant, Common, Frequent, Occasional and Rare
SBL
Short Baseline
SCI
Site of Community Importance
USBL
Ultra-short Baseline
WP
Waypoint
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Thesis Aim
4
3
Marine Habitat Mapping
6
3.1
The Natura 2000 network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Marine habitat mapping in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Mapping of habitat type Reefs 1170 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Danish interpretation of biogenic reefs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Method Requirements
14
4.1
Mapping requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Citizen science projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Methods
22
5.1
ROV system, conﬁguration and performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Preparations prior to survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Data Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Data Processing and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Results
34
6.1
ROV surveys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Area A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Area B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Area C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.5
Classiﬁcation of the mussel beds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Discussion
50
7.1
Mapping biogenic reefs in accordance to the new deﬁnition . . . . . . . .
50
7.2
Mapping biogenic reefs with a ROV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.3
Evaluation of the ROV as a citizen science mapping tool . . . . . . . . .
61
8
Concluding Remarks
65
References
66
Appendices
77
A ROV Log books
77
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
B All surveys
81
C QR-codes to video clip
82
D Error Plots
82
E
Aerial Drone Survey
83
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The long history of coastal development, overﬁshing and pollution in the coastal zone have
resulted in severe habitat modiﬁcations, fragmentation and loss of important coastal eco-
systems (Gibson et al., 2007; Lotze et al., 2006). An additional consequence is the loss
of structurally complex habitats, which in general had led to declines in species richness
and abundance (Airoldi et al., 2008; Marchese, 2015). Biogenic reefs are examples of such
structurally complex habitats, where the structure itself forms small crevices and cavities
for colonization of invertebrates and at the same time provides hard substrata for sessile
organisms (T. J. Holt et al., 1998; Norling et al., 2007). Furthermore, biogenic reefs have
an important eﬀect on the physical environment as they stabilise the sediment surface
and thus reduce the risk of coastal erosion (T. J. Holt et al., 1998; Tillin et al., 2016; zu
Ermgassen et al., 2020). Biogenic reefs can be formed by several diﬀerent species such as
the reef-forming polychaetes Sabellaria alveolata, S. spinulosa, and Serpula vermicularis
and the bivalve species M. edulis and Modiolus modiolus and it is argued that temperate
biogenic reefs most likely are among the most threatened habitats globally (Airoldi et al.,
2008).
Blue mussels M. edulis are, along with horse mussels M. modiolus, the most common
reef-forming species found in Danish Seas (Dahl et al., 2018). It is an epibenthic species
found everywhere in the inner Danish waters and fjords and occurs both on rocky and
soft sedimentary shores in the intertidal and subtidal zones (Norling, 2009; Saier, 2002).
Blue mussels use their byssus threats for attachment to the substrate or to neighboring
mussels and thereby form aggregates of smaller or larger dense beds. Blue mussel beds
are made up of three structural components: 1) a top layer of living and dead shells, 2) a
bottom layer of mussel faeces and pseudofaeces, organic detritus and shell fragments and
3) an assemblage of associated ﬂora and fauna (T. J. Holt et al., 1998; Seed et al., 1992).
As the beds age and grow, they increase their physical entity of dead and living shells
and create a complex structure to be colonized by a diverse range of ﬂora and fauna and
thus forms a biogenic reef (Seed et al., 1992). However, well developed blue mussel beds
rarely exceed 30-50 cm in thickness (T. J. Holt et al., 1998).
Blue mussels are mainly found living in depths of 0-15 m, but can also be found at 30 m
depth in low saline waters, such as the Baltic Sea. This is presumably due to the lack of
predators and competitors (Dahl et al., 2018; Kautsky, 1982). The average size of blue
1 of 83
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
mussels typically range between 5-10 mm, but the largest specimens may reach 15-20 cm
(Tillin et al., 2016). The growth rate of blue mussels is in general aﬀected by several
environmental factors such as temperature, salinity, food availability, tidal exposure and
intraspeciﬁc competition (Tillin et al., 2016), but the growth rate and thereby size of the
mussel is also aﬀected by the position in the tidal zone. Blue mussels in the intertidal
zone tend to have lower growth rates due to the exposure to air and thereby limited
access to feed compared to blue mussels in the subtidal zone (Buschbaum et al., 2001).
The structural and functional eﬀects blue mussels bed are known to increase species rich-
ness and abundance of associated macrofauna, meiofauna and macroalgae (Borthagaray
et al., 2007; Norling et al., 2007). Additionally, blue mussel beds constitute important
nursery grounds for several ﬁsh species (L. D. Kristensen et al., 2015; Seitz et al., 2014),
and feeding grounds for various birds species including herring gulls (Larus argentatus),
oystercatchers (Haematopus ostralegus) and eiders (Somateria mollissim) (Goss-Custard
et al., 2004; Hilgerloh, 1997).
An experimental study even showed that mussel beds
are attractive habitats for the juvenile stage of the critically endangered European eel
(Anguilla anguilla) as mussels seemed to oﬀer the preferred cavity size for sheltering
(Schwartzbach et al., 2020). Thus, by protecting biogenic reefs formed by blue mus-
sels it is possible that this would also beneﬁt critically endangered species such as the
European eel. Besides the positive eﬀects on biodiversity, blue mussels also support a
variety of ecosystem services. Blue mussels ﬁltrate the water for phytoplankton and are
thus of great importance for the water quality and visibility in shallow areas and for the
transport of energy from the pelagic to the benthic zone (zu Ermgassen et al., 2020).
Other regulating ecosystem services provided by mussels include sediment stabilization
and carbon sequestration (zu Ermgassen et al., 2020).
The conservation importance of biogenic reefs has been recognised through a range of
national and international environmental legislation. Biogenic reefs are encompassed by
the EU Habitats Directive (Council Directive 92/43/EEC) under the habitat type Reefs
(code 1170) and thereby serves as foundation for designation in the network of Natura
2000 sites.
Furthermore, as a part of the Danish implementation of the EU Marine
Strategy Framework Directive (Directive 2008/56/EC) and the Danish Marine Strategy
Act, a list of environmental target have been deﬁned for each of the 11 descriptors of
the Marine Strategy Framework Directive.
One of the environmental targets set out
for Descriptor 6 (sea ﬂoor integrity) is that: "The Habitats Directive’s marine habitats
2 of 83
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
achieve favorable conservation status in accordance with the time horizon set by the habit-
ats directive.". Thus, the conservation of designated biogenic reefs should also be secured
through here (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2019). Moreover, mussel beds are included
as valuable habitats of the intergovernmental commissions HELCOM (Helsinki Commis-
sion) and OSPAR (Oslo-Paris Commission). OSPAR has identiﬁed intertidal blue mussel
on mixed sediment or sandy bottoms on their list of threatened or declining species and
habitats (OSPAR Commission, 2018) and HELCOM has listed Mytilus spp. beds at a
variety of diﬀerent substrates on their redlist (HELCOM Commission, 2013). OSPAR
and HELCOM manage smaller cross-border ecoregions, while the EU legislation applies
to the EU Member States. Any EU Member State is obliged to designate and protect
habitats listed in Annex I of the EU Habitats Directive, including biogenic reefs. How-
ever, the interpretation and criteria of each habitat type are deﬁned by the EU Member
State itself to take into account national and local variations. Concerning biogenic reefs,
a new Danish deﬁnition was published in 2018 which includes four deﬁnition criteria for
biogenic reefs in Denmark. Since then, no oﬃcial national marine mappings have yet
been conducted and there exist no standard for how to fulﬁll these criteria. Mapping
and designation are required to conserve and protect these valuable habitats. However,
habitat mapping is in general expensive, hence there is a need for new low-cost methods
that can increase knowledge of biogenic reefs in Danish coastal habitats.
3 of 83
==PAGE:13==
2
THESIS AIM
2
Thesis Aim
The intention of this thesis is to develop and test a new mapping procedure for bio-
genic reefs formed by blue mussels M. edulis (hereafter mussels). Since no biogenic reefs
formed by mussels have yet been mapped according to the new Danish deﬁnition pub-
lished in 2018, there exist no standard procedure for how to meet the criteria. Thus,
this is an attempt to test how the criteria can be fulﬁlled and at the same time improve
the existing knowledge of mussel reefs to secure the future protection of this habitat type.
A ROV has been selected as test tool due to it’s often relatively simple operational re-
quirements and it’s capabilities of surveying both shallow and deeper parts of coastal
zones. A ROV generates visual data required to identify mussels within a surveyed area.
A well-considered survey strategy is needed to increase the eﬃciency of the ROV survey,
as the ROV has a low coverage rate compared to other geophysical survey tools, such as
side-scan sonar and multi-beam sonar, which are commonly used for initial detection of
reefs. Marine habitat mapping is usually very costly and time demanding. To combat
this, it is considered how the mapping can be conducted in collaboration with volunteers,
more speciﬁcally local ﬁshermen, who may serve as users of the ROV.
The aim of this thesis is to improve the scientiﬁc basis for protection of biogenic reefs in
Danish waters by testing how a ROV can be applied as a mapping tool. The three main
questions addressed are:
• Q1: To what extent and how have biogenic reefs been mapped in Danish Natura
2000 sites today?
• Q3: How can a ROV be used to map biogenic reefs?
• Q3: What is the potential for local ﬁshermen to contribute to the mapping of biogenic
reefs with a ROV?
The structure of this thesis is as follows: Firstly, an introduction to designation and
management of Natura 2000 sites in Denmark is provided with emphasis on the habitat
type Reefs 1170. This section serves to answer Q1. Secondly, the method requirements
are speciﬁed to provide the necessary information and theory to the design of a new
ROV-based mapping procedure with the involvement of citizens. Hereafter, Q2 will be
addressed in the methods and results sections. The methods section provides a detailed
4 of 83
==PAGE:14==
2
THESIS AIM
description of the ROV hardware and functions, as well as the procedure for test and doc-
umentation of mussels in a smaller area in Roskilde Fjord. The results the ROV surveys
are then presented, which include both a qualitative and a quantitative representation of
the mussels beds. Subsequently, the results are discussed and the potential of the ROV
as citizen science mapping tool is evaluated. The evaluation serves as an answer to Q3.
Finally, some concluding remarks are provided.
5 of 83
==PAGE:15==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
3
Marine Habitat Mapping
This section provides an introduction to the process for the designation of Natura 2000
sites and habitats under the EU Habitats Directive. Emphasis is placed on how marine
habitat mapping has been carried out in the past with a special focus on biogenic reefs
and visual documentation. The habitat type Reefs 1170 is designation basis for 68 out
of 269 habitat sites, but the habitat type both cover geogenic reefs and biogenic reefs.
Thus, the 68 related management plans have been reviewed to uncover the total area of
designated biogenic reefs.
3.1
The Natura 2000 network
The two EU Nature Directives, the Habitats Directive (Council Directive 92/43/EEC)
and the Birds Directive (Directive 2009/147/EC) provide a comprehensive legal frame-
work for protection of rare and threatened species and habitats across the European
Union. Together, the two Directives constitute the basis of an European ecological net-
work of conservation sites named Natura 2000. Every EU Member State must contribute
to the Natura 2000 network and ensure or restore a favourable conservation status for
the designated habitat types and species within the Natura 2000 sites.
The initial designation of a Natura 2000 site, in relation to the Habitats Directive, in-
cludes the designation of Site of Community Importance (SCI) which is deﬁned as a site
or biogeographic region that signiﬁcantly contributes to the maintenance or restoration of
natural habitat types or species listed in the Habitats Directive Annex I or II, respectively
(Article 1.k). Every EU Member State make a list of proposed SCIs (pSCI) which are
then evaluate by the European Commission and the Member States at bio-geographical
seminars. When SCIs have been approved they must be designated as Special Area of
Conservation (SAC) within a six year time frame and this also includes a priority for
most important species and/or habitats (Article 4.4). Annex I in the Habitat Direct-
ive encompass a list of 233 natural habitat types of community interest, which requires
the designation of SAC. The designation of a SAC must be done at national level and
“. . . through a statutory, administrative and/or contractual act” (Article 1.l). However,
the particular procedure for the designation of SACs is a matter for the domestic law
of each EU Member State and a particular procedure does not exist, but the designa-
tion must apply legal provisions that provides legal clarity and transparency (European
6 of 83
==PAGE:16==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
Commission, 2012). The necessary conservation objectives and conservation measures
must be identiﬁed and appropriate management plans must be developed (Article 6.1).
In Denmark, these management plans are the so-called "Natura 2000-planer", which are
updated every sixth year and rely on data collected and documented in the respective
baseline analysis. Baseline analyzes are prepared from nationally collected and quality
assured data in the national surveillance program for the aquatic environment and nature
(NOVANA) and thus contain a factual presentation of data from the current Natura 2000
site. This includes mapping of habitat types and habitats of designated species, an assess-
ment of the state of the nature, a preliminary assessment of speciﬁc threats, an overview
of completed eﬀorts in the area and a map describing the location and condition of the
habitats (Miljøstyrelsen, 2022b). Denmark has, according to the Danish Environmental
Protection Agency (MST), designated 269 habitat areas on the basis of the EU Habitats
Directive (Miljøstyrelsen, 2022a). This corresponds to 20.000 km2 of which 3.500 km2
are terrestrial areas (8 % of Denmark’s land area) and 16.400 km2 marine areas (16 % of
Denmark’s sea area) (Miljøstyrelsen, 2022a).
3.2
Marine habitat mapping in Denmark
In the past decade, several marine habitat mappings in Denmark have been performed
with the aim of gaining more knowledge about the seabed and associated habitats. In
order to generate substrate- and habitat type maps for use in management of SACs,
four larger marine habitat mappings were conducted in 2017-2018, 2015, 2014 and 2012
(Al-Hamdani et al., 2019; Al-Hamdani et al., 2015; Al-Hamdani et al., 2014; Nielsen
et al., 2013). Every assessment had a speciﬁc interest in the extent and distribution
of the three habitat types 1110 (Sandbanks which are slightly covered by sea water at
all times), 1170 (Reefs) and 1180 (Submarine structures made by leaking gases). The
2012-assessment carried out a large scale-mapping in 38 coastal marine habitats, whereas
the 2014-assessment sought to provide more detailed information of some of the reefs
assessed in 2012 as well as for new areas and assessed a total of 9 Natura 2000 sites. The
assessments conducted in 2015 and 2017-2018 concentrated about 8 and 4 Natura 2000
sites near Skagerrak and the North Sea, respectively. Common for these national marine
habitat mappings is that a combination of geophysical surveys and visual inspections
was used to create habitat type maps in relation habitat types listed in the EU Habitats
Directive (Table 1). Archive data, together with satellite images and/or ortophotos, were
used to strategically select positions for closer inspection of the physical and biological
conditions and thereby target new areas for mapping. The applied type of archive data
7 of 83
==PAGE:17==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
varied between the areas dependent on availability. The archive data could for instance
consist of a combination of geophysical surveys extracted from GEUS’s Marine shallow
geophysics database (MARTA), bottom sampling descriptions from GEUS’s Jupiter data-
base and data collected as a part of the National Monitoring and Assessment Programme
for the Aquatic and Terrestrial Environments (NOVANA).
Table 1: Overview of Danish marine habitat mappings and methods applied
Year
Publisher
Conducted by
Areas
Methods
2012
Naturstyrelsen
Orbicon & GEUS
38
Archive data, satellite, orthophotos, echosounder, side-scan
sonor, sediment echo sounder, visual veriﬁcation (ROV)
2014
Naturstyrelsen
DCE & GEUS
9
Archive data, multibeam, orthophotos, echosounder, side-
scan sonor, sediment echo sounder, visual veriﬁcation
(Drop-video with GoPro)
2015
Naturstyrelsen
DCE & GEUS
8
Archive data, echosounder, side-scan sonor, sediment echo
sounder, visual veriﬁcation (DropVideo and ROV)
2017-
2018
Miljøstyrelsen
Orbicon & GEUS
4
Archive data, orthophotos, multibeam echosounder, side-
scan sonor, sediment echo sounder, visual veriﬁcation
(DropVideo and ROV) and HAPS for infauna sampling
Satellite data and orthophotos have mainly been used as basis for area classiﬁcation in
the shallow parts. Speciﬁc mapping activities have involved geophysical surveys with
echo sonar measurements of bathymetry, acoustic measurements with seismic equipment
and side-scan sonar, as well as visual observations of the seabed with video and photos
collected with either ROV or drop-video. Visual examination of the seabed have primarily
been applied at selected positions which on printouts of side-scan sonar data showed
diverse characteristics and thereby required visual veriﬁcation. The procedure for visual
inspection with ROV and/or DROP-Video has varied between the diﬀerent assessments,
but was overall used to verify side-scan data. In the assessments from 2012 and 2017-2018,
the substrate and biological conditions were documented with ROV video recordings of 2-5
minutes. The video recordings were live-commented by experienced marine biologists and
the "speak" was recorded together with the video track. A diﬀerent procedure was applied
in 2014 and 2015, where target points were selected in areas where the acoustic surveys
indicated changes in bottom conditions. The video recordings were conducted with a
DROP-video and made along a 100 m long line with the center at the target point. The
transect was split into subsections indicating transitions of changing bottom conditions
8 of 83
==PAGE:18==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
and the transition positions were recorded (Figure 1).
The visual documentation of
the seabed in both the shallow and the deeper areas collected in 2014 and 2015 have
been uploaded in GEUS’s database MARTA (http://data.geus.dk/geusmap/?mapname=
marta) which makes it possible to inspect the video transects.
Figure 1: An example of the procedure applied in the habitat mapping conducted in 2014 and 2015. The
substrate classiﬁcation is partly based on a 100 m DROP-video transect (red line). The ﬁgure is modiﬁed
from Al-Hamdani et al., 2014.
The videos in the MARTA database show how biogenic reefs previously have been mapped
and also provide insight to the characteristics of the designated biogenic mussel reefs. As
an example, 173 ha biogenic reef and 44 potential biogenic reefs has been designated
in the Natura 2000 site "Centrale Storebælt og Vresen". The video transect (locality:
HAB100_D1_H100_P131) showed a very dense mussel reef at 10-11 m depth with an
estimated coverage of 60-95 % mussels. In another Natura 2000 site, "Horsens Fjord,
havet øst for og Endelave", 17 ha biogenic reefs and 11 ha potential biogenic reefs have
been designated. One transect shows how large mussels occur less densely distributed in
smaller clumps at 12 m depth (locality: HAB52_D1_H52_P103) and another transect
within the same Natura 2000 site shows a more homogeneously distributed beds with a
lot of dead mussel shells at 5-6 m depth (locality: HAB52_D1_H52_P118) (Figure 2).
Thus, large variations in distribution and density of the mussels may be found between
and within the Natura 2000 sites.
9 of 83
==PAGE:19==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
Figure 2:
Examples of biogenic reefs from the marine habitat mapping conducted in 2014.
The
images are screenshots from videos.
a) HAB100_D1_H100_P131), b) HAB52_D1_H52_P103), c)
HAB52_D1_H52_P118
3.3
Mapping of habitat type Reefs 1170
To assess the current mapping of Reefs 1170 within these habitat areas, every revised
baseline analysis of the latest third generation management plans (2022-2027) were sys-
tematically reviewed. The habitat type Reefs 1170 is designation basis for 68 out of 269
Danish habitat areas according to the latest overview of the Habitat Areas’ designation
basis published in February 2022 (Miljøstyrelsen, 2022c). Every baseline analysis con-
tains a summary table listing the total area of each mapped marine habitat type. As
habitat type Reefs 1170 covers both geogenic and biogenic reefs, the listing are in most
cases divided between the two reef types, however, the annotation were found to vary
between the baseline analyzes. The diﬀerent reef mapping notations included: "Reef",
"Stone Reef", "Biogenic Reef" and "Potential Biogenic Reef". "Reef" were found to be used
as a collective term when both geogenic and biogenic reefs had been mapped collectively
or if it only covered mapping of stone reefs. "Stone Reef" were found to be used when only
stone reefs had been mapped and quantiﬁed within the habitat area and there had been
no mapping of biogenic reefs. Some baseline analyzes that use the term "Stone Reef" does
mention the observation of potential biogenic reefs, but do not provide a quantiﬁcation
of the size of the biogenic reef. "Biogenic reef" were found to be used when only biogenic
reefs had been mapped, and there had been no observations of stone reefs. Lastly, "Po-
tential Biogenic Reef" were found to be used when an area with potential biogenic reefs
had been observed and to some extent quantiﬁed, but not fully veriﬁed (Table 2).
10 of 83
==PAGE:20==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
Table 2: Overview of reef mapping category notations in the baseline analyzes
Category
Deﬁnition
Reef
Mapped area covers either stone reef and biogenic reefs collectively or only stone reefs
Stone Reef
Mapped area covers only stone reefs (may contain an observation of biogenic reefs)
Biogenic Reef
Mapped area covers only biogenic reefs
Potential biogenic reef
Area with potential biogenic reefs has been observed, but not veriﬁed
To create an overview of the reef types mapped in each habitat, the annotations were
simpliﬁed to “Stone Reef”, “Stone Reef & Biogenic Reef”, “Biogenic Reef” and “No
Mapping” based on the content of the basis analyzes.
In the 68 habitat sites, stone
reefs have solely been mapped in 42 of the sites, stone reefs and biogenic reefs have
been mapped or observed collectively in 21 of the sites (16 with both reef types mapped
and 5 with observations of biogenic reefs) and biogenic reefs alone have been mapped in
two sites (Figure 3). Three sites did not provide a speciﬁc mapping of Reefs 1170, but
observations of biogenic reefs were mentioned in two of these habitat sites (H78 & H94),
whereas the baseline analysis of H242 does not provide any information on Reefs 1170
despite the designation of this habitat type.
Figure 3:
Overview of the reef types mapped within the 68 habitat sites where Reefs 1170 have been
designated.
MST collects and publishes nature and environmental data collected as a part of the
11 of 83
==PAGE:21==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
Natura 2000 management. The data are available as GIS-layers and contain an area
calculation of each reef type mapped in the diﬀerent Natura 2000 sites. Based on these
numbers, the total area of all reef types were calculated (Figure 4). It is quite clear, that
stone reefs are the most dominating reef type mapped within the habitat areas covering
a total area of 163,386.3 ha. A total of 574.4 ha of biogenic reefs has been mapped in
18 habitat sites, which is approximately 284 times less than stone reefs. A larger area of
potential biogenic reefs has been estimated with a total area of 2,165 ha. It should be
noted that 2,093 ha of potential biogenic reef are within a single habitat area (H260). It
is not clear from the baseline analyzes why such a major diﬀerence occur. It could be
due to a greater eﬀort of mapping stone reefs, but it could also simply be that stone reef
in general is a more common reef type compared to biogenic reefs. Nevertheless, there is
an incentive for facilitation of a more comprehensive mapping of biogenic reefs.
Figure 4:
Total area size of each reef category within the 68 habitat sites. Information is derived from
the MST GIS-database https://miljoegis.mim.dk/spatialmap?proﬁle=natura2000planer3basis2020.
3.4
Danish interpretation of biogenic reefs
The European Commission has developed a manual for interpretation of the diﬀerent
habitat types listed in Annex I, and the manual includes a deﬁnition and description of
12 of 83
==PAGE:22==
3
MARINE HABITAT MAPPING
the characteristics of each of these natural habitat types (European Commission, 2013).
The deﬁnition of Reefs 1170 in the interpretation manual covers both reefs of biogenic
concretions and reefs of geogenic origin.
Geogenic reefs are deﬁned as hard compact
substrata of rocks, boulders and cobbles, whereas biogenic reefs are formed by biological
material such as dead or living animals and thus create hard bottom habitats for epi-
benthic species. The reef must be topographically distinct, support a zonation of benthic
communities and may only be located in the sublittoral zone or extend from the sub-
littoral zone uninterrupted into the intertidal zone (European Commission, 2013). It is
up to an EU Member State to interpret and adopt the deﬁnition of each habitat type in
national regional context.
In 2018, a new Danish deﬁnition of biogenic reefs was published. Thus, the current map-
ping of Reefs 1170 in the 68 habitats has been completed before this deﬁnition. The
deﬁnition covers two species which particularly form biogenic reefs: the blue mussel M.
edulis and the horse mussel M. modilus. The deﬁnition includes criteria for area size,
coverage rate, stability and documentation of associated species community and criteria
diﬀers between the two mussel species.
For biogenic reefs formed by blue mussels the four criteria includes 1) an area size of a
minimum 2500 m2, 2) sea bed coverage of a minimum 30 % mussels, 3) stability deﬁned
as the presence of minimum three mussel cohorts and 4) the documentation of associated
biota.
The deﬁnition does not provide any mapping guidelines on how to fulﬁll the criteria, but
all together, a more comprehensive and detailed mapping seems to be required to fulﬁll
these criteria compared to the previous mapping procedure for biogenic reefs. Especially
the criteria of minimum three cohorts makes a new demand for in situ sampling and labor-
atory examination. In the following, the presumed method requirements are described
along with functional requirements of a ROV-based habitat mapping with involvement
of citizens.
13 of 83
==PAGE:23==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
4
Method Requirements
This section aims to describe the overall requirements for mapping biogenic reefs as well
as the functional requirements and constraints of the ROV as a mapping tool. In addition,
it is described how the ROV is intended to be applied in a citizen science project and what
requirements it needs to fulﬁll as a citizen science mapping tool. It should be emphasized,
that this is not an actual design of a citizen science project, but rather an initial test of
how a ROV possibly can be a tool in a citizen science mapping toolbox.
4.1
Mapping requirements
A new mapping procedure for biogenic reef will in general require:
• Initial detection
• Classiﬁcation
• Identiﬁcation
The initial detection includes a preliminary designation of mussel occurrences, as well
as a presumed delimitation of the mussel reef. The initial detection can be based on
mussel registrations in previous studies or in connection with marine mappings, where
various geophysical survey tools have shown possible occurrence of mussels, as in the
previous national marine mappings (Al-Hamdani et al., 2019); Al-Hamdani et al., 2015;
Al-Hamdani et al., 2014; Nielsen et al., 2013). Mussels can also be detected on aerial pho-
tos or orthophotos, where the characteristic distribution of mussel banks can be observed
if the water depth and visibility allow it (Holm et al., 2016; ICES, 2007). The initial
detection constitute the basis for the further strategic and more detailed investigation of
the possible biogenic reef and should also provide an indication of, whether the mussel
distribution meets the criterion of a minimum size of 2500 m2.
Classiﬁcation in this case refers to the criterion om minimum 30 % sea bed coverage.
Thus, the mapping tool must be able to detect the distribution and density of the mus-
sels to assess whether the mussels in a surveyed area fulﬁll this criterion. This can be
performed by in situ techniques such as diver surveys or by remote video techniques
with cameras mounted on a towed platform (e.g. sledge), drop-cameras or ROVs (Cog-
gan et al., 2007b). Ideally, and dependent on technique and strategy, the classiﬁcation
14 of 83
==PAGE:24==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
would conﬁrm and deny whether the reef fulﬁll the criterion of a minimum size of 2500 m2.
Identiﬁcation relates to the criterion on reef stability and associated species. In the deﬁn-
ition on biogenic reefs it is argued (translated from Danish) that: "it is important for
the designation that the location of the biogenic reefs is stable in order to meet the re-
quirements of the Habitats Directive for area propagation". The stability is deﬁned as the
presence of three cohorts, thus size estimations of individual mussels must be examined.
This requires in situ sampling with e.g. a small dredge or divers (Ricklefs et al., 2020).
Alternatively, continuous monitoring over several year would give an indication of the
longevity of the mussel reef.
It is important to reﬂect on the possibilities and limitations of a ROV in relation to
the three overall requirements of detection, classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of potential
biogenic reefs.
The primary data collected with a ROV consists of videos or images
captured with the ROV camera. The visual data can either serve as the primary survey
technique for further investigation or as ground-truthing surveys for targeting objects or
features detected by other remote sensing techniques (Coggan et al., 2007b). Compared
to geophysical surveys or aerial photos, the ROV has a low spatial coverage rate (Kenny
et al., 2003), and the ROV is therefor not ideal for initial detection of mussel reefs. The
coverage rate of a ROV is directly proportional to the transect width and the speed
of the ROV (Ludvigsen, 2010) and the transect width is a function of the ﬁeld-of-view
of the camera and the ROV’s height above seabed. ROVs can be equipped with other
sensors or sonars that allow broader coverage and thereby for collection of multi-sensor
data (Chemisky et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), but in this project the ROV camera is
the primary data source. Thus, prior information of study site is required in advance.
The ROV provides the necessary visual proof for mussel distribution and density and
can thereby be applied for classiﬁcation of mussels reefs. The ROV can however not be
used to identify the number of cohorts. Consequently, additional sampling is required to
assess the criteria of stability, but this is not addressed in this project.
4.1.1
Functional requirements of ROV habitat mapping
The functional requirements for ROV habitat mapping are pointed out in Table 3.
15 of 83
==PAGE:25==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
Table 3: Functional requirements of a ROV survey
Functional requirements of the ROV survey
Generate visual, high quality data that allow for classiﬁcation of the mussel reefs
Stable performance
Provide geo-referencing
Survey a coherent area (min. 2500 m2)
Classiﬁcation of the mussel reef from ROV data
Visual data collected with the ROV can be processed in various ways. The British Joint
Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC) has published guidelines on epibiota remote
monitoring from digital imagery, where they give three suggestions on how to determ-
ine the percentage cover (Turner et al., 2016). The ﬁrst suggestion is visual estimation,
where a quadrant is overlain a video frame or still image and the percentage is quantiﬁed.
The quantiﬁcation thus relies on the observer’s ability to visually quantify the percentage
cover within a frame (Figure 5), and errors may be found between observers. The second
suggestion involves point counts, where a quadrant with predetermined number of points
are overlain the video frame or still image and the percentage of those points that con-
tain the species of interest is recorded. The third suggestions is frequency of occurrence,
where a gridded quadrant is overlain a video frame or still image. Each cell in the grid
represents a percentage of the total quadrant and the species of interest is then either
recorded present or absent within the cell. Thus, the total percentage cover is based on
the frequency of occurrence in a cell. However this method tends to over-represent the
true occurrence (Turner et al., 2016). Alternatively, the European research project MESH
(Mapping European Seabed Habitats) has published a range of guidelines and reviews
for seabed habitat mapping, including speciﬁc recommendations for ROV surveying and
data processing (Coggan et al., 2007a; Coggan et al., 2007b; Davies et al., 2008; White
et al., 2007). The recommendations apply to both larger and smaller ROVs. According to
MESH, ROV surveys can be designed to either acquire descriptive/semi-quantitative data
or quantitative data (Coggan et al., 2007b) and highly relies on the survey design. An
example of a semi-quantitative derived data is the SACFOR (Superabundant, Abundant,
Common, Frequent, Occasional and Rare) abundance scales, which has been widely used
to describe the marine habitats, communities and species around Great Britain (Moore
et al., 2020; Strong et al., 2020). However, for classiﬁcation of percentage cover, a more
quantitative approach is required. The MESH suggestions of quantitative data acquisi-
16 of 83
==PAGE:26==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
tion involves either enumeration of species in transects or by a period of time. For blue
mussels, individual species count is a diﬃcult challenge albeit by transects or by time,
as blue mussels settles in beds and individual counts are nearly impossible in a video
recording.
Another increasingly popular technology for video processing is photo mosaic. Photo
mosaic allows for a qualitative inspection of a ROV survey to assess the distribution
patterns of key species or habitats (Ludvigsen, 2010; Turner et al., 2016). It is the pro-
cess of stitching several images together based on image feature recognition and thereby
provides visualization of areas larger than the original image dimensions. Photo mosaic
can be performed in numerous ways and some examples of photo mosaics systems are the
MATISSE system (Mosaicking Advanced Technologies Integrated in a Single Software
Environment) (Vincent et al., 2003), the StripMaker software, which creates long image
strips based on cross-correlation (Stage et al., 2011a; Stage et al., 2011b) and the LAPM
tool, which creates mosaics from ROV images and corresponding navigation data (Mar-
con, 2014). Thus, photo mosaic serves as a qualitative representation of a ROV survey
rather than a quantiﬁcation of the percentage cover but may support the interpretation
of the classiﬁcation.
Figure 5:
Illustration to assist estimation of percentage cover in a still frame (adopted from Turner
et al., 2016)
Geo-referencing
A proper navigation system is required for geo-referencing the data recorded with the
ROV. Common ROV navigation tracking systems are the beacon systems SBL (Short
17 of 83
==PAGE:27==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
BaseLine) and USBL (Ultra Short BaseLine), which relies on a transmitter mounted on
the vehicle and hydrophone receivers near the surface. The systems are connected to a
GPS, which allows for the latitude/longitude conversion of the vehicles position (Mallios
et al., 2009). Another common tracking system is the DVL (Doppler Velocity Logger)
which tracks the velocity of the vehicle by sending sound waves towards the sea bottom
and analyzing the echoes. The relative velocity measurement are used used for holding a
stable position, obtaining a speed reading or navigating without the need for an acoustic
positioning system.
Survey strategy a coherent area
The survey strategy speciﬁes how the area of interest is inspected by the ROV. The
single survey is limited to the length of the tether, which for small ROVs range between
100-300 m. The ROV survey is designed dependent on the purpose of the survey and the
operational capabilities of the software (Ludvigsen, 2010). To determine the percentage
cover of mussels in an area, it is relevant to investigate the distribution pattern in a
coherent area. An example of such typical trajectory design are presented in Figure 6
from Vincent et al., 2003. The placement of single ROV surveys in the area of interest
must be strategically selected dependent on prior information available.
Figure 6: Example on a ROV trajectory (adopted from Vincent et al., 2003)
Survey constraints
A boat is required to conduct the ROV surveys. The operation window is limited to wind
speeds below 6 m/s to ensure stable and secure control of vehicle and to limit the boat
drift.
18 of 83
==PAGE:28==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
4.2
Citizen science projects
Citizen science is the involvement of volunteers in research projects and during the past
decades, the application of citizen science data in peer-reviewed articles has increase
dramatically (Dickinson et al., 2010; McKinley et al., 2015). Some of the main advantages
of citizen science projects are the opportunity to collect large amounts of data over a
large geographical span using few resources and the same time gain insight to the public
understanding of science. Through citizen science, scientists have the opportunity to
teach, educate and pass on new knowledge to the public. Data can be collected frequently
over many years at locations at local, regional, and national level (McKinley et al., 2015).
Limited marine studies have combined citizen science and underwater drones, as these
are often not cost-eﬀective and not commonly used by non-scientists in contrast to aerial
drones (Garcia-Soto et al., 2021; Pucino et al., 2021). However, this does not negate
the great potential they have to discover what is below the sea surface. Anton et al.,
2021 developed a system where they used citizens to classify occurrences and abundances
of cold water corals from videos recorded with a ROV. The classiﬁcations were used to
develop a machine learning model for monitoring the corals. Similarly, citizen have been
used to identify megafauna from underwater images, though recorded with an autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV) (Langenkämper et al., 2019). These studies are examples of
how citizen can contribute to data analysis. Citizen science projects can be designed in
many diﬀerent ways and varies dependent on when and how the citizens are involved in
the project. Bonney et al., 2009 proposed three categories for citizen science projects:
• Contributory projects: the project is designed by the scientists and citizens primar-
ily contribute to data collection
• Collaborative projects: the project is designed by the scientist, however the cit-
izens may contribute to several steps including data collection, data analysis and
communication results
• Co-created projects: the entire project is jointly designed by the scientist and
citizens and the citizens are encouraged to take part in all steps of the scientiﬁc
process
Emphasis in this project will primarily be placed on clarifying if and how a ROV may act
as a mapping tool in a contributory citizen science project, and be a "tool in a mapping
toolbox". In this conceptualized citizen science project, the ﬁsherman contribute to data
collection in a pre-agreed area and the mapping tool should foremost enable the citizens
19 of 83
==PAGE:29==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
to conduct the mapping themselves with minimum training and guidance in advance.
The data processing and data analysis is expected to be carried out by researchers, who
will assess whether the studied mussel beds fulﬁll the criteria of size and percentage cover
deﬁned for biogenic reefs. The expected scientiﬁc output are habitat maps which should
serve as proposals of potential biogenic reefs (in relation to the Habitats Directive) to
MST. Ideally, MST should then assess whether a more comprehensive mapping of habitat
type 1170 should be initiated in the area in question (Figure 7). Overall, the purpose
and motivation behind the citizen science mapping is to contribute to protecting more
biogenic reefs in existing Natura 2000 sites. It should be noted, that encountering the
entire design process of a citizen science project is not the primary purpose of this project,
as the appropriate mapping tool must be found in advance in order to clarify all necessary
inputs, outputs and outcome as well as time and resources required to conduct the data
collection. Thus, this is not an actual design of a citizen science project, but rather an
initial testing of a potential tool to be used in a citizen science project.
Figure 7: Suggestion for how local ﬁshermen can contribute to mussel reef mapping in a citizen science
project. The ﬁsherman collects video data with the ROV from his boat and sends the data to a scientiﬁc
institution (e.g. DTU). DTU will process the data, create habitat maps and make a proposal for new
potential biogenic reefs to MST
The requirements of a citizen science mapping tool are listed in Table 4.
The ROV
should be able to fulﬁll these requirements of a citizen science mapping tool. One of
most important requirements is that the tool should allow a non-scientiﬁc person to
use the mapping tool them self and the operation should be safe and reliable to avoid
complications. Ideally, minimum training and guidance in advanced should be required,
so that the tool can be applied right away and increase the eﬃciency of the mapping while
keeping the labor costs of the scientists low. This also implies a good user interface and
a easy handover/handback between the citizen and the scientists. The mapping should
be conducted from a boat to secure mapping of subtidal mussel beds, thus a practical
20 of 83
==PAGE:30==
4
METHOD REQUIREMENTS
requirement of the citizen is that they must contribute with a boat. The tool should be
transportable and enable submersion without additional supporting tools such as e.g. a
crane. At the same time, the tool must not be too heavy to avoid occupational injury.
The data collection should be conducted within reasonable time (5-6 hours per day) and
provide high quality data to assess the mussel extent and degree of coverage.
Table 4: Requirements of a citizen science mapping tool
Requirements of a citizen science mapping tool
Should allow a non-scientiﬁc person to use the mapping tool by them self
Safe and reliable
Easy to operate
Good and intuitive user interface
Minimum practice and instruction in advance
Easy to handover/handback
Data collection should be within a reasonable time frame
Transportable and no need for crane or similar device to deploy the mapping tool in the water
Relatively maintenance free and limited calibration needed
Should provide quality data about mussel cover and mussel extent
The functional requirements of the ROV survey as well as the requirements of a citizen
science mapping tool has collectively been considered in the development of a new pro-
cedure for mapping biogenic reefs with a ROV. The individual steps of how a ROV can
be used to map biogenic reef are described in details in the following methods section,
while the question of whether the ROV can be used as a citizen science mapping tool is
addressed in the evaluation of the ROV in the discussion section.
21 of 83
==PAGE:31==
5
METHODS
5
Methods
This section describes the methods applied to map mussel beds with a ROV. The intention
of the section to give an insight into the various steps associated with especially data
acquisition and data processing. Firstly, the ROV hardware is presented, followed by
a detailed description of each step in the data processing from planning the surveys,
collection the data and analyzing the data. The initial preparations of the ROV testing
were inspired from ROV protocols provided by Ludvigsen, 2010, which include guidelines
for design of all phases of ROV surveys from planning to survey reporting. The guidelines
were adjusted to this current project and the processing included three main steps: Prior
to survey, Data Acquisition and Data processing, which are described throughout this
section (Figure 8).
Figure 8: Data processing overview
5.1
ROV system, conﬁguration and performance
The BlueROV2 is a smaller high-performance ROV developed by BlueRobotics. The
ROV was speciﬁcally purchased as a custom solution for this project from the Danish
engineering company EIVA. EIVA is specialised in equipment and software solutions for
subsea investigations and took care of the ROV hardware assembly as well as the supply
22 of 83
==PAGE:32==
5
METHODS
of control and processing software.
Figure 9: The ROV setup includes the following parts: 1) the ROV itself, 2) a joystick, 3) tether spool,
4) topside interface, 5) connecter cable and 6) topside PC.
The BlueROV2 has an open frame with three cylinder enclosures carrying the electronics
and battery and is equipped eight thrusters, buoyancy foam, and ballast weights. It has
the "Heavy Conﬁguration Retroﬁt Kit" which provides full six-degree-of-freedom control
and feedback stability enabled by the eight T200 thrusters.
It has in addition been
equipped with an reinforced and rugged frame designed by EIVA A/S to increase stability
and resistance of the vehicle. The BlueROV2 base system electronics consist of an inbuilt
Raspberry PI 3 onboard computer and the Pixhawk4 ﬂight controller unit. The maximum
forward speed is 1.5 m/s (3 knots) and the speed can be adjusted to the purpose of the
survey. The maximum depth range is 100 m and the search range is limited to the length
of the tether (150 m). The BlueROV custom lithium-ion battery (14.8V, 15.6Ah) provides
power supply for 1-3 hours dependent on use of the vehicle. The ROV hardware setup
is relatively simple and consists of six main parts (Figure 9). The interaction between
the ROV and the topside PC is ensured by the Fathom-X Topside Interface to where the
connector cable and tether is plugged in. The ROV is controlled by a wireless Logitech
gamepad or autonomously through the software.
23 of 83
==PAGE:33==
5
METHODS
5.1.1
Sensor suite
The low-light HD USB camera is located in front of the vehicle and has a maximum
resolution of 1920x1080 pixels with a horizontal ﬁeld-of-view of 80¶ and a vertical ﬁeld-
of-view of 64¶. Due to a manufacturing error in the video chip, the camera resolution
was lowered to 1280x720 in order to have a stable control of the camera. This aﬀected
the image quality as the number of pixels in an image were reduced from approximately
2 million pixels to fewer than one million pixels with the lower resolution. The video
camera records approximately 30 frames per second (fsp). The camera tilt servo provides
up and down tilting with a tilt range of +/- 45¶ (BlueRobotics, 2022b). The in-built
sensors encompass an IMU (inertial measurement unit), barometer, compass and an
integrated leak sensor.
The ROV is equipped with four Lumen Subsea Lights which
are mounted in the "corners" of the vehicle and each has a maximum brightness of 1500
lumens (BlueRobotics, 2022c).
The navigation and geo-referencing is ensured by the
Wayﬁnder DVL from Teledyne RD Instruments. It tracks the position of the ROV and
has a speciﬁed long term accuracy of +/- 1.15 % and can track a minimum altitude of
0.5 m and maximum altitude of 60 m (EIVA, 2022).
5.2
Preparations prior to survey
5.2.1
Study site and prior information
The study site is located in Roskilde Fjord in Denmark in an area named Selsø Hage
between the penisula Hornsherred and the island Eskilsø (Figure 10). Roskilde Fjord is
a shallow estuary and the average depth of the fjord is only 4 m (Haraguchi et al., 2022).
It receives saline water from Kattegat in the northern part of the fjord and the salinity
varies through the fjord from 18 ‰ in the northern part near the outlet to 12 ‰ in the
southern part of the fjord. Roskilde Fjord is a part of the Natura 2000 site "Roskilde
Fjord og Jægerspris Nordskov" number 136 and consist of two habitat areas (H120 and
H199) and two bird protection areas (F105 and F107). Concerning marine habitat types,
this Natura 2000 site is designated due to the presence of the following four marine hab-
itat types: sandbanks (1110), mudﬂats and sandﬂats (1140), coastal lagoons (1150) and
large shallow inlets and bays (1160). The habitat type Reefs (1170) is currently not a
basis for designation in this Natura 2000 site (Miljøstyrelsen, 2021).
The study site was in 2019 investigated for it’s suitability of stone reef restoration. As
24 of 83
==PAGE:34==
5
METHODS
a part of the investigation, diver surveys were conducted to determine sediment cover
and the cover of eel grass and blue mussels at diﬀerent depths. The information from
the resulting report (more speciﬁcally Figure 3.10+3.18 and Table 3.2+4.2) were used as
prior information as the diver surveys revealed dense mussel banks (Dahl et al., 2019).
The diver coordinates and diver transects from 2019 are shown in Figure 10, but it should
be noted that only mussels were recorded in transects 2.2 and 2.3. Here, 30-97 % mussel
coverage was recorded, which created an incentive to investigate the area more closely.
Figure 10:
The study site is located in Roskilde Fjord and the extent of the area of interest was based
on previous registrations of mussels along diver transects conducted 2019 (Dahl et al., 2019).
5.2.2
Survey strategy
The survey strategy relied on the registrations of mussels along the diver transects from
2019 and was thus placed close to the diver transects. Since the minimum area for bio-
genic reefs formed by blue mussels is 2500 m2, the objective was to test if the ROV could
survey an area of this size and how this could be done in the most optimal way.
25 of 83
==PAGE:35==
5
METHODS
The collection of visual data with a ROV is limited to the camera resolution, the ﬁeld-of-
view of the camera and the visibility of the water. Early demonstrations with the ROV
showed that the visualization of the mussel beds was best at an altitude of 0.6 m at the
current time. The ﬁeld-of-view is determined by the camera’s factory settings of hori-
zontal and vertical ﬁeld-of-view as well as the tilt of the camera. The ROV’s camera tilt
system allows a maximum camera tilt of 45¶ which created a distortion in the image from
the rectangular shape otherwise seen if the camera would have been pointing straight
downwards. This means that the distance between the ROV and objects in the camera’s
ﬁeld-of-view will varied as well as the width of the area covered (Burke et al., 2019). The
result was a trapezoid shape with a wider area covered at the top of the image and a
narrower area covered in the bottom (Figure 11b).
Burke et al., 2019 have described how the relation between the distance of the camera
and the target of interest can be calculated in a setup with an angled camera at a
given altitude. They demonstrated this in a study of observing strategies for monitoring
animals with an aerial drone. The relation is illustrated in Figure 11 and the principle
and equations were applied to the ROV setup. This was mainly to obtain an approximate
estimate of the ROV transect width. The transect width is relevant for assessment of the
spatial coverage, however the estimated values provide insight and not necessarily the
exact transect width during the entire survey as vehicle stability will vary. Following the
equations provided by Burke et al., 2019, the horizontal distances, DC (closest distance)
and DF (furthest distance), are given by;
DC = h tan(„ ≠◊y
2 ),
(A1)
DF = h tan(„ + ◊y
2 ),
(A3)
and the distance DF ≠DC is given by;
DF ≠DC = h(tan(„ + ◊y
2 ) ≠tan(„ ≠◊y
2 ),
(A3)
where ◊y is the camera’s vertical ﬁeld-of-view, „ is the angle between the centre of the
vertical ﬁeld-of-view and the nadir and h is the height above the seabed (Figure 11a).
26 of 83
==PAGE:36==
5
METHODS
Figure 11:
a) Illustration of image projection with a tilted camera setup. ◊y denotes the vertical ﬁeld-
of-view of the camera, „ is the tilt angle of the camera, h is the height above the seabed (altitude), and
DC, DM and DF , are the closest, middle and furthest distances along the ﬁeld-of-view of the camera. b)
Illustration of the de-projected trapezoid shape from the setup with WC, WM and WF being the closest,
middle and furthest width. The ﬁgure is adopted from Burke et al., 2019.
The projected ﬁeld-of-view in the x-direction, the transect width, varies as a function of
distance along the y-direction, and the three projected widths, closest width, WC, middle
width, WM and furthest width, WF, are given by;
WC = 2(D2
C + h2)
1
2 tan(◊x
2 ),
(A4)
WM = 2((DC + DF
2
2
) + h2)
1
2 tan(◊x
2 ),
(A5)
WF = 2(D2
F + h2)
1
2 tan(◊x
2 ),
(A6)
where, ◊x is the camera’s horizontal ﬁeld-of-view.
The area, A, covered within a single image can be calculated as the area of a trapezoid
and is in this case given by;
A = 1
2(WC + WF)(DF ≠DC),
(A7)
The theoretical transect widths were estimated from the above mentioned equations with
◊x = 80¶, ◊y = 64¶, „ = 45¶ and h = 0.6 m. The resulting transect widths of an image
27 of 83
==PAGE:37==
5
METHODS
were WC = 1.0 m, WM = 2.5 m, and WF = 4.5 m, and a total area of A = 6.77 m2 and
thus provided useful insights to the survey planning.
Figure 12: Visualization of the projected transect widths, WC = 1.0 m, WM = 2.5 m, and WF = 4.5 m
derived from a ROV operated at an altitude of 0.6m.
The NaviSuite Mobula control software developed by EIVA was used to design and plan
the ROV surveys. The software allows the design of routes within a speciﬁed polygon
where the distance between the transect lines, turn radius and the angle of the route are
determined. Polygons of approximately 50x50 m were designed prior to the ﬁeld work
and had either 5 m or 10 m between the transect lines and a turn radius of 10 m or 6.76 m,
respectively. Due to low visibility, the identiﬁcation of mussel beds in the top part of the
recording were not possible and the WF were therefore not used as reference of transect
width. Instead, the theoretical middle width, WM, were used as input to the survey
strategy. With WM = 2.5 m, this meant that surveys conducted with 5 m apart would
ideally have 2.5 m uncovered seabed between the survey lines and surveys conducted with
10 m apart would have 7.5 m uncovered seabed between the survey lines. Additionally,
the angle of the ROV survey, either North/South or East/West direction, was tested to
see if it would have an impact on the ROV behaviour. Waypoints (WPs) near the survey
route were prepared for the boat to anchor close to the pre-planned survey routes.
5.2.3
Test
Prior to each ﬁeld trip, the ROV equipment and software was tested either in a small
test pool (6.5x3.5x3 m) inside DTU’s Autonomous System Test Arena (ASTA) or in
Skovshoved Harbor to ensure proper functioning.
28 of 83
==PAGE:38==
5
METHODS
5.3
Data Acquisition
The ﬁeldwork in Roskilde Fjord were carried out with local ﬁshermen who provided boat
access in a smaller vessel named Balder (Model RYDS 485) (Figure 13). DTU Aqua’s
safety instructions for cruises with smaller vessels was carefully followed.
For safety
reasons, ﬁeldwork was only carried out in calm weather conditions with a maximum
wind speed of 6 m/s and preferably below 4 m/s for better control of the ROV. The ﬁeld
work surveys took place on 17/06/2022, 22/06/2022 and 12/07/2022.
Figure 13: a) The vessel Balder (Model RYDS 485), b) voluntary ﬁshermen and c) voluntary ﬁsherman
and surveyor.
5.3.1
Operational setup
The boat was directed towards a pre-planned waypoint near the survey route, however
anchoring of the vessel directly over a precise location proved diﬃcult to perform, so the
anchoring was done at an approximate position near the pre-planned waypoint. Since the
ROV setup did not include any external GPS with global reference system, the position
expressed in latitude and longitude was derived from the surveyor’s build-in phone GPS
and transformed into WGS 84/UTM zone 32N coordinates expressed in easting/northing.
The transformed coordinates were used as initial position of the ROV.
The ROV control and data acquisition were performed via NaviSuite Mobula control
software. The ROV was directed to the starting point of the survey and then initiated
with automatic control of the ROV through the software. The software allowed assisted
steering from where, among other things, the altitude, depth and speed of the ROV were
controlled. The ROV surveys were conducted at an altitude of 0.6 m and the camera
29 of 83
==PAGE:39==
5
METHODS
was tilted to the maximum of 45¶ downwards during the entire survey. The speed of the
ROV was set to 0.3 m/s to decrease motion blur and the resulting survey eﬃciency was
approximately 2700 m2 per hour.
5.3.2
Real time control and logbooks
Sensor data like depth, position, heading and roll/pitch were controlled in real time to
avoid possible damage and entangling of the ROV during the survey. Observations about
ROV control and behavior were noted down. The raw data acquired during the survey
consisted of videos of maximum 15 min (.mp4 format) and geotrack data (.mgtr format)
with all related sensor data. Logbooks were ﬁlled out to provide an overview of the raw
data collected as well as notes of the challenges and opportunities that were faced during
the diﬀerent surveys. Logbooks are found in Appendix A.
5.4
Data Processing and Analysis
5.4.1
Photo mosaic
Images for photo mosaic were exported at a rate of 30 fps in VideoPad version 11.18.
This meant that a video of 15 min consisted of approximately 27.000 images. The photo
mosaicking was performed using the StripMaker mosaicking tool. StripMaker was de-
veloped in MATLAB by scientists at DTU Aqua (Stage et al., 2011; Stage, et al., 2011).
The software is based on brute forced normalized cross-correlation, which measures the
similarity between two entities and thus creates strips from stitched images (MathWorks,
2022; Wikipedia, 2022). The cross-correlation was conducted on a smaller section of the
image and the section baseline was placed below the middle width (WM) of the image,
where the motion blur was at its minimum. The processing time varied between 2-5 hours
dependent on the amount images.
5.4.2
Estimation of percentage cover
To determine the degree of coverage of the mussels, the percentage cover was assessed in
single images. Thus, images were exported in two steps. First, all images were exported at
a rate of 1 fps in NaviModel Producer. Each image contained a corresponding timestamp,
which assisted the synchronization of the images with the navigation data at a later step.
From here, diﬀerent data sets were made with images exported at intervals of either
15 sec or 30 sec in the MacOS Automator software. At an average speed of 0.3 m/s,
30 of 83
==PAGE:40==
5
METHODS
the theoretical distance between the exported images was 4.5 m and 9 m, respectively.
However, the ROV speed varied during turns or deviated due to control disturbances,
so the distance would vary dependent on vehicle speed.
To quantify the percentage
cover, a quadrant was overlain each exported still image and the percentage cover was
estimated based on expert judgement. The method is similar to the ﬁrst suggestion of
visual estimation of percentage cover described by Turner et al., 2016. The grid was
constructed through a script in MATLAB R2020a, which read and divided each image
into 12 cells by coloring every 640 pixels horizontally and every 120 pixels vertically
(based on the image resolution of 1280x720 pixels). The purpose of the grid were solely
to support the visual estimation. The visibility did not allow for estimation in entire
image. Thus, in images with rather good visibility, the two top cells were left out and in
images with rather bad visibility, the four top cells were left out. The percentage cover
were estimated as the total percentage in the remaining cells (Figure 14). The image
projection meant that the cells would not represent the same true size of the seabed (as
explained in Section 12). However, for simpliﬁcation and to improve the eﬃciency of the
data processing, it was decided that the percentage cover reﬂected mussels covered within
an image and not as the true size of the seabed (Figure 15). The estimation ranged from
0-100 % cover within an image and the estimation were categorized into intervals of 0-
10-20-30-40-50-60-70-80-90-100 and would either be round up or down to nearest interval
(Figure 15).
Figure 14:
A grid with 12 cells was added to the exported images to support the quantiﬁcation of
percentage cover. In images with rather good visibility, the two top cells left out and in images with
rather bad visibility, the four top cells were not assessed.
31 of 83
==PAGE:41==
5
METHODS
Figure 15:
a-e) Examples of determinations of the degree of coverage. Note the overall diﬀerence in
the distribution and density between the ﬁve images in the top and the ﬁve images in the middle, which
are from two diﬀerent surveys. The ﬁve images in the bottom are examples of images left out of the
assessment.
5.4.3
Geotrack processing
Navigation data were logged approximately 20-30 times per second. To be able to syn-
chronize the navigation data with the exported images, the geotrack data had to be
reduced to one recording per second (hh:mm:ss format). The reduction was performed
through queries in the database management software Microsoft Access 2010 and data-
bases encompassing geotrack data with same timestamp as images exported at intervals
either 15s or 30s were created to allow geo-referencing of the images.
5.4.4
Interpolation
The assessed images were geo-referenced in ArcGIS Pro version 2.9.0 and the estimated
percentage cover was used to interpolate the degree of coverage in the entire surveyed
area with the inverse distance weighing (IDW) interpolation method. IDW has been
used for interpolating mussel density in other studies due to the assumption that mussel
density decreases in inﬂuence with distance from the sample location (Chopin, 2021;
ICES, 2007). The IDW interpolator uses the sampled points and the distance to nearby
points to estimate the value of unknown points (Bolstad, 2016, p. 529-530). The distance
to the sampled points determines the weight of each sample point and the farther away
32 of 83
==PAGE:42==
5
METHODS
the point, the less weight the point has, thus inverse distance weighing. IDW is an exact
interpolator meaning that the maximum and minimum values in the interpolated surface
only occur at sample points (ArcGIS Pro, 2022). Values are estimated by:
Zj =
ÿ
i
Zi
dnij
ÿ
i
1
dnij
(A8)
where Zj is the estimated value for an unknown point, Zi is the value of the sampled
point, dij is the distance from a known point i to an unknown point j and n is the power
exponent. The power exponent determines the inﬂuence of the nearby sampled points
and a high n results in higher inﬂuence of nearby points (Bolstad, 2016, p. 530). The
number of sampled points to be included as well as the power exponent were tested over
a range of n and i values and thereby adjusted to ﬁt the data most optimally.
To assess how well the interpolated model performed and thereby how well the model
predicted values at unknown points, a cross-validation was conducted in ArcGIS Pro. A
cross-validation uses all observed values, but removes an observation one at a time and
then predicts the associated value from the rest of the observations. The procedure is
repeated for all observations and makes it possible to compare the observed values with
the predicted values. The output is a classiﬁcation of observed and predicted values from
the original data set. Commonly used evaluation indicators are the R2 and the RSME-
value (Root Square Mean Error) (Vinh, 2020). The R2 value measures the correlation
between the obserbed and predicted values, and a high R2 are preferable. The RSME-
value provides a measure of the error size, and low values are preferred (Vinh, 2020). The
cross-validation output was processed in RStudio version 1.4.1103 to assess whether the
model and its associated parameter values were reasonable.
33 of 83
==PAGE:43==
6
RESULTS
6
Results
In this section, the results of the ROV surveys are presented. Several surveys was initi-
ated, but the results of three larger surveys will here be presented in two ways: qualitative
as a photo mosaic and quantitatively as an interpolation surface of the entire area.
6.1
ROV surveys
Three ROV surveys (survey IDs: WP3_10, WP5_10 and WP5_5m) were successfully
conducted across the desired area size of >2500 m2. The three resulting areas (A, B and
C) were positioned near the diver transects from 2019 (Figure 16). The survey in area C
was initially prepared to geographically cover the same area as area B to compare results
of surveys conducted with 5 m and 10 m between survey lines. However, the depth sensor
data revealed large depth diﬀerences between the surveys and the areas were therefore
treated as two separate areas (Figure 17). The survey conducted in area A was 336 m
long with 10 m between the survey lines and covered an area of 2671 m2. The survey
duration was 21 min and 46 sec and the depth varied between 1.0-2.9 m. The survey in
area B was 314 m long, covered an area of 2503 m2 and similarly had a distance of 10
m between the survey lines. The duration was 21 min and 49 sec and the depth varied
between 2.7-3.9 m. The longest survey was conducted in area C with a length of 644 m
and a distance of 5 m between the survey lines, covered an area of 2570 m2. The duration
was 42 min and 46 sec and the depth varied between 2.7-4.4 m (Table 5). Other ROV
surveys were initiated, but interrupted due to control errors and/or battery drainage. An
overview of all initiated surveys can be found in the map in Appendix B. Roskilde Fjord
is in general very little aﬀected by tide (tide size < 10 cm) and it was therefore assumed,
based on the depth proﬁles, that all surveys were conducted in the subtidal zone.
Table 5: Survey details
Date
Area
Survey ID
Distance between lines
Video duration
Transect length
Area size
22/06/2022
A
WP3_10m
10 m
21 min 46 sec
336 m
2671 m2
12/07/2022
B
WP5_10m
10 m
21 min 49 sec
314 m
2503 m2
12/07/2022
C
WP5_5m
5 m
42 min 56 sec
644 m
2570 m2
All ROV surveys were reviewed in NaviModel Producer to assess the performance of the
ROV and check the quality of the videos. The reviews showed that the ROV successfully
34 of 83
==PAGE:44==
6
RESULTS
followed the pre-planned routes, but instability of the vehicle resulted in "bouncing"
behavior and thereby varying performance. The instability were presumably a result of
varying current conditions and tether pull, when the tether was fully rolled out. The
QR-codes in Appendix C each provides a link to a clip of a review of the ROV survey
conducted in area A, B and C, respectively.
Figure 16: ROV surveys were conducted near diver transects from 2019 study. The initial ROV position
denotes the waypoint (WP) from where the ROV position was initiated, but also the position of where
the boat was anchored when performing the associated surveys in Area A, B and C. WP3_10, WP5_10
and WP5_5m are the respective survey IDs.
Figure 17: Depth proﬁle of surveys conducted in a) area A, b) area B and c) area C.
35 of 83
==PAGE:45==
6
RESULTS
6.2
Area A
Area A was surveyed on 22/06/2022 and revealed dense mussel beds on sandy substrate
in most parts of the survey, but also sandy patches with few mussels and few eelgrass
beds. In Figure 18, four representative images from the survey are provided to give an
impression of the survey observations.
Figure 18: Images selected to represent the ROV survey in area A. a) and b) shows the dense mussel bed
on sandy substrate, c) shows a part with sand, eelgrass and few mussels and d) reﬂects a dense mussel
bed with algae growth.
6.2.1
Photo Mosaic
All images from the videos recorded in area A (21 min and 46 sec) were exported for photo
mosaic. This resulted in an export of 42.235 images which were all stitched together into
a total of six photo mosaic strips. The strips were arranged according to the shape of the
ROV survey (Figure 19), but some limitations to the arrangement must be highlighted.
Firstly, smaller variations in ROV speed and stability created minor deviations in video
duration and thereby the amount of frames included in photo mosaic, meaning that the
length of the strips does not necessarily reﬂect the physical length of the survey. Secondly,
the distance of 10 m between survey lines is not reﬂected in the visual representation
of the photo mosaic, as this would minimize the representation and thus decrease the
interpretation. Thus, the ratio of the width size of a strip and the distance between the
strips does not reﬂect a 1:1 ratio. Thirdly, the stitching cannot account for the turns made
with the ROV, thus the "turning" parts of the strips are arranged as perpendicular ends
of each survey line. Lastly, the resolution of the photo mosaic is retained in the original
ﬁles and the details should advantageously be inspected, as the resolution is lowered in
the visual representation provided here.
These limitations apply to all photo mosaic
presented in this assignment. An impression of the level of details is provided in small
sections (1. and 2. in Figure 19), where the occurrence of mussel beds on sandy substrate,
eelgrass, algae growth, jellyﬁsh and a dead garﬁsh are presented. The video recording
was in general "disturbed" by large presence of jellyﬁsh, which is reﬂected as oblong grey
36 of 83
==PAGE:46==
6
RESULTS
features. The photo mosaic served as a great visual overview of the survey. By comparing
the photo mosaic with the survey depth proﬁle, some obvious distribution patterns were
noted. In the shallow part of the survey (1.0-2.0 m), the mussel beds appeared irregular
distributed in a characteristic ribbon-like pattern with few occurrences of eelgrass. In
the deeper part of the survey (2.0-2.9 m), the density of mussels increased and in most
parts covered 80-100 % of the seabed and smaller patches of algae growth were observed
on top op the mussel beds.
Figure 19: Survey conducted in area A: 42.235 images were exported from the ROV video, stitched into
a photo mosaic and arranged according to the route.
37 of 83
==PAGE:47==
6
RESULTS
6.2.2
Interpolation
Images exported for interpolation was divided into three datasets.
The ﬁrst dataset
(A30s1) consisted of images exported at every hh.mm.03 and hh.mm.33 and thereby in
intervals of 30. seconds, resulting in a total export of 43 images. The second dataset
(A30s2) also consisted of images exported every 30. seconds, but with 15 seconds apart
from 30s1, meaning that images were exported at every hh.mm.18. and hh.mm.48 and
resulted in a total export of 42 images. The third dataset (A15s) was a combination of
dataset A30s1 and A30s2 and thereby consisted of images exported every 15. second (at
hh.mm.03, hh.mm.18, hh.mm.33 and hh.mm.48) with a total of 85 images. The intent
was to test what the ideal number of images would be for the interpolation. The mussel
percentage cover in each exported image were quantiﬁed in the lower ten cells of the
grid and served as observed values. A statistical summary for the observed data and
interpolated data are provided in Table 6. The IDW interpolation parameters were set to
a power of 2.8 and to include a maximum 6 of points and a minimum of 4 points within a
search range of 15 m and the cell size were set to 2.5 m reﬂecting the center transect width
obtained at an altitude of 0.6 m. The observed values and interpolated values reﬂected
the same range from 0-100 % coverage. The mean values of the three interpolations were
recorded from 59.76-60.06 % and thereby all exceeded the criterion of 30 % and were
close to the observed mean values that ranged from 59.08-59.30 % (Table 6). Figure 20
shows the interpolation surface of the three interpolations. The part with least mussels,
less than 30 %, was found in the southeast corner of the area, which matches very well
with the photo mosaic representation.
Table 6: Statistical summary of observed mussel percentage cover and interpolation data in area A
Data
Min. value
Max. value
Mean
SD
Observed values (A15s)
0.0
100.0
59.08
33.81
Observed values (A30s1)
0.0
100.0
58.86
31.64
Observed values (A30s1)
0.0
100.0
59.30
36.28
Interpolated values (A15s)
0.0
100.0
59.76
29.96
Interpolated values (A30s1)
0.0
100.0
58.82
27.13
Interpolated values (A30s2)
0.0
100.0
60.06
31.45
38 of 83
==PAGE:48==
6
RESULTS
Figure 20:
Interpolaton of mussel percentage cover in images exported every a) 15. seconds (A15s), b)
30. seconds (A30s1) and c) 30. seconds (A30s2).
Table 7 shows the cross-validation results of the interpolated data. The R2 values ranged
from 0.43-0.67, and the interpolation of A15s recorded the best ﬁt with a R2 = 0.67. Based
on the RSME values, the order of the interpolations was A15s < A30s1 < A302s, were
the lowest value of A15s again indicated the best interpolation. As the cross-validation
is based on a leave-one-out principal, it might not account for the high and low values if
no neighboring observations represent an equally high or low value as the point left out.
Thereby, the range of minimum and maximum values may be aﬀected by the distribution
of high and low values.
The interpolation of A15s almost reﬂected the whole range,
whereas the interpolations of A30s1 and A30s2 did not reﬂect the whole range of low and
high values (Table 7 and Figure 21). This is evident in the histogram plots, were the
frequency of observed and predicted values were compared. The frequency of observed
minimum values (0-10 %) and maximum (90-100 %) in A30s1 and A30s2 was higher
than the frequency of predicted minimum and maximum values (Figure 21e, 21f, 21h and
21i). The minimum and maximum values is much better represented in A15s (Figure 21b
and 21c). Thus, the cross-validation results indicated that the optimal interpolation of
mussel percentage cover was performed on images exported every 15. second and that
the interpolation reﬂected the observed data quite well.
39 of 83
==PAGE:49==
6
RESULTS
Table 7: Statistical summary of cross-validation of interpolation of area A
Cross-validation
Predicted min. value
Predicted max. value
RMSE
R2
Interpolation (A15s)
2.27
98.61
19.36
0.67
Interpolation (A30s1)
13.65
87.90
22.74
0.48
Interpolation (A30s2)
7.20
97.64
27.35
0.43
Figure 21:
Cross-validation of interpolations in area A. The scatter plots shows the relationship of
predicted to observed values. The histograms show the frequency distribution of observed and predicted
values. The red line denotes the mean.
6.3
Area B
Area B was surveyed on 12/07/2022 and revealed mussels on muddy/sandy substrate.
The majority of the mussels were distributed in smaller and less dense mussel patches.
40 of 83
==PAGE:50==
6
RESULTS
Figure 23 displays four representative images from the survey.
It was clear that the
distribution of mussel diﬀerentiated from the survey conducted in area A. The mussel
distribution were more evenly distributed on the seabed, but the density of mussels
varied along the survey route.
Some parts had very few mussels and other parts of
the survey had a more dense cover of mussels. The seabed was also heavily covered by
ﬁlamentous algae growth in some parts, which made it impossible to identify potential
mussel beds underneath (Figure 22d). The recording was aﬀected by low visibility, which
also complicated the mussel classiﬁcation.
Figure 22:
Images selected to represent the content of the ROV survey in area B. a) mussels in less
dense beds, b) dense mussel bed covering the majority of the seabed. c) few mussels distributed on muddy
substrate and d) heavy algae growth on sandy substrate. The dark patch is a mussel bed.
6.3.1
Photo Mosaic
All images from the video recorded in area B (21 min and 49 sec) were exported for
photo mosaic and resulted in an export of 42.252 images which were stitched intro seven
photo mosaic strips (Figure 23). The strips were again aligned according to the ROV
survey, but the same limitations apply to the arrangement as described in Section 6.2.1.
The visual overview provided by the photo mosaic showed a tendency of fewer and less
dense mussel beds in shallow part of the survey (2.7-3.0 m) when comparing the mussel
distribution to the depth proﬁle (Figure 17b). The shallow part also had a few eelgrass
shoots and the seabed was heavily overgrown with ﬁlamentous algae. The deeper parts
of the survey (3.0-3.9 m) showed a higher density of mussels equally distributed in small
patches on muddy substrate, and also few more compact mussel beds were observed.
41 of 83
==PAGE:51==
6
RESULTS
Figure 23: Photo mosaic of 42.252 images exported from the survey conducted in area B. Three smaller
parts of the survey shows the details of the photo mosaic: 1. Dense mussel cover on muddy substrate, 2.
Few mussels and ﬁlamentous algae growth on sandy substrate, and 3. Dense mussel bed with ﬁlamentous
algae growth.
6.3.2
Interpolation
Since results from area A showed that the optimal interpolation was found at images
exported at intervals at 15. seconds, the same procedure for area B was applied. Images
were exported at every hh.mm.08, hh.mm.23, hh.mm.38 and hh.mm.53 resulting in an
export of 88 images. Due to the low visibility, the degree of coverage was only assessed
in the lower eight cells of the grid. The seabed was covered with ﬁlamentous algae in
some parts of the survey, which complicated the classiﬁcation of mussels and images with
very high algae cover were left out, which resulted in parts without observations.
A
total of 64 images were used for interpolation of the mussel percentage coverage. The
IDW interpolation parameters were set to a power of 1.9 and to include a maximum
10 of points and a minimum of 6 points within a search range of 15 m and the cell
size were set to 2.256 m reﬂecting a smaller area, as the mussel cover was assessed in
a smaller part of the image compared to area A. The interpolated values ranged from
42 of 83
==PAGE:52==
6
RESULTS
0.6-75.8 % and the range was thereby close to the observed value range of 0.0-80.0 %
mussel cover (Figure 8). The occurrence of single high and low observed values led to
the "buphthalmos phenomenon" (bulls eye eﬀect) on the interpolation surface (Figure
24), which is a common phenomenon for the IDW interpolation method (Vinh, 2020;
Xiao et al., 2016). Despite this, the interpolated surface reﬂected the distribution of
mussels similar to the photo mosaic representation, were the highest mussel percentage
cover were found in the deeper part of the survey. However, the mean values diﬀered
across the criterion of 30 % mussels. The observed mean value was 30.17 % whereas the
interpolated mean value was 26.88 % and thereby below the limit.
Table 8: Statistical summary of observed mussel percentage cover and interpolation data in area B
Data
Min. value
Max. value
Mean
SD
Observed values (B15s)
0.0
80.0
30.17
18.98
Interpolated values (B15s)
0.6
75.8
26.88
13.23
Figure 24: Interpolation of mussel percentage cover in images exported every 15. seconds in area B.
The cross-validation result revealed a low ﬁt of the observed vs. predicted values with a
R2=0.21 and a RMSE value of 16.97 (Table 9 and Figure 25). The maximum predicted
value of the cross-validation was only 50.89 % mussel cover, which indicated that the
43 of 83
==PAGE:53==
6
RESULTS
highest values were not accounted for in the cross-validation, which was also apparent in
the frequency distribution (Figure 25b and 25c). In addition, the observed values had
a higher frequency of low values (0-30 %), compared to the frequency distribution of
predicted values where the highest frequency was observed in the interval of 30-40 %.
This truly clariﬁed the limitations of the IDW interpolation method. The largest errors
were found when predicting extreme values that were unevenly distributed (Error plot
in Appendix D). However, the mean value of the observed values and cross-correlated
values were very similar (30.16 % and 28.87 %, respectively), thus the values were evened
out. Overall, the cross-validation indicated that the interpolation of area B had large
uncertainties and was not as accurate as the interpolation in area A. The fact that a
part of the interpolated surface did not have any observations, could also aﬀect the cross-
validation results.
Table 9: Statistical summary of cross-validation of interpolation in area B
Cross-validation
Predicted min. value
Predicted max. value
RMSE
R2
Interpolation (B15s)
5.58
50.89
16.97
0.21
Figure 25:
Cross-validation results of interpolation in area B. a) Relationship of predicted to observed
values of mussel percentage cover. b) Frequency distribution of observed values. Red line denotes the
mean = 30.16 % mussel cover. c) Frequency distribution of predicted values. Red line denotes the mean
= 29.87 % mussel cover.
6.4
Area C
Area C was, as previously mentioned, meant to be geographically located in the same
area as area B. However the depth proﬁles and the video observations showed that this
was not the case. The survey was presumably shifted 15-18 m in a western direction. The
44 of 83
==PAGE:54==
6
RESULTS
survey was carried out the same day as area B, on 12/07/2022, and the initial position
of the ROV was similar to the survey conducted in area B. Thus, the inaccuracy was
believed to be in relation to the DVL. The mussel distribution pattern was similar to
the observations in area B, with mussels distributed more equally on the seabed in less
dense beds on muddy substrate. The general mussel distribution patterns are visualized
in Figure 26. Few parts of the survey had more dense mussel beds as shown in Figure
26d. The recording was also aﬀected by low visibility, and thereby also complicated the
mussel identiﬁcation in some parts of the survey.
Figure 26: Images selected to represent the content of the ROV survey in area C. Mussels were in general
distributed on muddy substrate in smaller patches (a, b and c), but did also occur in denser beds.
6.4.1
Photo Mosaic
Since the survey in area C was the longest survey conducted (42 min and 46 sec), this
resulted in a high export of images, in total 76.362, which were stitched into 10 photo
mosaic strips (Figure 27). The distance of 5 m between the survey lines should be kept
in mind when interpreting the photo mosaic. Few mussel beds occurred in the shallow
part of the survey (2.7-3.0 m) where the seabed was covered with ﬁlamentous algae. The
deepest part of the survey (4.0-4.5 m) also revealed a low density of mussels on muddy
substrate (Figure 27b2).. The photo mosaic actually found to improve the visualization
and interpretation of the objects on the seabed compared to still images exported from
the video as the structure and distribution of the mussels became more apparent.
45 of 83
==PAGE:55==
6
RESULTS
Figure 27: Photo mosaic of 76.352 images exported from the survey conducted in area C. Three smaller
parts of the survey shows the details of the photo mosaic: 1. and 3. show a patchy, but dense cover of
mussels on muddy/sandy substrate and 2. shows few mussels on muddy/sandy substrate.
6.4.2
Interpolation
Images were exported in intervals of 15. seconds at every hh.mm.02, hh.mm.17, hh.mm.32
and hh.mm.47 resulting in an export of 158 images. Due to ﬁlamentous algae cover, some
images were excluded from the assessment resulting in a total of 128 images used for
interpolation of the percentage cover. The IDW interpolation parameters were set to a
power of 2.1 and to include a maximum 6 of points and a minimum of 4 points within
a search range of 18.4 m and the cell size were set to 2.256 m reﬂecting the lower center
transect width obtained at an altitude of 0.6 m. The interpolated values ranged from
10.1-82.66 % and the range was thereby close to the observed value range of 10.0-90.0 %
mussel cover (Table 8). The interpolated mean value was 32.11 % mussel cover and the
46 of 83
==PAGE:56==
6
RESULTS
observed mean value was 31.10 %, thus both mean values exceeded the criterion of 30 %
mussel cover. The "buphthalmos phenomenon" was also apparent for the interpolation
surface of area C, especially for the high values (60-90 % coverage). The interpolated
surface reﬂected the distribution of mussels similar to the photo mosaic representation.
Table 10: Statistical summary of observed mussel percentage cover and interpolation data in area C
Data
Min. value
Max. value
Mean
SD
Observed values (C15s)
10.0
90.0
31.10
16.08
Interpolated values (C15s)
10.1
82.66
32.11
12.32
Figure 28: Interpolation of mussel percentage cover in images exported every 15. seconds in area C.
The cross-validation of the interpolation revealed a low ﬁt of the observed vs. predicted
values with a R2 = 0.17 and a RSME value = 15.15 (Table 11 and Figure 29). Similar to
area B, the cross-validation did not predict the high observed values and the maximum
value predicted in the cross-validation was only 58.99 % (Figure 11c). Again, it was
emphasized that the IDW interpolation cannot predict unevenly distributed high and
low values and the largest error was found for the high observed values and for some of
the low observed values (Error plot Appendix D). Regarding the minimum values, the
IDW method calculates the weighted average of the neighbor points and the observed
minimum value is not reﬂected if there are points with larger values nearby. Thus, when
47 of 83
==PAGE:57==
6
RESULTS
the observed minimum value is 10 % coverage, the predicted value will appear higher,
due to the average weight of neighboring points, and thus fall into the "next" bin of
the histogram (Figure 29b and 29c). This cause the centering of values between 20-40 %
mussel cover, as the same is evident for uneven distribution of maximum values. However,
the mean values of the observed and predicted values were similar (31.09 % and 31.78
%, respectively), indicating that the distribution were evened out. Overall, the cross-
validation of the interpolation of area C also indicated large uncertainties and the result
should be interpreted carefully.
Table 11: Statistical summary of cross-validation of interpolation in area C
Cross-validation
Predicted min. value
Predicted max. value
RMSE
R2
Interpolation (C15s)
11.54
58.99
15.15
0.17
Figure 29: Cross-validation results of interpolation in area C. a) Predicted vs. observed values of mussel
percentage cover. b) b) Frequency distribution of observed values. Red line denotes the mean = 31.09.
% mussel cover. c) Frequency distribution of predicted values. Red line denotes the mean = 31.78 %
mussel cover.
6.5
Classiﬁcation of the mussel beds
There was no doubt that area A fulﬁlled the both the minimum criterion of 30 % mussel
coverage and the minimum size of >2500 m2 with mussels densely distributed in both
an irregular, ribbon-like shape and also covering 100 % of the seabed in some parts.
The cross-validation indicated a high accuracy of the interpolation with a R2 value =
0.67. The distribution of mussel beds in area B and C appeared diﬀerent from area A
(Figure 30), and the mussels were more evenly distributed on the seabed with generally
higher densities of mussels in the deeper part of area B and in shallow and of area C.
Both areas fulﬁlled the minimum size of >2500 m2, but it is expected, that there are
48 of 83
==PAGE:58==
6
RESULTS
some geographical overlap between area B and C, but it has not been possible to clarify
exactly how large an overlap from the ROV videos. Both cross-validations indicated large
uncertainties of the interpolations of area B and C. In both cases, the majority of the
observations fell within the categories of 0-30 % but also had some higher observations
up to 80 % and 90 %, respectively (Figure 25b and 29b) whereas the distribution of
observations in area A were more equally distributed across all categories from 0-100 %
(Figure 21). This suggests that the model had diﬃculty taking into account observations
that were skewed to one end of the spectrum, but still contained individual extreme
values. The RSME values were however lower for area B and C, compared to area A,
indicating that the mean error size were lower for those areas. Based on the mean value
of the interpolations, only area C just met the criterion of 30 % mussel coverage, but due
to the low R2 values, high uncertainties are expected for both interpolations. However,
the observed mean values for both areas were just above 30 % coverage (30.17 % for area
B and 32.11 % for area C). Another important consideration is the demarcation of the
mussel beds. The degree of coverage was assessed individually in each area, but it is
clear from especially the photo mosaics, that the edges of the mussel beds have not been
mapped. The delimitation of the mussel bed is important to determine how large an area
is actually in question, as well as assessing the degree of coverage within that area. It
is clear that the total degree of coverage will be lower if the demarcation includes areas
without mussel beds. Thus, to make a ﬁnal classiﬁcation of the mussel beds, a proper
inspection of the extent of the mussel beds is required.
Figure 30: Visual comparison of the three areas.
49 of 83
==PAGE:59==
7
DISCUSSION
7
Discussion
This study is the ﬁrst, to the author’s knowledge, to map potential biogenic reefs since
the publication of the new Danish deﬁnition in 2018. The mapping was carried out with
a ROV, where it was possible to survey the required minimum area of 2500 m2. The ROV
recordings oﬀered visual insights to the existence, distribution and structure of subtidal
mussel beds in a smaller area of Roskilde Fjord. Two proposals were given to assess the
degree of coverage of mussels: qualitatively by using photo mosaic and quantitatively
by estimating the degree of coverage of individual images that were exported at selected
points and then interpolated. This study illustrates how the criteria of minimum size and
minimum degree of coverage can be assessed with a ROV. The two remaining criteria of
stability and associated fauna were not investigated, but should in theory be examined for
a complete assessment of the potential biogenic reefs in the surveyed area. The mapping
was conducted with help from local, voluntary ﬁshermen. During ﬁeldwork, testing of the
ROV and discussions with the ﬁshermen, it was evaluated whether the ROV at a later
stage could be a mapping tool for volunteers. The evaluation is provided in the current
section, together with a discussion on the fulﬁllment of the criteria and challenges of ROV
habitat mapping.
7.1
Mapping biogenic reefs in accordance to the new deﬁnition
7.1.1
Criterion 1: minimum area
In this study, there has been a great focus on investigating how and how large an area
the ROV could search at a time and each surveyed area was assessed individually. It was
possible to search an area of 2500 m2 with the ROV, and thereby assess the coverage of
mussels within the minimum area required. The survey time was just below 22 min when
the area was searched in lines with 10 m apart. With this approach, the entire seabed was
not covered, but still provided a great visual insight to the distribution patterns within a
polygon. However, it is suspected that the extent of the mussel reef is greater than that
observed in the three surveyed areas, as the edges of the mussel beds were not discovered.
To examine the area of interest in its entirety, it is necessary to map the boundary of the
mussel beds to obtain a clear understanding of the overall extent of the potential biogenic
reef. It would be ideal to improve the ROV survey strategy and the strategical placement
of the ROV polygons with other survey techniques, dependent on what prior knowledge
of the area is available. This is simply due to the low coverage rate of the ROV and the
50 of 83
==PAGE:60==
7
DISCUSSION
limitation of the cable length.
To obtain more knowledge about the possible extent of the mussel reef in the area of
interest, an aerial drone survey was conducted as a supplement to the ROV surveys.
The aerial drone footage and orthomosaic was kindly performed by Aris Thomasberger
from DTU Aqua. A real-time kinematic positioning (RTK) drone, which has a high geo-
accuracy (centimeter-level) was used to construct an orthomosaic image of the area. The
survey was conducted at an altitude of 99 m, lasted 37 min and had a total distance
of 13.3 km (Appendix E). The image clearly showed the details of the seabed in the
shallow part of the survey, 0-1.5 m, however from around 1.5-2 m depth, there was an
instant change in contrast and it was not possible to detect or classify potential mussel
beds below 1.5 m. The aerial drone image was aﬀected by reﬂection and was conducted
during high tide, so there is a slight possibility that the visualization could be improved
under better conditions. However, with the presented aerial orthomosaic it has not been
possible to demarcate the mussel reef or optimize the survey strategy. This implies that
detection of the extent of the mussel reef should be conducted below the sea surface in
this area.
Figure 31: Aerial orthomosaic of the area. The aerial drone survey was conducted by Aris Thomasberger.
To support the ROV survey procedure, initial detection of the extent, besides prior in-
51 of 83
==PAGE:61==
7
DISCUSSION
formation, could be done with relatively simple survey techniques such as snorkeling or
drop-camera (R. Holt et al., 2001). In eelgrass studies, for example, T-shaped transects
formed by a line from the coast out to the maximum depth limit of the eelgrass are carried
out (Bruhn et al., 2021). At the maximum depth limit, a zigzag transect is established
with 7-10 turning points perpendicular to the main line conducted from the coast. In
this way, the extent of the eelgrass and the degree of coverage is assessed. The area of
interest in this project is relatively shallow (1-5 m), so performing snorkeling transects
in a similar way with a predeﬁned distance between the transects could be an option.
Alternatively, if the depth and visibility does not allow for snorkeling, transects with
a drop-camera deployed from a boat could be performed instead. More advanced geo-
physical equipment, such as side-scan sonar, is also an option depending on resources,
experience and scientiﬁc background. Side-scan sonars have a much broader range (25-
600 m swath width) than a ROV (Kenny et al., 2003) and have commonly been used for
detection of Reefs 1170 (Al-Hamdani et al., 2014; Al-Hamdani et al., 2019; Al-Hamdani
et al., 2015; Lazar et al., 2013; Nielsen et al., 2013; Ricklefs et al., 2020). Side-scan sonar
have been used to survey intertidal mussel beds in the Wadden Sea, where it proved to
be a good and cost-eﬀective tool for quantitative time-lapse monitoring of mussel beds
(van Overmeeren et al., 2009). The minimum altitude required was 1.4 m, thus it is
possible to use side-scan sonar in shallow areas. The precision and accuracy of side-scan
images will generally decrease at increasing range and the image resolution depends on
the type of side-scan sonar system and the operating signal frequency. However, even at
the lowest range (swath width of 25 m), a side-scan sonar will still have a large coverage
rate of approximately 3090 m2/min (180.000 m2/h) obtained with an operating speed of
2 m/s (Kenny et al., 2003) compared to the ROV survey. Thus, depending on resources,
equipment availability and experience the survey could be optimized by detecting the
extent of the mussel reef with either snorkeling, drop-camera or geophysical tools, but
aerial footage do not seem to provide the suﬃcient information of mussel extent for this
area. There will be limitations to any survey technique, thus a combination of diﬀerent
tools is recommended to improve the eﬃciency of the habitat mapping.
7.1.2
Criterion 2: Minimum degree of coverage
The three surveyed areas provided useful insights into the distribution and density of
mussel beds in the subtidal zone. Furthermore, they revealed that there were substantial
diﬀerences in degree of coverage within a smaller area, as the appearance of area A diﬀered
from area B and C. The new deﬁnition of biogenic reef requires a minimum coverage of
52 of 83
==PAGE:62==
7
DISCUSSION
30 % and it thereby increases the requirement of the biological classiﬁcation of mussels,
which previously in general was 10 % for dominant species communities, including com-
munities dominated by blue mussels (Al-Hamdani et al., 2014). It is uncertain how the
estimation of 30 % coverage should be approached, as this is not speciﬁed. It is assumed,
based on the available material, that the previous mappings of biogenic reefs have been
approached qualitatively via expert judgements of video material and sonar images as
there are no indication of a speciﬁc quantiﬁcation of coverage levels (Al-Hamdani et al.,
2014; Al-Hamdani et al., 2019; Al-Hamdani et al., 2015; Nielsen et al., 2013). The results
of this study provided both a qualitative representation and quantitative assessment of
the degree of coverage from the ROV videos. The photo mosaic contributed with a visual
portrayal of the distribution of the mussel beds, which improved the understanding and
interpretation of the survey, especially in relation to depth. It is possible that the qual-
itative representation of the area is enough to assess the degree of coverage in relation to
how the biogenic reefs previously have been assessed. The processing of the photo mo-
saic is less time consuming compared to the quantitative assessment, as it involves fewer
steps and additionally made it possible to characterise and assess the natural distribu-
tion patterns. Nevertheless, the quantitative assessment made it possible to model the
percentage coverage in the whole area. It was clear from the cross-validations that there
can be great uncertainties in performing interpolation, thus cross-validation is required to
assess the interpolation performance (Vinh, 2020). The IDW interpolation method was
mainly applicable for data with even distribution of observations across the categoriza-
tions of percentage coverage and with very few outliers. Ideally, statistical criteria should
be deﬁned to assess when the interpolation is valid. An R2 value above 0.6 is accepted
in a number of studies(Vinh, 2020). However, a categorization based on the substrate,
distribution and density patterns should be considered and tested, as it may aﬀect the
interpolation performance and possible statistical limits.
Another challenge related to the low coverage areas was the estimation of the percentage
coverage. In general, the estimation of coverage was more manageable in the images where
the mussels were more densely distributed, as in area A, whereas the patchy distribution
in area B and C was more challenging. This form of expert judgement is often applied
to assess video and image data, but the method is susceptible to inaccuracy and tends
to be less reproducible (Bruhn et al., 2021; Rasmussen et al., 2020; Turner et al., 2016).
A quality assurance of the assessment of percentage coverage should be undertaken by
several experts to verify the quantiﬁcation and improve conﬁdence and robustness of the
53 of 83
==PAGE:63==
7
DISCUSSION
assessment (Coggan et al., 2007b; Eno et al., 2013).
Literature that actually describes the degree of coverage of subtidal mussel beds is scarce
and it has not been possible to ﬁnd adequate image material in peer-reviewed publica-
tions, besides side-scan sonar images. In fact, the video material provided by the MARTA
database gives the best insight into how designated biogenic reefs appear in the subtidal
zone (Figure 2), where both dense and patchy mussel beds were observed. There could
be several reasons for the pronounced diﬀerences in the degree of coverage. Firstly, mus-
sels in area A occurred on sandy substrate, whereas mussels in area B and C occurred
primarily on muddy/sandy substrate. Mussels rarely attach to the primary sediment in
soft-sediment habitats (Commito et al., 2005; Commito et al., 2014) and it has been
experimentally found that byssal threads are unable to attach to grain sizes less than
0.85 mm in diameter (Young, 1983). In fact, mussels tend to prefer byssal attachment
to live mussels, followed by dead mussel shells and gravel (Commito et al., 2014). This
indicates that attachment to existing mussels plays a major role in soft-bottom spatial
pattern development and thereby formation of new mussel beds (Commito et al., 2014).
Thus, the underlying substrate and absence/presence of either live mussels or shell debris
could be an explanatory factor.
Secondly, the tidal position may also generally aﬀect the distribution and density of mus-
sels. Several studies have argued that mussel beds in the subtidal zone do not appear
as densely distributed as in the intertidal zone (Buschbaum et al., 2001; Nehls et al.,
2009; Ricklefs et al., 2020), but despite this it is often assumed that subtidal mussel
beds resemble intertidal mussel beds (Troost et al., 2022). Intertidal mussel beds have
been studied more intensively compared to subtidal mussel beds, presumably due to the
advantages of ground-truthing intertidal zones during low tides compared to the more
methodological diﬃculties associated with gathering data of submerged mussels (Knights,
2012; Ricklefs et al., 2020; Troost et al., 2022; van Overmeeren et al., 2009). Buschbaum
et al., 2001 proved the eﬀect of tidal position on the density of mussels in the Wadden
Sea and found that the density of intertidal mussels was two times higher than subtidal
blue mussels, but the proportion of large mussels was higher in the subtidal zone. The
density distribution was assumed to be a result of higher predation pressure and lower
recruitment in the subtidal zone. Another ﬁnding was that the growth rate of mussels
in the subtidal zone was approximately three times higher for subtidal mussels, as a
function of higher submergence time. In fact, mussel shell length varied between the
54 of 83
==PAGE:64==
7
DISCUSSION
tidal zones and increased from the mid intertidal zone (25-35 mm) over low intertidal
zone (30-45 mm) to the subtidal zone (45-60 mm). Furthermore, Ricklefs et al., 2020
found that older mussels in the subtidal zone often occurred as individuals attached to
dead shells or in small clumps of few individuals and that small young mussels (<2cm)
were rarely observed. Additionally, (Saier, 2002) found that subtidal beds have a higher
species diversity and richness compared to intertidal beds, and that the mussel abund-
ances signiﬁcantly dropped with increasing submergence due to the presence of predators.
The Danish deﬁnition on biogenic reefs does not distinguish between mussel reefs in the
intertidal and subtidal zone, despite the European Interpretation Manual states "..that
the reefs may extend from the sublittoral uninterrupted into the intertidal (littoral) zone
or may only occur in the sublittoral zone, including deep water areas such as the bathyal."
(European Commission, 2013), and thus places greater emphasis on reefs in the subtidal
zone, since reefs located exclusively in the intertidal zone may not be considered (Nehls
et al., 2009). The references used to support the criterion for a minimum coverage rate
of 30 % in the Danish deﬁnition of biogenic reefs all rely on mussels in the intertidal zone
(OSPAR Commission, 2018; Pulfrich, 2018; Svane et al., 1993; Thiel et al., 1993). It is
problematic if the criteria of biogenic reefs are unattainable due to a presumption that
subtidal mussel beds resemble intertidal beds, as this might lead to fewer designations of
biogenic reefs in the deeper parts of the subtidal zones.
Ricklefs et al., 2020 have highlighted that biogenic reefs created by blue mussels are
rare, because of the diﬃculty to fulﬁll the prerequisites. They tried to apply the criteria
deﬁned in the German instruction for Reefs 1170, and found that it was especially hard
to demonstrate the criterion of "distinguishable from the seabed relief and tower above the
bottom surface" of mussels in the subtidal zone due to low densities and degree of cov-
erage (Ricklefs et al., 2020). The German deﬁnition requires only a 5% mussel coverage
in the North Sea and a 10 % mussel coverage in the Baltic Sea, but a coverage of 100
% at the center of the mussel bed must be ensured (Boedeker et al., 2018). Tidal zones
and low percentage coverage are also speciﬁed in detail in the deﬁnition of Reefs 1170
in Sweden. Here, mussel beds are included as a part of the habitat type if these have
a degree of coverage exceeding 10 % and are topographically separated by rising above
seabed in the littoral and sublittoral zone (Naturvårdsverket, 2011). Thus, diﬀerence in
the deﬁnition of Reefs 1170 are found between the various neighboring countries and the
Danish deﬁnition requires a higher degree of coverage than the neighboring countries, but
55 of 83
==PAGE:65==
7
DISCUSSION
does not require a topographic distinction. If either the Swedish or German deﬁnition
would be applied for area A, B or C, they would all fulﬁll the requirement of 10 % cover,
but area B and C might not fulﬁll the requirement of being topographic distinct, as the
mussels tended to occur in one layer and thereby do not "tower" above the seabed. It
should also be noted, that the Swedish deﬁnition does not require any minimum area
size or minimum number of cohorts, whereas the German deﬁnition requires a minimum
size of 100 m2 or mussels along a 25 m axis and a stability requirement of 2-3 cohorts
(Boedeker et al., 2018; Naturvårdsverket, 2011).
Lastly, the distribution and density can be related to single strong year classes where
mussels have settled in high densities. Mussel recruitment can take place during the
entire year but usually takes place in spring/early summer, depending on environmental
variables such as temperature and salinity (T. J. Holt et al., 1998). The planktonic larval
stage normally varies 2-4 weeks after which the post-larvae settles and become visible
to the human eye in the late summer (T. J. Holt et al., 1998; Troost et al., 2022). As
the mussels grow, they form a thin carpet of mussels with a patchy extent on a layer
of mussel mud, but are often washed away during the autumn storms (T. J. Holt et al.,
1998). A closer examination of the mussels’ size would give an indication of the age
of the mussels and thereby stability of the mussel beds (discussed in next subsection).
Overall, substantial investigation eﬀort is required to document the distribution, density
and coverage patterns of subtidal mussel beds.
7.1.3
Criterion 3: Stability
The stability of the mussel reef was not assessed and thus it is unknown, if the mussel beds
fulﬁll the criterion of minimum three cohorts. The criterion relies on the assumption, that
most stable reefs are characterized by several cohorts (Dahl et al., 2018). Examination
of cohorts in a mussel bed has its challenges. Firstly, to know the number of cohorts
and thereby the age of mussels within a mussel bed, continuous monitoring over several
years is required, which is very resource demanding, time consuming and labor intensive
(Ricklefs et al., 2020; Troost et al., 2022). Secondly, mussel size, growth rates and life
span varies across tidal zonation, salinity gradients and energy ﬂow (Buschbaum et al.,
2001; Ricklefs et al., 2020; Troost et al., 2022). Size variations occur within a bed, and
mussels at the edges tend to be larger than mussels in the center of the bed (Bertolini
et al., 2020). The growth rate is in general inﬂuenced by temperature and salinity, but
also food availability and air-exposure (Buschbaum et al., 2001; Ricklefs et al., 2020)
56 of 83
==PAGE:66==
7
DISCUSSION
Thus, proper comparative growth rates must be used for individual mussel reef locations
that share comparable environmental conditions (Ricklefs et al., 2020). In relation to as-
sessing cohorts and age structure of biogenic reefs, Ricklefs et al., 2020 applied the shell
length-frequency distribution (LFD) method, which reﬂects the age structure of a mussel
population within a mussel bed and provides insight to missing year classes and spatfall
events (Ricklefs et al., 2020). The method relies on the collection of mussels with either
a small mussel dredge or by divers, and then the length of each mussel is measured to
mm-scale. At their study site in the Wadden Sea, they carefully assumed that subtidal
mussels would reach a shell length of 70 mm within 3–4 years. The LFD showed the
presence of diﬀerent age groups, but cohorts of juvenile mussels (<20 mm) were rarely
found in the subtidal beds. Very few mussels collected in one year had an estimated age of
minimum 3 years (mussels shell > 70 mm), while mussels collected 6 years later indicated
5-6 year old mussels. Despite this, the beds showed increasing degradation during the
monitoring period from 2012-2018, which indicates that large ﬂuctuations occur even in
beds with >3 cohorts.
T. J. Holt et al., 1998 have argued that mussel reef populations generally only are two
or three years old, despite the higher life expectancy of blue mussels. This was further
supported by a more recent study by Troost et al., 2022. Troost et al., 2022 studied the
survival chances of subtidal mussel beds in the Dutch Wadden Sea. They used long-term
annual data of 365 individual mussel subtidal beds from 1992-2019. They found that the
average life span of subtidal mussel beds was 2.3 years, when the mussels had survived
their ﬁrst winter, but that the survival of subtidal mussel beds in less saline water on
average had a life span of 3.4 years, which is comparable to the survival of intertidal
mussel beds (van der Meer et al., 2019). However, they also found that the survival of
larger beds was signiﬁcantly higher. Their results were compared to a similar study on
intertidal mussel beds (van der Meer et al., 2019), and the comparison showed that the
survival of subtidal mussel beds (90 % loss after 5 years) were lower than intertidal mussels
bed (90 % loss after 8-9 years). Hence, diﬀerences within the tidal zonation may aﬀect
longevity of mussels. As a consequence, subtidal mussel beds rely on new recruitment for
prolonged survival (Smaal et al., 2021; Troost et al., 2022). Thus, assessment of cohorts
within a mussel reef is a diﬃcult task, especially when the growth rate and longevity
are aﬀected by several physical and environmental factors. Vlas et al., 2005 and Nehls
et al., 2009 have used the following deﬁnition of a stable mussel site: "Location where
mature mussel beds (one or more) occur regularly over several years", where two beds
57 of 83
==PAGE:67==
7
DISCUSSION
are considered separate if there of more than 25 m between them. This deﬁnition may
serve as a more appropriate deﬁnition to apply as the criterion of minimum three cohorts
might be diﬃcult to fulﬁll as many mussel beds may only consist of mussels up to two
or three years of age depending on environmental variables (T. J. Holt et al., 1998). The
conﬁrmed occurrence of blue mussels in both 2019 and 2022 indicates that there is a
relative stable mussel reef at the site at Selsø Hage.
7.1.4
Criterion 4: Associated Fauna
The Danish deﬁnition of a biogenic reef includes a criterion of documented associated ﬂora
and fauna. This criterion was not assessed in this study, however with relevant expert
knowledge, it would be possible to identify macroﬂora and macrofauna in the videos. For
assessment of infauna, in situ sampling is required, which could be done with either a
hand-held metal box corer as in Saier, 2002 or with a van Veen grab or net sampling as
in Ricklefs et al., 2020.
7.2
Mapping biogenic reefs with a ROV
One of the main advantages of the ROV survey design was its ability to clarify the
distribution of mussels within a coherent polygon. It was only possible to survey such
a precisely delineated area because of the "mission-planner" function and autonomous
control in the NaviSuite Mobula control software. The quality and stability of the ROV
recordings were in general good, but the identiﬁcation of mussels would have been easier
at maximum camera resolution and higher water visibility. It was not obvious in advance
that the ROV could search an area of 2500 m2 as several, both technical and practical,
factors came into play. The testing showed that it was possible to autonomously survey an
area of approximately 50x50 m from the volunteers’ boat, but not without complications
along the way. Table 12 summarize the main complications faced during the ROV surveys.
Comments and description of issues faced during the ROV surveys are provided in the
logbooks in Appendix A.
58 of 83
==PAGE:68==
7
DISCUSSION
Table 12: Complications faced during the ROV surveys
Complication
Possible cause
Resolution
Loss of manoeuvrability
Wrong thruster conﬁguration
Check thruster conﬁguration
Entangling
Retrieve ROV, remove obstruction and check for damage
Boat drift in opposite direction
Reassure ROV is within reasonable distance
Current
Change direction of ROV survey
Joystick battery is too low
Change joystick batteries
Battery discharge
Too high vehicle speed
Keep speed below 0.5 m/s
Overheated battery
Turn of thrusters immediately, retrieve and change battery
Max tether length used
Turn of thrusters immediately and retrieve
Entangling
Retrieve ROV, remove obstruction and check for damage
Instable manoeuvrability
Tether drag
Ensure enough tether and avoid to use max tether length
Wrong stability conﬁguration
Check/test stability performance of ROV
Navigation/tracking
To close to bottom
Stay above 0.5 m altitude
Navigation not activated
Activate DVL and check for errors
Inactive for too long
Initialize start position of ROV again
Loss of data
Change in folder directory
Do not edit the default folder directory
Software
Antivirus blocking
Deactivate all antivirus programs
The ROV piloting was conducted by one surveyor and with help from volunteers. The
volunteers were very helpful in managing the tether cable and keeping an eye on how the
tether shaped on top of the surface of the water, as this could imply tether drag and result
in unstable manoeuvrability. A major advantage was that the volunteers had experience
from previous ﬁeld work trips with ROVs, thus they had gained good understanding of
the practical management of the ROV. However, the technical management of the ROV
relied on the surveyor including initialization of the ROV, piloting the ROV, ensuring the
manoeuvrability underwater, avoiding battery depletion and entanglement and writing
logbook, which at some points was a stressful activity in a moving boat. To minimize
problems and improve eﬃciency, it would be an advantage to be two ROV surveyors,
which has also been recommended by Pacunski et al., 2008.
One of the biggest challenges faced during the ROV surveys was discharging the ROV
battery. According the BlueRobotics technical information, the battery has a nominal
capacity of 15.6Ah, which should allow for 3-4 hours of moderate use on the BlueROV2
(BlueRobotics, 2022a). However, the voltage dropped drastically several times during the
surveys due to either high vehicle speed, overheated battery, entanglement or if the tether
59 of 83
==PAGE:69==
7
DISCUSSION
drag was too high. These issues were mainly faced when the ROV was in an autonomous
mode surveying a pre-planned route. This was a major issue, as the minimum safe voltage
of the battery is 12V and may not re-charge below this voltage.
The survey of area B and C uncovered an inaccuracy of the ROV tracking system. The
exact cause of this is unknown, but it indicates a need to resolve the potential drift over
time through test and calibration of the DVL and/or test of how often the ROV position
should be initialized to ensure accurate position of the ROV.
An interesting observation faced during the surveys showed that the direction of the
ROV survey inﬂuenced the manoeuvrability of the ROV. At ﬁrst, the ROV surveys were
planned in a North/South direction, but this often caused unstable manoeuvrability and
drop in battery voltage, but when conducting surveys in the East/West direction, the
manoeuvrability was much better and the battery lasted for a long time.
The exact
cause is unknown, but could be a result of wind direction aﬀecting the boat drift in the
opposite direction or an eﬀect of the current. As a consequence, it is recommended to
change direction of the survey if the manoeuvrability is unstable for no known reason.
Proper data storage and backup is an essential consideration that cannot be overlooked
(Pacunski et al., 2008). This was made clear as the ﬁeld laptop at a certain point deleted
all video ﬁles recorded during the ROV surveys. This was believed to be a result of
creating new folders within the default directory folder of the software. Fortunately, a
backup was secured in advance, but it illustrated how important it is to secure the raw
data ﬁles.
7.2.1
Seasonality
In Roskilde Fjord, the spring phytoplankton bloom occurs in March/April and a smaller
autumn bloom occurs in October/November, resulting in a reduction in visibility (Har-
aguchi et al., 2022). Thus, to increase the quality of the ROV videos and the classiﬁcation
of mussels, the surveys should be conducted either before the spring bloom or before the
autumn bloom, preferably in December/January/February or August/September.
60 of 83
==PAGE:70==
7
DISCUSSION
7.3
Evaluation of the ROV as a citizen science mapping tool
7.3.1
The ROV is not the ideal citizen science mapping tool
The initial objective of the project was to test if the speciﬁc ROV tested in this project
could work as a mapping tool in a "mapping toolbox" for local ﬁshermen, who have
interest in contributing to mussel reef mapping. The ﬁeldwork and ROV surveys were
carried out with help from local ﬁshermen, who greatly contributed to the practical part of
the mussel reef mapping. However, the ROV quickly proved to be technically demanding
and challenging in its setup and control. Even though it is often expected that citizens
become familiar with data collection over time (Dickinson et al., 2010), there are too
many challenges and risks involved with the ROV as a citizen science mapping tool. The
ﬁshermen themselves stated that they would not be able to use the ROV as it was too
complicated to use and that they would not take the risk. One ﬁsherman also said that
he was not a very experienced computer user, thus he would not be able use the computer
and manage the setup. Nevertheless, he expressed that he was delighted to help out with
managing the boat and that he found great joy in being part of a voluntary project,
because he also learned something about their own local area and nature. Based on the
complications faced during the ﬁeld work testing (Figure 12) and the inputs from the
volunteers, the potential risks associated with allowing the ROV to be a mapping tool for
volunteers were deﬁned and categorized in a risk matrix. The risks were categorized based
on their level of likelihood and impact (Figure 32). The very high and high level risks
were especially associated with the operational and technical use of the ROV, which was
considered to be the main challenge of the ROV being a citizen science tool. The mapping
tool needs to be more manageable and intuitive to be applied by a citizen. Returning to
the requirements deﬁned in the method requirements (Section 4.2), the ROV only partly
fulﬁlled the requirements and for the most part did not fulﬁll the requirements related to
use and operation (Table 13). Handling the ROV requires considerable experience and
practice in advance to search an area of 2500 m2 and the ROV operation is not as safe and
reliable, as it should be to allow a non-scientiﬁc person to use it. The user interface does
not allow citizens with minor knowledge of IT and computers to use the control software.
However, the ROV did prove that it was possible to collect data within a reasonable time
frame and provided quality data about the mussel percentage coverage rate, and to some
degree the extent of the mussel beds.
61 of 83
==PAGE:71==
7
DISCUSSION
Figure 32: Risk matrix
Table 13: Fulﬁllment of speciﬁed requirements of a citizen science mapping tool
Functional requirements of a citizen science mapping tool
Fulﬁlled
Should allow a non-scientiﬁc person to use the mapping tool by them self
No
Safe and reliable
No
Easy to operate
No
Good and intuitive user interface
No
Minimum practice and instruction in advance
No
Easy to handover/handback
No
Data collection should be within a reasonable time frame
Yes
Transportable and no need for crane or similar device to deploy the mapping tool
Yes
Relatively maintenance free and limited calibration needed
No
Should provide quality data about mussel cover and mussel extent
Partly
7.3.2
Opportunities
Although it was assessed that the ROV is not suitable as a citizen science mapping tool,
it does not rule out that locals can contribute to the mapping of mussel reefs and improve
the existing knowledge of mussel reefs. They should simply be involved in another way.
In fact, local ﬁshermen have previously contributed to the restoration of blue mussel beds,
62 of 83
==PAGE:72==
7
DISCUSSION
where their practical skills in particular were a great advantage (Poulsen et al., 2012).
The volunteers contributed to the practical work with 3000 volunteer hours, thus it was
possible to conduct the project cost-eﬀectively and at the same time draw attention to
the ecological value of mussel beds and raise the environmental awareness of the local
community (L. D. Kristensen et al., 2015; Poulsen et al., 2012). The work in this cur-
rent project demonstrated that locals ﬁshermen can contribute to habitat mapping as
a practical resource. Thus, one alternative option would be to involve the ﬁshermen in
the mussel reef mapping in the same way as in this project, where the ﬁshermen provide
boat access and knowledge about the fjord and the area, but do not perform the actual
mapping themselves. The mapping should instead be carried out by the scientist. In
such a setup it is important that the ﬁsherman also beneﬁts from being involved in the
project, for example through personal enjoyment, credit and acknowledgement of their
contribution and possible learning opportunities (ECSA, 2015).
A second alternative would be to develop and/or test other mapping tools that are more
suitable as a mapping tool for ﬁshermen and that meet the requirements set out in Table
13. In this way, the ﬁsherman could either 1) carry out an independent mapping and
collect data which would be analysed to assess whether there is a mussel reef in the area
in question, which can potentially meet the requirements for size and degree of coverage
or 2) contribute to the initial investigation concerning the delimitation of the mussel reef,
so that a more targeted and eﬃcient mapping could then be carried out with the ROV.
Nonetheless, the procedure for data collection must be well designed and standardised
(Silvertown, 2009).
A third alternative would be to investigate local recreational ﬁshermen’s knowledge of
occurrences of subtidal mussel beds.
Fish habitats in Øresund have previously been
mapped based on semi-structured interviews with local ﬁshermen (Sørensen et al., 2016)
and it would be interesting to investigate, if ﬁshermen have knowledge of sites or areas
with subtidal mussel beds. The information would be useful for targeting the mapping of
potential biogenic reefs and should ideally be digitized to create an overview of the sites.
The three alternative suggestions on how to include local ﬁshermen is presented in Figure
33. ECSA (European Citizen Science Association) has developed ten principles for citizen
science projects that constitute a successful citizen science project, and they should all
be taken into account if any of the three suggestions were to be carried out. In any
case, there should be a genuine scientiﬁc outcome, the data collected should be validated
63 of 83
==PAGE:73==
7
DISCUSSION
and the citizens should be acknowledged and receive feedback from the project (ECSA,
2015; Silvertown, 2009). Involving citizens is generally recommended for the collection
of environmental data over large scales (Silvertown, 2009), and could be an important
step to build awareness, increase the knowledge of extent and distribution of especially
subtidal mussel reefs and not at least secure the future protection of these valuable
biogenic habitats.
Figure 33: Other citizen science opportunities for contributing to mussel reef mapping
64 of 83
==PAGE:74==
8
CONCLUDING REMARKS
8
Concluding Remarks
This study proved that a ROV can be applied to map mussel beds, which potentially
should be designated and protected according to the EU Habitats Directive. At least one
area (area A) in the study site in Roskilde Fjord fulﬁlled the criteria of both size and cov-
erage of biogenic reefs required by the Danish deﬁnition. Greater uncertainties were found
for area B and C, but the degree of coverage was approximately 30 % in both areas. The
two remaining criteria of stability and associated fauna were not assessed. It is important
to emphasize that the areas were examined individually, and the boundaries of the sur-
veys marked the limit of the assessment. Ideally, the extent of the mussel beds should be
investigated to assess the degree of coverage within the natural boundaries of the mussel
beds. Nonetheless, photo mosaics of the surveyed areas revealed valuable insight to the
distribution and density patterns of subtidal mussel beds and pronounced diﬀerences were
found within this smaller area. The interpolation as well as the estimation of percentage
cover proved to be diﬃcult for the areas with mussels distributed homogeneously at lower
densities. The results thus call for further evaluation of the quantiﬁcation of the degree of
coverage of mussels in areas with patchy distribution and coverage around 30 %, as this
may be decisive for the designation. In general, further research is required to document
the distribution, density and coverage patterns of subtidal mussel beds, as the majority
of studies have been conducted on intertidal mussels and these may not resemble subtidal
mussel beds. A combination of mapping tools is recommended to increase eﬃciency of
the mussel reef mapping and to place the ROV surveys more strategically. The ROV
survey procedure could be adopted in future mapping or research programs, either in
national marine mappings to secure the fulﬁllment of size and coverage rate, or as part
of a citizen science project, were citizens are involved in either one of the three proposals
provided in this study.
65 of 83
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
References
Airoldi, L., Balata, D. & Beck, M. W. (2008). The gray zone: Relationships between
habitat loss and marine diversity and their applications in conservation. Journal
of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 366(1-2), 8–15. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jembe.2008.07.034
Al-Hamdani, Z., Jensen, J. B., Skar, S., Nørgaard-Pedersen, N., Leth, J. O., Lomholt, S.,
Bennike, O., Granat, H., Andersen, M. S., Rödel, L. G., Pjetursson, B., Rasmussen,
M. B., Dahl, K., Göke, C., Bruhn, A. & Andersen, O. G. N. (2014). Marin habit-
atkortlægning i de indre danske farvande 2014. Naturstyrelsen.
Al-Hamdani, Z., Owen, M., Rödel, L. G., Witt, N., Nørgaard-Petersen, N., Bennike, O.,
Sabra, H., Eriksen, L. N., Kragh, S., Jensen, J. B., Nicolaisen, J., Schmedes, M. L.,
Nielsen, B., Kjellerup, S., Dons, S., Stæhr, M. W. & Gai, F. (2019). 2017-2018
marin habitatkortlægning i skagerrak og nordsøen 2017-2018. Miljøstyrelsen.
Al-Hamdani, Z., Skar, S., Jensen, J. B., Rödel, L. G., Pjetursson, B., Bennike, O., Jensen,
G. C. O., Rasmussen, M. B., Dahl, K., Rømer, J. K., Göke, C., Bruhn, A. &
Lundsteen, S. (2015). Marin habitatkortlægning i skagerrak og nordsøen 2015.
Naturstyrelsen.
Anton, V., Germishuys, J., Bergström, P., Lindegarth, M. & Obst, M. (2021). An open-
source, citizen science and machine learning approach to analyse subsea movies.
Biodiversity Data Journal, 9. https://doi.org/10.3897/BDJ.9.e60548
ArcGIS Pro. (2022). How inverse distance weighted interpolation works [Accessed: 2022-
08-22]. https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/help/analysis/geostatistical-
analyst/how-inverse-distance-weighted-interpolation-works.htm
Bertolini, C., Montgomery, W. & O’Connor, N. E. (2020). Edge eﬀects are not linked to
key ecological processes in a fragmented biogenic reef. Estuaries and coasts, 43(4),
708–721.
BlueRobotics. (2022a). Lithium-ion battery [Accessed: 2022-08-30]. https://bluerobotics.
com/store/comm-control-power/powersupplies-batteries/battery-li-4s-15-6ah/
BlueRobotics. (2022b). Low-light hd usb camera [Accessed: 2022-06-10]. https://bluerobotics.
com/store/sensors-sonars-cameras/cameras/cam-usb-low-light-r1/
66 of 83
==PAGE:76==
REFERENCES
BlueRobotics. (2022c). Lumen subsea light for rov/auv [Accessed: 2022-06-10]. https:
//bluerobotics.com/store/thrusters/lights/lumen-r2-rp/
Boedeker, D. & Heinicke, K. (2018). Bfn-kartieranleitung für “riﬀe “in der deutschen aus-
schließlichen wirtschaftszone (awz). Federal Nature Conservation Agency (BfN):
Vilm, Germany.
Bolstad, P. (2016). Gis fundamentals: A ﬁrst text on geographic information systems
(5th ed.). Eider Press.
Bonney, R., Ballard, H., Jordan, R., McCallie, E., Phillips, T., Shirk, J. & Wilderman,
C. C. (2009). Public participation in scientiﬁc research: Deﬁning the ﬁeld and
assessing its potential for informal science education. a caise inquiry group re-
port. Washington, DC, Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education
(CAISE).
Borthagaray, A. & Carranza, A. (2007). Mussels as ecosystem engineers: Their contribu-
tion to species richness in a rocky littoral community. Acta Oecologica, 31, 243–
250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actao.2006.10.008
Bruhn, A., Høgslund, S., Dahl, K., Krause-Jensen, D. & Rasmussen, M. B. (2021). Ålegræs
og anden vegetation på kystnær blød bund. DCE - Nationalt center for miljø og
energy.
Burke, C., Rashman, M., Wich, S., Symons, A., Theron, C. & Longmore, S. (2019). Op-
timizing observing strategies for monitoring animals using drone-mounted thermal
infrared cameras. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 40(2), 439–467. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2018.1558372
Buschbaum, C. & Saier, B. (2001). Growth of the mussel mytilus edulis l. in the wadden
sea aﬀected by tidal emergence and barnacle epibionts. Journal of Sea Research,
45(1), 27–36.
Chemisky, B., Nocerino, E., Menna, F., Nawaf, M. M. & Drap, P. (2021). A portable opto-
acoustic survey solution for mapping of underwater targets. International Archives
of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences - Isprs
Archives, 43(2-2021), 651–658. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B2-
2021-651-2021
67 of 83
==PAGE:77==
REFERENCES
Chopin, N. (2021). Seed mussel bed post ﬁshery survey 2020. Ireland’s Seafood Develop-
ment Agency.
Coggan, R., Clements, A., White, J. & Golding, N. (2007a). Recommended operating
guidelines (rog) for underwater video and photographic imaging techniques. https:
//doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1919.9206
Coggan, R., Populus, J., White, J., Sheehan, K., Fitzpatrick, F. & Piel, S. (2007b).
Review of standards and protocols for seabed habitat mapping. Peterborough, UK,
Mapping European Seabed Habitats (MESH).
Commito, J. A., Celano, E. A., Celico, H. J., Como, S. & Johnson, C. P. (2005). Mussels
matter: Postlarval dispersal dynamics altered by a spatially complex ecosystem
engineer. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 316(2), 133–147.
Commito, J. A., Commito, A. E., Platt, R. V., Grupe, B. M., Piniak, W. E. D., Gownaris,
N. J., Reeves, K. A. & Vissichelli, A. M. (2014). Recruitment facilitation and
spatial pattern formation in soft-bottom mussel beds. Ecosphere, 5(12), 1–26.
Dahl, K., Al-Hamdani, Z. K., Rasmussen, M. B., Svendsen, J. C. & Bennike, O. (2019).
Naturgenopretning af stenrev i roskilde fjord: Basisundersøgelse af tre udvalgte
lokaliteter. Aarhus Universitet, DCE–Nationalt Center for Miljø og Energi.
Dahl, K. & Petersen, J. K. (2018). Deﬁnition af biogene rev: Miljøprojekt nr. 1992.
Miljøstyrelsen,
Davies, J. & Young, S. (2008). Mesh guide to habitat mapping: A synopsis. Peterborough,
UK, Joint Nature Conservation Committee.
Dickinson, J., Zuckerberg, B. & Bonter, D. (2010). Citizen science as an ecological research
tool: Challenges and beneﬁts. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 41, 149–
172. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-102209-144636
ECSA. (2015). Ten principles of citizen science. Berlin, European Citizen Science Asso-
ciation. https://doi.org/http://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/XPR2N
EIVA. (2022). Wayﬁnder dvl [Accessed: 2022-06-10]. https://www.eiva.com/products/
rental/adcp-and-dvl/wayﬁnder-dvl-1
Eno, N. C., Frid, C. L., Hall, K., Ramsay, K., Sharp, R. A., Brazier, D. P., Hearn,
S., Dernie, K. M., Robinson, K. A., Paramor, O. A. & Robinson, L. A. (2013).
68 of 83
==PAGE:78==
REFERENCES
Assessing the sensitivity of habitats to ﬁshing: From seabed maps to sensitivity
mapsa. Journal of Fish Biology, 83(4), 826–846. https://doi.org/10.1111/jfb.12132
European Commission. (2012). Commission note on the designation of special areas of
conservation (sacs) [Doc. Hab.12-04/05].
European Commission. (2013). Interpretation manual of european union habitats. Eur,
28.
Garcia-Soto, C., Seys, J., Zielinski, O., Busch, J., Luna, S., Báez, J., Domegan, C., Dub-
sky, K., Kotynska-Zielinska, I., Loubat, P., Malfatti, F., Mannaerts, G., Mchugh,
P., Monestiez, P., van der Meeren, G. & Gorsky, G. (2021). Marine citizen science:
Current state in europe and new technological developments. Frontiers in Marine
Science, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2021.621472
Gibson, R., Atkinson, R., Gordon, J., Editors, T., In, F., Airoldi, L. & Beck, M. (2007).
Loss, status and trends for coastal marine habitats of europe. An Annual Review,
45, 345–405. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420050943.ch7
Goss-Custard, J. D., Stillman, R. A., West, A. D., Caldow, R. W., Triplet, P., Dit Durell,
S. E. & McGrorty, S. (2004). When enough is not enough: Shorebirds and shellﬁsh-
ing. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(1536), 233–237.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2003.2602
Haraguchi, L., Moestrup, Ø., Jakobsen, H. H. & Lundholm, N. (2022). Phytoﬂagellate
diversity in roskilde fjord (denmark), including the description of pyramimonas oc-
topora sp. nov. (pyramimonadales, chlorophyta). Phycologia, 61(1), 45–59. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/00318884.2021.2000285
HELCOM Commission. (2013). Red list of baltic sea underwater biotopes, habitats and
biotope complexes. Finland, HELCOM Helsinki.
Hilgerloh, G. (1997). Predation by birds on blue mussel mytilus edulis beds of the tidal
ﬂats of spiekeroog (southern north sea). Marine Ecology Progress Series, 146(1-3),
61–72. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps146061
Holm, M., Davids, J., Dolmer, P., Holmes, E., Nielsen, T., Vismann, B. & Hansen, B.
(2016). Coexistence of paciﬁc oyster crassostrea gigas (thunberg, 1793) and blue
mussels mytilus edulis linnaeus, 1758 on a sheltered intertidal bivalve bed? Aquatic
Invasions, 11, 155–165. https://doi.org/10.3391/ai.2016.11.2.05
69 of 83
==PAGE:79==
REFERENCES
Holt, R. & Sanderson, W. (2001). Procedural guideline no. 3-3 in situ survey of sub-
tidal (epibiota) biotopes and species using diving techniques. Marine Monitoring
Handbook, 233–239.
Holt, T. J., Rees, E. I., Hawkins, S. J. & Seed, R. (1998). Biogenic reefs: An overview of
dynamics and sensitivity characteristics for conservation management of marine
sacs. Scottish Association for Marine Science (UK Marine SACs Project).
ICES. (2007). Report of the working group on marine habitat mapping (wgmhm). USA,
Woods Hole.
Kautsky, N. (1982). Growth and size structure in a baltic mytilus edulis population.
Marine Biology, 68, 117–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00397599
Kenny, A. J., Cato, I., Desprez, M., Fader, G., Schüttenhelm, R. T. & Side, J. (2003).
An overview of seabed-mapping technologies in the context of marine habitat
classiﬁcation. Ices Journal of Marine Science, 60(2), 411–418. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S1054-3139(03)00006-7
Knights, A. M. (2012). Spatial variation in body size and reproductive condition of
subtidal mussels: Considerations for sustainable management. Fisheries research,
113(1), 45–54.
Kristensen, L. D., Stenberg, C., Støttrup, J., Poulsen, L. K., Christensen, H. T., Dolmer,
P., Landes, A., Røjbek, M., Thorsen, S., Deurs, M. A. v. & Grønkjær, P. (2015).
Establishment of blue mussel beds to enhance ﬁsh habitats. Applied Ecology and
Environmental Research, 13(3), 783–796. https://doi.org/10.15666/aeer/1303_
783798
Langenkämper, D., Simon-Lledó, E., Hosking, B., Jones, D. O. & Nattkemper, T. W.
(2019). On the impact of citizen science-derived data quality on deep learning
based classiﬁcation in marine images. PloS ONE. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0218086
Lazar, V., Lazar, R., Ungureanu, G., Ionescu, A. & Niţă, V. (2013). Side-scan sonar
mapping of coastal seabed habitats. a case study on romanian sci natura 2000.
Lotze, H., Lenihan, H., Bourque, B., Bradbury, R., Cooke, R., Kay, M., Kidwell, S.,
Kirby, M., Peterson, C. & Jackson, J. (2006). Depletion, degradation, and recovery
70 of 83
==PAGE:80==
REFERENCES
potential of estuaries and coastal seas. Science, 312, 1806–9. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.1128035
Ludvigsen, M. (2010). An rov toolbox for optical and acoustical seabed investigations (Doc-
toral dissertation). Norwegian University of Science & Technology.
Mallios, A., Romagós, D. & Ridao, P. (2009). Localization advances in the unstructured
underwater environment., 111–116.
Marchese, C. (2015). Biodiversity hotspots: A shortcut for a more complicated concept.
Global Ecology and Conservation, 3, 297–309. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.gecco.2014.12.008
Marcon, Y. (2014). Lapmv2: An improved tool for underwater large-area photo-mosaicking.
Oceans, 7003185. https://doi.org/10.1109/OCEANS.2014.7003185
MathWorks. (2022). Cross-correlation [Accessed: 2022-08-22]. https://se.mathworks.com/
help/matlab/ref/xcorr.html
McKinley, D., Miller-Rushing, A., Ballard, H., Bonney, R., Brown, H., Evans, D., French,
R., Parrish, J., Phillips, T., Ryan, S., Shanley, L., Shirk, J., Stepenuck, K., Weltzin,
J., Wiggins, A., Boyle, O., Briggs, R., Chapin III, F. S., Hewitt, D. & Soukup, M.
(2015). Investing in citizen science can improve natural resource management and
environmental protection. Issues in Ecology, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocon.2016.05.015
Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet. (2019). Danmarks havstrategi ii første del: God miljøtil-
stilstand basisanalyse miljømål. Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet.
Miljøstyrelsen. (2021). Natura 2000-basisanalyse 2022-2027: Roskilde fjord og jægerspris
nordskov. Miljøstyrelsen Sjælland,
Miljøstyrelsen. (2022a). Fakta om natura-2000 områderne [Accessed: 2022-05-28]. https:
//mst.dk/natur-vand/natur/natura-2000/natura-2000-omraaderne/fakta-om-
omraaderne/
Miljøstyrelsen. (2022b). Natura 2000-planlægning 2022-2027 [Accessed: 2022-08-02]. https:
//mst.dk/natur-vand/natur/natura-2000/natura-2000-planer/natura-2000-
planlaegning-2022-2027/
Miljøstyrelsen. (2022c). Oversigt over habitatområdernes udpegningsgrundlag februar
2022 [Accessed: 2022-05-28]. https://mst.dk/media/237678/upg-hab-feb-2022.pdf
71 of 83
==PAGE:81==
REFERENCES
Moore, C. G., Harries, D., Tulbure, K., Cook, R., Saunders, G., Lyndon, A., Kamphausen,
L. & James, B. (2020). The current status of serpulid reefs, horse mussel beds and
ﬂame shell beds in loch creran sac and mpa. Scottish Natural Heritage.
Naturvårdsverket. (2011). Rev. vägledning för svenska naturtyper i habitatdirektivets bil-
aga 1 [NV-04493-11].
Nehls, G., Witte, S., Büttger, H., Dankers, N., Jansen, J., Millat, G., Herlyn, M., Markert,
A., Kristensen, P. S., Ruth, M. et al. (2009). Beds of blue mussels and paciﬁc
oysters. Common Wadden Sea Secretariat (CWSS), Wilhelmshaven, Germany;
Trilateral Monitoring; Assessment Group (TMAG).
Nielsen, B., Nicolaisen, J. F., Nejrup, L. B., Macnaughton, M., Schmedes, M. L., Jensen,
J. B., Al-Hamdani, Z., Nørregaard-Pedersen, N., Grete, L., Kaarina, A., Mikkel,
W. & Andersen, S. (2013). Marin habitatnaturtype-kortlægning 2012. Naturstyrelsen.
Norling, P. (2009). Importance of blue mussels for biodiversity and ecosystem function-
ing in subtidal habitats (Doctoral dissertation). Department of Systems Ecology.
Department of System Ecology, Stockholm Univeristy.
Norling, P. & Kautsky, N. (2007). Structural and functional eﬀects of mytilus edulis on
diversity of associated species and ecosystem functioning. Marine Ecology-progress
Series, 351, 163–175. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps07033
OSPAR Commission. (2018). Background document on intertidal mytilus edulis beds on
mixed and sandy sediments. Federal Nature Conservation Agency (BfN): Vilm,
Germany.
Pacunski, R. E., Palsson, W. A., Greene, H. G. & Gunderson, D. (2008). Conducting
visual surveys with a small rov in shallow water. Marine habitat mapping techno-
logy for Alaska, 109–128.
Poulsen, L. K., Christensen, H. T., Stenberg, C., Kristensen, L., Thorsen, S. W., Røjbek,
M., Landes, A., Andersen, S. K., Dolmer, P., Geitner, K., Gram, V., Holm, N.,
Holmer, M., Knudsen, J., Knudsen, M. & Støttrup, J. (2012). Slutrapport for
projekt biorev 2010-2012. DTU Aqua.
Pucino, N., Kennedy Cross, M. M., Carvalho, R. & Allan, B. (2021). Citizen science for
monitoring seasonal-scale beach erosion and behaviour with aerial drones. Sci-
entiﬁc Reports, 11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-83477-6
72 of 83
==PAGE:82==
REFERENCES
Pulfrich, A. (2018). Reproduction and recruitment in schleswig-holstein wadden sea ed-
ible mussel (mytilus edulis l.) populations (Doctoral dissertation). Institut für
Meereskunde an der Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Germany.
Rasmussen, M. B., Krause-Jensen, D. & Balsby, T. J. S. (2020). Udvikling og test af
dronemetode og interkalibrering af eksisterende metode til undersøgelse af ålegræs
og anden vegetation på blød bund. Aarhus Universitet, DCE - Nationalt Center for
Miljø og Energi.
Ricklefs, K., Büttger, H. & Asmus, H. (2020). Occurrence, stability, and associated species
of subtidal mussel beds in the north frisian wadden sea (german north sea coast).
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 233, 106549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.
2019.106549
Saier, B. (2002). Subtidal and intertidal mussel beds (mytilus edulis l.) in the wadden sea:
Diversity diﬀerences of associated epifauna. Helgoland Marine Research, 56(1),
44–50.
Schwartzbach, A., Munk, P., Sparholt, H. & Christoﬀersen, M. (2020). Marine mussel
beds as attractive habitats for juvenile european eel (<i>anguilla anguill</i>); a
study of bottom habitat and cavity size preferences. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf
Science, 246, 107042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2020.107042
Seed, R. & Suchanek, T. (1992). Population and community ecology of mytilus (Vol. 25).
Elsevier.
Seitz, R. D., Wennhage, H., Bergström, U., Lipcius, R. N. & Ysebaert, T. (2014). Ecolo-
gical value of coastal habitats for commercially and ecologically important species.
ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71(3), 648–665.
Silvertown, J. (2009). A new dawn for citizen science. Trends in Ecology and Evolution,
24(9), 467–471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2009.03.017
Smaal, A., Craeymeersch, J. & van Stralen, M. (2021). The impact of mussel seed ﬁshery
on the dynamics of wild subtidal mussel beds in the western wadden sea, the
netherlands. Journal of Sea Research, 167, 101978. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.seares.2020.101978
Sørensen, T. K., Egekvist, J., Brown, E. J., Hansen, F. I., Carl, H., Møller, P. R., Dinesen,
G. E., Vinther, M. & Støttrup, J. (2016). Kortlægning af ﬁskenes levesteder i
73 of 83
==PAGE:83==
REFERENCES
den danske del af øresund: Rapport til miljø- og fødevareministeriet. Miljø- og
Fødevareministeriet.
Stage, B., Lundgren, B. & Lisbjerg, D. (2011a). Design of integrated survey systems to
provide high quality, low-cost data for marine management. Dansk Havforsker-
møde.
Stage, B., Lundgren, B., Pedersen, E. M. & Lisbjerg, D. (2011b). High-resolution geo-
coded mapping of shallow-water benthic ecosystems using a towed video-array: A
pilot experiment. Dansk Havforskermøde.
Strong, J. A. & Johnson, M. (2020). Converting sacfor data for statistical analysis: Val-
idation, demonstration and further possibilities. 13. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1186/s41200-020-0184-3
Svane, I. & Ompi, M. (1993). Patch dynamics in beds of the blue mussel mytilus edulis
l.: Eﬀects of site, patch size, and position within a patch. Ophelia, 37, 187–202.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00785326.1993.10429917
Thiel, M. & Reise, K. (1993). Interaction of nemertines and their prey on tidal ﬂats.
Netherlands Journal of Sea Research, 31(2), 163–172. https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0077-7579(93)90006-E
Tillin, H. & Mainwaring, K. (2016). Mytilus edulis beds on sublittoral sediment. Marine
Biological Association of the United Kingdom. https://doi.org/https://dx.doi.
org/10.17031/marlinhab.36.1
Troost, K., van der Meer, J. & van Stralen, M. (2022). The longevity of subtidal mussel
beds in the dutch wadden sea. Journal of Sea Research, 181, 102174. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.seares.2022.102174
Turner, J., Hitchin, B., Verling, E. & van Rein, H. (2016). Epibiota remote monitoring
from digital imagery: Interpretation guidelines. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.
2442.2805
van der Meer, J., Dankers, N., Ens, B., van Stralen, M., Troost, K., Waser, A. M. et al.
(2019). The birth, growth and death of intertidal soft-sediment bivalve beds: No
need for large-scale restoration programs in the dutch wadden sea. Ecosystems,
22(5), 1024–1034.
74 of 83
==PAGE:84==
REFERENCES
van Overmeeren, R., Craeymeersch, J., van Dalfsen, J., Fey, F., van Heteren, S. &
Meesters, E. (2009). Acoustic habitat and shellﬁsh mapping and monitoring in
shallow coastal water - sidescan sonar experiences in the netherlands. Estuarine,
Coastal and Shelf Science, 85(3), 437–448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2009.
07.016
Vincent, A., AnneGaelleVincent, I., ifremerfr J Jouﬀroy, JeromeJouﬀroy, I., ifremerfr N
Pessel, NathaliePessel, I., ifremerfr J Opderbecke, JanOpderbecke, I., ifremerfr
M Borgetto, ManonBorgetto, I. & ifremerfr V Rigaud. (2003). Real-time geo-
referenced video mosaicking with the matisse system. https://doi.org/10.1109/
OCEANS.2003.178271
Vinh, D. (2020). The uncertainty of gis-based interpolation methods in constructing shal-
low groundwater distribution map: A case study at pleiku city, gia lai province.
Journal of Science and Technology Issue on Information and Communications
Technology, 18, 82–86. https://doi.org/10.31130/jst-ud2020-207E
Vlas, J., Brinkman, B., Buschbaum, C., Dankers, N., Herlyn, M., Kristensen, P., Millat,
G., Nehls, G., Ruth, M., Steenbergen, J. & Wehrmann, A. (2005). Intertidal blue
mussel beds.
Wang, J., Chen, F., Huang, Y., McConnell, J., Shan, T. & Englot, B. (2022). Virtual maps
for autonomous exploration of cluttered underwater environments. Ieee Journal of
Oceanic Engineering, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/JOE.2022.3153897
White, J., Clements, A., Coggan, R., Southern, I. & Golding, N. (2007). Seaﬂoor video
mapping: Collection, analysis and interpretation of seaﬂoor video footage for the
purpose of habitat classiﬁcation and mapping. MESH Video Working Group Re-
port.
Wikipedia. (2022). Cross-correlation [Accessed: 2022-08-22]. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Cross-correlation#Normalized_cross-correlation
Xiao, Y., Gu, X., Yin, S., Shao, J., Cui, Y., Zhang, Q. & Niu, Y. (2016). Geostatistical
interpolation model selection based on arcgis and spatio-temporal variability ana-
lysis of groundwater level in piedmont plains, northwest china. Springerplus, 5(1),
425. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40064-016-2073-0
75 of 83
==PAGE:85==
REFERENCES
Young, G. (1983). The eﬀect of sediment type upon the position and depth at which byssal
attachment occurs in mytilus edulis. Journal of the Marine Biological Association
of the United Kingdom, 63(3), 641–651.
zu Ermgassen, P. S., Thurstan, R. H., Corrales, J., Alleway, H., Carranza, A., Dankers,
N., DeAngelis, B., Hancock, B., Kent, F., McLeod, I., Pogoda, B., Liu, Q. &
Sanderson, W. G. (2020). The beneﬁts of bivalve reef restoration: A global syn-
thesis of underrepresented species. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater
Ecosystems, 30(11), 2050–2065. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.3410
76 of 83
==PAGE:86==
Appendices
A
ROV Log books
ROV LOG BOOK #1
Station information
Date:
2022-06-15 & 2022-06-16
Area:
DTU’s Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA)
Participants:
Michelle Melin (surveyor)
Platform:
Pool
Wind speed:
-
Survey aim:
ROV setup and software and PC conﬁguration. First test of ROV in pool.
Issues faced:
Antivirus blocking. Control of ROV in customized Mobula projects not enabled
Comments:
PC has to be oﬀDTU’s domain and all antivirus had to be switched oﬀ.
Only possible way was to uninstall antivirus and not connect the PC to the wiﬁ/internet at any time.
This means that the background map in Mobula is not accessible and cannot be used as reference.
Setup notes: thruster 7 must be activated in thruster conﬁguration, DVL must be switched on when
the ROV is in the water.
Initial position has to be initialized and depth sensor must be activated when the ROV is in the surface.
Survey information
WP
Survey ID
Initial ROV
position
Geotrack
ﬁlename
Video ﬁlename
Camera tilt
Lenght
Duration
Line
distance
Comments
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
77 of 83
==PAGE:87==
ROV LOG BOOK #2
Station information
Date:
2022-06-17
Area:
Selsø Hage, Roskilde Fjord
Participants:
Michelle Melin (surveyor), Jonn Poulsen & Kim Lund Jørgensen (volunteers).
Platform:
Boat (Balder, model RYDS 485)
Wind speed:
3-5 m/s (West)
Survey aim:
First test of ROV in the ﬁeld after receiving the ROV and setting up software.
Issues faced:
Software license didn’t work at beginning.
Diﬃcult to initialize ROV position from boat.
No satellite map as reference.
Camera tilt didn’t work.
Comments:
Possible to do “ﬁnd waypoint”, and “follow route”. A smaller route of approximately 10x15m was tested.
Would be a good idea to create preplanned routes before heading out as it takes too long time to do from
the boat and it is not possible to localize the boat on the software map
Would be better to place the ROV at a speciﬁc starting waypoint to have an idea of how far from the boat
the ROV will before “follow route” is executed. Two useful transect recordings were obtained in the same
polygon, however camera tilt not applied.
Survey information
WP
Survey ID
Initial ROV
position
Geotrack
ﬁlename
Video ﬁlename
Camera tilt
Lenght
Duration
Line
distance
Comments
WP1
WP1_2m
55,72893
12,05778
20220617-
134407
20220617_134407_821
0%
152m
15m 19s
2m
No mussels detected.
Eelgrass beds.
WP2
WP2_2m_1
55,72726
12,06064
20220617-
144354
20220617_144354_478
0%
89m
10m 34s
2m
1. attempt
WP2_2m_2
55,72726
12,06064
20220617-
145614
20220617_145614_441
0%
115m
14m 5s
2m
2. attempt
ROV LOG BOOK #3
Station information
Date:
2022-06-21
Area:
Skovshoved Harbor
Participants:
Michelle Melin (surveyor)
Platform:
Harbor bridge
Wind speed:
-
Survey aim:
Test the ROV from shore, initialize position correctly, perform preplanned routes, test camera tilt.
Issues faced:
Lack of satellite map created big problems and there are no reference to make routes from in the background map.
High risk of entanglement in seaweed near shore. Too much recreational activity (kayaks, boat, ﬁshers, swimmers etc)
to test the ROV fully safely.
Comments:
Camera tilt enabled. Several small routes were tested, but very diﬃcult to make them "in ﬁeld" as the there were no
background map to use as reference. Not much useful data collected.
Survey information
WP
Survey ID
Initial ROV
position
Geotrack
ﬁlename
Video ﬁlename
Camera tilt
Lenght
Duration
Line
distance
Comments
-
Test_3m
55,75910
12,60265
20220621-
161242
20220621_151241_921
100 %
67m
6m 1s
150m2
Test
78 of 83
==PAGE:88==
ROV LOG BOOK #4
Station information
Date:
2022-06-22
Area:
Selsø Hage, Roskilde Fjord
Participants:
Michelle Melin (surveyor), Jonn Poulsen & Kim Lund Jørgensen (volunteers).
Platform:
Boat (Balder, model RYDS 485)
Wind speed:
3-4 m/s (West)
Survey aim:
Revisit area around WP2 and test preplanned routes.
Issues faced:
Battery voltage decreased drastically in few minutes, ROV was retrieved, but voltage became too low (10V).
Lack of sensor information throughout the entire survey period in assisting steering control panel.
However, it was possible to get depth and altitude information in dashboard view.
ROV bouncing when performing the route.
Comments:
Several routes within a polygon of approximately 50x50m were created prior to ﬁeld trip.
The routes had diﬀerent distances (5m and 10m) between the transect lines within in the same polygon.
The ﬁrst route (WP3_10m) went well without major issues and mussel were detected.
An area of approximate 50x50m were tested and is the maximum area size that the ROV can survey in
regards to the tether length. After a battery exchange, a new route (WP3_5m) within same polygon was tried,
however the ROV started behaving strange and the battery died out quickly.
Survey information
WP
Survey ID
Initial ROV
position
Geotrack
ﬁlename
Video ﬁlename
Camera tilt
Lenght
Duration
Line
distance
Comments
WP3
WP3_10m
55,727530
12,061110
20220622-
121157
20220622_121157_187+
20220622_122657_190
100%
336m
21m 46s
10m
Many mussel
beds
WP3_5m
-
-
-
-
-
-
5m
Not possible due
to ROV errors
ROV LOG BOOK #5
Station information
Date:
2022-07-11
Area:
DTU’s Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA)
Participants:
Michelle Melin (surveyor)
Platform:
Pool
Wind speed:
-
Survey aim:
Prepare the ROV for ﬁeldwork. Test sensors and data storage.
Issues faced:
All previous recorded videos was unintentionally and automatically deleted by the PC in the directory of the software.
Deviations in start position of "follow route" if ROV has been inactive for some minutes.
Deviation of approximately 1-2m.
Delayed control response was experienced, but nothing severe.
Comments:
All previously videos recorded was unintentionally deleted. It is unknown how this could happen, but it is presumed
to be due to an error in the directory where the ﬁles are automatically saved. Storage of video material was therefor
tested prior to ﬁeldwork.
The sensor information appeared ﬁne again.
Survey information
WP
Survey ID
Initial ROV
position
Geotrack
ﬁlename
Video ﬁlename
Camera tilt
Lenght
Duration
Line
distance
Comments
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
79 of 83
==PAGE:89==
ROV LOG BOOK #6
Station information
Date:
2022-07-12
Area:
Selsø Hage, Roskilde Fjord
Participants:
Michelle Melin (surveyor) & Kim Lund Jørgensen (volunteer).
Platform:
Boat (Balder, model RYDS 485)
Wind speed:
5-6 m/s (North West)
Survey aim:
Test preplanned routes with known mussel banks.
Issues faced:
Transect WP4_10m was attempted but failed to complete two times. ROV stopped at approximately same place on the route and
battery voltage started decreasing drastically so the ROV was retrieved. Error could be due to currents or tether drag by wind.
Possible position deviation when ROV had been inactive for 5-10min in water (trusters oﬀ). The same area was surveyed with
diﬀerent transects, but did not appear to be in the same area.
Comments:
It was not possible to complete the preplanned transects near WP4. Mussels did occur, but in less dense beds compared to transect
WP3_10m. In order to get the ROV working, new routes were attempted. A smaller transect (WP5_test_in_ﬁeld) were tested and
completed. An area of approximately 50x50 m was again attempted but with "horizontal" transects in stead of "vertical" transects.
The "horizontal" transects seemed to work better for the ROV and were completed without any complications. However, even
though the transects (WP5_10m & WP5_5m) were placed in the same area, the real-time position seemed to deviate.
Survey information
WP
Survey ID
Initial ROV
position
Geotrack
ﬁlename
Video ﬁlename
Camera tilt
Lenght
Duration
Transect
distance
Comments
WP4
WP4_10m
55,727355
12,060080
20220712-
143750
20220712_143749_962
100 %
168m
14m 41s
10m
Stopped halfways and
battery voltage dropped
WP4_10m
55,727355
12,060080
20220712-
150049
20220712_150049_110
100 %
170m
11m 38s
10m
Second try. Same
issue as before
WP5
WP5_test_
in_ﬁeld
55,727393
12,060090
20220712-
154546
20220712_154705_632+
20220712_160205652
100 %
260m
17m 57s
5m
Test of smaller area
Route made in ﬁeld
WP5_10m
55,727393
12,060090
20220712-
160938
20220712_160938_223+
20220712_162438_234
100 %
314m
21m 49s
10m
Preplanned route
WP5_5m_h
55,727393
12,060090
20220712-
164332
20220712_164332_853+
20220712_171332_859+
20220712_172303_927
100 %
644m
42m 56s
5m
Preplanned route
80 of 83
==PAGE:90==
B
All surveys
Figure 34: All initiated surveys
81 of 83
==PAGE:91==
C
QR-codes to video clip
(a) Area A
(b) Area B
(c) Area C
Figure 35: The QR-codes contain a closed link to a screen-recording of the ROV surveys reviewed in
NaviModel Producer.
D
Error Plots
Figure 36: Error plot of B15s. The largest error are found for high values
82 of 83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 37: Error plot of C15s. The largest error are found for high and low values
E
Aerial Drone Survey
Figure 38: Aerial drone survey
83 of 83
