==PAGE:1==
Investigation of power converter solutions for
grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrol­
yser
Master Thesis
August, 2022
By
Mahmoud Mohamed Abdellattif Ahmed
s202511
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Ørsteds Plads, Building 348,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.Elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months for the Department of Electrical Engi­
neering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Mahmoud Mohamed Abdellattif Ahmed ­ s202511
Signature
Date
ii
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In parallel with the global trend into net­zero emissions this thesis is dedicated to the
contribution to improving and developing the water electrolysis system efficiency through
providing a selective guide of the proper topology of a power converter to connect a MW­
scale electrolyser to the grid. This thesis is an attempt to find out the optimal choice
of a specific topology that reduce the system cost, increase hydrogen productivity, and
optimize the specific energy consumption.
To achieve the goal of the thesis an investigation took place over selected topologies,
where the performance was being studied in a comparative method and measured in a
simulated systems and models to obtain a close to reality tabular results of each topology’s
characteristics.
The final results was analyzed and summed up at the end of the thesis where a con­
clusion and recommendations was presented. a three­phase interleaved buck converter
was suggested, however, throughout the investigation it become clear that the choice of
a specific power rectifier is subject to several aspect where some limitation could affect
choosing the better efficiency such as regulatory constraints or the availability of the nec­
essary footprint. Nevertheless, a performance parameters for a selected topologies were
presented which could be used as a guide for deciding on the appropriate topology.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to praise Allah the Almighty, the Most Gracious, and the
Most Merciful for His blessing given to me during my study journey and in completing this
thesis.
I would like to express my profound gratitude to the thesis supervisors Shi You, Tonny
Wederberg Rasmussen, and Chunjun Huang for their patience during the thesis period
which was filled with some difficulties; some of it was personal inconvenient circumstances
and other logistics related to some administrative issues, and their expressed support and
following up to ensure the progress of the work.
I also would like to thank deeply my family for their un­conditional support, for my wife
who did all her best to create the appropriate environment to work on the thesis while she
was highly pregnant and continued her support after the birth our our third child Adam. I
need to express my apologies for my three children; Sana, Yumna, and Adam for the time
that thesis took me away from them when they needed me around. Lastly but not least
my deep I would like to extend my gratitude to my amazing mother­in­law for her support
and for her existence in our life.
iv
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background / Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Goals and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Thesis overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology and Specification
5
2.1
Grid compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Electrolyser modeling and specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Power rectification topologies: Comparative study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Modeling and Simulation
25
3.1
Electrolyser model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Rectifier Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3
filter design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.4
System integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results
33
4.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Bibliography
35
A Appendix
37
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:9==
The Stone Age did not end for lack of stone,
and the Oil Age will end long before the world
runs out of oil.
Sheikh Zaki Yamani
Saudi minister of oil
(1962–1986)
==PAGE:10==
viii
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The last decade was a decade of exceptional global heat; 2019 was the second warmest
year on record. Nevertheless, temperature is only part of the story; ice sheet and glaciers
are continue to melt and as a result global see level rise has accelerated and reached its
highest value since measurements started, ocean heat hit a new record which will all drive
toward a dire consequences on our ecosystem and the livability of our planet. Climate
change is a direct result of greenhouse gases released by our energy consumption[1].
With all above in mind a strong and serious steps must be taken to to change our fuel
spectrum and replace the fossil fuel with clean renewable energy with zero CO2 emis­
sions. An efforts had be taken already to combat climate change, both globally and here
in Denmark, starting with Paris Agreement 2015 which has along term goal to keep the
rise in mean global temperature to well below 2 °C,and to stay below 1.5 °C of global
warming, emissions need to be cut by roughly 50% by 2030. This is an aggregate of each
country’s nationally determined contributions [2].
However, Denmark took the lead to inspire and encourage the rest of the world and to be
a green front­runner in global climate action and set the goal to achieve 70% emissions
reductions by 2030 and climate neutrality by 2050[3]. That been said, a realistic and
practical steps are already taken in that direction; where an artificial energy islands will be
established in the north sea (a hub for 3 GW offshore wind farms and with the possibility of
10 GW in the long term) and in the Baltic Sea ­ Bornholm ­ (a hub for 2 GW offshore wind
farms), which drives progress towards optimal design and grid connection of multi­MW
electrolyser systems.
1.1
Context and Motivation
Green hydrogen can play an essential role in decarbonization of multiple sectors, such
as heavy transportation, see freight, airlines, district heating and many industry sectors.
In addition to the ability to solve the problem of the fluctuation nature of most of the RES
like wind and solar power systems by providing off peak storage solution.
Universities and research community must play their role in accelerating the development
of Hydrogen electrolysis technology to increase the efficiency and decreasing the cost.It
took decades for the wind and solar power systems to develop and be able to compete
against the conventional energy resource without the need of subsidies and governmental
support. Whilst, we might not have decades to stop the climate change from crossing the
irreversible threshold.
1.2
Background / Literature review
Notably lack of research Today, neither renewable hydrogen nor low­carbon hydrogen,
notably fossil­based hydrogen with carbon capture, are cost­competitive against fossil­
based hydrogen. Estimated costs today for fossil­based hydrogen are around 1.5 €/kg
for the EU, highly dependent on natural gas prices, and disregarding the cost of CO2.
Estimated costs today for fossil­based hydrogen with carbon capture and storage are
around 2 €/kg, and renewable hydrogen 2.5­5.5 €/kg24. Carbon prices in the range of
EUR 55­90 per tonne of CO2 would be needed to make fossil based hydrogen with carbon
capture competitive with fossil­based hydrogen today25. Costs for renewable hydrogen
are going down quickly. Electrolyser costs have already been reduced by 60% in the
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
1
==PAGE:12==
last ten years, and are expected to halve in 2030 compared to today with economies of
scale.26 In regions where renewable electricity is cheap, electrolysers are expected to be
able to compete with fossil­based hydrogen in 2030. These elements will be key drivers
of the progressive development of hydrogen across the EU economy [4][5].
1.3
Thesis statement
In this thesis an investigation will be conducted to different power electronics rectifica­
tion solutions and topologies as an attempt to provide the most optimal solution for grid­
connected multi­MW electrolyser, with the main focus on the characteristics relevant to
enhancing power quality, controlability, reliability that can lead to increasing the produc­
tion and complying with the grid requirements, in addition to the ability of scaling up.
1.4
Goals and methods
The main goals of this investigation beside the academic learning objectives is to provide
a guide for the judgment criteria of choosing a power converter that suitable for the water
electrolysis systems in term of efficiency, power quality, coast , and footprint. To do so,
the following goals had been set to be expected outcome of this investigation
• Review of the state of art from the research community side and the adopted solu­
tions by the industrial community, in addition to a comparison of the findings.
• Investigations of selected power converters solutions and topologies and their com­
pliance to the grid­code and the industrial requirements.
• Provision of simulated model based on the outcome of the previous investigations.
• Results analysis and recommendations.
• The ambition also is to look into advanced design options, f.x. in­turbine electrolyser.
A comparative study of various power rectification topologies performance is conducted
where a certain parameters are measured and calculated in a simulated model of these
topologies, in this investigation simulations and modeling is done using Simulink platform.
Noticing that the water electrolyser itself is not the main focus, nevertheless an Alkaline
electrolyser I­U model is built in Simulink, despite that, a necessary explanation of an
electrolyser principle of work and a practical model description is important to the main
goal of this investigation.
1.5
Thesis overview.
A short overview is given in this section over over the topic of each chapter; where the
thesis is arranged in five chapters which their content is outlined below:
• Chapter 2 provide the theoretical basis, principle of work, mathematical modeling of
each of the involved system component in this thesis. Starting with general overview
of some of the challenges facing the green hydrogen market and stating the general
specifications of the whole system being investigated. The grid code compliance
shortly presented in the first section. Then a more technical explanation of the elec­
trolyser theory and modeling is fairly demonstrated in the second section. The core
of this investigation ­ the power converter ­ presented in the third section where
a comparative study took place on selected power rectification topologies. Lastly,
the investigation is narrowed down to a selected topologies that will be used in the
system simulation and integration in the following chapter.
2
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:13==
• Chapter 3 is assigned for the modeling and simulation work in this investigation,
where the Simulink models is illuminated and described in reasonable level of details.
The chapter start with the electrolyser model blocks presented and described in
addition to the model sizing and the parameters used in this model, in the last part
of section one the model is verified against the original model that is design based
on, where the I­U curve is compared from both models. In the fourth section of this
chapter the recommended power rectifier was modeled in Simulink and the filter
design was explained. the whole system was integrated together in Simulink.
• Chapter 4 sums up and presents the final results of this investigation in the first
section, where a future work is suggested to be a complementary to this investigation
and what is possibly could be done differently.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology and Specification
Hydrogen produced using electrolysis process and water as a raw material is what is
called Green Hydrogen to be distinguished from other hydrogen produced using different
methods and different raw materials such as grey and blue hydrogen. As we can see from
table 2.1 neither renewable hydrogen nor low­carbon hydrogen, notably fossil­based hy­
drogen with carbon capture, are cost­competitive against fossil based hydrogen.However,
electrolyser costs have already been reduced by 60% in the last ten years, and are ex­
pected to halve in 2030 compared to today with economies of scale [6] .
Table 2.1: Various Hydrogen production methods along with their advantages, disadvantages efficiency and
cost [2019][7]
Hydrogen
Advantages
Disadvantages
Efficiency Cost [$/kg]
production method
Steam Reforming
Developed technology and Existing infras­
tructure
Produced CO, CO2 Unstable supply
74­85
2.27
Partial Oxidation
Established technology
Along with H2 Production, produced heavy
oils and petroleum coke
60–75
1.48
Auto thermal Reforming
Well established technology, Existing in­
frastructure
Produced CO2 as a byproduct, use of fossil
fuels.
60–75
1.48
Bio photolysis
Consumed CO2, Produced O2 as a byprod­
uct, working under mild conditions.
Low yields of H2, sunlight needed, large re­
actor required, O2 sensitivity, high cost of
material.
10–11
2.13
Dark Fermentation
Simple method, H2 produced without light,
no limitation O2, CO2­neutral, involves to
waste recycling
Fatty acids elimination, low yields of H2, low
efficiency, necessity of huge volume of reac­
tor
60–80
2.57
Photo Fermentation
Involves to waste water recycling, used dif­
ferent organic waste waters, CO2­neutral.
low efficiency, Low H2 production rate, sun­
light required, necessity of huge volume of
reactor, O2­sensitivity
0.1
2.83
Gasification
Abundant, cheap feedstock and neutral
CO2.
Fluctuating H2 yields because of feedstock
impurities, seasonal availability and forma­
tion of tar.
30–40
1.77­2.05
Pyrolysis
Abundant,
cheap
feedstock
and
CO2­
neutral.
Tar formation, fluctuating H2 amount be­
cause of feedstock impurities and seasonal
availability
35–50
1.59­1.70
Thermolysis
Clean and sustainable, O2­byproduct, copi­
ous
High capital costs, Elements toxicity, corro­
sion problems.
20–45
7.98­8.40
Photolysis
O2 as byproduct, abundant feedstock, No
emissions.
Low efficiency, non­effective photocatalytic
material, Requires sunlight.
0.06
8­10
Electrolysis
Established technology Zero emission Ex­
isting infrastructure O2 as byproduct
Storage and Transportation problem.
60­80
10.30
Presenting some of the economical challenges that face the green hydrogen technology
to be adapted commercially in different energy sector, would signify the urge need to
accelerate the development and optimization of the water electrolysis systems.
The Alkaline electrolysis technology will be the focus of this investigation, where the elec­
trolyser will be modeled in Simulink® to examine the power characterises of different rec­
tifiers topologies. Based on electrolyser manufacturer feedback, the electrolyser system
including the power rectifier are chosen to have following general characteristics: ­
• Nominal power rating: up to 2[MW] with the capability of scaling with the same rating.
• Grid compliant in regard to harmonics and power factor.
• High efficiency it terms of specific energy consumption.
• Floating DC voltage output.
• Nominal operating DC voltage of 1200V.
• Capable of boosting the nominal DC voltage 30% or buck the nominal DC voltage
25%.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
5
==PAGE:16==
• Minimized current ripple, based on the investigated topology.
• DC voltage and current regulation properties such as minimum current threshold
etc.
2.1
Grid compliance
According to the Demand Connection Code [8] (DCC­”forordningen”) section II article 15
published by the Danish TSO ”ENERGINET” the transmission­connected demand installa­
tions and transmission­connected distribution systems shall be able to maintain operation
in static mode at their connection point within a range of reactive power according to the
following conditions:
• the actual range set for reactive power in connection with the import and export of
reactive power, not to be wider than 48% of the maximum consumption right ”for­
brugsrettighed” or the maximum production right ”produktionsrettighed”, i.e. whichever
of the two is greater (0.9 power factor leading or lagging).
• The consumer must be able to refrain from exporting reactive power (at the refer­
ence value 1 pu voltage) at the connection point when the flow of active power is
less than 25% of the maximum consumption right ”forbrugsrettighed”.
Even though the water electrolysis system in this investigation is assumed to be connected
to the distribution network to the 10KV grid, this is the most relevant regulation was found
online.
2.2
Electrolyser modeling and specifications
Overview
The principle of work of an alkaline water electrolyser is demonstrated in fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Alkaline electrolyser principle [9]
By applying a direct voltage between the electrolyser electrodes a chemical reaction will
be driven to separate oxygen and hydrogen gases from the water as the products of the
reaction as shown in eq. (2.1)
6
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:17==
H2O(l) + (electrical energy) −→H2(g) + 1
2O2(g) + (thermal losses)
Anode :
2OH−
( aq) −→1
2O2(g) + H2O(l) + 2e−,
Cathode :
2H2O(l) + 2e−+ 2e−−→H2(g) + 2OH−
( aq).
(2.1)
In the anode half­reaction 2 electrons will be produced and driven by the applied voltage
to form a direct current outside the electrolyser toward the cathode, these two electrons
will be combined with two water molecules to dissociate and hydrogen arises.
Basically, in the electrolyser electrical energy will be transformed into chemical energy
stored in the produced hydrogen in addition to thermal losses.The electrolyser model is
not the main focus of this investigation, even though It has a significant impact on the final
outcome of this thesis. Nevertheless, for simplicity only the I­U model will be built in this
investigation, while the thermal model will be neglected. In the following section 2.2.2 the
mathematical model of the electrolyser will be demonstrated and it’s characteristics as
well. The model of the Alkaline electrolyser is created based on Øystein Ulleberg model
[10].
2.2.1
Thermal Model
To drive the water­splitting reaction shown in eq. (2.1) an external voltage must be applied
between the electrolyser electrodes, this voltage will be defined as operation voltage Uop.
To determine the value of Uop some pre­explanation will be necessary.
The quantity of hydrogen produced at the cathode can be calculated using Faraday’s law:
˙m = Mp
z · F · I
(2.2)
Where ˙m is the mass flow, Mp is the molar mass ( for Hydrogen = 2.02[g · mol−1]), z
is the number of moles of electrons, and F is Faraday constant. The mass flow rate
will increase by increasing the current, however, this is not the best way to increase the
Hydrogen production; as increasing the current will reduce the efficiency as will be seen
later in this section.
Nevertheless, no hydrogen will flow before the equilibrium condition of the electrochemical
system is met:
∆G = z · F · Urev
(2.3)
Where ∆G is Gibbs energy, and Urev is the reversible voltage, which in this case is the
minimum operation voltage Uop to drive the water­splitting reaction [11]. Knowing that
z = 2, F = 96485[C/mol], and ∆G0 = 237[kJ · mol−1]; the reversible voltage is equal to
1.23[V ].
However, In reality no hydrogen will be produced from the reaction at this voltage level, as
the reaction is endothermic* and the standard Gibbs free energy G0 is not enough. But the
operation voltage must be increased to the thermo­neutral voltage Uth. Thus, the reaction
will turn into exothermic* (the reaction will start generate heat instead of consuming it ­ see
fig. 2.2a ) and amount of energy fed to the reaction will be increased to cover the entropic
term T · ∆S [11]:
∆H = ∆G + T · ∆S
(2.4)
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
7
==PAGE:18==
(a) Reversible and thermo­neutral voltage
for water electrolysis as a function of
temperature at a pressure of 1 bar
(b) Contribution of individual overvoltage
to the operating (actual) voltage of the
electrolytic cell [11]
Figure 2.2: [11]
To calculate the thermo­neutral voltage Uth The total energy (enthalpy) ∆H = 285.5[kJ ·
mol−1] will be used:
∆H = z · F · Uth
=⇒
Uth = 285500
2 · 96485 = 1.48[V ]
(2.5)
The reversible voltage Urev and the thermo­neutral voltage Uth calculated above are at
the standard conditions, therefore a slightly change is expected due to the change of the
temperature and pressure [10].
The hydrogen mass flow rate ˙mH2 mathematical representation is explained later in sec­
tion 3.1.1.
2.2.2
Electrochemical Model
In fig. 2.2b the over­potential voltages contribution to the operating voltage can be de­
scribed by the following equation[10]:
Uop = Urev + Uohm + Uact
(2.6)
While the temperature dependant overvoltages can be expressed as:
Uop = Urev + r1 + r2 · T
A
· I + s · log
((
t1 + t2
T + t3
T 2
)
· I
A + 1
)
(2.7)
Where r1, and r2 are the ohmic resistance parameters of the electrolyte, t1, t2, t3, and s
are the activation overvoltage parameters of the electrode, while A is the cell active area.
As mentioned previously the I­U model expressed in [10] will be used in this investigation,
fig. 2.3 illustrate the results of the implementation of the model versus experimental mea­
surements fir verification. The same curve will be used later in section 3.1 to verify the
simulated model that will be build in Simulink.
8
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Ulleberg model vs measured values for an electrolyser cell I–U curve. [10]
2.3
Power rectification topologies: Comparative study
Overview
Power rectification is in the essence of growing and expanding the dependency on RES in
our energy sector, seeking new horizons to harness clean energy has growing rapidly. To
enhance the reliability of RES, a strong and widespread power network in a must. Power
rectification is very necessary for harnessing and transport energy offshore deep in the
sea where wind is more available and reliable, supporting the relentless endeavors of
building energy island, expanding the electricity grid and transporting bulky amount of
energy between countries, linking different frequency systems, connecting solar power
plant, and lastly but not least providing power to Green hydrogen systems which is the
focus of this investigation.
The quality of the DC power supplied to the electrolyser has direct impact on the efficiency
and productivity of the system such as the flow rate, specific energy consumption and the
lifetime degradation of the electrolyser. On another hand the technology or the topology
used to draw the power and rectify it from the grid has direct impact on the grid itself in
term of power factor, harmonics and reactive power consumption or provision. The main
characterises of the power converter that will be used as comparison criteria is listed in
table 2.2.
Power rectification technologies can be categorized into three main categories based on
the electronic component used in the process; uncontrolled rectifiers ( Diode­based), line­
commutated controlled rectifiers (Thyristor­based), and force­commutated controlled rec­
tifiers (Transistor­based).
In the following sections the specific characterises of each of these technologies will be
investigated and compared to determine the most suitable and recommended solution to
be used in connecting a MW­scale electrolyser to the grid.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
9
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.2: Rectifier performance parameters
Parameter
Description
Average voltage
Vdc
Is the DC output voltage and current that is seen by the load, when it’s expressed as a function
of the input peak voltage and current it will provide a good indication on the level of grid voltage
level and the transformer rating as well.
Average current
Idc
Repetitive
Reverse
Voltage
VRRM
When it’s expressed as a function of Vdc&Idc it will reflect on the switching device ratings, and
consequently the type os switching device.
Repetitive
forward
current
IF RM
Rectification Ratio
Is an indication on the effectiveness of the rectification process.
Form Factor
Ripple factor
Is an indication on the output power quality. It also affect the hydrogen flow rate and the specific
energy consumption.
Transformer
Utiliza­
tion Factor
TUF
is a very important parameter; as it is an indication on how big the transformer ratings (VA) must
be to deliver the desired dc output power.
Total Harmonics Dis­
tortion
THD
Are the indication on the compliance with the grid requirement and the distortion caused by the
rectification process on the grid side. The THD is mainly affect by the number of pulses or what
is know as the ripple frequency.
Power Factor
2.3.1
Uncontrolled Rectifiers
Even though diode rectifiers lack the most first necessary characteristic of a rectifier used
for connecting an electrolyser to the grid which is current­controlling, however It consid­
ered as starting point to highlight the rectification characteristics and configurations. It also
can be apart of controlled rectifier where it can be combined with DC chopper or thyristor­
based controlled rectifier such as half controlled thyristor bridge rectifier. Therefore it is
important to be apart of the investigation.
However, this investigation will be limited to three­phase rectifiers which is particularly fit
for high power applications higher than 15kw [12]. In this stage of the investigation a pure
resistive load will be assumed while filtering system will be discussed later in section 3.3
with the consideration of the electrolyser as the load.
Three­phase Star Rectifier Circuit
Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4 shows the basic circuit of a three­phase star rectifier where a three diodes are
connected in series with one of each of the transformer secondary coils; each diode will
conduct for 2π
3 for each cycle at the time where the phase voltage is higher than the other
2 phases as shown in fig. 2.5.
10
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5
The diode current is the same as the load current except from it only flows for third of the
cycle for each diode. While the diode voltage is the aggregation of the line­to­line voltage
of the other two waveform as shown in the lower waveform in fig. 2.5, therefore, the peak
diode voltage is VDpeak = Vph−rms ×
√
2 ×
√
3 = 2.45Vph−rms.
The main performance characteristics of this topology are calculated in simulink as shown
fig. A.1 in appendix A where the results of 5 different topologies are demonstrated in
fig. 2.10 and fig. 2.11. For the mathematical equations refer to [12].
As a result of the unidirectional current flow in transformer secondary winding, the core
of the transformer is exposed to a saturation problem. Additionally, the primary currents
do not sum up to zero leading to a return current in the neutral in case of star connected
primary windings.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
11
==PAGE:22==
Three­phase Double­Star Rectifier Circuit
Figure 2.6
Unlike the basic three­phase star rectifier, the three­phase double­star rectifier uses six
diodes instead of three which are connected to inter­phase transformer as illustrated in
fig. 2.6
By connecting a two three phase star circuits to the load through a inter­phase transformer,
the output of each circuit will be phase shifted, thus , doubling the number of pulses in
one cycle and reducing the ripple factor. and additional benefit of this configuration that
the current in the transformer windings is no longer flowing in one direction and the core
saturation problem is being avoided. However the cost of doubling the circuit and the
special transformer must be comparing of the reduction cost of the output filtering.
Three­phase Bridge Rectifiers
Figure 2.7
In comparison with the star rectifier topology, the three­phase bridge rectifier has six diode
that are connected as shown in fig. 2.7 to form a bridge where each pair of diodes will
12
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:23==
connect exchangeably to allow a line­to­line voltage to be applied on the load. A natural
commutation will take place between the three­pairs of diodes simultaneously with the
superiority of the line to line voltage that pair of diodes is connected to it at the same time.
The commutation will occurs every third of each cycle (π
3 ) as demonstrated in fig. 2.8.
Figure 2.8
Several advantages are presented together with this topology such as a good rectification
ratio and form factor, small ripple factor, and high utilization factor as seen in ??. These
advantage makes the three­phase bridge rectifier suitable for high power applications with
relatively reduced cost of power conversion.
Six­phase bridge rectifier
To enhance the quality of the output dc power in term of ripple and form factors and
rectification ratio, and extra set of six diodes must be connected to the six phases of an
inter­phase transformer. The power improvement comes with an increase in the cost.
The inter­phase transformer create a phase shift in the output voltages by (π
6 ) which
means higher ripple frequency due to the faster commutation between the six pairs of
diodes. Therefore a reduction in the ripple factor is notably gained (1% comparing to
4.2% for three­phase bridge rectifier).
There are two configuration of the six­phase bridge rectifiers; series vs parallel bridge.
The only main different is how the output of each six­diode are connected as shown in
fig. 2.9.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
13
==PAGE:24==
(a) Series connected six­phase bridge
(b) Parallel connected six­phase bridge
Figure 2.9: Six­phase diode bridge rectifer
Briefly, nether parallel nor series six­phase bridge configuration will have an effect on the
quality of the output dc power, nevertheless the output voltage and current ratings will
change inversely and consequently the power characteristics of the chosen diodes will
differ similarly. this can be seen in fig. 2.10 and fig. 2.11.
14
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:25==
Summery
Figure 2.10
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.11
To sum up, the four different topology characteristics that categorized under uncontrolled
rectifiers were discussed previously are compared in fig. 2.10 and fig. 2.11, where on the
X­axis we can see the topology number as listed in table 2.3
Table 2.3: Figure 2.10 & Figure 2.11 X­axis legend
X­axis number
1
2
3
4
Topology (Diode­based)
3­ph star Rectifier
3­ph bridge Rectifier
6­ph bridge rectifier(parallel)
6­ph bridge rectifier(series)
The main take out that can be carried on further in the next sections when the controlled
rectifiers are discussed is that an inevitable compromise must be made between power
quality and cost; f.x fora significant improvement in the rectification ratio, form factor, and
the ripple factor when move from star rectifier to bridge rectifier, and further improvement
comes with doubling the bridge. Furthermore, a better transformer utilization achieved,
and reduction in the diode ratings is obtained which means better reliability.
2.3.2
Line­commutated Controlled Rectifiers
Both thyristor and diode based rectifiers are line commutated topologies , yet the thyris­
tor based rectifier output voltage can be further controlled by controlling the gate firing
current pulse of the thyristor to determine the conduction time (on­state) withing the nat­
ural conduction period. The thyristor gate signal is what is defined as the firing angle (α)
which is measured from the position where a diode would naturally conduct [13]. Once
16
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:27==
the thyristor is triggered it will stay conducting until the zero­crossing current or negative
voltage is applied as shown in fig. 2.12
Figure 2.12: The DC output voltage for different firing angles
The DC value of the controlled load voltage now is a function of the firing angle in addition
to the peak voltage as seen in eq. (2.9).
Vdc ∝Vmcos(α)
(2.8)
Which is an essential characteristic for any power converter that can be used in connecting
an electrolyser to the power grid where the current is controlled by controlling the applied
operation voltage.
Three­phase star rectifier (Thyristor­Based)
There are several topologies for a star rectifier configuration where the switching device
whether it is a diode or thyristor is connected in series with one of the transformer sec­
ondary coils from the anode side and all the cathode terminal are connected together to
form the positive terminal that is connected to the load.
Figure 2.13
Figure 2.13 shows three of these topologies; Basic star, double star, and double star with
inter­phase transformer. However to avoid repetition as we mentioned the drawbacks of
one of these topologies in section 2.3.1 where the diode is replaced by a thyristor, these
topologies will not be focused on them further in this investigation as they suffer from
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
17
==PAGE:28==
over­sizing transformer due to current harmonics circulation which does not produce a
real power, and core saturation caused by the asymmetric ac current which present a dc
component. In table 2.4 a summarized transformer ratings comparing to the dc output
power.
Table 2.4: Transformer ratings for different star rectifier topologies[14]
3­ph star Rectifier
6­ph star Rectifier
6­ph star Rectifier with Interphase
Tr(V A)prim
1.21PD
1.28PD
1.05PD
Tr(V A)sec
1.48PD
1.81PD
1.48PD
Three­phase bridge rectifier (Thyristor­Based)
Figure 2.14
This is the most common used line­commutated thyristor rectifier, it is also known as
Graetz bridge, as a result of the arrangement of the six thyristors to enable rectifying both
side of the waveform allowing a symmetric ac current to flow in the transformer winding,
thus, avoiding dc component into the windings and the need for a special transformer [14].
As shown in fig. 2.14 the topology is very similar to the one discussed in section 2.3.1
where the thyristors replacing the diodes converting the topology to be controllable through
the firing angle of the thyristor to control the output voltage which can be calculating from
the following equation[14]:
Vdc = 2Vm
2
3π
∫π/3+α
−π/3+α
cosωt · d(ωt) =⇒
= 1.35Vrms · cos(α)
(2.9)
The performance parameters of this topology is exactly similar to the three­phase bridge
rectifier mention in fig. 2.10 & fig. 2.11 when the firing angle α = 0, furthermore, the
performance parameters for different firing angle is listed in fig. 2.15 below.
18
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.15: Performance parameters at different firing angles
As illustrated in the in fig. 2.15 the increasing the firing angle will has a negative effect on
the power quality from both side of the converter, and on the rectification performance as
well. The total harmonic distortion increased and the ripple factor also, while transformer
utilization reduced. And that one of the main drawbacks of using Thyristor­based power
rectifiers, as it require high level of filtration even though it provide high reliability and
higher power ratings.
2.3.3
Force­commutated Controlled Rectifiers
Three main capabilities distinguish the forced­commutated controlled rectifiers from the
line­commutated ones; the capability of controlling the off­state, switching on and off sev­
eral hundreds or thousands of times in one cycle (switching frequency fw, controlling the
time of the on­state and the off­state (Duty cycle). These three features allow to control
the average magnitude of the voltage voltage seen by the load, creating either a voltage
source or a current source rectifier, suppressing and elimination the harmonics content
injected into the source, control the magnitude and the direction of the reactive power in
the system, and the ability to reverse the direction of the power by reversing the current
direction without reversing the voltage polarity as in the thyristor rectifiers.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
19
==PAGE:30==
(a) Voltage source rectifier
(b) Current source rectifier
Figure 2.16: Voltage source vs Current source rectifier
The forced­commutated rectifiers are categorized into two configuration; voltage source
rectifier, and current source rectifier which are illustrated in fig. 2.16. The voltage source
rectifier is the relevant configuration to our application, electrolyser, in this investigation,
therefore the discussion in this section will be limited to it.
Three­phase bridge rectifier (IGBT­Based)
Figure 2.17: [14]
AS shown in fig. 2.17 the way the voltage is controlled is by comparing the measured
voltage with a pre­set reference voltage, whenever a change occurred in the measured
voltage it will deflect the error signal sent to the control block which control IGBT switch­
ing state to readjust the output voltage, the process of detecting the voltage change and
generating the error signal and adjusting the reference signal which is sent to the control
block is what is defined as closed loop control. While the process of generating the proper
signal to control the output of the switching devices(IGBTs) is know as pulse width modu­
lation (PWM). In the next few line the closed loop control and the pulse width modulation
will be explained in more details.
20
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:31==
PWM & closed loop control
Figure 2.18: Illustration of a PWM example
The pulse width modulation is illustrated in fig. 2.18, so basically the gate signal is gener­
ated by comparing the reference signal to a carrier signal which is a repeating sequence
shaped as triangle waveform where the ratio of reference signal magnitude to the the
carrier signal magnitude is know as the modulation index m =
(
Vref
Vcarrier
)
.
So, when the reference is higher than the carrier signal, the pulse status will be high and
the IGBT will turn on, and when the the reference is lower than the carrier signal the pulse
status will be low and the IGBT will turn off. The implementation of PWM in Simulink is
shown in fig. 2.19 below.
Figure 2.19: Simulink implementation of PWM
The control of the output voltage of the rectifier is achieved by controlling the gate signal,
to do so, the reference signal must be adjusted to obtain the desired output level and to
maintain it as well. Therefore, a closed loop control scheme must be utilized.
Implement the control scheme using abc­frame reference where the three­phase voltage
needed to be measured and compared with the reference signal as shown in fig. 2.17 will
lead to a high level of complexity to the control, and a delay in the converter response. In
the abc domain the control scheme need to be design to deal with three signal that are
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
21
==PAGE:32==
sinusoidal and phase shifted. On another hand the dq­domain is much simple to deal with
where only two dc constant quantities are involved.
Therefor, the first step is the transformation the voltage and current from the abc­domain
to the dq domain using Clarke­Park transformation, where further explanation about the
transformation is available in [15]. Figure 2.20 below demonstrate the implementation of
the control scheme in Simulink, where the mathematical modeling is explained nicely in
[16].
Figure 2.20: PWM and control scheme
2.3.4
summary
...
In this section we talked about the most commonly used rectification topologies, the main
focus is to illustrate the main differences in principle of working and performance char­
acteristics. To sum up, the performance of the power rectification depend mainly on two
criteria, first, the configuration; how the switching devices are arranged and connected to
the power source and the load, which determine the number of phases and the transformer
type and ratings, and second is the switching device technology that is used; whether it is
an Uncontrolled diodes, line­commutated controlled like thyristor, or forced­commutated
controlled such as IGBT.
On one hand, the configuration, as demonstrated previously in section 2.3.1 by increasing
22
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:33==
the number of switching devices, i.e. number of pulses, a notable improvement in the
power quality in both sides of the rectifier is detected f.x. the ripple factor on the output
current and the total harmonic distortion on the grid side improved when the number of
pulse increased; the THD reduced by 50% every time the number of pulse is double,
while the ripple factor reduced from 18% in the three­phase star topology to 4.2% in the
three­phase bridge topology and reduced more to 1% when the bridge is doubled.
On the other hand, the available different switching devices technologies has a distinct
effect on the power rectifier; while the IGBT increase the level of controllability in term of
active and reactive power direction, power factor control and the ability to work both as
voltage and current source. the thyristor based rectifier is very reliable and has a high
power efficiency in addition to the high power ratings availability. lastly the diodes are
very low cost high simplicity with a reasonable performance.
Nevertheless, as a rule of thumb, improving the power quality will always come with an in­
crease in the cost and footprint no matter which switching device technology is employed,
therefore a compromise must be made. ...
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
23
==PAGE:34==
24
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:35==
3
Modeling and Simulation
All models are approximations.
Essentially, all models are wrong, but
some are useful. However, the
approximate nature of the model
must always be borne in mind ...
George E. P. Box
British statistician
3.1
Electrolyser model
3.1.1
Simulink model description
The I­U model described previously in section 2.2 is built in simulink as shown in fig. 3.1,
The upper middle area represent the ohmic overvoltage Uohm, while the lower to the left
is the representative blocks of the activation overvoltage Uact. To avoid taking the log
function for negative values a threshold pass through switch is used. The reversible volt­
age has a constant value of 1.229V for simplicity. However, more accurate and dynamic
representation of Urev is calculate from the following equation
1
(3.1)
Where the reversible voltage Urev is function of the temperature and the pressure. In the
lower right area all the three voltages are added up to calculate the operation voltage Uop.
Figure 3.1: Simulink blocks for the cell operating voltage Uop
The top right area is where the hydrogen production is simulated. A detailed diagram of the
simulink blocks is shown in fig. 3.2. An empirical expression for the hydrogen production
efficiency is called Faraday efficiency is calculated from eq. (3.2) below:
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
25
==PAGE:36==
ηF =
(I/A)2
f1 + (I/A)2 · f2
(3.2)
Where f1 and f2 are parameters related to Faraday efficiency which they change linearly
with the temperature, from the experimental data expressed in [10] and [17], the following
expression is obtained to calculate f1 and f2:
f1
= 50 + 2.5T
f2
= 1 −6.25 × 10−6T
(3.3)
From Faraday’s law eq. (2.5) and Faraday’s efficiency eq. (3.2) the hydrogen flow rate
can be calculated as [10]:
˙nH2 = ηF · nc · I
z · F
(3.4)
Figure 3.2: Simulink blocks representing the Hydrogen production[10][17]
The volume of one mole of any gas at Standard Temperature and Pressure (STP = 273
K and 1 atm = 0.0224136 [m3]) and the hydrogen density are used to calculate the flow
rate of hydrogen in kg instead of moles at the right area in fig. 3.2.
3.1.2
Model sizing and parameters
As stated previously in chapter 2 the nominal power of the electrolyser is 2[MW] and the
system operating voltage to be 1200[V DC]. Even though the electrolyser model is built
for one cell, we can scale the model up by multiplying the hydrogen flow rate by number of
cells in series in one stack nc and the number of stacks in parallelns. As mentioned before
that the power converter needed to be design to buck the voltage up to 30% that means
the maximum operation voltage is calculated to be 1.3 × 1200 = 1560[V DC]. Therefore
assuming that the maximum cell voltage from the I­U curve to be 2.2[V DC], thus, the
number of cells in series is calculated to be 710 cell, which not necessarily to be be in one
stack, yet several stacks can be connected in series to make a module and the modules
can be connected in parallel. the parallel connected modules will draw a current equal to
2000000[W]/1560[V ] = 1282[A] in case of operating at 2.2[V DC] per cell, so the number
26
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:37==
of modules connected in parallel is 1282[A]/18[A] = 71 cell where 18[A] is the cell current
equivalent to 2.2[V DC] cell voltage from the I­U curve in fig. 3.4.
The electrolyser parameters used in this model and used to generate the I­U curve in
fig. 3.4 is shown in table 3.1 below.
Table 3.1: Alkaline electrolyser parameters [10]
Parameter
Describtion
Value
Unit
A
Cell Area
0.25
m2
r1
ohmic resistance
8.05e −5
Ωm2
r2
−2.5e −7
Ωm2◦C
s
overvoltage
0.185
V
t1
1.002
A−1m2
t2
8.424
A−1m2◦C
t3
247.3
A−1m2◦C2
nc
Cells number
710
ns
Stacks number
71
3.1.3
Model verification
To verify that the model that is build in Simulink works as the original model, the model has
been tested using a controlled voltage source and controlled current source as shown in
fig. 3.3
Figure 3.3: Simulink model verification
To simulate the I­U curve of the alkaline electrolyser a ramp block is used to control the
drawn current while the cell voltage is estimated in the electrolyser block. As seen in
fig. 3.4 the I­U curve, on the left, is resembled quit similarly the Ulleberg model I­U curve,
on the right, which the electrolyser model is built based on it[10]
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
27
==PAGE:38==
(a) Simulink I­U curve
(b) Ulleberg model I­U curve
Figure 3.4: [11]
3.2
Rectifier Model
... As mentioned in ?? a three­phase diode bridge combined with three­level interleaved
buck converter will be used as the power converter of the electrolyser system, therefore
in this section the design parameters and the simulation blocks will be presented. The
converter circuit is illustrated in fig. 3.5
Figure 3.5: Three­phase buck converter circuit[18]
The first part of this converter is explained in section 2.3.1, therefore, to avoid repetition
it will not be further explanation here.
Second part of the converter is the buck interleaved converter; the main function of this
converter is to add more dynamic and controllability to the system, where the voltage
will be design at the diode bridge to 1500[V DC] while the output voltage will be kept at
the nominal operation voltage 1200[V DC] that will provide the capability of controlling the
voltage in the range between 25% lower the nominal voltage and 30% above the operation
voltage.
In order to enhance the reliability a three­level interleaved converter are connected in par­
allel where the load current will be divided equally between them. The design parameters;
the inductorL and the capacitor C to operate the converter in the continuous conduction
mode (CCM) will be calculated from eq. (3.5) and eq. (3.6)
L = (1 −D)R
2f
(3.5)
28
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:39==
C = (1 −D)Vel
8VrLf2
(3.6)
For the voltage design mentioned earlier [900, 1200, 1500] the equivalent representative
resistance load R, the duty cycle D, the ripple voltage Vr (assuming 1% ripple), and as­
sumed switching frequency fr = 10[kHz] the minimum converter inductance and capaci­
tance to maintain continuous conduction mode is calculated in table 3.2
Table 3.2: Buck interleaved converter parameters
Vdc
R[Ω]
D
fW [Hz]
Vr
L[µH]
C[µF]
900
0.45125
0.64
10000
9
8.1225
0.005540
1200
0.72
0.8
10000
12
7.1999
0.003472
1500
1.125
0.99
10000
15
0.5625
0.002222
Figure 3.6: Three­phase interleaved buck converter implementation in Simulink
fig. 3.6 shows the implementation of the converter in Simulink where a simple PI controller
is used to keep track on the voltage level and generate the necessary pulse to control the
IGBTs.
3.3
filter design
In this investigation the filtration system design will be focused into two type:­
DC output filter ( ripple filtration): ­
For filtering the DC output voltage from the ripples that is caused by the switching process
of the switching devices, an inductor can be connected in series with the load to adjust
the ripple level for the accepted level, and the inductance can be calculated from eq. (3.7)
vo
vL
=
R
√
R2 + (2πfrLf)2
(3.7)
which is useful in case of the use of other rectification topologies, However the output
ripple filtration is already taken into consideration in the design of the interleaved buck
converter.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
29
==PAGE:40==
AC output filter (Harmonics filtration): ­
The current harmonics occurs due the the discontinuity of drawing the current from the
grid as a result of the switching will the reactance supply the current in case of dc output
included, or for a simple rectifier it will be due to the rectification process it self where the
current will be drawn in a similar form as the switching pulses. A rule of thumb can be used
to predict the order of the harmonics that will be in the system is the number of pulses;
f.x. in case of a six­ pulse rectifier the dominant harmonics order will be the fifth and the
seventh, for a twelve pulse rectifier the eleventh and thirteenth order will be dominating.
For our specific case the Simulink three­phase harmonics filter will be used for eliminating
the harmonics that is injected into the grid.
3.4
System integration
To get an overall overview of the of the system performance, the system component must
be integrated together. As shown in fig. 3.7 the resistive load is replaced by the Alkaline
model where the estimated hydrogen production is measure and integrated over the op­
eration time to calculate the overall production, then it was converted into energy using
the hydrogen energy content 120[MJ/kg] to be compared with energy input to the system
and calculate the efficiency.
Figure 3.7: 2­MW Alkaline electrolyser system implementation in Simulink
Surprisingly, the system efficiency reached 76% as shown in fig. 3.8 which raised doubts
about the credibility of the electrolyser model. Even though, these results does not affect
the performance parameters of the rectifier topologies which was presented previously.
30
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.8
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:43==
4
Results
...
4.1
Conclusion
To draw a conclusion on which rectification topology to to be recommended an economi­
cal aspect must be considered, as we saw in this chapter the new emerging technologies
is better than the oldest ones, the more advanced the configuration the better the perfor­
mance and with each improvement comes a cost. Further more there are several alter­
natives to achieve the same level of improvement, f.x. the ripple factor can be reduced
either by increasing the number of bridges or by using a inductance as filter in series with
the load as was explained in section 3.3. Another economical aspect is the preference
changes with every case, f.x some will be more concern about the footprint and the vol­
ume at the expense of the efficiency due to the limitation of the space or the cost of it.
While others can not tolerate the reliability because of the importance of the load or the
high cost of maintenance as the case of an offshore facility.
However, with the presented characteristics of various power rectification topologies that
has been investigated and shown before in fig. 2.10, fig. 2.10, table 2.4, and fig. 2.12
a choice can be made by adding a monetary value for these performance parameters
numbers and an optimization mathematical model can be used to find the optimal solution
based on the given variables.
With all the above in mind, most likely a suitable power rectifier would be a combination
of several advantages of each topology and several switching device technologies, Fur­
ther in this investigation a three­phase diode bridge rectifier combined with a three­phase
interleaved buck converter will be used
4.2
Future work
In this this investigation an attempt was made to propose an optimal solution for a power
converter for a MW­ scale electrolyser, However, with each step being taken further in, it
reveal the importance of other future work could be a complementary for this work; E.g.
mathematical optimization that can transform the technical parameters into a monetary
value that can be measured and optimized where an optimal solution can be proposed
based on the given decision variables and technical parameters. As already known that
the electricity prices has the highest share of the green hydrogen cost, where it represent
more than 50% of the cost before the Ukrainian crisis, therefore a predictive scenarios
of the future cost could be beneficial on directing the efforts toward the most effective
development and research.
In regard of the electrolyser modeling many assumption was made which reflect on the
credibility of the results, therefore a more advanced model could be a suggested improve­
ment of this investigation where a real­time data could be used. Last but not least a
feedback and interaction with a concerned industry party could direct this investigation
toward a more specific an realistic scope of work, and assist on narrowing wide spectrum
of the available power rectification topology.
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
33
==PAGE:44==
34
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
WMO Provisional Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 2019. 2019. URL:
https://library.wmo.int/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=21700#.YvIt3XZBxjx.
[2]
Carl­Friedrich Schleussner. “The Paris Agreement – the 1.5 °C Temperature Goal”.
In: Climate Analytics. 2022. URL: https://climateanalytics.org/briefings/15c/.
[3]
The Danish Government. “Denmark’s Global Climate Action Strategy”. In: A Green
and Sustainable World. OCTOBER, 2020. URL: https://um.dk/en/foreign-policy/
new-climate-action-strategy.
[4]
The European Commission. “A Hydrogen Strategy for a climate neutral Europe”. In:
JULY, 2020. URL: https://op.europa.eu/s/wO0W.
[5]
European Commission et al. Hydrogen generation in Europe : overview of costs
and key benefits. Publications Office, JULY, 2020. DOI: doi/10.2833/122757. URL:
https://op.europa.eu/s/wO0T.
[6]
Action Plan et al. “Communication from the Commission to the European Parlia­
ment, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Commit­
tee of the Regions”. In: European Commission (2020). URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
energy/sites/ener/files/hydrogen_strategy.pdf.
[7]
S. Shiva Kumar and V. Himabindu. “Hydrogen production by PEM water electrolysis
– A review”. In: Materials Science for Energy Technologies 2.3 (2019), pp. 442–454.
ISSN: 2589­2991. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mset.2019.03.002. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589299119300035.
[8]
ENERGINET Danish TSO. “NETTILSLUTNING: EU­forordningen”. In: URL: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/DA/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32016R1388&
from=EN#d1e992-10-1.
[9]
Ali Keçebaş, Muhammet Kayfeci, and Mutlucan Bayat. “Chapter 9 ­ Electrochemical
hydrogen generation”. In: Solar Hydrogen Production. Ed. by Francesco Calise et
al. Academic Press, 2019, pp. 299–317. ISBN: 978­0­12­814853­2. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814853-2.00009-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780128148532000096.
[10]
Øystein Ulleberg. “Modeling of advanced alkaline electrolyzers: a system simulation
approach”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 28.1 (2003), pp. 21–33.
ISSN: 0360­3199. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360- 3199(02)00033- 2. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319902000332.
[11]
Mitja Mori et al. “Integral Characteristics of Hydrogen Production in Alkaline Elec­
trolysers”. In: Strojniški vestnik ­ Journal of Mechanical Engineering 59.10 (2013),
pp. 585–594. ISSN: 0039­2480. DOI: 10.5545/sv- jme.2012.858. URL: https://
www.sv-jme.eu/article/integral-characteristics-of-hydrogen-production-in-alkaline-
electrolysers/.
[12]
Yim­Shu Lee and Martin H.L. Chow. “10 ­ Diode Rectifiers”. In: Power Electron­
ics Handbook (Third Edition). Ed. by Muhammad H. Rashid. Third Edition. Boston:
Butterworth­Heinemann, 2011, pp. 149–181. ISBN: 978­0­12­382036­5. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-382036-5.00010-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780123820365000100.
[13]
José Rodríguez et al. “11 ­ Single­phase Controlled Rectifiers”. In: Power Electron­
ics Handbook (Third Edition). Ed. by Muhammad H. Rashid. Third Edition. Boston:
Butterworth­Heinemann, 2011, pp. 183–204. ISBN: 978­0­12­382036­5. DOI: https:
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
35
==PAGE:46==
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-382036-5.00011-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780123820365000112.
[14]
Juan W. Dixon. “12 ­ Three­phase Controlled Rectifiers”. In: Power Electronics
Handbook (Third Edition). Ed. by Muhammad H. Rashid. Third Edition. Boston:
Butterworth­Heinemann, 2011, pp. 205–247. ISBN: 978­0­12­382036­5. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-382036-5.00012-4. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780123820365000124.
[15]
Surajit Chattopadhyay, Madhuchhanda Mitra, and Samarjit Sengupta. “Clarke and
Park Transform”. In: Electric Power Quality. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2011,
pp. 89–96. ISBN: 978­94­007­0635­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-0635-4_12. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-0635-4_12.
[16]
Juinne­Ching Liao and Sheng­Nian Yeh. “A novel instantaneous power control strat­
egy and analytic model for integrated rectifier/inverter systems”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Power Electronics 15.6 (2000), pp. 996–1006. DOI: 10.1109/63.892814.
[17]
D. Martínez and Ramon Zamora. “MATLAB Simscape Model of An Alkaline Elec­
trolyser and Its Simulation with A Directly Coupled PV Module for Auckland Solar
Irradiance Profile”. In: International Journal of Renewable Energy Research (2018).
[18]
Burin Yodwong et al. “AC­DC Converters for Electrolyzer Applications: State of the
Art and Future Challenges”. In: Electronics 9.6 (2020). ISSN: 2079­9292. DOI: 10.
3390/electronics9060912. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/6/912.
36
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1
Investigation of power converter solutions for grid­connected multi­MW electrolyser
37
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.Elektro.dtu.dk
