==PAGE:1==
Electrically tunable structural colors
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Electrically tunable structural colors
Supervisor: Søren Raza
Co­supervisors: Tim Booth, Kirstine Engell Sandager Nielsen
Master Thesis
August, 2022
By
Pinelopi Olgana Konstantinopoulou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Nanomade group, Department of
Physics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Pinelopi Olgana Konstantinopoulou ­ s192350
Signature
Date
ii
Electrically tunable structural colors
Pinelopi Konstantinopoulou
4/9/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this project it is aimed to demonstrate the electro­mechanical actuation of metadevice,
made of a silicon nanowire pair. The silicon beams have a defined length and subwave­
length width and height and are separated by a gap, g. The pair is suspended and con­
nected at their ends on electrodes, and their separation gap can be controlled by the
appliance of a voltage. In order to demonstrate the change in the scattering spectra in the
visible frequency range, an optical microscope holder is designed and built in order to per­
form electrical measurements during the optical characterization. The scattering spectra
is acquired by a dark field spectrometer and the characterization results are compared
with numerical simulations.
Electrically tunable structural colors
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Pinelopi Olgana Konstantinopoulou, MSc Physics and nanotechnology, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
This thesis was prepared at the department of physics at Technical University of Den­
mark (DTU). Within this work, there were people that contributed substantially, directly or
indirectly, to its completion, and I would like to express to them my sincere appreciation.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Søren Raza, for his guidance, the assign­
ment of the subject, and the trust that he showed to me but also for his availability and
positive attitude to discuss any question I might have regarding the project.
I would also like to express my appreciation to my co­supervisor Tim Booth for his assis­
tant in designing the optical holder and help in understanding critical parameters of the
experiment and my co­supervisor Kirstine Engell Sandager Nielsen for her training on the
spectroscopy tool and measurement, for her kind nature and for being so approachable.
I also thank the entire team for their help and in particular Artyom Assadillayev for pro­
viding me with the samples, Matias Vázquez Piñón for his help in the PCB design and
his insightful comments regarding the optical holder and Leonid Iliushyn for his help in
conducting the plasma cleaning of thesamples.
Special thank you to Jonas Michael­Lindhard for training me in the Imina system, for his
engagement with the project and his company and guidance during the nanobot experi­
ments.
I thank all the members of the mechanical workshop of the Department of Physics for
bringing to life the designs of the optical holder and the members of the nanomade lab­
oratory of the Department of Physics for providing me with the necessary laboratory in­
struments and tools contributing to the completion of my experiments. I thank Christina
Rochat for supplying me with cables, access cards and smiling good mornings.
A big and special thank you to my partner and colleague, Paolo, for his support, under­
standing and help in this hectic period.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and especially my brother for their support through­
out my studies. I thank my friends Alexandra, Abhi, Vaggelis and Erkan for their undivided
support and interesting chats.
Last but not least I thank my amazing roommate Dimitra, who is wonderful and under­
standing, and of course, I thank all my plants that are there with me always, silent but
present.
iv
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Mie theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods
13
2.1
Comsol modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Dark Field Spectroscopy, DF spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy, SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Holder for bias measurements in optical microscope
19
4
Results
23
4.1
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Optical microscopy and DF spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
COMSOL simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Discussion
37
Bibliography
41
A Pogo pin
43
Electrically tunable structural colors
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Refractive indices and absorption coefficients of four semiconductors in the
visible ­ IR region [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
plane wave scattered by an arbitrary object, copied from [13] . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
scattering regimes color coded, copied from [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
extinction cross section plot for Si(a) and Au(b) nanoparticles, Magnetic
resonances that appear in dielectric are not in the scatter plot of the metal,
[15]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
scattering cross section, multipole decomposition and near field plots. pro­
duced with Mie calculator, https://physics.itmo.ru/en/mie/nearfield . . . . . .
6
1.6
Dielectric slab mode nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Nanowires of length=L, width=w, and gap=g. The red dot lines indicate the
deflection of the beams after voltage appliance. UPI is the pull in voltage
that bring the beams in contact. Copied from [15] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.8
The illustration is a synthesis of images obtained by the integrated Circuit
(IC) design file, where information about the layers and geometry can be
found. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.9
Table with the fabrication dimensions of Si nanowire pairs . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.10 a. deviations in the gap separating the two beam, b.c. beam deflection
after voltage appliance d. the gap change as a function of applied voltage,
images copied from [15] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1
Mesh images from COMSOL multiphysics for the model of the single beam
and for the pair of beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Geometry of the modelled system. All areas out of the silicon beams are
considered to be air. The light blue colored area is the perfectly matched
layer, pml, the purple rectangular areas are the nanowire’s cross section
and the red circle denotes the area of integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
(left) the hollow cone light of the dark field mode (right) dark field disck, and
bright field microscope component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Setup of DFM coupled with color CCD, spectro­CCD and a slit­spectrometer.
Partially reprinted by [19] adjusted to a reflectance setup . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.1
(left) Reference holder designed by Tim Booth. (right) components of the
reference holder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
(left) General: in this design there is only a hole for the chip, the chip then
can kept down by tapping, (center) Ears: 0.2 mm thick ears were put on
the corners of the sample hole to keep the chip down, (right) Pocket: of
width 0.6 mm. In this design the chip is pushed and fixed with its edges in
the pocket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
eagle pcb (left) schematic (right) board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Holder components: pcb, pogo pin PMMA parts, and ear chip­lid part
. . . 21
3.5
Bright field (BF) optical microscope image, 100x magnification. Top view of
the nanowire pair tested for electrical actuation, NW average width: 425nm,
gap:340 nm, 10um scale bar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.6
Intensity profile obtained for the green arrow of the right image, helps in
tracking the distance between the beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
vi
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:9==
3.7
(left): bulk holder (center): the pogo pins (right): the lid with the thickness
grating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.1
Chip configuration of the devices. Parameters of the followed plasma clean­
ing procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
SEM image, a.v.: 5kV, left: single beam, right: beam pair of chip1 . . . . . . 24
4.3
SEM image, a.v.: 5kV, left: beam pair of chip 2, right: higher magnification
of the same pair from which the mean gap was evaluated . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
SEM image, a.v.: 5kV,left: beam column with 9 beam pair with fixed sep­
aration gap, center: the right end pairs are sitting on the Si02 substrate,
right: the first to the right pair, the gap was measured to be 820 nm . . . . . 24
4.5
SEM image, a.v.:5kV, Probes of the nanobots of imina sitting on the chips
contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6
BF images of Chip3 in 100x magnification. 10um unit bar. . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.7
BF Images of the beams through the suspension. The arms of the elec­
trodes in chip3 are visible through the hole. (right) Chip2 beam pair
. . . . 26
4.8
DF image of the single beam on Chip1 in 100x magnification. 10um unit bar. 27
4.9
Spectralon white reflectance standard of Labsphere, used for taking the
reference spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.10 Controlled parameters of the spectroscopic measurements
. . . . . . . . . 28
4.11 Surface plots of beam, background and reference data, y axis: wave­
length[nm], x axis: position
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.12 Data selection using the surface plot, the signal can observed between
118­127 X values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.13 Data selection using the surface plot, the signal can observed between
118­127 X values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.14 Single w=h=200nm beam scattering plot, x axis:scattering coefficient, y:
wavelength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.15 scattering plots from data obtained by two different spots indicated by the
arrows on the left images, and using two different slit sizes: 50um (right
column), 100um (left column). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.16 Comparison of the scattering plots from the beam pair (beam width=400nm)
with gap approximately 340nm (blue) and no gap (orange). . . . . . . . . . 31
4.17 Scattering plot produced by COMSOL multiphysics fot the single beam of
width = 200 nm. The total spectra is a superposition of TE and TM modes.
32
4.18 near field COMSOL simulation of TE (in plane) and TM (out of plane) modes
for the scattered field of beam with dimensions w=100nm, h=200nm . . . . 33
4.19 near field COMSOL simulation of TE and TM modes for the scattered field
of beam with dimension w=h=200 nm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.20 left. COMSOL multiphysics plot of the scattering coefficient on the visi­
ble frequency range for the beam of dimensions, w=425 nm, h=200 nm,
g=340 nm,. right. colored lines indicate the resonances, blue: simulation,
orange:experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.21 zero­340 nm gap width= 425nm beam, height= 200nm . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.22 Change on the resonant behavior of the pair beams by changing their dis­
tance, the scattering plots have been displaced on the y axis to help visu­
alize the shifts of the peaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.23 Color highlighted areas that show some change in the scattering plot when
modelling for different gap size. The signals are vertically translated to
observe the peaks more clearly.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Electrically tunable structural colors
vii
==PAGE:10==
4.24 Scattering plot for the zero gap case and the full 200 nm width. . . . . . . . 36
A.1 pogo pin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
viii
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Meta­materials, artificial structures composed of subwavelength elements, have rightfully
gain the attention in the nanophotonic community as an alternative platform for exploiting
the electric and magnetic resonances of scattered light. Specifically, high index dielec­
tric meta­materials present several advantages in comparison to their plasmonic coun­
terparts, with main the existence of a strong magnetic resonance predicted by the Mie
theory, the low losses and the compatibility with semiconductor fabrication technologies.
The strong magnetic response, negligible in the plasmonic and metal spherical meta­
materials, arise from the retardation of the field’s phase when entering the material due
to displacement currents. This phenomenon takes place when the wavelength of the in­
cident light is comparable with a geometrical factor of the material. For spherical particles
this is λns ≃2Rs where Rs is the radius of the sphere, ns is the refractive index and λ the
wavelength in free space[1].
For a resonance to be observed in the visible and IR spectra the refractive index of the
material needs to be high. Silicon (Si) and Germanium (Ge) present a high index and low
losses in the visible spectra and they have been used in several studies of meta­devices.
The losses are used also as figure of merit (FOT) quantified as |Re(n)|
|Im(n)|. In fig.1.1 are
presented the refractive indices and loss values of various semiconductors available in
the visible­IR region.
Figure 1.1: Refractive indices and absorption coefficients of four semiconductors in the
visible ­ IR region [2]
The existence of electric and magnetic dipole resonances of similar strength, and higher
order multipoles have been confirmed in several distinct works. Moreover, interference
between electric and magnetic dipoles or higher order modes can lead to several phe­
nomena like the directional scattering, anapoles and fano resonances. One of the aims
of the scientific community is to exploit these novel characteristics in order to control light’s
phase, amplitude and polarization, with applications between others in color printing [3],
sensing, quantum technologies, imaging and signal processing [4].
The resonant response does not only depend on the material used for these devices but
can be tailored by changing shape and size of the material, the aspect ratio and arrange­
ment of structures or even the host medium. A great scientific effort is given in designing
meta­devices of geometries which will support desirable interference phenomena and the
advances in nano­fabrication field provide with the tools to engineer a variety of different
structures. Nanodisks, spherical and rectangular beams, nanoparticles have been fabri­
cated and studied.
Electrically tunable structural colors
1
==PAGE:12==
The signal characteristics is not necessarily bound during the fabrication of the meta­
materials. Active meta­devices are reconfigurable structures where the resonant signal
can be tuned in real time and post fabrication. Materials such as silicon and liquid crys­
tals used in metamaterials are sensitive to temperature changes, voltage appliance and
light’s intensity. This open the way to many realization platforms including temperature
([5], [6]), optical ([7], [8]), electronic ([9], [10]) and mechanical ([11], [12]), actuation of
the devices. Potential applications of active metamaterials are found between others in
wireless communication, holographic imaging[128], and switchable lenses.
Examining the devices is an important and necessary step to define their properties and
confirm the reproducibility of the results. The available characterization tools depend on
the operation frequency range of the metamaterials.
In this thesis, we engage with the study of electromechanical actuated meta devices. The
device consists of two rectangular silicon beams with defined length and subwavelength
width and height, separated by a gap. The beams are suspended, and an applied voltage
drives a change in the gap that separates them. By adjusting the voltage and conse­
quently the gap, the scattering field changes and thus the spectra signal can be tuned.
The aim of this work is to investigate the tuning of the scattering spectra from the rectan­
gular beams using Dark Field (DF) spectroscopy. For this reason, an optical microscope
holder is developed with the aim of electrically actuating the silicon beams during the
dark­field measurements. Furthermore, numerical simulations of the system are held for
comparison reasons and for further investigation of the resonant behavior of the device.
In order to identify and control the resonances in the scattering spectra we first need to
understand their origin. The scattering of light from high index meta materials is explained
by the Mie theory. In the next section a brief introduction of this theory is given.
2
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:13==
1.1
Mie theory
When a plane wave polarized in x direction and propagating in the z direction hits a parti­
cle, its direction might change. The wave will now propagate in a new plane, the scattered
plane that is defined with respect to the incident wave plane by two angles, the polar, θ,
and azimuthal, φ as denoted in the fig.1.2.
Figure 1.2: plane wave scattered by an arbitrary object, copied from [13]
We are interested in the scattered wave, because it confines information about the light­
matter interactions. Understanding this interaction provides us with the potential to control
resonant phenomena and exploit them for several applications. We can separate the
scattering events in three regimes depending on the size of the object in comparison with
the incident wavelength. If a is the diameter of an atomic or molecular particle and λ the
wavelength of light, then these regimes can be defined as:
1. Rayleigh scattering if a « 1
10 λ
2. Mie scattering if 1
10 λ < a < λ
3. geometric scattering if a > λ
Rayleigh scattering of a particle of specific size, depends strongly on the wavelength and
the scattered wave intensity is proportional to 1/λ4. Contrary, the Mie scattering is not very
wavelength dependent. In fig. 1.3, the spectra of the normalized scattering coefficient,
for a particle with r=300nm and n=15 is presented.
This section aims to briefly introduce the reader to the concepts of Mie scattering and
Mie theory. A rigorous analysis of this subject can be found in the textbook by Huffman,
Bohren, and Craig F [13].
Mie theory took its name from Gustav Mie, a German physicist who in 1908, provided an
electrodynamical solution for the scattering of light from homogeneous spherical particles
employing the Maxwell equations.
Electrically tunable structural colors
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: scattering regimes color coded, copied from [14]
The formulated problem, describes an electromagnetic plane wave polarized in x direc­
tion, which propagates in z direction in the air, before hits a spherical particle. The sphere
has finite radius of r, permittivity ϵ and permeability µ, and the propagation medium has
equivalently permittivity ϵ0 and permeability µ0. The objective is finding the scattering
coefficients, that relate the incident field with the scattering field.
The analysis starts by expanding the incident field, the field inside the particle and the
scattered field in the spherical coordinate basis. The scattered fields can be expressed
as:
Es(r) =
∞
∑
l=1
El(ialN(3)
elm(kr) −blM(3)
olm(kr))
(1.1)
Hs(r) =
∞
∑
l=1
El(ialN(3)
olm(kr) −blM(3)
elm(kr))
(1.2)
where Nelm, Molm, Nolm, Melm, are the vector spherical harmonics. The subscripts e and
o refer to even and odd solutions, l is the angular momentum and m the azimuthal number
that for this example is equal to one. The superscript indicates the kind of Bessel functions.
k is the wavenumber of the medium which can be expressed as 2π/λ and El is defined as
ilE0 2l+1
l(l+1). Finally, al and bl are the scattering coefficients of the electric and equivalently
the magnetic vector harmonics and express the amplitude of the scattered fields.
Solving the boundary conditions that require the continuity of the incident, the scattered
and the field inside the particle, on the surface of the sphere, the n­th (with l=n) order a
and b multipoles can be found as:
an = mψn(mx)ψ
′
n(x) −ψn(x)ψ
′
n(mx)
mξn(mx)ξ
′
n(x) −ξn(x)ξ
′
n(mx)
(1.3)
bn = ψn(mx)ψ
′
n(x) −mψn(x)ψ
′
n(mx)
ξn(mx)ξ
′
n(x) −mξn(x)ξ
′
n(mx)
(1.4)
4
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:15==
Here ψ and ξ represent the Bessel­Ricatti functions, x is a size parameter defined as
x = kr, where k is the wavenumber of the medium and r is the radius of the particle.
Last, m is the contrast parameter expressed as:
√ϵµ
√ϵ0µ0 . The physical implication is that
the scattering coefficients depend on the size and optical properties of the material.
Far field characteristics like the extinction and scattering cross sections can also be ex­
pressed as combination of a and b:
σext = 2π
k2
∞
∑
n=1
(2n + 1)[Re(an) + Re(bn)]
(1.5)
σs = 2π
k2
∞
∑
n=1
(2n + 1)(| an |2 + | bn |2)
(1.6)
the equations include the infinite sum and thus the radiation pattern can also be decom­
posed in a sum of multipoles of different angular momentum values.
The equations 1.7 and 1.8 can be normalized over the geometric cross section, σg which
for spherical particles is πr2. The normalized cross section are:
Qext = σext
σg
(1.7)
Qs = σs
σg
(1.8)
1.1.1
Mie resonances in dielectric materials
Mie theory, predicts that the scattering plots will be different for materials with low (ϵ > 0)
and high(ϵ < 0) refractive index. In contrast with metallic nanospheres which do not
support magnetic resonances, the resonances in the spectra of scattered light from a
dielectric particle, are originated from both electric and magnetic contributions fig.1.4.
Figure 1.4: extinction cross section plot for Si(a) and Au(b) nanoparticles, Magnetic res­
onances that appear in dielectric are not in the scatter plot of the metal, [15]
Focusing now on the Mie resonances in dielectric materials we can examine further their
resonant characteristics.
In fig. 1.5 top, the normalized scattering cross section, with respect to the incident wave­
length is plotted for a particle of radius, r=300nm, and refractive index, n=4. It is illustrated
Electrically tunable structural colors
5
==PAGE:16==
that the total scattering cross section, depicted in blue colour, is composed from different
electric and magnetic multipole contributions tagged with different colors. The analysis of
the spectra to its multipoles is called multipole decomposition. Near field plots 1.5 bottom
show the magnetic Hk and electric Ek field distribution on the surface of the sphere for
the different exhibited multipole resonances.
Figure 1.5: scattering cross section, multipole decomposition and near field plots. pro­
duced with Mie calculator, https://physics.itmo.ru/en/mie/nearfield
Besides the peaks attributed to electric, magnetic dipoles, quadrupoles or higher multi­
poles, overlapping between those will also give characteristic peaks. Understanding the
scattering signal enables the control of the resonant behavior of nanostructures by engi­
neering the multimodal and multipolar interference.
6
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:17==
1.2
Background
Rectangular beams
Resonant phenomena from light interaction with spheres or cylindrical structures are well
understood, but for more complex geometries the problem becomes significant harder,
and the physical explanation of the resonances’ origin is more difficult. From a fabrication
point of view, nanowires (NWs) of rectangular cross section can be created relatively easy
using conventional semiconductor fabrication methods compared to cylindrical NWs.
Landerman et al [16], demonstrate that NWs with rectangular cross section can be mod­
elled as a Fabry Perot (FP) cavity. In the FP cavity, the light travels between two mirrors,
and is constructively interfere when after reflected has obtained a phase of an integer mul­
tiple of 2π. In the case of the rectangular beam the mirrors are the sides of the rectangle.
The results show that actually the rectangular beams can be approximated to two FP cav­
ities, taking account all the interfaces, one in the vertical direction (top­bottom surfaces),
and one in the longitudinal direction (left­right surfaces). The resonant conditions for the
two cavities are given as [16]:
ΦV = 2βv ∗h + ϕT + ϕB
(1.9)
ΦL = 2βL ∗h + ϕL + ϕR
(1.10)
where V, and L stand for vertical and longitudinal, T and B for top and bottom and L and
R for left and right.
Furthermore, the rectangular beam acts as a dielectric slab waveguide [17], where a
film with a refractive index n1, is sandwiched between a material with index n2 and a
material with index n3. fig.1.6. If n2 = n3 the dielectric slab is called symmetric. Assuming
an infinite long waveguide, the field along its long direction shows no variation. Then
the dielectric slab supports two types of polarised modes the transverse electric (TE)
where the electric field is normal to the length of the guide and the transverse magnetic
(TM) where the electric field is along the length of the guide. For the dielectric slab, the
thickness of the film, the wavelength of the radiation and the refractive indices of the three
layers will affect the exhibited resonant modes.
Figure 1.6: Dielectric slab mode nomenclature
In nomenclature higher order modes are denoted as TEm,n and TMm,n where the indices,
m, correspond to the number of longitudinal and, n, to the number of vertical magnetic
and electric antinodes.
Electrically tunable structural colors
7
==PAGE:18==
In the same study, the reflectivity was demonstrated to depend on the height of the
nanowire, with thin nanowires to exhibit only fundamental modes. Finally, another im­
portant parameter is the contrast of the refractive indices of the dielectric material and the
surrounding materials. The highest the index contrast the more reflective are the inter­
faces, and changing materials index can cause shifts in the spectral position.
The directionality of the scattered wave from asymmetric rectangular beams has been
also studied. In [18] it was shown that unidirectional scattering is possible for both TE and
TM modes. Furthermore, the change in the scattering response with different incident
wave angle, or polarization was verified. Last, Sharp Fano resonances were noted in the
scattering plot originated from guided modes along the width of the nanowire.
This last remark needs to be taken into consideration. Scattering plots defined by complex
Fano behavior have spectral peaks that do not exactly match to a specific mode.[16]
Moreover, a possible challenge concerning practical application is the higher resonance
density and the interference of higher order modes that appear in rectangular nanowire’s
spectra in comparison with the spectrum of a cylindrical nanowire. [17].
8
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:19==
The devices
In this thesis, we use for characterization and study, the metadevices fabricated by Artyo
A. as part of his phD project. These reconfigurable metadevices, consist of two free¬standing
dielectric nanowires where the distance between them can be tuned by the appliance of
voltage, controlling such their resonant response.
The beam pair schematic is presented in fig.1.7. A Si02/Si is used as a substrate and
the p­doped silicon beams of width, w, and length, L, are placed over a hole, separated
by each other by a gap, g. Each beam is connected at its ends to the oxide, and to
an electrode­contact making possible the electrical actuation of the device. In fig.1.8 is
illustrated the configuration of the sample chip.
Figure 1.7: Nanowires of length=L, width=w, and gap=g. The red dot lines indicate the
deflection of the beams after voltage appliance. UPI is the pull in voltage that bring the
beams in contact. Copied from [15]
Figure 1.8: The illustration is a synthesis of images obtained by the integrated Circuit (IC)
design file, where information about the layers and geometry can be found.
The rectangular cross section beams were fabricated on a 6 inch SOI wafer, using UV
Electrically tunable structural colors
9
==PAGE:20==
lithography followed by deep reactive ion etching step. Detailed description of the fabri­
cation, the masking and process materials, as also the process flow can be found in the
thesis document. [15]
Series of beams with different width and separation gap were developed. In fig.1.9 a table
is presented, with the dimensions of the fabricated beams and the gap between the pair.
The length of all silicon beams was kept at 25 um.
Figure 1.9: Table with the fabrication dimensions of Si nanowire pairs
In Artyom’s work a COMSOL model for the system with beams of w=h=205 nm and
L=15um separated by a g=205nm predicted a pull in behavior around 13V. Before the
pull in voltage the simulation shows an 85 nm of deflection of the beams.
The sample’s size were characterized by Artyom with Scanning Transmission Electron
Microscope (STEM). The analysis showed that the beams were curved and had deviations
in shape, attributed to the release step of fabrication. This affect the uniformity of the gap
between the beam pair, fig.1.10 (a). Next, the deflection of the beams with increasing
voltage appliance were observed. In fig.1.10 are the data from the characterization of
beams with average width:204nm, at separation gap: 104nm. The beams are moving
linearly with the voltage and the separation gap is reduced from 104 to 84nm, until the pull
in voltage, at 42V , were they snap close to each other, obtaining a 23nm separation gap.
The relation between the separation gap and the applied voltage is depicted in fig.1.10 d.
Moreover, it was demonstrated that the operation was reversible, and the beams return
to their previous position when the applied voltage was removed.
Figure 1.10: a. deviations in the gap separating the two beam, b.c. beam deflection after
voltage appliance d. the gap change as a function of applied voltage, images copied from
[15]
Last, EELS spectra before and after the application of bias have demonstrated the mode
tuning, with 100nm actuation range.
In this thesis, we will study three chips with the layout of fig.1.8. The dimensions of the
chip deviate from the expected 6x4mm values due to no smooth cutting of the edges
10
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:21==
during the cutting process. The dimensions of the beams are unknown and to be defined
by characterization.
Electrically tunable structural colors
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:23==
2
Methods
2.1
Comsol modelling
For simulating the scattering problem from the rectangular nanowires, a finite element
method is used.
Finite element method is a numerical method for solving differential equation where a
complex system is broken into a system of simpler parts, which are called finite elements,
that locally approximate the original equations. Specifically, the finite elements represent
different areas of the examined physical system, and the discretization of the system is
implemented by a mesh.
The size of the mesh elements depends on the studied underlying physics of the system,
and they have usually simple shapes, for which the solution of the equations is known,
but at the same time can capture the geometry of the input domain.
The modeling of the problem is done by re assembling the finite elements to a larger
system of equations. The mesh size on the domain depends on the wavelength of the
incident wave and the refractive index of the material. In the case of the examined system
the problem is solving Maxwell’s equations to find the scattering cross section for the
specific geometry of the metadevices. The module used for building the model is the
‘electromagnetic waves, frequency domain(ewfd)’ found under the wave optic’s category,
which solves the time harmonic wave equation for the electric field. The maximum mesh
element is given as λ/(5n).
Figure 2.1: Mesh images from COMSOL multiphysics for the model of the single beam
and for the pair of beams.
Since the length of the silicon beams is way larger than the width and height dimensions,
the beams can be considered as infinite long, and a 2­D model is constructed for the
rectangular cross section of the beams.
Two models were built, one where the response of a single beam is studied and another
where the same response is studied for a pair of beams separated by a gap, g.
A series of parameters need to be defined at the beginning Some of them refer to critical
dimensions of the geometry, like the width and height of the beams, or the size of the
examined area, others define properties of the incident wave like the value of the inserted
field and its intensity, and others measurement’s range values, like the maximum, λmax ,
and minimum, λmin wavelength. In each model a study of the system was done by tuning
parameters like the width and size of the beam/beams and the separation gap of the pair.
Electrically tunable structural colors
13
==PAGE:24==
The material of beams was defined as silicon with refractive index from the material ref­
erence Schinke et al. 2015: n,k 0.25 ­ 1.45 nm.
We chose to examine a circular area around the nanowires, of Rin. Since the system has
open boundaries a perfectly matched layer, pml, was defined as λmax/4.
The nanowire, or the pair of nanowires were placed at the center of the circle. The scat­
tered field is calculated by finding the rate at which the field is scattered across the inte­
gration area, fig.2.2
Figure 2.2: Geometry of the modelled system. All areas out of the silicon beams are
considered to be air. The light blue colored area is the perfectly matched layer, pml, the
purple rectangular areas are the nanowire’s cross section and the red circle denotes the
area of integration
Moreover, high­index metamaterials support TE and TM modes of resonances and their
simulation need to be ran twice, one for the in­plane (TM) electric field modes and one for
the out of plane (TE) electric field modes.
14
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Dark Field Spectroscopy, DF spectroscopy
The characterization of the silicon nanobeams is held by dark field spectroscopy. In this
technique a spectrometer is coupled to an optical microscope that is operated in dark field
(DF) mode.
To operate in DF mode, a disk, fig. 2.3, needs to be added between the light source and
the condenser lens of the microscope. This disc blocks the transmittance of light from the
central area, producing a hollow cone of light, fig.2.3. The angle of the light cone is bigger
than the angle of the scattered light. At the end, the light that reaches the objectives is
the light that is scattered by the sample which then focuses on the image plane, creating
a bright image of the sample on a dark background.
Figure 2.3: (left) the hollow cone light of the dark field mode (right) dark field disck, and
bright field microscope component
Moreover, the scattered light is detected laterally by placing the detector sideways in com­
parison to the specimen. This has the advantage to limit the collected excitation light.
This technique provides high sensitivity due to the black background and high contrast.
The resolution is around tens of nm. [] and is limited by the numerical aperture of the con­
denser and objective lenses which must satisfy the condition: NAcondenser > NAobjective.
A schematic of the used setup is illustrated in fig.2.4. In this design an optical microscope
operates in DF and reflectance mode, that means the sample is illuminated by the same
side where the scattered light is collected by the objective lens.
The beam can be guided to the imaging or spectrometry area. Both areas are equipped
with a charge coupled device (CCD) for the photon detection.
A slit is used to control the amount of the light that reaches the spectrometer. It affects the
resolution of the measurement with a narrow slit size providing higher resolution but at the
same time the signal decrease. Last, a monochromator equipped with an optical grating
is used to analyse the scattered light in order to export a scattering spectrum, recording
the intensity over the wavelength of the scattered light.
In this project a Nikon microscope and specifically the model ECLIPSE LV100N POL is
used. It is equipped with a 50W halogen lamp and has three objectives of x10, x50 and
x100 magnification. The microscope is coupled with a spectrometer controlled by Andor’s
Solis software. The spectrometer is thermoelectrically cooled to −60◦C to improve the
signal­to­noise ratio.
Electrically tunable structural colors
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.4: Setup of DFM coupled with color CCD, spectro­CCD and a slit­spectrometer.
Partially reprinted by [19] adjusted to a reflectance setup
In the first section it was discussed that the resonance behavior of the examined materials
depend on the size parameter and optical properties like their refractive index. Thus,
different structure sizes and different materials appear with different color. Shifts of the
resonances due to the electrical actuation are also expected to change the demonstrated
color in DF images.
DF Spectroscopy is going to be used in order to obtain the scattering plots and track
changes in the spectra characteristics in the visible frequency range, when deviating the
gap between the silicon beam pair.
16
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy, SEM
In this section the function of electron microscope is described as in [20].
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), is an imaging technique that can provide images
with very high resolution. Electrons are accelerated through a column, made of electro­
magnetic components, that control the trajectory of the beam’s electrons and the unifor­
mity of the field. The sample is placed in a vacuum chamber and it is hit by the beam with
a specific acceleration voltage. The interaction of the material with the beam takes place
in the interaction volume, that can expands several units under the surface depending on
the acceleration voltage and the material of the sample.
Backscattered electrons and secondary electrons generated from the beam­material in­
teraction are captured from different types of detectors which can be selected by the user
depending on the examined feature. Secondary electron detectors are mainly used for
topographical examination while backscattered electron detectors can be used for compo­
sitional characterization. The acceleration voltage, the working distance, and the magnifi­
cation can be adjusted by the user, and the quality of the final images is highly dependent
on the user’s experience.
For the purposes of this project a microscope of the Zeiss Supra series was used. The
microscope is equipped with InLens, SE2 and backscattered detectors and two TV cam­
eras in different angles for assisting in the navigation of the stage in the chamber. It can
operate in high vacuum and variable pressure modes, allowing the examination of insulat­
ing materials that exhibiting charging problems. The samples were put in the microscope
in order to measure with high accuracy critical dimensions as the gap between the device
beams and the width size of the beams.
Imina system
The SEM instrument used for characterization in this thesis is equipped with an exten­
sion tool the imina system nanobots which can be used for the electrical actuation of the
sample. Though it was a bit out of the scope of this project which focuses on the optical
characterization of the devices, it is considered worthy to try imaging the response of the
devices in real time with a tool purpose­built for such applications.
The Bots are sitting on a magnetic stage, and their movement is mediated by a piezo
crystal. The stage plugs into the microscope’s dedicated holder space and the control
cables pass through a flange on the chamber’s door and connect with the source and
measurement unit. The user can control the movement of the nanobots with a joystick
while imaging the sample.
Electrically tunable structural colors
17
==PAGE:28==
18
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:29==
3
Holder for bias measurements in optical
microscope
In order to electrically actuate the sample during the spectroscopic measurement, an op­
tical microscope holder was developed. The proposed designs were sketched around the
general idea that wants the device chip on top or in contact with a printed circuit board
(PCB), which can connect to a DC power supply.
Several alternative ways were examined for their suitability for this task including the PCB
soldering or the wire bonding of the chip. Both techniques ensure good contact between
the sample and the PCB without the need for extra parts to hold the chip in place and in
contact with the PCB. A disadvantage is that these two alternatives cannot be used for
measuring several chips and the attached chip is not available anymore for characteriza­
tion with other tools like for example the Scanning Electron Microscope. Lacking many
samples, a holder design that does not bind the chip on the structure was considered a
more attractive idea.
For this reason, the holder of fig. 3.1, made by Tim Booth was used as a reference. In this
design, the contact between chip and PCB is mediated by pogo pins. The holder consists
of layers of components, beginning with the PCB, and continuing with PMMA parts for
confining the pogo pins. Another layer is used for sample’s placement and last a lid layer
ensures that the chip is pressed uniformly down and that is in good contact with the pins.
Figure 3.1: (left) Reference holder designed by Tim Booth. (right) components of the
reference holder
Several parameters had to be adjusted to support Artyom’s samples. Specifically, be­
cause the used optical microscope has a working distance of 1mm at its maximum mag­
nification at 100x, the lid layer had to be very thin. Moreover, the optical measurement of
the nanowires, is taken from the bottom of the chip through the wafer hole, meaning that
the thickness of the chip which is 0.6 mm, needs to be taken into account. That finally
limits the thickness of the lid to less than 0.4 mm. It was decided to merge the sample’s
and lid’s parts and three alternatives that meet the above specification were designed in
the fusion 360 CAD software and 3D printed fig.3.2. From these three, the ’ears’ design,
showed a good fit and was chosen for the holder.
Gold­plated pogo pins and specifically the emulation technology model SKT2930, with a
barrel diameter size of 0.51mm, overall length of 12.30 mm, and barrel length of 8.30 nm,
Electrically tunable structural colors
19
==PAGE:30==
were chosen for mediating the PCB­sample contact. The assembly drawing can found in
the appendix section, fig. A.1. The thickness of the pogo pin holder part depends on the
length of the pins. The size is picked to be in the middle of the overall and barrel length
of the pin, and for this case we chose a 10 mm thick part.
Figure 3.2: (left) General: in this design there is only a hole for the chip, the chip then can
kept down by tapping, (center) Ears: 0.2 mm thick ears were put on the corners of the
sample hole to keep the chip down, (right) Pocket: of width 0.6 mm. In this design the
chip is pushed and fixed with its edges in the pocket
Two PMMA layers of 5mm, with eight drilled holes for the pogo pins were used.
The PCB part was designed on Autodesk’s software eagle. A schematic and board of the
design are presented below fig.3.3. The PCB has a hole in the middle for allowing the
imaging of the Si beams in the optical microscope. The design of chip’s devices electrode
contacts is transferred to the PCB and each pad, is connected to a wire. The middle wires
are used as ground. The top layer of the board is copper grounded providing resistance
to noise.
Figure 3.3: eagle pcb (left) schematic (right) board
The several components were put together, beginning with gluing with super glue the PCB
and pogo pin layers. Holes in each corner of the layers were drilled allowing for fixing and
unfixing the sample’s lid layer, 3.4.
Last, Keithley’s Standard Series 2400 Source Measure Unit (SMU) Instrument was used
as a DC supply, concluding the setup for bias measurements.
20
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: Holder components: pcb, pogo pin PMMA parts, and ear chip­lid part
The experiment
The contact between the pogo pins and pads were tested before any measurement, and
none cross talking between electrodes was observed. Cable connections between the
sample and a bread board, and between the breadboard and the source/multimeter were
used for bias application. The wires were handled with anti­static tweezers and grounded
before being plugged to the source, to deal with any discharging effects. An experiment
was performed to the pair of beams shown in fig.3.5, by placing one beam contact to the
positive and the other beam contact to the negative end. The voltage values were slowly
raised from 0 to 100 V but no displacement of the beams was observed.
Figure 3.5: Bright field (BF) optical microscope image, 100x magnification. Top view of
the nanowire pair tested for electrical actuation, NW average width: 425nm, gap:340 nm,
10um scale bar
Figure 3.6: Intensity profile obtained for the green arrow of the right image, helps in track­
ing the distance between the beams
Electrically tunable structural colors
21
==PAGE:32==
Some possible reasons were that 1. no contact between pogo pins and the sample were
achieved, and thus the holder design needs to be optimized, 2. we deal with dysfunctional
sample.
Starting the problem solving from the first hypothesis of no contact, a bulk holder was
SLA 3D printed fig.3.7 to avoid the gluing of many pieces that could cause small tilt of
the pins moving them spatially and reducing the contact area of the tip. Moreover there
is a sample hole of 6x4mm dimensions, in the bulk holder to ensure the samples position
with respect to the pins and PCB. The pogo pin holes were drilled after the printing fig.3.7,
(center). The PCB was still glued, and the cables were soldered and fixed. Next, the lid
part shown in fig.3.7, (right), was FDM 3D printed. There is a gradient on the thickness
allowing working in small distances with the central region to be nominal 0.25 mm thick.
Figure 3.7: (left): bulk holder (center): the pogo pins (right): the lid with the thickness
grating
Bulk part and lid were held on with thumb screws and the setup was moved to the lab for
testing. The cables were given banana ends for direct connection to the source unit.
At this point of characterization only one of the three samples had an intact beam pair
available for measurements and therefore the experiment was held once more on the
sample that gave no results when tested with the previous holder. The sample was not
perfectly fitted to the dedicated hole, due to the no clear cut of its edges, mentioned on
the first chapter. Nevertheless the centering was satisfactory and is not considered to
significantly undermine the contact.
The experiment was repeated as above and once more no displacement was observed.
After this two failed attempts, the focus returned to the samples functionality. The resis­
tivity of one of the pads were tested with a multimeter, placing two probes on it in order
to check if it is around the expected values for doped silicon. The result shows a very
high resistivity value of 108 ohms and taking into account the size of the pad this value
matches with resistivity values of SiO2.
This somehow concluded the process of trying to optimize the holder for electrical actua­
tion of the metadevices and the attention was moved to the sample’s condition.
22
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:33==
4
Results
4.1
SEM
This section starts with the characterization results obtained by SEM which gives some
useful insights about the sample’s dimensions and quality. It needs to be noted that this
was not the first characterization step during the experiments and more sample’s friendly
procedures were prioritized. Because the samples were fabricated and last used a year
ago, they were plasma cleaned before inserted in the SEM chamber, to remove any or­
ganic residuals that might lead to carbon deposition which could undermine the perfor­
mance of the device. The used parameters are listed in fig.4.1.
Figure 4.1: Chip configuration of the devices. Parameters of the followed plasma cleaning
procedure
The three samples were given the names chip1, chip2 and chip3 and for now on their
going to be referred to like this. The SEM characterization was held with SE2 detector
and 5 kV acceleration voltage. A long working distance (13 mm) was initially chosen to
take images of all the surface’s features of chip 1, fig.4.1. Imaging of the 1st pair, fig.4.2,
revealed that one beam was detached from the arms. The 2nd pair while intact, present
a non uniform separation gap along the nanowires length, fig.4.2.
The working distance was lowered to 5.3 mm in order to take finer images of the beams
for analyzing their dimensions. For this purpose, the software imageJ was used. The
width was measured in 10 different spots along the length of the beams and the average
width were 214 nm for the single beam and 200 nm for the pair of beams of electrode 2.
The separation gap shows a maximum value at the end where the beams are connected
to the oxide at nm, but in general demonstrates great deviations along their length, with
points where the beams are even in contact.
Chip 2
Chip 2 imaging presented a pair of beams with a quite uniform gap separation around
340nm. The beams fabricated on this chip are thicker than the ones in chip 1, with mean
width value equal to 425 nm. The height remains at 200nm.
Electrically tunable structural colors
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: SEM image, a.v.: 5kV, left: single beam, right: beam pair of chip1
Figure 4.3: SEM image, a.v.: 5kV, left: beam pair of chip 2, right: higher magnification of
the same pair from which the mean gap was evaluated
Figure 4.4: SEM image, a.v.: 5kV,left: beam column with 9 beam pair with fixed separation
gap, center: the right end pairs are sitting on the Si02 substrate, right: the first to the right
pair, the gap was measured to be 820 nm
Images of the beam’s column located at the end of the suspension, were also taken for
this sample in fig. 4.4. The beam pairs share the same width, but they have different
separation gap, beginning with a wider gap to a narrower, moving on the image from right
to left. According the integrated Circuit (IC) design file, the gap starts from 900 nm to 200
nm reducing with a 100 nm step for the first eight pairs. The last gap is at 150 nm. The
characterization instead showed 820 nm width for the first pair from the right while the first
from the left wires were in contact.
24
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:35==
Chip 3
In chip 3, the electrodes with respect to the hole were misaligned, as it will be shown later
in the text and beams were broken. Thus, it was used as dummy for several tests and no
SEM images were taken for this sample.
Imina system
Figure 4.5: SEM image, a.v.:5kV, Probes of the nanobots of imina sitting on the chips
contacts
The electromechanical actuation of the devices was tested in chip 1. During the charac­
terization, every nanobot was carrying a tungsten probe of 100um which is free to move
in the upward and downward direction. The probes were first put on the contacts of a pair
system, one connected to the positive and the other one to the negative end. The voltage
was progressively raised from 0 to 40 V, but no deflection of the beams was observed. All
probes were tested by bringing in contact the tips and tracking the resistivity values. Next,
a resistivity measurement was held in one of the contact pads, by placing both probes on
the same pad and close to each other. The area of the pad was measured, and the re­
sistivity value was what would be expected to be for a p­doped silicon contact. No more
tests were run with the Imina system.
Electrically tunable structural colors
25
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Optical microscopy and DF spectroscopy
As have been already mentioned the electromechanical actuation was not achieved. Nev­
ertheless, DF spectra of a single beam and from pair of beams were extracted to be
compared with the numerical simulations, and to be evaluated for the feasibility of optical
detected tuning of the device’s spectra. Before the spectroscopic data extraction, some
images were taken with the optical microscope in Bright field (BF) and Dark field (DF)
mode.
Optical microscopy
In fig.4.6 BF field images of chip 3 are presented were the electrodes appear misaligned
in respect with the hole. One of the beams on the right image is additionally broken.
Additional imaging with the chip upside down through the hole, shows that the arm part
of the electrode is sitting on the hole, fig.4.7 (left). This could potentially deteriorate the
signal coming from the beams during a measurement. Thus, chip3 was decided to be
excluded from the measurements.
Figure 4.6: BF images of Chip3 in 100x magnification. 10um unit bar.
Figure 4.7: BF Images of the beams through the suspension. The arms of the electrodes
in chip3 are visible through the hole. (right) Chip2 beam pair
Next, DF images of the single electrode of Chip1, were taken, fig.4.8. The difference
in electrodes color on the substrate and on the suspension indicates an influence to the
scattering light from the substrate.
26
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.8: DF image of the single beam on Chip1 in 100x magnification. 10um unit bar.
DF spectroscopy
The data are taken using the reflectance mode, by having the devices upside down and
illuminating the beams, through the substrate’s hole.
Spectralon white reflectance standard of Labsphere with reflectance operation range from
250 – 2500 nm is used for taking a reference spectra, fig.4.9. For a background spectra an
acquisition is held with the light source turned­off. The light intensity of the source needs
to be kept steady while performing a set of measurements (sample, reference) because
the counts deviations need to be target dependent. It is recommended that the reference
spectra are taken before the sample’s to control the intensity of the source, since the white
standard scatters much more light and can harm the CCD detector. The counts should
not exceed 106 counts/sec.
Figure 4.9: Spectralon white reflectance standard of Labsphere, used for taking the ref­
erence spectra
The resonance pattern of a single beam was acquired by measuring the lone 200nm wide
beam of chip 1 4.8. The pair beams measurements were taken from Chip 2. Spectra were
extracted for the electrode beams pair (electrode pair) of 400 nm width and 340 nm gap,
fig.4.7 (right) and from the first from the left (suspended fixed pair) for which the pair is in
contact.
In fig.4.10 the acquisition parameters of the experiments are presented. The luminosity
condition of the room affects the measurement and needs to be taken into consideration.
The slit has a rectangular cross section and reducing the slit size, signal from a smaller
area of the sample reaches the spectrometer. The wavelength is centered at 550 nm for
visible range spectra measurements.
Electrically tunable structural colors
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.10: Controlled parameters of the spectroscopic measurements
Matlab programming platform is used for analysing the data and plotting the scattering
spectra over the wavelength. The procedure is explained below.
Data processing
The data analysis begins by plotting the surface plots of the spectroscopic data for the
reference and the background, fig. 4.11. On the beam plot fig.4.12 we can inspect which
values of the data matrix contain the signal from the beam. The location of the signal
depends on the position of the beam on the restricted by the slit image during the data
acquisition.
Figure 4.11: Surface plots of beam, background and reference data, y axis: wave­
length[nm], x axis: position
Figure 4.12: Data selection using the surface plot, the signal can observed between 118­
127 X values
28
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:39==
Plotting the data of the reduced matrix, results in the graphs of fig.4.13. The reference
spectra shows as expected a normal distribution in the visible range and the background
illustrates the ambient noise.
Figure 4.13: Data selection using the surface plot, the signal can observed between 118­
127 X values
In order to take the scattering coefficient plot, we need to perform a normalization step,
eq.4.1. The normalization step is taking place by subtracting the noise and taking the
beam over the reference spectra.
Isample −Ibackground
Ireference −Ibackground
(4.1)
The final single beam scattering plot is depicted in fig.4.14.The peaks appear around 470
nm, 490 nm, 560 nm and 740 nm.
Similar procedure is followed for the pair beams. Measurements of the electrode pair were
taken from two different spots to test the uniformity of the gap along their length. Moreover,
measurements were taken for two different slit sizes, 100um and 50um, to check how the
signal is affected. The results are summarized in fig.4.15. The measurement spot is
indicated by the cross on the left images. The same images lateral size represents the
width of the substrate’s hole, and is around 9um. The measurments obtained with 100um
size slit are presented on the left column plots and with the 50um size slit on the right
column plots. A fall in the scattering amplitude is observed when using smaller slit size.
Measurement results of the suspended fixed pair are plotted in the same plot with the
electrode pair results for comparison reasons, fig.4.16. The two plots do not show similar
behavior. The amplitude of the scattering for the pair with no gap is quite lower. The peak
observed at 640 nm when there is a 340 nm gap seems to be flatten when the beams
Electrically tunable structural colors
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.14: Single w=h=200nm beam scattering plot, x axis:scattering coefficient, y:
wavelength
Figure 4.15: scattering plots from data obtained by two different spots indicated by the
arrows on the left images, and using two different slit sizes: 50um (right column), 100um
(left column).
are in contact. The peak at 750 nm of the electrode pair is not present in the plot of the
suspended fixed pair gap that instead has a peak at 790 nm.
30
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.16: Comparison of the scattering plots from the beam pair (beam width=400nm)
with gap approximately 340nm (blue) and no gap (orange).
Electrically tunable structural colors
31
==PAGE:42==
4.3
COMSOL simulation
In this section are presented the modelled plots created by the COMSOL multiphysics
simulation software. The work can be divided in two parts. In the first part, are demon­
strated the models that simulate the examined systems, presented in the previous section.
Then, the modelled plots are compared with the characterization results.
In the second part, a model is presented on which the gap between the wires in the w=h=
200 nm beams pair is tuned. This study represents the electro­mechanically actuated
beams measurement that was aimed to be performed during this thesis. The goal is to
investigate the system’s resonant behavior under the actuation in the visible range of
frequencies.
Part 1
Single pair
The model for the single beam of dimensions w=h=200 nm is illustrated below, fig.4.17.
The two simulations for the in plane and out of plane background field have been plotted
together and the scattering coefficient is given as a superposition of the two contributions
(fig.4.17 left). The simulation is ran for the visible wavelength range, 400 ­ 800 nm with a
step of 10 nm.
Figure 4.17: Scattering plot produced by COMSOL multiphysics fot the single beam of
width = 200 nm. The total spectra is a superposition of TE and TM modes.
In fig.4.17 (right) perpendicular lines with blue color have marked the resonances on the
total scattering cross section. The orange lines indicate the resonances that appear in
the experimental results. The two plots are in good agreement as it concerns the appear­
ance of the resonances. Specifically, the resonances at 740 nm and 465 nm are in total
agreement for both experiment and simulation. Two peaks at 430 nm and 675 nm appear
only in the simulation. This can indicate that some resonances appear in specific angles
which are not collected by the spectrometer.
In order to investigate the modes, the dimensions of the beam are lowered and set at
width=100 nm, height=200 nm and the scattering field is plotted in a larger range of fre­
quencies, 400­1400 nm. Near field plots, of the z component of the relative magnetic field
for the in plane modes and of the z component of the electric field for the out of plane
modes, are taken in order to examine the peaks. The lower order magnetic mode, which
we will call TE1, appear at 700 nm and the lower order electric TM1 mode at 910 nm.
Higher order modes can be found in lower wavelengths.
Examining the near field images on the scatter plot of the nanowire with width=height=200
nm, fig.4.19 we can see the displacement of the modes and the appearance of additional
32
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.18: near field COMSOL simulation of TE (in plane) and TM (out of plane) modes
for the scattered field of beam with dimensions w=100nm, h=200nm
Figure 4.19: near field COMSOL simulation of TE and TM modes for the scattered field
of beam with dimension w=h=200 nm
modes. Specifically, the TE1 mode in this case appears at 1040 nm, and the TM1 at 1070
nm. The rest of the modes appear displaced but still in the visible range of the spectrum.
Electrically tunable structural colors
33
==PAGE:44==
Beams pair
Next, the beam pair was simulated. The dimensions of the beam were defined according
to the measured values, with the average width being 425 nm, the height 200 nm and the
gap 340 nm. The scattering cross section is presented in fig.4.20 as a superposition of
the in plane and out of plane modes. Again, on the right image the resonance peaks of
the total cross section have been marked with blue, and those from the experimental data
with orange.
Figure 4.20: left. COMSOL multiphysics plot of the scattering coefficient on the visible
frequency range for the beam of dimensions, w=425 nm, h=200 nm, g=340 nm,. right.
colored lines indicate the resonances, blue: simulation, orange:experiment
A comparison similar with the one at the spectroscopy section between the pair with
gap=340 nm and the one with the beams in contact is presented in figure 4.21. The
plots do not present significant differences, besides of the fall in scattering amplitude for
the zero gap case, in the frequency range between 580 to 700 nm. The big peak on the
g=340nm simulations that starts developing the last 100nm of the plot is separated into
two resonances around 720 nm and 775 nm for the beams with no gap .
Figure 4.21: zero­340 nm gap width= 425nm beam, height= 200nm
Part 2
In this part we model a pair of beams of w=h=200 nm, and simulations are held for different
values of g. The modelled gap values are: zero, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 150 and 200 nm.
The total scattering cross section of all models are plotted together in fig.4.22. There is a
clear response in the resonant behavior when the distance between the pairs is changed,
with peak shift and new resonances appearance.
34
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.22: Change on the resonant behavior of the pair beams by changing their dis­
tance, the scattering plots have been displaced on the y axis to help visualize the shifts
of the peaks
Specifically, fig.4.23 the spectra is separated into areas of different colors that represent
changes in the resonance behavior when the gap changes. The matrix summarizes that
peak shifts of yellow, brown and purple boxes. In the green box is highlighted the reso­
nance appearance at zero gap around 640 nm wavelength not evident for larger beam
separations. The blue and black boxes include amplitude changes of the scattering coef­
ficient.
The potential change in the optical response is more clear when the zero gap case and
the full 200 nm gap case are plotted alone in a graph, fig.4.24.
The first half of the plot presents significant more resonances for the full gap separation
than the zero case. In the second half the resonances for the two models are not in
agreement. A resonance appeasr at 655 nm when the gap is set at 200 nm, while for the
zero gap a resonance appears at 655 nm, presenting a 20 nm difference.
Electrically tunable structural colors
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.23: Color highlighted areas that show some change in the scattering plot when
modelling for different gap size. The signals are vertically translated to observe the peaks
more clearly.
Figure 4.24: Scattering plot for the zero gap case and the full 200 nm width.
36
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:47==
5
Discussion
In this thesis we wanted to demonstrate the electrical color tuning of metadevices con­
sisting of silicon nanowire pairs, using DF spectroscopy. The original plan was to focus
the first two months in the optical holder design and fabrication and at the same time be­
come familiar with the modelling software. The next months were going to be dedicated
in performing iterations of measurements and data processing with aim the holder and
measurement optimization.
Since the actuation was not achieved this plan had to change. Instead the holder design
and testing was repeated throughout all the duration of the project and in parallel was
running the characterization of the samples with the different tools. A model simulation of
the actuation was finally decided to be presented as an alternative near the ending of the
project when it was assumed that the holder actuation was not going to be achieved.
This discussion starts with some comments about the characterized samples. The metade­
vices that was used to run the tests were presenting some challenges due to their fab­
rication. Artyom reports on his phD thesis the deviation of the gap between suspended
pairs of beams, coming from the release step during the fabrication and the non uniform
edges of the beams. These observations was confirmed during the SEM characterization
with additional the detection of misalignments of the devices with respect to the substrate
hole, that should also have taken place during the mask alignment in the lithography step.
Besides these fabrication problems there were pairs which beams were missing or were
broken due to handling of the chips. In general the handling of small chips (6x4mm)
requires some experience in order to not damage the sample. In this case where it was
a first contact of the user with small chips the condition of the devices was potentially
deteriorated with every test on them during this thesis. Last, an extra challenge that
these samples presented were the chip dimensions. The chips do not have clear edges
because of the laser cutting process of the device carrier wafer and the three examined
samples were not sharing the exact spatial dimensions. This can be a problem when
designing the optical holder as it will discussed next.
The main experiment which was the actuation of the devices was not achieved. This
could be because of the holder if not appropriate contact was achieved, because of the
sample if the devices were damaged or the material was not enough conductive, or from
the measurement performance in case the setup was not put together correctly.
Beginning with the holder, its design and fabrication had to be repeated a couple of times.
Since electrical actuation was not achieved it is good to consider which parameters of the
holder could be further adjusted or discuss the alternatives. As general comment because
it is really important to know with high accuracy the position of the chip with respect to the
pogo pins and the pogo pins in their turn need to sit perpendicular to the PCB and sample,
it is preferred to have as less components as possible. This is because gluing components
or putting them together with screws can cause small undesirable misalignments that can
affect the quality of the contact. Additionally metal paste could be applied on the end tips
of the pogo pins to increase and secure the contact, something that was not tried during
this project. About the positioning of the chip, due to the differences of the three samples
dimensions, while some of the chips were fitting in the sample hole of the final holder
design the examined one could not. It would be optimal to correct this fit if continuing the
experiments with this holder design. Last alternatives as wire bonding and PCB bonding
Electrically tunable structural colors
37
==PAGE:48==
of the chip, could potential secure the contact of the chip with the PCB but there are less
flexible than the presented holder.
Next we consider the devices itself. The devices were tested for their resistivity during the
SEM imina characterization where no displacement were shown and with a multimeter af­
ter the actuation with the optical holder was not achieved. Different samples were tested
in the two occasions. In the imina case, the resistance of one of the contacts of chip 3
was measured and the values matched those of doped silicon. In this sample the char­
acterization indicates possible structural problems of the device that could have prevent
the actuation. At the same time it could be attributed to the size and material of the probe
tip of the imina system. The tip was small 100um and the tungsten is not as conductive
metal as gold (Au).
The second resistance measurement was held in one of the contacts of the beam pair
on chip 2. The device did not seem to have any problem, both beams were whole and
attached to the arms of the electrodes. There was a very uniform gap between the beams
and it can not be assumed that the structure was problematic and could have affected
the actuation, if other possible causes are not first excluded. The values of resistivity in
this case matched those found in SiO2. If this measurement was held correctly it could
suggest the growth of a native oxide on top of Si devices deteriorating their conductivity.
This needs to be investigated.
Concerning the measurement, the Keithley instrument that we use as a DC supply is
very trustworthy and straightforward to use. The setup was not so complicated, and pre­
cautions were taken to diminish any discharging effects, while the voltage increase was
happened progressively to protect the sample. If there is any problem regarding the mea­
surement this escapes the author’s knowledge.
Let us know consider the spectroscopic and modelling results.
The experimental data for the single beam of dimensions w=h=200 nm, showed four dis­
tinct peaks at: 470 nm, 490 nm, 560 nm and 740 nm. In the measurement of the beam
pair of nanowires with dimensions w=400 nm, h=200 nm and g=340 nm, we have ex­
perimented with the slit size and the measuring point. The slit size affects the resolution
but also intensity of the signal. Reducing the slit, slightly increases the sharpness of the
peaks and at the same time reduces the intensity from 0.35 (0.3 spot 2) for the 100 µm slit
case to 0.2 (0.16 spot 2) for the 50um case. Measuring in different points along the length
of the beams had also a slight affect on the scattering signal. All the observe differences
in this case are a result of dimensional deviations in the gap and width of the beams.
Last comparison of the measurements of the beam pair with g=340 nm and of the beam
pair in contact, showed two quite different scattering plots. Both signal exhibit many reso­
nances, some of them on similar positions like the one in 425 nm and others demonstrated
only in one of the two plots like the one at 680 nm for the pair in contact. The amplitude
of the scattering signal is very different in the two plots. This result shows the potential of
tunable structural colors for the pair beam system of w=400 nm, h=200 nm with seperation
gap, g=340 nm.
Modelling simulations of the same systems were constructed as superposition of In plane
(TE), and out of plane modes(TM). The simulation of the single beam was held for a larger
frequency range (400­1400 nm) and for two different widths:100 nm and 200 nm, in order
to track the lower order modes. Increasing the size of the beam moves the lower order
modes to higher wavelengths. Specifically TE1, shows a displacement from 700 nm to
1040 nm and the TM1 mode a displacement from 910nm to 1070nm when changing from
38
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:49==
100nm to 200nm wide beam. Higher order modes are presented in the visible range
spectra. Field plots of the electric and the relative magnetic field were taken. It is avoided
to name the modes, and performing multiple decomposition is proposed if finding the
correspondence of the resonances to the modes is desired.
Comparing the experiment and simulation we can see that do not exactly match. This
is something expected. In the simulation we are modelling all the scattered light inde­
pendently from the angular distribution by integrating a circular area around the system,
while in the experiment only the light which lays in the angular range of the objective is
collected. Thus, if there is a resonance that appears in a specific scatter angle could be
missed from the measurement. This can be for example the case of the two peaks at 430
nm and 675 nm in the modelled scattering plot of the single 200 nm wide beam, fig.4.17,
or the peak at 460 nm in the modelled plot for the pair of beams, fig.4.20.
The low scattering coefficient values (0.3­0 a.u.) in experiment’s plot in comparison with
the numerical simulation (22.5­0 a.u.) is something expected. Different normalization
process is used, with the normalization by subtracting the noise intensity from the samples
intensity and dividing with reference intensity on the experimental data acquired from the
spectrometer and of the scattered cross section over the geometrical cross section in the
simulation. Nevertheless a comparison of the shape and of the spectral position of the
peaks can be done.
Furthermore, in the simulation we consider a significant smaller area of study while in the
experiment is collected as much light is allowed by the spectrometers slit.
Last, during the measurements we do not use a polariser/analyser system. Since the
model is considering a linear polarised incident beam, using a polariser would have prob­
ably help to interpret better the experimental scattering plots and identify the TE, TM
modes.
The modelling of the beam pair system of w=h=200 nm that simulate the actuation by de­
viating the gap between the nanowires(gmax:200nm, gmin:0 nm), showed clearly a change
in the signal with peak shifts, changes in the scattering amplitude, manifestation of new
resonances and different resonant behavior when the beams are brought into contact.
Specifically it was demonstrated the possibility of 24 nm tuning of peak (568­592 nm),
fig.4.23.
In conclusion, the electrical actuation of the metadevices was not achieved. Neverthe­
less, an optical holder was designed and fabricated that potentially can drive the actua­
tion. The demonstration of structural colors is confirmed from the simulation and individual
measurements. Spectroscopic measurements of static suspended nanowires, of same
dimensions (w=400 nm, h=200 nm) but with difference in their separation gap exhibited
scattering plots with different characteristic. This result is positive towards the demon­
stration of tunable resonances in the visible range using the suspended silicon beam pair
device. Modelling of beam pair or (w=h=200 nm), and deviating the gap from 200 nm to
zero, confirmed the change in the scattered signal in the visible range.
Electrically tunable structural colors
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Alex Krasnok et al. “Towards all­dielectric metamaterials and nanophotonics”. In:
Proceedings of SPIE ­ The International Society for Optical Engineering 9502 (Mar.
2015). DOI: 10.1117/12.2176880.
[2]
Yuri Kivshar and Andrey Miroshnichenko. “Meta­optics with Mie resonances”. In:
Optics and Photonics News 28.1 (2017), pp. 24–31.
[3]
Zhaogang Dong et al. “Printing beyond sRGB color gamut by mimicking silicon
nanostructures in free­space”. In: Nano letters 17.12 (2017), pp. 7620–7628.
[4]
Manukumara Manjappa et al. “Reconfigurable MEMS Fano metasurfaces with multiple­
input–output states for logic operations at terahertz frequencies”. In: Nature com­
munications 9.1 (2018), pp. 1–10.
[5]
Mohsen Rahmani et al. “Reversible thermal tuning of all­dielectric metasurfaces”.
In: Advanced Functional Materials 27.31 (2017), p. 1700580.
[6]
Jingyi Tian et al. “Reconfigurable all­dielectric antenna­based metasurface driven
by multipolar resonances”. In: Opt. Express 26.18 (Sept. 2018), pp. 23918–23925.
DOI: 10.1364/OE.26.023918. URL: http://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-
26-18-23918.
[7]
Qian Wang et al. “Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based
on phase change materials”. In: Nature photonics 10.1 (2016), pp. 60–65.
[8]
Longqing Cong et al. “All­optical active THz metasurfaces for ultrafast polarization
switching and dynamic beam splitting”. In: Light: Science & Applications 7.1 (2018),
pp. 1–9.
[9]
Lei Chen et al. “Dual­manipulation on wave­front based on reconfigurable water­
based metasurface integrated with PIN diodes”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 125.2
(2019), p. 023107.
[10]
Ke Chen et al. A Reconfigurable Active Huygens’ Metalens. 2017. DOI: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1702.01920. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.01920.
[11]
Zuojia Wang et al. “Origami­based reconfigurable metamaterials for tunable chiral­
ity”. In: Advanced materials 29.27 (2017), p. 1700412.
[12]
Jeremy B Reeves et al. “Tunable infrared metasurface on a soft polymer scaffold”.
In: Nano Letters 18.5 (2018), pp. 2802–2806.
[13]
Craig F Bohren and Donald R Huffman. Absorption and scattering of light by small
particles. John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[14]
Andrey Bogdanov. “Mie Theory”. conference lecture slides. METANANO 2020, V
International Conference on Metamaterials and Nanophotonics, 2020.
[15]
Artyom Assadillayev. “Electron energy­loss spectroscopy of reconfigurable meta­
atoms”. PhD dissertation. Technical University of Denmark, DTU, 2022.
[16]
Patrick E Landreman et al. “Fabry­Perot description for Mie resonances of rect­
angular dielectric nanowire optical resonators”. In: Optics Express 24.26 (2016),
pp. 29760–29772.
[17]
RK Mongia. “Theoretical and experimental resonant frequencies of rectangular di­
electric resonators”. In: IEE proceedings H (microwaves, antennas and propaga­
tion). Vol. 139. 1. IET. 1992, pp. 98–104.
[18]
Peter R Wiecha et al. “Strongly directional scattering from dielectric nanowires”. In:
ACS photonics 4.8 (2017), pp. 2036–2046.
Electrically tunable structural colors
41
==PAGE:52==
[19]
Yuanyuan Tian et al. “An Individual Nanocube­Based Plasmonic Biosensor for Real­
Time Monitoring the Structural Switch of the Telomeric G­Quadruplex”. In: Small
12.21 (2016), pp. 2913–2920.
[20]
Pinelopi Olgana Konstantinopoulou. “Investigation of Au layers on APTMS deposited
using various recipes”. special course report. Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
2022.
42
Electrically tunable structural colors
==PAGE:53==
A
Pogo pin
Figure A.1: pogo pin
Electrically tunable structural colors
43
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
