==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Digitalisation and environmental sus-
tainability - impacts and policy needs
Carlo Scognamiglio (s223778)
Gianluigi Esposito (s223779)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to growing energy needs and changing consumer expectations, the energy
sector has become more complex, competitive and unpredictable. Energy com-
panies can overcome these challenges and improve their sustainability through
the inclusion of new digital technologies. In fact, there is talk of digitalization
of the energy sector. There are various studies that explore various aspects
of digital technologies including their use in the energy sector and the bene-
fits that they bring. However, there are gaps in the literature regarding their
impacts on environmental sustainability and sustainability metrics to assess
them. This research fills these gaps by studying reports, empirical and re-
view studies. Based on a content analysis of 48 articles and 43 reports and
news, the term digitalization is initially clarified. Subsequently, the main dig-
ital technologies adopted by the energy sector were catalogued (Internet of
Things, Artificial Itelligence, Big Data, Blockchain and Cloud Computing),
extensively described and their impacts, both positive and negative, explored.
As there is a significant lack of precision in the arguments, the study focuses
on the impacts and metrics for evaluating the data centers, a digital technol-
ogy that is the basis of those already argued and also it is the causes of 1% of
the world’s energy consumption and 2.3% of the world’s GHG emissions. The
study concludes with a discussion of policies and their shortcomings in ensur-
ing a sustainable digital transition. Specifically, it emerges that Europe does
not yet have an adaptable regulatory framework for all digital technologies to
quantify the negative effects on environmental sustainability, especially in the
energy sector. This offers new insights for the identification and quantifica-
tion of these negative impacts and the development of policies that are able
to contain and mitigate them.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Technology, Manage-
ment and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of
the requirements for acquiring a Master degree in Management Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, September 13, 2022
Carlo Scognamiglio (s223778)
Gianluigi Esposito (s223779)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Main objectives of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Guide for the reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Power system overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Need for sustainability and need for digitalization . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
European Green Deal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
17 Sustainable Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Energy transition: the phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
19
4
Digital Technologies in energy sector
25
4.1
Internet of Things
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Big Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Cloud Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in en-
ergy sector
41
5.1
The concept of sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Impact of digital technologies of the energy sector
. . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.3
Negative impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Environmental sustainability metrics are used in the literature
55
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Datacenter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Datacenter impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.4
Impacts of Digital Technologies on environmental sustainability
60
6.5
The concept of Green Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.6
Rebound effect of Datacenter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.7
Digital transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Policies suggested
65
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
The roll of policies in sustainable energy transition . . . . . . .
69
7.3
Use of data centers for improved statistics . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.4
Recommendations pertaining to the energy transition
. . . . .
72
8
Conclusions and future works
75
List of Figures
77
List of Tables
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In addition to desiring a more reliable and less priced energy source, customers
expect their energy suppliers to provide better sustainability, dependability,
simplicity of use, customisation, and control. As a result of the increasing
need for energy and the altering expectations of consumers, the energy sector
has become more complex, competitive, and unpredictable. Energy firms may
overcome these challenges and enhance their sustainability through digital
transformation and the inclusion of new digital technology. Utilizing digital
technology enables the optimization of the operation of renewable and other
energy sources, hence enhancing their eﬀiciency and dependability.
In light of this energy transformation, the idea of digitalization, particularly
in the energy industry, will be clarified.
Currently, considerable research has been undertaken on digital technologies
and sustainable energy development, but its scope and depth are insuﬀicient.
Regarding the implications of digital technologies on sustainable energy devel-
opment, relatively few research have provided a comprehensive analysis, and
even fewer are empirical investigations. Most researches have measured the de-
gree of digital technologies using a single indicator or have focused on a certain
area of sustainable energy development, resulting in erroneous conclusions.
The possibility of impediments to energy sustainability have therefore been
questioned. Increasing data makes the use of digital technology necessary to
avoid insuﬀicient information and insecure decisions. The integration of all
stakeholders is crucial for the functioning of the complex energy system of the
future. Digital technology can increase the eﬀiciency and longevity of energy
systems. As early as the 1970s, the development of digital technology facil-
itated the operation of the grid for the energy sector. Recent developments
in digital technologies are redefining the end-use model of energy (transport,
buildings, industry, etc.), transforming the business model of energy supply
(coal, oil, gas, electricity, etc.) and fostering deeper market integration across
energy boundaries (renewables versus grid, residents versus consumers, etc.).
Although digital technologies have the capacity and potential to promote en-
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
ergy sustainability through increased eﬀiciency, they also present new obsta-
cles.
Despite the fact that digital technology can provide enormous benefits, it also
offers serious challenges to energy sustainability. Regardless of the increasing
amount of research on the broad implications of digitalization, it remains
diﬀicult to understand the effects of digital technology on energy sustainability.
As digital technology becomes an increasingly important component of the
energy system, a rigorous examination of these consequences is essential.
The dynamic and nuanced effects on sustainability are very important to con-
tribute new information to the existing body of knowledge.
1.1
Main objectives of the study
The contribution of the research is a better understanding of methods for
assessing the impacts of digital technologies on sustainability, including the
cataloguing of models, frameworks and indicators, as well as a discussion of
the various perspectives on the topic over the past decade.
A general overview of the existing power system and the main European poli-
cies inherent in its transition is proposed in order to give a greater awareness
of the issue to introduce the concept of digitalization.
The main digital technologies will be catalogued and functionalities in the
power sector will be explained.
Next, the impacts, both positive and negative, on the environmental sustain-
ability of these technologies will be considered and then focus on the one
considered of greatest importance, namely the data center, the cause of 1% of
the planet’s entire energy demand and of 2.3% of greenhouse gas emissions.
Given the impacts and metrics used in research and case studies, existing
policies will be examined to analyze measures to mitigate these effects from
the European Union.
1.2
Thesis contribution
This work offers more contributions to the scientific community:
1. The first is greater clarity of the energy transition and in particular of
the digitalization of the energy sector.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Guide for the reader
3
2. The second is a cataloging of the main digital technologies adopted by
the current energy sector to improve its eﬀiciency and an exploration of
their impact on environmental sustainability.
3. The third is a review of evaluative metrics of the impacts of digital
technologies in the sustainable sphere.
4. The fourth is an assessment of the gaps found in the policies adopted by
the European Union on assessing the impacts of digital technologies in
the energy sector.
1.3
Guide for the reader
Figure 1.1: Guide for the reader.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
This section provides an overview of the five different chapters that comprise
the thesis.
Chapter 1 presents an introduction to the subject of energy sustainability
and how digital technologies, to the extent that they may be regarded as
sotenible, impact environmental sustainability by highlighting the lack and
inaccuracy of literature-based knowledge.
Chapter 2 presents an overview of the current state of the energy sector and
examines the concept of digitalization within the energy sector.
The purpose of Chapter 3 is to explain the methods employed in the re-
search, with a focus on the rise in the number of papers published after the
development of the European Green Deal.
Chapter 4 catalogues and analyses the digital technologies employed by the
energy sector, stressing the impact of enhanced energy eﬀiciency and improved
demand forecasts.
After establishing the concept of sustainability and focusing on the pillar of en-
vironmental sustainability, the Chapter 5 analyses the positive and negative
impacts of different technologies on environmental sustainability.
The Chapter 6 discusses the fundamental digital technology, the data centre,
and investigates its sustainability metrics in the literature.
The Chapter 7 provides an overview of European policy regarding not only
the trend and support of digitalization advancement, but also the selected
sustainability indicators.
The last chapter shows not just a dearth of research on impacts and metrics
with imprecise, if not erroneous, interpretations, but also a lack of specificity
in policies that are not sector-specific.There are also suggestions for future
developments in this area.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Power system overview
Thomas Edison planned and built the first electricity grid in New York in
1882, which was far smaller than current systems, both in terms of the data
generated and the following processing and analysis required. In the last cen-
tury, and especially during the second half of the 20th century, the worldwide
need for primary energy has increased dramatically. In the past seventy years,
humankind’s energy consumption has more than quintupled, maintaining eco-
nomic and population expansion through an energy system mostly centred on
the usage of fossil fuels, which remain the primary source of energy worldwide.
The production of energy from fossil fuels is one of the primary contributors
to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (including CO2), which are widely
acknowledged as the cause of significant environmental and climate impacts,
such as the increase in the global average temperature and the intensification of
catastrophic natural events. Global warming induced by humans is currently
projected to be approximately 1°C, with an increasing trend of +0.2°C each
decade.[1]
To be able to characterise the transition to which the energy system is suscep-
tible, we began with the energy system’s general description and functioning,
which is as follows:
Figure 2.1: Traditional electricity grid [2].
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Background
The energy system begins precisely where electricity is generated. Coal or
natural gas-fired thermal power stations, hydroelectric dams, and nuclear re-
actors are typically constructed in remote locations, distant from customers,
and are normally positioned near to the energy source.
Transmission System Operators (TSOs) lines provide the delivery of energy
from power plants to customers with increased eﬀiciency, reduced prices, and
less losses, particularly over long distances. However, there is a significant
issue: power generators create low voltage energy.
Therefore, the output
voltage must be boosted using step-up transformers and then reduced to safe
low voltage levels with step-down transformers before being supplied to the
distribution network.
Distribution System Operators (DSOs) are the last type of electrical grid; they
begin after the step-up transformer and where transmission lines finish. At the
final destination, electricity is acquired from primary and secondary customers.
It is feasible to produce a coordinated, dependable, and cost-effective energy
grid able to satisfy current and anticipated future demands via the use of
proper management and planning tools.
The traditional electricity grid had a limited structure that could only trans-
fer electricity from distant, large power plants to consumers, allowing only
one-way communication and energy exchange infrastructure, limited energy
storage capacity, and passive loads. Nevertheless, it is evident that the mod-
ern energy system has evolved into a complex energy architecture, given the
technological revolutions that have developed on both the supply and demand
sides. Over the past decade, an improvement on the supply side has been ac-
celerating: RES-based distributed generating units and lighter generators (e.g.
gas turbines) have replaced huge synchronous generators in widespread usage.
On the demand side of the energy grid, prosumers (consumers who also have
on-site production facilities) and the variety of equipment pose significant un-
certainty. However, with demand response (DR) programs, load-based energy
reduction flexibility may be utilized.
In addition, a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system
has been created as an industrial automation system to boost energy eﬀiciency
while simultaneously reducing extra expenses by continuously monitoring sys-
tem parameters.
However, these quick changes/transformations are having a significant influ-
ence on the electrical system, sparking a great deal of debate due to rising
security concerns; doubts have also been raised regarding the capacity of our
present power infrastructures.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Power system overview
7
Figure 2.2: Smart electricity grid [2].
In order to define smart grids, firms have begun integrating ICT (Informa-
tion and Communication Technology) into their technologies. This improves
the grid’s eﬀiciency, resilience, and intelligence, but security, privacy, data
storage, and analysis must also be addressed (more on this later). The EU’s
conceptual definition of a smart grid is as follows: “A smart grid is an electric-
ity network that can intelligently integrate the actions of all users connected
to it; generators, consumers and those that do both in order to eﬀiciently
deliver sustainable, economic and secure electricity supplies”.
Traditional energy networks now contain varying degrees of intelligence due
to the implementation of smart grids. Unlike traditional grids, which focused
on the production and distribution of electricity, smart grids deal with a dif-
ferent set of aspects, such as the reliability of the energy supply, the effective
management of demand, and the integration of renewable sources into the
grid, all of which have been achieved by integrating a vast array of sensing
mechanisms into the grid, particularly in the final portion of distribution to
the customer. In terms of data analysis, only load, voltage, and current data
are gathered in conventional systems. This data is then analysed manually
or with low-end tools, which slows down the process and allows for extremely
restricted analysis.
Smart grids, on the other hand, acquire a vast quantity of real-time data
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Background
for intelligent analysis as a result of the installation of smart metres and an
extended sensor system. This enables remote network control, particularly
for the management and prediction of problems and malfunctions, hence in-
creasing the network’s reliability. Given the vast amount of data to be kept
and analysed at this time, Big Data Analytics technologies are created, in
particular Big Energy Data, to address dependability challenges, with privacy
and security concerns as a result. All of this is summed up by the notion of
the European Green Deal (EGD) [3], which refers to the abandoning of tradi-
tional energy sources in favour of renewable energy sources. This is nothing
less than a strategy to develop a sustainable European economy based on the
problems of battling climate change and protecting the natural environment
for EU member states.[4, 5]
2.2
Need for sustainability and need for
digitalization
For the scenario defined, therefore, one of the goals is to make the energy sector
sustainable in order to cope with the climate emergency. This also includes
the need to digitalize the sector itself so that production and distribution can
be made more eﬀicient and optimised, reducing waste and thus the resulting
impact in terms of emissions.
2.3
European Green Deal
The European Green Deal (EGD), which was unveiled in December 2019 by
the European Commission, intends to cut carbon emissions by 55 percent by
2030 and reach carbon neutrality by 2050.[6]
Generally speaking, it is a strategy of the European Commission to address
climate change by a defined set of focused activities. By 2050, Europe will no
longer be required to produce net greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, the
development paradigm as a whole will need to alter in order to detach economic
growth from the ineﬀicient use of resources. This is a massive undertaking
that will effect tens of millions of people and on which all major European
institutions will spend years working. Europe will be the first continent to
attain climate neutrality if the accord is implemented.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 European Green Deal
9
The European Green Deal envisions activities to increase resource eﬀiciency
by transitioning to a clean, circular, and sustainable economy. The approach
is described through certain sectors, which may be condensed into a few broad
categories:
• investing in ecologically responsible technology
• promoting innovation in industry
• promoting greener, more affordable, and healthier private and public
modes of transportation
• carbon reduction in the energy industry
• achieving better building energy eﬀiciency
• collaborate with foreign partners to enhance global environmental regu-
lations
Figure 2.3: The overarching aim of the European Green Deal [3].
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Background
The first and most important step will be to clean up energy generation, which
now accounts for 75% of greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union.
This will mostly be accomplished through expanding the use of renewable
energy and discentivizing the usage of fossil fuels.
This will be especially
problematic for nations in the East, where the usage of renewable energy is
still rather restricted.
The presentation of the 2030 Climate Targets Plan was a significant mile-
stone, since it establishes a first set of intermediate goals to be attained over
a ten-year period. The climate change challenge for Europe is to increase the
target reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 from the present 40%
below 1990 levels to at least 55%. Recently, the Commission has considered
increasing the tax rate to 60%. The only option to keep the global tempera-
ture increase below 1.5°C relative to pre-industrial levels is to revise the 2030
climate target upwards. [3]
2.4
17 Sustainable Development Goals
To the contribution of the European Green Deal must be added that of the
17 Sustainable Development Goals (or Global Goals). Adopted by all United
Nations Member States in 2015, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop-
ment presents a blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet,
now and in the future. At its core precisely are the 17 Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDGs), which are an urgent call to action for all nations, both
developed and developing, in a global partnership.
They know that eradi-
cating poverty and other deprivations must go hand in hand with initiatives
that promote health and education, decrease inequality, and stimulate eco-
nomic growth, all while addressing climate change and preserving our seas
and forests.[7] The Sustainable Development Goals are the following:
• Goal 1: Eliminate all types of global poverty
• Goal 2: Eliminating hunger, achieving food security, enhancing nutri-
tion, and promoting sustainable agriculture
• Goal 3: Guarantee the health and well-being of all people of all ages
• Goal 4: Provide quality, inclusive, and equitable learning opportunities
for everyone
• Goal 5: Achieve gender parity and empower all women and girls
==PAGE:19==
2.4 17 Sustainable Development Goals
11
• Goal 6: Ensure that all people have sustainable access to water and
sanitation
• Goal 7: Ensure universal access to cheap, sustainable, dependable, and
modern energy systems
• Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth,
productive employment, and decent work for everyone
• Goal 9: Construct a resilient infrastructure and encourage innovation
and equitable, responsible, and sustainable industrialization
• Goal 10: Reduce inequality inside and between countries
• Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, secure, resilient,
and sustainable
• Goal 12: Ensure sustainable production and consumption trends
• Goal 13: Take immediate action to address the effects of climate change
• Goal 14: Conserve and utilise oceans, seas, and marine resources re-
sponsibly for sustainable development
• Goal 15:
Protect, restore, and promote the sustainable use of the
planet’s ecosystems; sustainably manage forests; battle desertification;
halt and reverse land degradation; and prevent the loss of biological
diversity
• Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable de-
velopment; give access to justice for everyone and establish at all levels
effective, responsible, and inclusive bodies
• Goal 17: Strengthen implementation mechanisms and revitalise the
global partnership for sustainable development
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.4: 17 Sustainable Development Goals [7].
The research takes into account the new technological infrastructures applied
to Renewable Energy Sources (RES) as a result of the modern energy tran-
sition away from fossil fuels, affecting not only the energy sector but also
others, with a particular emphasis on policies to be adopted by EU nations.
Therefore,the study pursues the following goals:
7 Affordable and Clean Energy
9 Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure
11 Sustainable Cities and COmmunities
12 Responsible Consumption and Production
13 Climate Action
17 Partnerships for the Goals
To achieve these objectives, the primary tool is the energy transition, or the
move from an energy mix dominated by fossil fuels to one with low or zero
carbon emissions, based on renewable sources.
2.5
Energy transition: the phases
The move away from the present global energy system is crucial. Current en-
ergy systems are unsustainable according to all social, economic, and environ-
mental factors, making the necessity for the next energy transition painfully
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Energy transition: the phases
13
evident. The future of energy systems is a significant policy concern for in-
dustrialised nations.[8]
Neither private markets nor government institutions appear capable of fos-
tering a shift on their own. In addition, the move to newer, cleaner energy
systems, such as renewable energy sources or electric cars, frequently neces-
sitates considerable changes in governmental restrictions, tariffs and pricing
schemes, user and adopter behaviour, and technology. Consequently, the rate
at which a transition might occur (its timing or time dynamics) is an essential
factor to consider.
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) [9], if “action to reduce
CO2 emissions is not taken before 2017, all the allowable CO2 emissions would
be locked-in by energy infrastructure existing at that time”. In other words,
it may be too late if the change does not occur fast or soon. This “climate
dilemma” is characterised as the reality that by the time mankind realises
how important it is to convert to low-carbon types of energy, the point of no
return will have passed. The concept of “energy transition” is at the centre of
this contentious debate.
The energy transition may be characterised as a particularly substantial set of
changes in a society’s energy consumption patterns, with possible ramifications
for resources, carriers, converters, and services. In other words, according to
proponents of this definition, an energy transition is the period between the
introduction of a new main energy source or prime mover and its climb to
claim a considerable portion of the market.
According to one theory, energy transformations take a staggering amount of
time to complete. All energy transitions have one thing in common: they
take decades to complete, and the larger the volume of current usage and
conversions, the longer the replacements will take. Rapid transitions, when
they occur, are anomalies, confined to nations with relatively tiny populations
or to exceptional contextual conditions that are unlikely to be duplicated
elsewhere.
Another viewpoint suggests the contrary. Extending the subject beyond basic
national sources of energy supply and considerable changes in their composi-
tion, it implies that there have been several quick transitions on various sizes
and involving various aspects, including fuels, services, and end-use devices.
That is, within a few years to a decade, or one generation.[10]
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Background
2.5.1
The modern phase of energy transition
Therefore, the current energy transition is predicated on the substitution of
fossil fuels with renewable energy sources (RES). 90% of current CO2 emissions
originate from the burning of fossil fuels, mostly for energy generation.[11]
In actuality, it is not an instantaneous process, as it involves a drastic trans-
formation of the whole energy sector, i.e. the electrification of systems such
as transportation and heating, as well as a significant increase in the usage of
energy storage devices.
In addition, the introduction and incorporation of RES is not simple. In fact,
the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) proposed the notion
of the “3 D’s” (decarbonization, decentralization, and digitalization) with the
conclusion that digitalization aids electrification and decentralization in the
energy industry.
2.5.2
Decarbonization
Introduced by the Green New Deal, decarbonization is a term intimately asso-
ciated with the harmful emissions (particularly carbon dioxide and methane)
from the usage of energy derived from coal, gas, and oil. To lessen the harm-
ful consequences of our energy systems on the environment, it is necessary to
engage on a route whose principal players are:
• Renewable energy
• Energy conservation
• Electrification
It is precisely the combination of these three acts that gives rise to the idea
of decarbonization.
Recall that approximately two-thirds of worldwide greenhouse gas emissions
are attributable to the use of fossil fuels (oil, gas, and coal) for energy needs,
including heating, power production, transportation, and industry.
It was precisely this circumstance that necessitated serious action to reduce
emissions from the use of fossil fuels, a process known as decarbonization.
In a technical sense, the word refers to the “down over time of the ratio between
a country’s emissions and its energy consumption during the same period.”
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Energy transition: the phases
15
Decarbonizing our energy system will allow us to reduce CO2 emissions by
2050 and put us on track to limit global warming below +1.5°C by the end of
the century.
Failure to do so would expose the planet and all living species to spectacular
and catastrophic disasters, such as flooding caused by rising sea levels and
melting glaciers, as well as food and water shortages.[12]
2.5.3
Decentralization
To introduce the notion of decentralization, we must analyse the four essential
areas of the power system, namely:
• Production: every nation has big power facilities that produce en-
ergy, the majority of which are privately owned and utilise nonrenewable
sources. Through international grid connections, the portion of power
that is not produced locally is purchased and imported from overseas.
• Transmission: the Transmission Operator System (TSO) oversees en-
ergy flows in the national grid by continually balancing supply and de-
mand, hence preventing grid issues. The produced energy is injected
into the grid through high voltage before being controlled and delivered
by the TSO via storage and transformer stations.
• Distribution: unlike the TSO, which is often a public monopoly, Distri-
bution System Operators (DSOs) can be private and many. DSOs are re-
sponsible for energy distribution and administer the primary (HV/MV)
and secondary (MV/LV) substations, as well as the ultimate low-voltage
(LV) section of the concession-based electrical system.
Thus, energy
from the other line is changed to a different voltage in order to better
serve the various sorts of customers.
• Utility: Ultimately, power reaches the utilities and, by extension, the
various sectors, such as residential, industrial, etc.
The electricity flows essentially follow a linear and highly centralised motion,
moving vertically from large production plants to individual consumers; con-
versely, the data flows retrace the energy chain to provide the TSO with the
information required to balance the network in conjunction with the produc-
tion data.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Background
The just-described plan is undergoing a significant paradigm shift. The en-
ergy system is becoming progressively permeated by distributed generation,
or small-scale power generation that is scattered over the area and directly
connected to the distribution network. Increasing percentages of renewable
sources are contributing to this dispersed generation. In reality, the high rate
of investment in renewables has made these technologies accessible to a far
broader audience, who is increasingly concerned with energy independence.
2.5.4
Digitalization
It is very important for our work to be clear about the digitalization, in this
regard, the first distinction to make is between digitization and digitalization;
the distinctions between the two are evident and significant.
The term “digitised” denotes a transition from an analogue to a digital phase,
which indicates that data has been converted from analogue to digital and that
the organisation has had to adjust its procedures to the change by adopting
an ERP system, for instance. Digital, on the other hand, entails a birth and
development in a fully digital “mode” and structuring one’s business model
accordingly. Using the work of Peter et al. and adding certain definitions,
a table including the multiple meanings of digitisation, digitalization, and
digital is shown below.[13]
Therefore, the following are an entirely new set of definitions of digitalization.
According to [17], digitalization is defined as “the act of acquiring, editing/us-
ing, and storing analogue information on digital data storage devices,” whereas
digital transformation is defined as the deployment of digital technology. In
addition, the International Energy Agency (IEA) notes that “digitalization
reflects the expanding use of ICT and may be seen as the confluence of the
digital and physical worlds.”[18]
The German Association of Energy and Water Industries’ study titled “The
digital energy sector” [19] states that ”digitalization in the energy industry
is defined as the network of internet-based applications, processes, and equip-
ment.” Another definition describes digitization as “the transformation from
analogue to digital form”.[20]
Unlike digitization, however, digitalization does not have a single unambiguous
definition, but rather encompasses a broader range of concepts.
Digitalization refers to the reorganisation of many domains of social life around
digital communication and media infrastructures. According to Gartner’s glos-
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Energy transition: the phases
17
Authors
Construct
Definitions
[14]
Digitization
“the increasing use of digital technologies for
connecting people, systems, companies,product
and services”
[15]
Digitization
“the action or process of digitizing; the conversion
of analogue data (esp. in later use images,
video, and text) into digital form”
[15]
Digitization
“the material process of converting analog
streams of information into digital bits”
[16]
Digitiazion
“digitization involves standardizing business
processes and is associated with cost cutting
and operational excellence”
[15]
Digitalization
“the adoption or increase in use of digital
or computer technology by an organization,
industry, country, etc.”
[15]
Digitalization
“the way many domains of social life are
restructured around digital communication
and media infrastructures”
[16]
Digital
“to become digital, leaders must articulate
a visionary digital value proposition. This
value must reassess how digital technologies
and information can enhance an organization’s
existing assets and capabilities to create new
customer value”
Table 2.1: Definitions and their authors.
sary [21], digitalization is the use of digital technologies to alter a business
model and create new revenue-generating and value-creating opportunities.
In conclusion, digitalization is the incorporation of digital technology into
daily life. The digitization of information allows for this type of integration.
In this case, the research points to the term digitalization because the en-
ergy system, which has been developed since 1882, must transition from a
completely analogue data management system to a digital data management
system in order to combat the environmental cause, reduce energy waste, and
achieve the most effective peak management possible.
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Background
it is possible to consider the definition issued by the German Association of
Energy and Water Industries to be the most applicable to our field of appli-
cation as the study aims at an understanding of digital tencologies and their
interconnection in order to then be able to assess their impacts. According to
this definition, digitisation in the energy sector is described as “the network
of Internet-based applications, processes, and equipment.”
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
We initially conducted a systematic literature review based on a 4-step pro-
cedure. First, a comprehensive database was considered to select previous
studies. The next step included the presentation of the descriptive analysis.
Then, to investigate the proposed questions, a complete overview was pre-
sented in the introduction. In the final stage, the extracted materials were
evaluated.
Subsequently, the references, reports, various case studies and websites were
considered and integrated into the research for a greater understanding of the
problem and to obtain a comprehensive view of the challenges to be faced in
the coming years.
Scopus, known as the most comprehensive scientific database, was chosen for
the literature search. For the definition of the search, we used the combina-
tions of “sustainability”,“environmental”, “eﬀiciency”, “digitalization” (and
the words associated with it), “technology” and “energy sector” that were
analysed via the database.
We then focused mostly on articles from English-language journals and espe-
cially on articles with content that corresponded to the scope of the following
study, finding 1999 articles and entire books. Therefore, other areas inves-
tigating barriers and performance were excluded. After limiting the search
to the years running from 2012 to 2022 (last decade), checking abstracts, ti-
tles and eliminating duplicate sources, the initial search yielded 43 articles,
including review articles and original research papers. The content of these
references was checked considering the application of digital technologies in
the energy sector.
We thus obtained 48 articles, added another 43 mentions between reports and
news, and finally obtained 91 references.
The general trend of publications in the field has shown an increase in pub-
lications since 2015, probably due to the awareness of climate issues and the
definition of the SDGs by the United Nation in the same year. In fact, almost
70% of the papers were published after 2015 (Figure 1.4).
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Methodology
Figure 3.1: Number of papers published per year.
In the first instance we went to analyze the trend of publications per year
(Figure 2.1). As can be seen, the trend is strongly increasing with a sharp
surge since 2015 as there was both increased awareness of the climate problem
and the establishment of the SDGs in the same year.
Next we evaluated the composition of the pool according to the different types
of documents found.
Figure 2.2 shows that 62% were part of the article
category followed at 9% by book. Below is the exact composition of the pool
(Figure 1.5, Figure 1.6, Table 1.1).
Figure 3.2: Document types in the dataset.
==PAGE:29==
3 Methodology
21
Document type
%
Article
61,83%
Book
9,15%
Book Chapter
6,05%
Conference Paper
2,95%
Editorial
0,10%
Note
0,25%
Review
19,46%
Short Survey
0,20%
Table 3.1: % of Document types in the dataset.
Analysing the publishers of the articles, it can be seen that an important share
of the articles in the pool were published by Elsevier Ltd; the second most
present publisher is MPDI AG.
Figure 3.3: Document types in the dataset.
Then analyzing the publishers of the articles, it can be seen that an important
slice of the articles in the pool were published by Elsevier Ltd; the second
most present publisher is MPDI AG. (Table 1.2, Figure 1.7)
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Methodology
Publishers
N° of papers
Elsevier Ltd
481
MPDI AG
132
Elsevier B.V.
124
MDPI
84
Taylor and Francis
45
Elsevier Inc.
39
Springer Science and Business
Media Deutschland GmbH
37
Springer
33
Table 3.2: Number of papers per publisher.
Figure 3.4: Number of papers per publisher.
Finally, the last analysis carried out concerns the keywords found, which touch
on all the topics covered and are in line with the search carried out. The
keyword most frequently found is “renewable energy” followed by “energy
transition” and “climate change”. Figure 1.8 and Table 1.3 show the most
frequently found keywords.
==PAGE:31==
3 Methodology
23
Figure 3.5: Number of the most found keywords.
Renewable energy
23
Energy transition
11
Climate change
8
Machine Learning
7
Energy policy
7
Energy eﬀiciency
6
Energy
6
Internet of things
6
Energy sector
6
Sustainability
4
Decarbonization
4
Table 3.3: Number of the most found keywords.
==PAGE:32==
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Digital Technologies in
energy sector
The sort of service that consumers anticipate from their energy suppliers is
evolving. In addition to desiring a safer and less expensive source of energy,
customers also want their energy suppliers to provide more sustainability, re-
liability, ease, customization, and control. Consequently, the increasing de-
mand for energy and shifting customer expectations have made the energy
sector more complicated, competitive, and uncertain. Through digital trans-
formation and the incorporation of new digital technologies, energy firms may
overcome these obstacles and improve their sustainability. Utilizing digital
technology permits the optimization of the operation of renewable and other
energy sources, hence enhancing their eﬀiciency and dependability. Therefore,
there are several methods to categorise these digital applications.
Specifically, the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) [22] has
recognised the following types of digital technologies as crucial to increasing
the use of renewable energy:
• Internet of things (IoT)
• Artificial intelligence e Big Data
• Blockchain
Wenjing Lyu and Jin Liu [23] include the following as emerging digital tech-
nologies affecting the energy sector:
• Robotics
• Cloud computing
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
4.1
Internet of Things
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a significant issue in the technology sector,
engineering, and policy circles, and has become a major topic of discussion
in both the specialised and general press. This technology is implemented in
a vast array of networked goods, systems, and sensors that offer previously
unattainable capabilities by leveraging advances in computer power, electron-
ics downsizing, and network linkages.
Numerous conferences, publications,
and news stories explore and debate the potential effects of the “Internet
of Things” revolution, from new market prospects and business models to
security, privacy, and technical interoperability problems.
The widespread
deployment of IoT devices has the potential to revolutionise several parts of
our lives. New Internet of Things (IoT) goods, such as Internet-enabled ap-
pliances, home automation components, and energy management devices, are
advancing the concept of the ”smart home” by providing users with enhanced
security and energy eﬀiciency.
Other personal IoT gadgets, such as wearable fitness and health monitoring
devices and network-enabled medical equipment, are reshaping how healthcare
services are delivered. IoT solutions such as networked automobiles, intelligent
traﬀic systems, and sensors embedded in roads and bridges bring us closer to
the concept of ”smart cities,” which reduce congestion and energy usage. IoT
technology has the potential to revolutionise agriculture, manufacturing, and
energy production and distribution by boosting the availability of information
along the entire value chain by means of networked sensors. However, the
Internet of Things poses several concerns and obstacles that must be evaluated
and handled before its advantages can be realised.[24]
British technology pioneer Kevin Ashton coined the phrase “Internet of Things”
(IoT) in 1999 to envision a system in which actual things may be connected
to the Internet via sensors. Ashton created the phrase to describe the capabil-
ity of linking Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) tags13 used in business
supply chains to the Internet in order to automatically count and track items.
The Internet of Things has become a popular phrase for characterising situ-
ations in which Internet connectivity and computer power are extended to a
range of objects, devices, sensors, and ordinary items.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Internet of Things
27
4.1.1
Definitions of IoT
Definition of IoT
Reference
Internet of Thing” (IoT) denotes a trend where a large number of
embedded devices employ communication services offered by the
Internet protocols. Many of these devices, often called “smart
objects”, are not directly operated by humans, but exist as
components in buildings or vehicles, or are spread out in the
environment.
[25]
A global infrastructure for the information society, enabling
advanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual)
things based on existing and evolving interoperable information
and communication technologies.
[26]
The interconnection via the Internet of computing devices
embedded in everyday objects, enabling them to send and receive
data.
[27]
Table 4.1: Definitions of IoT.
The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) begins RFC 7452,33 [25], with this
description: The term “Internet of Thing” (IoT) denotes a trend where a
large number of embedded devices employ communication services offered by
the Internet protocols. Many of these devices, often called “smart objects”,
are not directly operated by humans, but exist as components in buildings or
vehicles, or are spread out in the environment”. Published in 2012, the Interna-
tional Telecommunication Union (ITU) ITU–T [26], 36 discusses the concept
of interconnectivity “Internet of things” (IoT): “A global infrastructure for the
information society, enabling advanced services by interconnecting (physical
and virtual) things based on existing and evolving interoperable information
and communication technologies.” The Oxford Dictionaries offers a concise
definition of the IoT [27] :
“Internet of things: The interconnection via the Internet of computing devices
embedded in everyday objects, enabling them to send and receive data.”
All of the definitions describe scenarios in which network connectivity and
computing capability extend to a constellation of objects, devices, sensors,
and everyday items that are not ordinarily considered to be “computers”; this
allows the devices to generate, exchange, and consume data, often with min-
imal human intervention. The various definitions of IoT do not necessarily
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
disagree – rather they emphasize different aspects of the IoT phenomenon
from different focal points and use cases.
4.2
Artificial Intelligence
The objective of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is to comprehend intelligence
and create intelligent systems. However, the methodologies and formalisms
employed to achieve this objective are not well established, resulting in AI’s
current diversity of subdisciplines. The challenge of an introductory AI course
is communicating as many branches as possible without sacrificing too much
depth and precision.
4.2.1
Definitions of Artificial Intelligence
With so many ad hoc definitions, it becomes challenging to describe artificial
intelligence or AI in a simple and solid manner. John McCarthy [28] , one of
the AI’s pioneers, was the first person to characterise artificial intelligence as
follows: “The goal of AI is to develop machines that behave as though they
were intelligent.”
In the Encyclopedia Britannica [29] one finds a Definition that goes like:
“AI is the ability of digital computers or computer-controlled robots to solve
problems that are normally associated with the higher intellectual processing
capabilities of humans …”
However, this definition also has flaws.
It would concede, for instance,
that a computer with a large memory that can store a lengthy text and re-
trieve it on demand demonstrates intelligence, as the memorization of lengthy
texts can certainly be regarded as a higher intellectual processing ability of
humans, as can, for instance, the rapid multiplication of two 20-digit numbers.
Consequently, based on this definition, every computer is an AI system.
This diﬀiculty is easily resolved by Elaine Rich’s following definition [30]:
“Artificial Intelligence is the study of how to make computers do things at
which, at the moment, people are better.”
At this point it’s possible use the definition: “Artificial intelligence is the
simulation of human intelligence processes by machines, especially computer
systems. Specific applications of AI include expert systems, natural language
processing, speech recognition and machine vision.”
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Big Data
29
Definition of AI
Reference
The goal of AI is to develop machines
that behave as though they.
[28]
AI is the ability of digital computers
or computer-controlled robots to solve
problems that are normally associated
with the higher intellectual processing
capabilities of humans …
[29]
Artificial Intelligence is the study of
how to make computers do things at
which, at the moment, people are better.
[30]
Artificial intelligence is the simulation
of human intelligence processes by
machines, especially computer systems.
Specific applications of AI include
expert systems, natural language
processing, speech recognition and
machine vision.
Final
Table 4.2: Definitions of AI.
4.3
Big Data
Big data refers to huge, diverse, and complicated data collections that are
challenging to store, analyse, and visualise for subsequent processes or out-
comes. Big data analytics refers to the technique of analysing huge volumes
of data to uncover hidden patterns and hidden relationships. This information
assists businesses and organisations in generating richer and deeper insights
and gaining an advantage over the competition. Implementations of big data
must thus be studied and implemented as precisely as feasible. The exami-
nation of massive data sets is at the heart of modern research and industry.
These data are created through online transactions, emails, movies, audios,
photos, click streams, logs, postings, search queries, health records, social
networking interactions, science data, mobile phone sensors, and their appli-
cations. It becomes increasingly diﬀicult to acquire, create, store, manage,
distribute, analyse, and display them using standard database software tools
as the amount of data contained in databases grows exponentially. Big Data
analysis necessitates a revolutionary leap ahead from traditional data analysis,
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
and is characterised by its three primary components: diversity, velocity, and
volume. Variety makes big data incredibly big. Structured, semi-structured,
and unstructured data are the three most common categories of big data. Un-
structured data is random and diﬀicult to examine, but structured data is
marked and readily sorted before entering a data warehouse. Semistructured
data do not correspond to established fields, however tags are used to distin-
guish data pieces. The quantity or magnitude of data exceeds terabytes and
petabytes. Traditional data storage and processing approaches are outpaced
by the vast quantity and growth of data. Not only is velocity necessary for
big data, but for all operations as well. To maximise the usefulness of big
data for time-sensitive tasks, organisations should use information as it en-
ters. To these three voices, one might add a fourth V, namely the value of
analysing this massive amount of data. Below is a summary of key questions
and responses from TDWI’s study of data management professionals [31]:
• After the company used some sort of big data analytics, the following
advantages occurred: more targeted marketing, clearer business insights,
customer-based segmentation, and detection of sales and market oppor-
tunities.
• Implementing big data analytics may be hindered by the following: inex-
perienced personnel, expense, lack of corporate sponsorship, diﬀiculty in
building analytic systems, and absence of contemporary database soft-
ware for analytics.
• Structured, semi-structured, complex, event, and unstructured data are
the sorts of large datasets that are now stored and analysed using so-
phisticated methodologies.
• When updating analytics systems, the following issues may arise: inabil-
ity to accommodate big amounts of data, inability to support required
analytic models, delayed data loading, need for an advanced analytics
platform, and IT’s inability to keep pace with demand.
McKinsey Global Institute specified the potential of big data in five main
topics [32] :
• Healthcare: clinical decision support systems, individual analytics ap-
plied to patient profiles, tailored treatment, pricing based on staff per-
formance, analysis of illness trends, and improvement of public health.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Blockchain
31
• Public sector: establishing transparency by making associated data
accessible, identifying requirements, enhancing performance, customis-
ing actions for suitable products and services, making decisions using
automated systems to reduce risks, and generating new products.
• Retail: in-store behaviour research, variety and pricing optimization,
product placement design, performance enhancement, labour inputs op-
timization, distribution and logistics optimization, and online market-
places.
• Manufacturing: enhanced demand forecasting, supply chain planning,
sales assistance, enhanced manufacturing processes, and web-based ap-
plications.
• Personal location data: intelligent routing, geotargeted advertising
or emergency response, urban planning, and innovative business models.
4.4
Blockchain
First designed for the Bitcoin cryptocurrency, blockchain is a decentralised
transaction and data management platform. Since 2008, when the term was
first defined, interest in Blockchain technology has increased.
The cen-
tral characteristics of Blockchain that provide security, anonymity, and data
integrity without any third-party organisation in control of the transactions
are the reason for its popularity, and as a result it generates interesting re-
search areas, particularly from the perspective of technical challenges and
limitations. A blockchain is a digital data structure, a shared and distributed
database containing an ever-expanding ledger of transactions in chronological
order. In other words, the data structure is a journal that may contain digital
transactions, data records, and executables. Transactions are aggregated into
bigger formations called blocks, which are time-stamped and cryptographi-
cally connected to previous blocks to build a chain of records that establishes
the chronological order of occurrences or the ’blockchain’. In addition to defin-
ing the data structure itself, the phrase is widely employed in the literature
to describe digital consensus systems, algorithms, and application domains
developed on top of such architectures. Blockchains are supported by digital
networks. In such networks, data transfer is analogous to copying data from
one location to another; for example, in the cryptocurrency world, this is anal-
ogous to copying digital coins from one user’s electronic wallet to another’s.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
The primary diﬀiculty is that the system must verify that coins are only used
once and that there is no double-spending. Traditionally, a central authority,
such as a central bank, functions as the trusted middleman between transact-
ing parties and is responsible for storing, protecting the ledger’s valid status,
and updating the entries. A central authority implements concurrency control
and consolidates ledger modifications when numerous parties must update the
ledger simultaneously. In a number of instances, central administration may
be impractical or undesirable, as it incurs intermediate expenses and forces
network users to place their faith in a third party to administer the system.
Due to a single point of failure, which makes centralised systems more sus-
ceptible to both technical failures and malicious attacks, centralised systems
also have significant disadvantages. The basic goal of blockchain technology
is to eliminate the need for middlemen and replace them with a distributed
network of digital users who collaborate to validate transactions and protect
the ledger’s integrity. In contrast to centralised systems, each participant in
the blockchain network maintains his own copy of the distributed ledger or
has access to it via the public cloud. As a result, everyone in the network
has access to the historical record of system transactions and can check their
correctness, allowing for a high level of openness. If central administration
is eliminated, the diﬀiculty is to combine and synchronise many copies of the
ledger in an effective manner. The precise method of validation and ledger
consolidation differs across different types of blockchains, but in general, net-
work members compare their copies of the ledger in a manner analogous to
distributed voting to obtain consensus on the ledger’s legitimate state. Dis-
tributed consensus algorithms refer to these validation approaches. Incentives
or rewards based on game theory facilitate the cooperation and integrity of
dispersed nodes. In reality, tampering with a blockchain can be quite diﬀicult
without the cooperation of a substantial portion of the network. Therefore,
blockchain systems can be safe and resistant to tampering. In addition to hash
functions and public-key cryptography, additional aspects that contribute to
heightened security include hash functions and public-key cryptography. Cryp-
tographic hash functions are mathematical methods or one-way functions that
turn an input into an output of a certain length, such as a sequence of 256 bits
known as the hash output. Their functioning is based on the fact that it is
exceedingly challenging to reconstruct the original input data from the hash
output alone (collision resistance). In addition, blockchains employ public-
key cryptography, an asymmetric protocol for cryptography. Each user has
two cryptographic keys consisting of numeric or alphabetic characters: a pri-
vate key that is kept secret and a public key that may be shared with other
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Cloud Computing
33
network users. The mathematical relationship between the keys ensures that
information encrypted by one key can only be decoded by its counterpart.
The use of public-private key cryptography guarantees authentication, i.e.,
that a transaction is begun by the source it claims to originate from, and
authorization, i.e., that activities are carried out by people with the necessary
permissions. The network can authenticate the sender’s identity, for instance,
because only the sender’s public key can decode the original message (which
was encrypted and digitally signed by the sender’s private key). A commu-
nication encrypted using a recipient’s public key can only be decoded by the
recipient’s private key. In blockchain systems, these and other conventional
communication characteristics, such as data veracity and security, are attained
using P2P communication and sophisticated cryptographic algorithms. The
British Government Oﬀice for Science [33] : the true potential of blockchain
technologies can only be realised when paired with smart contracts, which
are user-defined programmes that establish the rules for writing to the ledger.
Smart contracts are executable programmes that modify the ledger and may
be executed automatically if a given condition is satisfied, such as if an agree-
ment between the parties is honoured. Legal limitations and agreement terms
are encoded in a computer language including contract terms.
Smart con-
tracts are self-enforcing and tamper-proof, providing major benefits such as
the elimination of middlemen and the reduction of transaction, contracting,
enforcement, and compliance expenses. Low-value transactions may be made
more cost-effective, and blockchains can facilitate interoperability across trans-
action platforms.
4.5
Cloud Computing
Cloud Computing is an umbrella name for a variety of sophisticated on-
demand computing services supplied first by commercial companies. It refers
to a model in which a computing infrastructure is viewed as a “Cloud”, from
which businesses and individuals can access applications on demand from any-
where in the world [34]. This model’s guiding idea is providing computing,
storage, and software as a service. A first definition of cloud computing is,
“A computing Cloud is a set of network-enabled services, providing scalable,
Quality of Service (QoS) guaranteed, normally personalized, inexpensive com-
puting platforms on demand, which could be accessed in a simple and pervasive
way”[35] Markus Klems asserts that quick scalability and resource utilisation
optimization are essential Cloud characteristics”. In a dynamic context, these
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
are given via enhanced monitoring and automation of resource management
[36]. Other writers argue that this is a need for an infrastructure to be labelled
a Cloud. According to a 2008 paper by Carl Hewitt [37]“Cloud Computing is a
paradigm in which information is permanently stored in servers on the internet
and temporarily cached on clients that include desktops, Cloud Computing:
Paradigms and Technologies 41 entertainment centres, table computers, note-
books, wall computers, handhelds, sensors, monitors, etc.”
Cloud computing, the long-held fantasy of computing as a utility, has the
potential to revolutionise a significant portion of the IT business, making soft-
ware even more attractive as a service, according to a Berkeley report pub-
lished in February 2009 [38] Cloud Computing is defined as follows from an
economic standpoint: ”Building on compute and storage virtualization tech-
nologies and leveraging the modern Web, Cloud Computing provides scalable
and affordable compute utilities as on-demand services with variable pricing
schemes, thereby enabling a new consumer mass market.” [39]
Clouds have been characterised in terms of Quality of Service as a huge
pool of easily available virtualized resources (such as hardware, development
platforms, and/or services). These resources can be adjusted dynamically for
optimal resource use. This pool of resources is often exploited using a pay-per-
use approach, with Infrastructure Providers providing assurances via tailored
SLAs.[40] The term relates to a pay-per-use economic model derived from
the Utility Computing paradigm. Some writers emphasise the business model
(collaboration and pay-as-you-go) and the decrease of capital expenditures
brought about by the implementation of Utility Computing.
The US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has published
a working definition of Cloud Computing [41] that appears to capture the gen-
erally accepted characteristics. This definition of Cloud Computing includes:
Five characteristics: on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource
pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service. Four deployment models: pri-
vate Clouds, community Clouds, public Clouds, and hybrid Clouds. Three
service models: Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS),
and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Finally, a definition has been proposed
that attempts to bring together all the fundamental aspects of cloud comput-
ing, which is as follows “Clouds are a vast collection of virtualized resources
(such as hardware, development platforms, and/or services) that are easily
accessible and useable”. These resources may be adjusted dynamically to ac-
commodate a varied load (scaling), allowing for optimal resource use. This
pool of resources is often exploited using a pay-per-use approach, with In-
frastructure Providers offering customised SLAs as assurances. In contrast,
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Cloud Computing
35
searching for the lowest common denominator would result in the absence of
a definition, as no one characteristic is given by all definitions. Scalability,
pay-per-use utility model, and virtualization most nearly reflect this basic de-
scription”.[42] Clearly, the Cloud notion is still evolving, and these definitions
demonstrate how the Cloud is now envisioned.
4.5.1
Features
The characteristics of Cloud Computing are that it provides vast computing
and storage power, as well as enhanced scalability and elasticity. Moreover,
as a result of eﬀiciency and economies of scale, Cloud Computing services are
becoming not only a less expensive but also a more environmentally friendly
way to build and deploy IT services [J. Grimes, P. Jaeger, J. Lin, Weathering
the storm: The policy implications of cloud computing, in Proceedings of
iConference, University of North Carolina [43]. The following characteristics
separate Cloud Computing from other computing paradigms:
• On-demand service: Computing clouds deliver on-demand resources and
services to users. Users often possess administrator capabilities, allowing
them to modify and personalise their computing settings in the future,
for example, programme installation and network setup.
• QoS-guaranteed computing environments: Clouds can provide QoS-guaranteed
computing environments for users, including hardware performance such
as CPU speed, I/O bandwidth, and memory capacity. By processing
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with users, the Cloud computing en-
vironment provides QoS in general.
• Autonomous System: The computing Cloud is an autonomous system
that is openly controlled for its users. In Clouds, hardware, software,
and data may be automatically changed, choreographed, and integrated
to offer an unified platform picture to users, which is then presented.
• Scalability: Flexibility and scalability are the most significant charac-
teristics that have led to the creation of cloud computing. The Cloud
services and computing platforms provided by computing Clouds are
scalable with respect to a variety of factors, such as geographic loca-
tions, hardware performance, and software configurations. The comput-
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
Definition of Cloud Computing
Reference
A computing Cloud is a set of network-enabled services,
providing scalable, Quality of Service (QoS) guaranteed,
normally personalized, inexpensive computing platforms
on demand, which could be accessed in a simple and
pervasive way
[35]
Cloud Computing is a paradigm in which information is
permanently stored in servers on the internet and cached
temporarily on clients that include desktops, Cloud Computing:
Paradigms and Technologies 41 entertainment centers, table
computers, notebooks, wall computers, handhelds, sensors,
monitors, etc.
[37]
Cloud Computing, the long-held dream of computing as a
utility has the potential to transform a large part of the IT industry,
making software even more attractive as a service
[38]
Building on compute and storage virtualization technologies,
and leveraging the modern Web, Cloud Computing provides
scalable and affordable compute utilities as on-demand services
with variable pricing schemes, enabling a new consumer mass
market’
[39]
From the Quality of Service perspective, Clouds have been defined
as a large pool of easily usable and accessible virtualized resources
(such as hardware, development platforms and/or services). These
resources can be dynamically reconfigured to optimum resource
utilization. This pool of resources is typically exploited by a
pay-per-use model in which guarantees are offered by the
Infrastructure Provider by means of customized SLA’s
[40]
Clouds are a large pool of easily usable and accessible virtualized
resources (such as hardware, development platforms and/or services).
These resources can be dynamically reconfigured to adjust to a variable
load (scale), allowing also for an optimum resource utilization. This
pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-per-use model in
which guarantees are offered by the Infrastructure Provider by means
of customized SLAs. On the other hand, looking for the minimum
common denominator would lead us to no definition as no single feature
is proposed by all definitions. The set of features that most closely
resemble this minimum definition would be scalability, pay-per-use
utility model and virtualization
[42]
Table 4.3: Cloud Computer Definitions.
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Cloud Computing
37
ing systems must be adaptable to the diverse needs of a potentially vast
number of users.
4.5.1.1
Affects
Cloud Computing has received a significant lot of attention recently. Cloud
Computing tops Gartner’s list of the ten most disruptive technologies of the
upcoming decade. Since Cloud Computing makes various time-, management-,
and operational-cost-related promises, businesses must comprehend its effects,
which are centred on the following key themes.
• The organisational transformation caused by cloud computing: The sort
of organisational transformation brought about by Cloud Computing
may be illustrated by examining business IT procurement, for instance.
In a nutshell, procurement is centred on acquiring estimates for items
and securing management approval for these estimates before proceeding
with the acquisition. In this approach, capital and operating expendi-
tures are kept separate, and it might take several months between the
decision to acquire hardware and its delivery, installation, and readiness
for use. The usage of Cloud Computing can significantly minimise this
amount of time, but the most significant shift is the empowerment of
users and the decentralisation of IT department authority. For instance,
a company’s training coordinator who needs many servers to execute a
week-long web-based training course can skip their IT department and
operate the course in the Cloud. They might pay their Cloud use ac-
count using a personal credit card and reimburse the amount to their
employer as an expenditure.
• The economic and organisational ramifications of Cloud Computing’s
utility billing model: New pricing models for Cloud Computing based on
market processes are beginning to develop, however it is not yet obvious
how enterprises may utilise these models successfully. Amazon’s Spot
Instances, which allows customers to bid on spare capacity in Amazon’s
data centres, is an example of such a model. Amazon runs the user’s
instances as long as the bid price is more than the spot pricing, which
Amazon sets based on their data centre usage.
• The security, legal, and privacy concerns raised by Cloud Computing: It
is commonly understood that security, legal, and privacy considerations
are crucial in cloud computing.
The majority of Cloud Computing’s
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Digital Technologies in energy sector
security and privacy vulnerabilities stem from the absence of user con-
trol over the physical infrastructure. This results in legal concerns that
depend on the physical location of a Cloud, which determines its ju-
risdiction.
Additionally, multitenancy necessitates novel solutions for
security and privacy. Before Cloud Computing became widespread, De-
nial of Service (DoS)1 assaults were a prevalent worry. However, when
an application is targeted by a DoS attack in the Cloud, the user or
owner may wind up paying for the attack through higher resource utili-
sation. This might be substantially greater than the application’s peak
utilisation in an internal data centre with restricted resources.
4.5.1.2
Advantages of the Use of Cloud Technology
The advantages of Cloud Computing are that it provides vast computing and
storage power, as well as enhanced scalability and elasticity. Moreover, as
a result of eﬀiciency and economies of scale, Cloud Computing services are
becoming not only a cheaper option for developing and deploying IT services,
but also a much greener one. The following characteristics separate Cloud
Computing from other computing paradigms:
• On-demand service provisioning: Cloud computing provides customers
with resources and services on demand. Users often possess adminis-
trator capabilities, allowing them to modify and personalise their com-
puting settings in the future, for example, programme installation and
network setup.
• QoS-guaranteed computing environments: Clouds can provide QoS-guaranteed
computing environments for users, including hardware performance such
as CPU speed, I/O bandwidth, and memory capacity. By processing Ser-
vice Level Agreements (SLAs) with users, the cloud computing platform
provides quality of service.
• Autonomous System: The computing Cloud is an autonomous system
that is openly controlled for its users. In Clouds, hardware, software,
and data may be automatically changed, choreographed, and integrated
to offer an unified platform picture to users, which is then presented.
•
Scalability and adaptability: The scalability and adaptability are the
most influential factors in the growth of cloud computing. Cloud ser-
vices and computing platforms provided by computing Clouds might be
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Cloud Computing
39
scaled across a variety of factors, including geographic locations, hard-
ware performance, and software configurations. The computing systems
must be adaptable to the diverse needs of a potentially vast number of
users.
4.5.1.3
Classifying Clouds
In this section, many categories of Clouds and Cloud service providers are
presented. There are many ways to categorise Cloud Computing, but the two
most frequent are service boundary and service type.[44]
Cloud Computing may be categorised as public Cloud, private Cloud, or hy-
brid Cloud based on the service boundaries. The public Cloud refers to ser-
vices made available to other parties. Enterprises create and maintain their
own private cloud infrastructure. Through a secure network, Hybrid Cloud
exchanges resources across public Cloud and private Cloud. Google and Ama-
zon’s Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) services are examples of Hybrid Cloud.
Cloud Computing may be categorised by service type as Infrastructure as
a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service
(SaaS) (SaaS). SaaS provides services to end users, whereas IaaS and PaaS give
services to ISVs and developers, providing room for third-party application
developers.
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Impacts of digital
technologies on
environmental
sustainability assessed
in energy sector
Our research seeks to investigate the effects of digital technologies in the en-
ergy sector on the pillar of environmental sustainability. Understanding the
rationale for not evaluating impacts on all three pillars of sustainability, but
solely on the environmental pillar, requires a thorough understanding of the
notion of sustainability.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
5.1
The concept of sustainability
Figure 5.1: Concept of Sustainability [45].
To date, the idea of sustainability has become a highly evaluative and non
descriptive phrase, a vessel to be filled with the appropriate content: ”In
both practise and philosophy, the definition of sustainability in its numerous
meanings appears diﬀicult.
Not only can different perspectives exist when
transitioning from theory to practise, but also within the concept itself. Not
for this reason, however, does the author feel that the term sustainability is
intrinsically ”empty,” nor should it be viewed thus.
Despite the fact that
the term sustainability has its origins in the field of ecological studies and
refers to the capacity of an ecosystem to persist without change over time,
it is also true that the topic of sustainability immediately involves multiple
fields of knowledge: environmental, ecological, economic, social, and cultural.
Therefore, the concept of sustainability does not only refer to ecological issues:
in England, the United States, and the United Nations, ”sustainability” has
emerged as a social, economic, and political objective, even before it was a
more narrowly defined resource management and ecological concept.
It can therefore be stated that sustainability is a formal category before it is
a content-rich category that refers to a specific reality. In actuality, sustain-
ability is provided as a concept, i.e., as a general signal of behaviour that may
be modelled based on situations and interests and must be rooted in another
==PAGE:51==
5.1 The concept of sustainability
43
context. [46]
It is agreed with TL Reddy and RJ Thomson’s definition of sustainability [47]
as the necessity to strike a balance between economic, environmental, and
social considerations.
Environmental, social, and economic sustainability are referred to as the pil-
lars of sustainability. These pillars are interconnected. A system that incor-
porates social sustainability (respect for man), environmental sustainability
(preservation of natural resources), and economic sustainability (development
that enhances the quality of life while respecting the environment). The three
”pillars” comprise a synergistic and meaningful structure. Therefore, there
are three pillars of sustainable development that do not exclude one other but
rather enhance one another.
In essence, sustainability seeks environmental, social, and economic well-being
in a constant relationship of continuous synergy in order to ensure quality of
life and a healthy planet for future generations, which necessitates the inclu-
sion of culture, technology, and politics in sustainable development.
5.1.1
Environmental sustainability
Environmental sustainability equates to an unlimited pace of resource exploita-
tion and pollution emission. It is a form of contact with the environment that
sustains a high level of environmental quality over the long term. Addition-
ally, we may define environmental sustainability using Herman Daly’s three
requirements. A human system is only environmentally sustainable if the pace
of exploitation of renewable resources is lower than their rate of regeneration.
The intake of contaminating particles and garbage does not exceed the envi-
ronment’s capacity to digest them, also known as its carrying capacity.The
depletion of nonrenewable resources is offset by the substitution of renewable
resources.
Ecological sustainability is primarily dependent on the carrying and self-regulatory
capacity of natural systems, and therefore on their resilience.
Nature has
an incredible potential to self-regulate, recover, and replenish itself if left
alone. However, things become problematic when ecosystems clash with the
anthropic system, i.e. human pressure.
Consequently, environmental sustainability entails living within the means of
our natural resources. Nonetheless, we must guarantee that our consumption
of natural resources such as materials, energy fuels, land, and water is sus-
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
tainable. Some resources are more numerous than others, therefore we must
assess their scarcity, the environmental damage caused by their extraction,
and whether the resource can be preserved in accordance with the Circular
Economy principles. We must strive for net-zero carbon emissions and then
go above and above to realise climate-friendly ideas.
5.1.2
Economic sustainability
Economic sustainability is defined as development that advances social and
environmental sustainability via the use of existing economic resources. Un-
just wealth distribution leads to unsustainable behaviour and makes change
more diﬀicult. It is no accident that the paradigm of economics is growth
(stagnation and underdevelopment are not considered compatible with the
survival of economic systems and the well-being of people). The classic pro-
duction and consumption model is founded on the idea of Linear Economy
(take-make-dispose) and was effective in the 20th century as a result of the
easy availability of abundant materials and energy. However, society is becom-
ing increasingly aware that we live in a world with scarce resources: Covid-19
shown the severe economic consequences of supply interruptions (such as the
recent microprocessor issue). In a world with finite resources, it is becoming
increasingly important to address these supply challenges. The Circular Econ-
omy, a new economic paradigm that decouples economic development from
resource consumption by rethinking production and consumption models to
decrease waste and reuse materials in infinite production cycles, may be a
feasible option. In a Circular Economy, the take-make-dispose manufacturing
paradigm is replaced by Reduction, Reuse, Regeneration, and Recycling across
the whole product life cycle, from design through end-of-life recovery. One of
the fundamental methods of the Circular Economy, capable of removing the
idea of end-of-life and producing considerable environmental advantages, is
the regeneration of goods and components. Through remanufacturing, trash
and scrap may be collected and used through remanufacturing procedures.
Therefore, economic sustainability necessitates that a firm or nation utilise
its resources effectively and ethically in order to function in a manner that
regularly generates an operational profit. Without an operational profit, a
business cannot continue its operations. Without operating responsibly and
making optimal use of its resources, a business will not be able to continue its
operations over the long run.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Impact of digital technologies of the energy sector
45
5.1.3
Social sustainability
Social sustainability is the collection of efforts aimed at promoting social equal-
ity. Social sustainability necessitates a variety of acts touching primarily the
legal, economic, and cultural levels.
In general, social sustainability is ac-
complished by the eradication of poverty and the realisation of fundamental
conditions of human dignity for every individual. It entails the eradication
of benefit disparities between the socioeconomic classes of a nation and the
various people of the world.
Particularly, social sustainability is concerned with the right of a person to
live in an environment and environmental context that allows him to express
his uniqueness. This advantage is not only tied to the legitimate interest of
each individual, but also to the larger objective of creating a better society
for the entire community. Inferentially, this objective of sustainability is also
achieved through enhancing social cohesiveness and empowering all individ-
uals to participate in political decision-making processes. In addition, social
sustainability is achieved via the protection of minorities, particularly in terms
of their rights and the expression of their traditions and beliefs, within the
confines of the law.
Therefore, social sustainability is the capacity of a society or social system to
continually attain high levels of social welfare. Social sustainability assures
that the social well-being of a nation, organisation, or society can be sustained
throughout time.
5.2
Impact of digital technologies of the
energy sector
There are several impacts of digital technologies of the energy sector on envi-
ronmental sustainability. In the next part, we will examine the purely positive
impacts, which have been thoroughly explored in the literature, in order to
evaluate the various digital technologies and then contrast them with the neg-
ative impacts.
5.2.1
Positive impacts
As the costs of digital technologies have decreased significantly over the past
few years, it has been feasible to implement a number of modifications to the
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
current structure and operation of energy systems, therefore decreasing the
costs of new and existing projects for all forms of power generation. With
the introduction of digital technologies, it is feasible to enhance the overall
performance of the energy system. Using sensors, it is feasible, for instance,
to obtain real-time data on the state of various power plant components or the
input and output flows of electricity or pollutants. Long-term, the application
of digital technologies enables the extension of the lifespan of power plants and
grid components, resulting in improved profits for asset owners by decreasing
investment needs and costs for end users.[48]
Wang J. et al.[49] evaluated the overwhelmingly favourable impacts of digital
technologies in China from 2002 to the present. Although these technologies
have helped China cut its CO2 emissions, they have had a limited impact on
CO2 reduction. However, digital technologies have resolved traditional issues
in the energy sector. It is now feasible to provide energy firms with services
that may cover the whole region, as well as appropriate and uninterrupted
supply services, while cutting costs and conserving the environment.
Therefore, it is feasible to independently examine the digital technologies and
their impacts on the energy business in order to gain a more concentrated yet
complete understanding of the case study.
5.2.2
Internet of Things
Sensors are the key drivers of IoT [50]. They are utilised for real-time data
collection and transmission. The use of sensors improves IoT’s eﬀicacy and
utility, and is crucial to its success [50]. There are several types of sensors
designed for a variety of applications. Agriculture sector, environmental mon-
itoring, healthcare systems and services, and public safety are examples of
these applications. Numerous of these sensors are utilised in the energy sector,
including energy generation, transmission and distribution, and manufacture.
In the energy sector, sensors are utilised to provide cost and energy savings.
Sensors enable intelligent energy management systems, offer real-time energy
optimization, and enable novel methods to energy load control [51].
In a word, the usage of sensor devices inside IoT significantly enhances di-
agnostics, decision-making, analytics, optimization processes, and integrated
performance metrics in the energy sector. Due to the vast variety of sensors
utilised in the energy sector, we will now provide a few examples of regularly
used sensor devices in energy production and consumption.
Temperature sensors are used to monitor variations in a system’s heating
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Impact of digital technologies of the energy sector
47
and cooling [52]. Temperature is an essential and widespread environmental
factor. The fundamental premise of power generation in the energy sector
is the transformation of mechanical energy into electrical energy, where me-
chanical energy is derived from heat energy, such as thermal power plants,
wind, water flow, and solar power plants. These energy transformations are
accomplished using thermal, or temperature, means. On the energy consump-
tion side, temperature sensors are utilised to enhance a system’s performance
when temperature fluctuations occur during regular operation. Temperature
sensors recognise, for instance, the optimal time for turning on or off ven-
tilation and cooling systems in residential areas; as a result, energy can be
managed correctly to conserve energy [50].
We utilise humidity sensors to discriminate between the amount of wetness
and the humidity of the air. Relative humidity is the ratio of the amount
of moisture in the air to the maximum amount of moisture at a specific air
temperature. There are several uses for humidity sensors in the energy sector.
Typically, they are utilised in wind energy generation. Use of humidity sensors
on wind turbines is much more crucial if the turbines are offshore (due to
the high level of moisture in the air).
Placed in the nacelle and base of
wind turbines, humidity sensors provide continuous moisture monitoring. This
enables operators to respond to changes or deviations in turbine operating
conditions, resulting in more consistent operations, enhanced performance,
and reduced energy expenditures.
The purpose of light sensors is to measure luminance (ambient light level)
or the intensity of a light. Regarding energy consumption, light sensors have
several applications in industrial and consumer settings. As a primary source
of energy consumption in buildings, lighting accounts for around 15% of overall
electricity consumption [53]. Approximately 20% of the world’s power is used
for lighting. Consequently, light sensors may be used to automatically manage
lighting levels indoors and outdoors by turning lights on and off or dimming
them, allowing the electric light levels to be automatically altered in response
to changes in ambient light. In this manner, energy consumption for interior
lighting may be lowered [54].
Passive Infrared sensors (PIR), often known as motion sensors, measure
the infrared light radiation released by nearby objects. These sensors are used
to lower the energy consumption of buildings in energy consumption. Using
PIR sensors, for example, it is possible to identify the presence of humans in
interior environments. If no motion is detected in the area, the space’s lighting
control shuts off the lights, i.e. intelligent lighting control [55]. This may also
be used to air conditioning systems, which consume roughly 40 percent of the
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
energy in buildings.[53]
Without physical touch, proximity sensors are applied to identify the pres-
ence of surrounding items. On target tracking using binary proximity sen-
sors[56]. An example use of proximity sensors is in the production of wind
energy. These sensors offer wind turbines with long-lasting and dependable
position sensing performance. Applications of proximity sensors in wind tur-
bines include blade pitch control, yaw position, rotor and yaw brake position;
monitoring of brake wear; and rotor speed monitoring.
In the 1990s, supervisory control and data collection systems and automated
industrial processes gained popularity in the power sector [57].
By monitoring and regulating equipment and processes, the earliest phases of
the Internet of Things began to benefit the power sector by reducing the risk
of output loss or outage. Old power plants have significant impacts in terms
of dependability, eﬀiciency, environmental impact, and upkeep. High levels of
energy loss and unreliability can be caused by the age of equipment in the
power sector and maintenance concerns. Sometimes, assets are over 40 years
old, extremely expensive, and diﬀicult to replace. IoT can help mitigate some
of these issues in power plant management [57]. Using IoT sensors, Internet-
connected devices are able to detect any operational breakdown or unexpected
drop in energy eﬀiciency, hence signalling the need for repair. In addition to
increasing the system’s dependability and eﬀiciency, this reduces maintenance
costs.
According to, a new IoT-based power plant may save 230 million USD during
its lifespan, while an old plant of the same size integrated with the IoT plat-
form can save 50 million USD. Numerous nations are pushing RES in order to
reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and rely on local energy sources. The
intermittency problem is posed by weather-dependent or variable renewable
energy (VRE) sources, such as wind and solar energy, to the energy system. In
an energy system with a significant proportion of variable renewable energy
sources, it is diﬀicult to match energy generation with demand due to the
mismatch between supply and demand on various time scales. IoT systems
offer flexibility in balancing generation with demand, which can decrease the
diﬀiculties of establishing VRE, resulting in larger integration shares of clean
energy and lower GHG emissions [58]. In addition, by employing IoT, a more
eﬀicient use of energy can be attained through the use of machine-learning al-
gorithms that help determine the optimal balance between various supply and
demand technologies [57]. Using artificial intelligence algorithms, for instance,
it is possible to balance the power output of a thermal power plant with the
sources of in-house power generation, such as aggregating several small-scale
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Impact of digital technologies of the energy sector
49
solar PV panels[59].
5.2.3
Blockchain
Energy sector decision makers [60] Blockchain technology and utility compa-
nies [61] have asserted that blockchains may provide solutions to problems
in the energy sector.
The German Energy Agency asserts that blockchain
technologies have the potential to improve the eﬀiciency of current energy
practises and processes, can accelerate the development of IoT platforms and
digital applications, and can facilitate innovation in peer-to-peer energy trad-
ing and decentralised generation.
Moreover, they indicate that blockchain
technologies have the ability to considerably enhance the present practises of
energy firms and utility companies by enhancing internal procedures, customer
services, and costs [60]. The development of dispersed energy resources and
information and communication technologies are causing a radical upheaval
in energy systems (ICT). Emerging decentralization and digitalization of the
energy system is one of the greatest problems, necessitating the examination,
development, and deployment of innovative paradigms and distributed tech-
nologies. Due to their intrinsic nature, blockchains might offer a promising
way to govern and manage increasingly decentralised and complicated energy
systems and microgrids.
Integration of small-scale renewables, distributed generation, flexibility ser-
vices, and consumer engagement in the energy market is a diﬀicult undertak-
ing [62]. The studies contend that blockchains might create creative trading
platforms where prosumers and consumers can trade alternately their energy
excess or flexible need on a peer-to-peer basis. Active consumer participation
can be secured and recorded in contracts that are immutable, transparent,
and tamper-proof. Enabling such automated trading platforms might be an
effective method of communicating price signals and information about energy
prices to customers [63], whilst offering them incentives for demand response
and intelligent energy management. Blockchains can allow local energy and
consumer-focused markets or microgrids designed to assist local power gener-
ation and consumption [64].
The growth of consumer-centric power markets. Reducing transmission losses
and delaying costly network improvements are two of the greatest advantages
of this strategy. On the other hand, energy is still provided via the physical
grid, and demand and supply must be carefully monitored and controlled to
conform to genuine technical restrictions and power system stability. Accord-
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
ing to a recently published report by Eurelectric [65], the physical exchange of
electricity has thus far prevented the widespread adoption of blockchains in the
energy sector, as opposed to applications in the financial sector. Blockchains
can record the ownership and sources of energy used or provided in a secure
manner. Therefore, blockchain technologies might be used for smart charging
arrangements and sharing of resources, such as community storage or micro-
grids, as well as for data storage applications in smart grids and cybersecurity
[62].
As quantities of RES continue to rise, ensuring supply security and enhancing
network resiliency represent a significant issue. By simplifying and expediting
Internet of Things applications and enabling more eﬀicient flexibility markets,
blockchains might enhance network resilience and supply security [66].
A Research Institute reports on the Finnish economy the disruptive poten-
tial of distributed consensus architectures. Using their open and transparent
solutions, blockchains might ensure interoperability in smart grid and IoT ap-
plications, according to a 2016 study. According to Deloitte [67], energy mar-
ket operations may become more transparent and eﬀicient. As a result, this
might enhance competition and make customer mobility and switching energy
suppliers easier. If the potential for cost reductions is realised, we might use
the technology to address fuel poverty and energy affordability challenges. By
virtue of their advantages, blockchains could potentially provide solutions for
all three aspects of the energy trilemma: they could reduce costs by optimis-
ing energy processes, improve energy security in terms of cybersecurity, but
also act as a supporting technology that could improve security of supply, and
promote sustainability by facilitating renewable generation and low-carbon so-
lutions. In the sections that follow, we explore some use cases presented in
the literature where blockchains potentially provide substantial benefits.
5.2.4
Robotics and AI
Existing research has ignored the reality that for decision-making interven-
tions, the decision maker must use measures based on concrete facts that
mobile robots may provide.
The realisation of a collaborative robot family requires the development of a
complex and integrated model based on the following: modularity achieved
through the integration, coordination, evaluation, and optimization of hetero-
geneous subsystems (hardware, mobile platforms, actuators/grippers/tools,
and sustainable energy systems), real-time test/evaluation models, and algo-
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Impact of digital technologies of the energy sector
51
rithms for subsystems [68].
At the crossroads of computer science and engineering, robotics encompasses
the design, manufacture, operation, and use of robots. Robotics is currently
playing an increasingly important part in the design, manufacture, and pro-
duction of energy sector equipment, such as solar panels and wind turbines.
Particularly in the renewable energy sector, robotics and automation are grad-
ually penetrating the whole business, being implemented across several seg-
ments, such as wind, solar, nuclear, biological settings, and hydropower. The
multidisciplinary, repeatable, dependable, and accurate character of robotics
enables it to perform a variety of inspection and maintenance jobs for en-
ergy systems. As a result, robotics is rapidly utilised in the energy sector to
minimise set-up time and costs as well as enhance quality and production [23].
5.2.4.1
Positive impacts of Cloud Computing
Several studies demonstrate that Cloud computing may improve the energy
eﬀiciency of conventional datacenters by employing technologies such as re-
source virtualization and workload consolidation.
Traditional data centres
that host Web applications are frequently designed to withstand irregular peak
loads, which can lead to ineﬀicient resource use and energy waste. The cloud
datacenter, on the other hand, may minimise energy consumption through
server consolidation, whereby diverse workloads can share the same physical
host via virtualization and idle servers can be turned off.
Recent research by Accenture [69] demonstrates that moving business applica-
tions to the Cloud can help organisations reduce their carbon footprint. Using
Cloud resources resulted in up to a 90 percent decrease in emissions for small
enterprises, according to the analysis. Using Cloud applications, large firms
may reduce their carbon emissions by 30 to 60 percent, while medium-sized
enterprises can reduce their emissions by 60 to 90 percent.
Cloud computing offers the greatest chance for ICT to contribute to the re-
duction of greenhouse gas emissions. As cloud technologies are optimised to
service thousands of consumers concurrently, they provide energy savings of
up to fifty percent in ICT, which now accounts for two percent of world emis-
sions. Accenture conducted a study on Microsoft’s cloud goods and services,
and found that the energy savings associated with migrating to the cloud are
proportional to the size of the organisation. Specifically:
• more than 90% for smaller setups with 100 users or less
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
• 60% to 90% for setups with between 500 and 1,000 users
• 30% to 60% for deployments with up to about 10,000 users
Clouds are simply virtualized datacenters that provide applications as subscription-
based services [70]. They take a great deal of energy to operate. Currently,
a typical datacenter with 1000 racks requires 10 MW of power to operate
[71], resulting in increased operational costs.Thus, the energy cost is a key
component of a datacenter’s operational and initial expenses.
5.3
Negative impacts
The research on negative impacts remains incomplete and confusing. Accord-
ing to Wang J. et al., the vast consumption of energy resources has had signif-
icant impacts on the ecosystem, including acid rain, environmental pollution,
and global warming. In addition, the use of sensors, supercomputers, data
analysis, and cloud-based AI has optimised the extraction and processing of
fossil fuels. The potential negative impact on the environment must be con-
sidered, as the transition to ”sustainable” power sources could be slowed by
extending the lifespan of fossil-fuel power plants, posing an additional chal-
lenge to the reduction of CO2 emissions. [48]
According to Jan CT Bieser et al[72] study, digitalization impacts greenhouse
gas emissions in two ways:
• Direct effects:
ICT (Information and Communication Technology)
gear is manufactured in growing quantities, supplied with electricity
while in use, and thereafter discarded. In brief, a series of operations
that demands resources and produces environmental emissions.
• Indirect effects: ICT enables the optimization of production and con-
sumption patterns, which has several positive indirect effects (e.g. work-
ing from home, avoiding consumption of fossil fuels for transport) but
neglect what are termed rebound effects.
Even though there are significant environmental impacts, emerging technolo-
gies can cut pollution. Statistically, by 2030, ICTs could prevent up to 20%
of indirect emissions while contributing to 2% of global emissions (direct).[73]
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has
categorised the effects of ICT on the environment as follows:
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Negative impacts
53
• First-order effects: the direct effects of ICTs on the environment re-
sulting from their manufacture, usage, and disposal.
• Second-order effects: the influence of ICTs on other impacts.
• Third-order effects: structural effects of ICTs.
On each order it is possible to detect the aforementioned “rebound effect”.
5.3.1
Rebound effect
The rebound effect is a frequently debated phenomena in the scientific liter-
ature since it is frequently underestimated and diﬀicult to quantify. Cedric
Gossart’s classification [74] of rebound effects is as follows.
The first type consists of direct rebound effects, in which a decrease in the
cost of energy promotes price reductions that result in an increase in demand
for the less expensive commodity. The savings from energy eﬀiciency improve-
ments are redistributed to increase consumption of the same item.
The second type consists of indirect rebound effects, which occur when a
resource is utilised more effectively and its price falls due to an increase in the
consumption of other items.
The third type relates to economy-wide rebound effects, which occur when
decreased energy costs lead to lower prices of intermediate and final goods
throughout the economy, resulting in structural changes to production and
consumption patterns.
The effects of interest for this study include direct and indirect environmental
effects. In the case of digital technologies, the technical evolution of micro-
processors is one of the immediate rebound effects [75]. On the other hand,
prices are down, demand is rising, and the rate of generational change is ac-
celerating, resulting in the overconsumption of raw materials and the disposal
of processors that may still be utilised. Energy usage is high and will increase
with ICT grid connections. With the expansion of server size and capability,
the ’miniaturisation’ challenge has also aided in improving the eﬀiciency of
data centres. Information is projected to expand in the energy sector, aided
by smart metres, and in response, increasingly complex archiving processes
and technologies have been used, resulting in increased expenditures in terms
of time and resources.
Indirect rebound effects, on the other hand, occur when a resource is used more
effectively and the costs of products or services generated from this resource
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Impacts of digital technologies on environmental sustainability assessed in energy sector
fall, causing a rise in the use of other resources. In the energy sector, indirect
rebound effects only become a concern when there is no plan to commence a
transition to sustainable’ by enhancing the eﬀiciency of existing assets. There
is also the rise in energy consumption and emissions to consider: smart controls
and connected gadgets consume energy even while inactive, and as energy
production becomes more eﬀicient and the price of energy lowers, electric cars
may stimulate greater travel.[48]
In conclusion, global consumption has grown despite anticipated eﬀiciency in-
creases of three orders of magnitude: this is effectively the rebound effect. Ul-
timately, the instance of ICT demonstrates, perhaps more clearly than others,
how agents, in the face of improved eﬀiciency, prefer to enhance their utility
(quantity of processed information) at the same cost, as opposed to main-
taining utility by lowering costs (matter/energy used).
Furthermore, such
behaviour should not be surprising because it is consistent with the standard
assumptions of non-satiety and agent behaviour maximisation. This appears
to be true at least throughout the expansionary period of a product’s life cycle,
i.e. before saturation and congestion forces come into play, as we shall show.
Consequently, it is essential for policymakers to keep in mind that the effects
of digitalization may not always be compatible with environmental protection,
and that well-considered policies must take all of these dynamics into account.
This subject will subsequently be examined in depth in Section.
At this point, we shift our focus to data centres, which, as we shall see, are
the physical facilities that enable the operation of all the aforementioned tech-
nologies. Subsequently, this section will present a description of data centres
and various metrics that are used to assess the impacts of data centres on
environmental sustainability.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Environmental
sustainability metrics
are used in the
literature
6.1
Introduction
At this stage, the attention changes to data centres, which, as will be shown in
the next section, are the actual facilities that allow the aforementioned tech-
nologies to function. They are responsible for 1% of world energy consumption
and 2.3% of global greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to connection and
security, which are the fundamental purposes of this sort of service, energy
eﬀiciency appears as an important consideration to consider when designing
these facilities. The cost of electricity, which is continually absorbed at high
power levels by data centres, particularly IT equipment and its cooling and
power supply systems, is the driving force behind efforts to improve energy
eﬀiciency.[76] This section will provide an explanation of data centres and the
many measures used to analyse the environmental effect of data centres.
6.2
Datacenter
Data centres are rooms constructed and outfitted expressly to suit the require-
ments of high density computing equipment, such as server racks used for data
storage and processing.
The datacenters of the Cloud are considerably distinct from conventional host-
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Environmental sustainability metrics are used in the literature
ing facilities. A cloud datacenter may consist of tens of thousands or hundreds
of thousands of networked computers, along with associated storage and net-
working subsystems, power distribution and conditioning equipment, and cool-
ing infrastructures. Due to the vast number of devices, datacenters can have
enormous energy consumption and carbon emissions.
According to a 2007 analysis by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
on computing datacenters [77], datacenters in the United States utilised around
1.5% of total energy at a cost of approximately 4.5 billion of dollars. This high
consumption also results in extremely high carbon emissions, estimated to be
between 80 and 116 Metric Megatons annually.
The equipment frequently
utilised in datacenters and their contribution to energy usage are detailed in
Table 3. It is evident that computers and storage devices are not the only
equipment in the datacenter that uses energy.
6.2.1
Infrastructure
A general data centre system (Figure) comprises of the following subsystems
in addition to the building itself:
1. IT infrastructure
2. cooling infrastructure
3. electricity infrastructure
[78] The IT infrastructure is comprised of three primary components: servers,
networking, and storage devices. Typically, the storage devices are linked by
a storage area network (SAN). Over Ethernet, servers may also connect to
distant file systems through network attached storage (NAS). The network in-
frastructure consists of the physical gear used for electronic data transmission,
such as switches, hubs, routers, bridges, and gateways. Web servers, applica-
tion servers, and database servers are often separated in a typical multi-tier
design for software services.
The Cooling infrastructure consists of computer room air conditioning (CRAC)
units, chillers, and cooling towers [78] 15–20% of the data center’s overall en-
ergy usage is contributed by the cooling infrastructure.
The Power infrastructure is responsible for supplying uninterruptible, condi-
tioned power at the proper voltage and frequency to both the IT equipment
in the racks and the cooling infrastructure [79].
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Datacenter
57
Additional energy consumption is caused by lights, power distribution losses,
and other electrical devices such as an uninterruptible power supply (UPS).
In other words, the bulk of energy consumption within a datacenter is not
utilised to power genuine IT services. To achieve optimum eﬀiciency in power
consumption and CO2 emissions, each of these devices must be built and
utilised in a manner that minimises their carbon footprint.
Calculating how much energy is used for cooling and other overheads is es-
sential for reducing the datacenter’s energy usage [80] which may be used to
assess how much energy is being used effectively against how much is being
wasted on overhead.
The PUE of a datacenter is the ratio of the facility’s (data or switching cen-
tre) total power consumption to the IT equipment’s total power consumption
(servers, storage, routers, etc.). PUE varies amongst datacenters depending
on their location and the equipment utilised in their design. Lessons Learned
from Benchmarking 22 Data Centers demonstrates [81] that PUE values for
22 datacenters measured in 2008 fall between 1.3 and 3.0.
The PUE of a
datacenter may be used to measure the power eﬀiciency of datacenters and
thus serve as an incentive to enhance its eﬀiciency.
In regard to information technology (IT) systems, the introduction of paradigms
such as cloud computing and social networks has increased the need for data
centre infrastructures comprised of a large number of computers. However,
data centres consist of more than just IT equipment; they also comprise the
power and cooling infrastructures. Consequently, in the United States [82], for
instance, data centres currently consume over 2% of all generated electricity
and contribute considerably to global CO2 emissions.
6.2.2
Metrics for evaluating a data centre
6.2.2.1
Metrics for IT equipment
Methods presented to optimise DCs design for energy concerns and perfor-
mance eﬀiciency benchmarking criteria are briefly examined here.
• Eﬀiciency per Watt: It quantifies the energy eﬀiciency of each com-
puter architecture and component. It is the processing rate that a pro-
cessor can output for each watt of electricity it consumes. Typically, it is
measured in floating-point operations per second (FLOPS) and million
instructions per second (MIPS) (million instructions per second).
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Environmental sustainability metrics are used in the literature
• ENERGY STAR score: gives an accurate evaluation of the energy
performance of a DC, taking climate, weather, and business operations
into consideration. A statistical study of the peer DC building is con-
ducted to discover the features of construction activity. This research
yields an equation that may forecast energy consumption, which is then
compared to actual energy consumption to get a percentile ranking from
1 to 100 relative to the national population.
6.2.2.2
Metrics for data center facility
As discussed in this part, a variety of energy and resource metrics utilised to
service the whole facility of the inspected data centre have been proposed to
quantify eﬀiciency.
Green Grid has established Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) to compare the
energy required by computing application and infrastructure equipment to the
energy lost in overhead loads.
Location and construction factors of a data centre facility affect the PUE
value. Using the following equation, the PUE may be defined as the ratio
of the total power utilised by a data center’s facilities to the total electricity
consumed by IT equipment.
PUE = Total Facility Energy / IT Equipment Energy
Where: IT Equipment Energy can be described as the energy that data center
has taken for the management of IT equipment, processing of IT equipment
and storing the data in disk drives or routing the data within the data center.
Total Facility Energy is IT equipment power plus power needed by uninter-
rupted power supply (UPS), generators (needed to provide power in case of
power failure), batteries, cooling system and lighting. Perfect eﬀiciency would
give data center a PUE of 1.0. An average data center has a PUE of 2.0, how-
ever, several recent super-eﬀicient data centers have been known to achieve a
PUE as low as 1.1 .
Green Energy Coeﬀicient (GEC) is a statistic that measures the propor-
tion of a facility’s energy that is derived from green and renewable sources.
GEC is determined by dividing the data center’s green energy consumption
by its total energy consumption. It is a metric for assessing the energy mix
and carbon footprint of a data centre, and its definition is as follows:
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Datacenter impacts
59
GEC = Green Energy / Total Facility Energy
where Green Energy can be generated locally or acquired from a utility
supplier with a green energy certificate by the data centre management.
Carbon use effectiveness (CUE) is a statistic recently proposed by Green
Grid to address carbon emissions linked with data centres. It provides the
evaluation of the overall GHG emissions of a data centre relative to its IT
energy consumption by dividing the total carbon dioxide emission equivalents
(CO2eq) from the facility’s energy consumption by the total IT energy con-
sumption. It is defined as:
CUE = Total GHG emissions / IT Equipment Energy
where Total GHG emissions are the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), and refrigerant fluids that can be released into the environ-
ment as a result of the total energy consumed by a data center’s infrastructure.
This amount is determined annually. CUE provides details on the data cen-
ter’s ecological impact. If the data centre has several energy sources, such as a
combination of grid-sourced power and on-site renewable sources, the partial
contribution of each should be taken into account.
Name
Meaning
Formula (If defined)
Performance per Watt
It quantifies the energy eﬀicacy of individual
computer architecture or computer hardware.
ND
ENERGY STAR score
Provides a fair assessment of the energy
performance of a DC, taking into account the
climate, weather and business activities
ND
Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE)
Defined for the comparison of energy used by
computing application and infrastructure
equipment with the energy wasted in overhead
loads
PUE = Total Facility Energy / IT Equipment Energy
Green Energy coeﬀicient (GEC)
Quantifies the portion of a facility’s energy that
comes from green and renewable energy sources.
GEC = Green Energy / Total Facility Energy
Carbon usage effectiveness (CUE)
To address carbon emissions associated with data
centers.
CUE = Total GHG emissions / IT Equipment Energy
Table 6.1: Metrics for DC facilities.
[83] [84]
6.3
Datacenter impacts
There are three sorts of data centres: cloud, conventional, and edge. Each
kind needs a unique number of data centres with particular characteristics.
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Environmental sustainability metrics are used in the literature
Traditional data centres have the most significant impact, followed by cloud
and edge data centres. As cloud-based solutions become increasingly popu-
lar among businesses and consumers, there is a growing need for cloud data
centres. However, they are typically more effective than conventional data
centres (lower PUE).
In 2019, edge data centres had a marginal impact, but the growth of the 5G
network is expected to enhance their prevalence.
In general, energy consumption has the greatest influence on the majority of
indices.
As the Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) has reduced over the years as a
result of more energy-eﬀicient datacenters, the impact of technical support
equipment’s energy usage is diminishing. Second, the majority of the impacts
are caused by computing and storage equipment because of their high quantity
and individual impact.
Creating ICT equipment demands a great deal of
energy and resources. The architecture and technical equipment supporting
the IT equipment ranks third. Although they comprise the great majority of
the volume in a datacenter, they have far less of an individual impact since
they are a more simpler sort of hardware. Their longevity also exceeds that of
IT equipment. Fourth on the list is network equipment. While the quantity
of devices is significant, network equipment in a data centre has a smaller
individual impact than servers or storage equipment.
6.4
Impacts of Digital Technologies on
environmental sustainability
The immaterial nature of digital technology tends to cause us to overlook its
rising environmental impact. Today, the situation has changed: we are becom-
ing more cognizant of the physical nature of digital technology, particularly
in light of the recent fires at datacenters. The problem is now on the political
agenda, and with good reason: the digital sector is responsible for approx-
imately 4% of global emissions, and the industry’s emissions are expanding
exponentially.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimates that green-
house gas emissions must be decreased by 70–80 percent over the next 50 years
in order to keep global warming below 1.5 degrees Celsius. The objective of
zero emissions will be attained no later than 2100. Moreover, the majority
of homes and companies utilise information and communication technology
==PAGE:69==
6.5 The concept of Green Computing
61
(ICT) everyday. Included in these technologies are computers, communica-
tions, and electronics. Consequently, concern for the environment is essential.
In general, these technologies are seen as “immaterial” and their impact on
the planet’s environment is disregarded. They evoke notions of lightness. The
energy intensity of the global GDP is now dropping at a pace of 1.8% per year,
whilst the energy intensity of the digital sector is increasing at a rate of 4%
annually. The rise in video usage (Skype, streaming, etc.) and the rise in the
number of digital devices that are constantly replaced are the primary drivers
of the increase in energy consumption.
Consequently, since the 1980s, the number of functioning computer devices
in the globe has continued to rise. The General Commission for Terminol-
ogy and Neology defines ”ecological ICT” or ”green ICT” as ”information and
communication technologies” that ”permit, via the design or use of communi-
cation methods, a decrease of the negative impact of human activities on the
environment.” In conclusion, the notion of responsible digital refers to a set
of efforts done by the business to limit the ecological, economic, and social
impact of information and communication technologies. It is a complete and
unified life to reducing the diﬀiculties mostly faced in the design, use, and
disposal of IT equipment. Consequently, we also frequently discuss ecological
responsibility.
The link between ICT and sustainable development includes green IT. Under-
standing the environmental impact of these technologies allows us to take more
effective steps to mitigate it. The development of environmentally friendly
information and communication technology should be encouraged by envi-
ronmental awareness and the incorporation of information systems into the
organization’s environmental policy. Increasing numbers of firms across the
world are incorporating their green IT strategy into their broader corporate
social responsibility (CSR) initiatives. In this essay, we shall discuss the major
environmental effects of ICT. Then, we will discuss the proposed solution of
digital responsibility and the anticipated benefits of adopting this technology.
6.5
The concept of Green Computing
Green computing (green information technology or responsible digital) is the
activity of computing in an ecologically responsible manner. Responsible digi-
tal strives to limit the negative impact of computing activities on the environ-
ment through the ecologically responsible design, production, use, and disposal
of computers and computing goods. Reducing the use of hazardous materi-
==PAGE:70==
62
6 Environmental sustainability metrics are used in the literature
als, increasing energy eﬀiciency across the product’s lifespan, and encouraging
the biodegradability of unneeded and outdated items are the motives behind
green computing techniques.
The notion of green computing arose in 1992, when the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency created Energy Star, a voluntary labelling programme that
helps companies save money and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by recognis-
ing items with exceptional energy eﬀiciency. Other aspects of green IT include
the redesign of data centres and the rising popularity of virtualization, green
networks, and cloud computing.[84]
6.6
Rebound effect of Datacenter
Without discussing the rebound effect, we could not define appropriate digital
use. The rebound effect, also known as Jevons’ paradox, may be characterised
in a very generic sense as ”an increase in consumption coupled with a reduction
in constraints on the use of technology; these limits can be monetary and
temporal, social and physical, etc. The conclusion that follows is that the
energy or resource savings initially expected by applying the new technology
are partially or completely negated by the company’s behaviour change. This
is crucial for the creation, evaluation, and ongoing revision of energy strategies
and policies.
Illustration: A rebound impact of 10%, for example, indicates that 10% of
the energy eﬀiciency improvement begun by the technological advancement
is countered by the rise in demand. The rebound effect can be stated as a
percentage of the engineer-predicted energy eﬀiciency increase potential. The
gain in energy eﬀiciency should be quantified in physical units.
Relatively few research have examined rebound effects and ICT. The Internet
can stimulate consumption (and have a rebound effect) since it facilitates the
identification, comparison, and purchase of products and services.
It was discussed the possible rebound impacts of ICT, claiming that ICT has
indirect effects on the environment in addition to the direct consequences
of creating, using, and disposing ICT gear.
These latter consequences are
ICT-induced changes in consumption and production patterns, including in
non-ICT domains (e.g., e-commerce, vehicle sharing, smart homes), as well
as the environmental repercussions of these changes.
ICT may have both
rising and lowering effects on environmental burdens; for instance, it might
reduce transport through virtual mobility or increase transit by generating a
desire to visit Internet-displayed locations. Studies that measure both direct
==PAGE:71==
6.7 Digital transformation
63
and indirect impacts frequently indicate that indirect effects are positive (e.g.,
lowering GHG emissions) and much greater than direct effects. However, such
studies frequently disregard systemic implications of ICT use, such as the fact
that ICT can boost transport demand; rebound effects, such as an increase in
demand as a result of eﬀiciency gains; and ICT-induced behavioural changes
(e.g. changes in shopping behaviour through e-commerce).
The choice of assessment technique and strategy for addressing such method-
ological problems determines the outcomes of these investigations. To analyse
indirect environmental consequences, a mixed-method approach is necessary
(e.g., integrating LCA with social science methodologies). It was discussed
in the lessons learned for life cycle assessment (LCA) from the GreenConcept
project, concentrating on multifunctionality and data availability. Green Con-
cept is an environmental assessment initiative that aims to provide enterprises
with life cycle–based environmental data on digital services. Multiactor (many
people and firms are participating in a single digital service), multi-product
(from the terminals, network, and data centres, a great deal of equipment is
utilised), and multifunctionality are hard characteristics of the LCA of digital
services (a single product can be involved in multiple functions). He empha-
sised that data availability is a significant barrier to LCA, particularly when
the usage phase is included in the assessment. While LCI data for terminals
is accessible, knowledge about networks and data centres is now somewhat
restricted and has to be expanded. Regarding multifunctionality, he noted
that allocation is a diﬀicult task since there are so many options. He stated
that system expansion to avoid allocation is only acceptable for single-product
LCA but unworkable for multiple product or service comparisons. Economic
allocation would need diﬀicult-to-obtain information on the economic worth
of the various features, whereas physical allocation would necessitate in-depth
understanding of user behaviour. Green Concept is superseded by the ”Ne-
gaoctet” project, which focuses on resolving some issues found during the
previous project’s operations. [85]
6.7
Digital transformation
The digital carbon footprint is increasing by around 8% annually due to the
exponential growth of digital ”volumes” (e.g., devices, network traﬀic, com-
puting instances, and stored data). As we approach the boundaries of present
technology and no technological breakthrough will be industrialised in the next
ten years, we will need to make the digital ecosystem more responsible so that
==PAGE:72==
64
6 Environmental sustainability metrics are used in the literature
digital energy consumption does not continue to rise. This is required if digi-
talization is to contribute positively to the aim of lowering global greenhouse
gas emissions by 50 percent over the next 10 years, which is a precondition
for limiting global warming to 2 degrees Celsius.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7
Policies suggested
7.1
Introduction
Integral to the digital transformation of the energy system are open and in-
teroperable digital solutions and data sovereignty.
The research focuses on European policies regarding digitization, particularly
those of the energy industry.
To support a successful digital transformation of the energy system, Europe
requires cutting-edge digital solutions, a robust smart grid infrastructure, and
a data ecosystem governed by the principles of interoperability, openness, and
data sovereignty. The European Union intends to reduce net greenhouse gas
emissions by at least 55 percent by 2030, relative to 1990 levels. For Europe
to become the world’s first climate-neutral continent by 2050, it is essential
that these reductions be realized over the next decade. It would necessitate
meeting the Paris Agreement’s commitments and leading the charge against
the effects of global warming. This will be accomplished through increased
use of renewable energy sources and enhanced energy eﬀiciency. Therefore,
the energy system must continue its profound transformation, which neces-
sitates linking energy and the digital economy, amongst other things. The
current energy system relies heavily on fossil fuels. By 2050, the proportion of
electricity in total energy demand will increase to 53%, with more than 80%
of electricity coming from renewable sources. In addition, the traditional con-
sumer landscape will transition to an electricity system with ever-increasing
decentralized generation and storage.
The European Commission has updated its climate and energy policy frame-
work as part of the fit-for-55 climate package in order to accomplish these
lofty objectives. This package includes revisions to the directives on energy
eﬀiciency and renewable energy, as well as other measures to achieve the EU’s
goals. In addition, the Commission proposed a roadmap to the digital decade,
a concrete plan to realize the digital transformation of our society and economy
by 2030.
==PAGE:74==
66
7 Policies suggested
As one of the major steps to expedite the deployment of digital solutions in
energy, for a better operating, intelligent, integrated, and networked energy
system, the Commission considered and sought expert opinions on an action
plan for the digitalization of energy sector. The strategy will also facilitate the
implementation of REPower, the cooperative initiative for affordable, secure,
and sustainable energy.
This will pave the way for the ongoing dual digital and green transformation
of the energy system to benefit from advanced digital solutions with lower
environmental impact and greater energy and material eﬀiciency, resulting in
a more resilient, eﬀicient, and environmentally friendly energy system.
Cooperation is needed for Europe to achieve genuine excellence in energy
digitalization.
In terms of digitalization and digital infrastructure, public
agencies must work together, for example through national or regional energy
industries. Through excellent, effective, and close cooperation between the
European Commission’s Directorate-General for Communication Networks,
Content and Technology (DG CONNECT) and the Directorate-General for
Energy (DG ENER), the EU is setting an example for other stakeholders
from the public and private sectors as well as civil society in areas such as leg-
islation, standardization and interoperability, cybersecurity, sustainable ICT,
research and innovation, and deployment.[86]
7.1.1
Path to the Digital Decade for digital
transformation of the EU by 2030
On 15 September 2021, during a meeting in Brussels, the European Commis-
sion proposed a Roadmap to the Digital Decade, a specific plan to realize the
digital transformation of our society and economy by 2030. The proposed
Roadmap to the Digital Decade intends to translate the EU’s digital goals for
2030 into a delivery system. It would build a governance framework based
on an annual cooperation mechanism with Member States to fulfill the goals
of the Digital Decade 2030 at EU level in the areas of digital skills, digital
infrastructure, digitization of companies, and digitisation of public services.
In addition, the initiative intends to develop and implement large-scale digital
initiatives involving the Commission and Member States.
The pandemic has shown the important role digital technology plays in con-
structing a sustainable and prosperous future. Specifically, the crisis has em-
phasized the split between digitally fit businesses and those that have not
yet implemented digital solutions, as well as the barrier between urban, ru-
==PAGE:75==
7.1 Introduction
67
ral, and distant places that are well-connected. In 2020, there will be more
than 500,000 job openings for cybersecurity and data expertise on the Euro-
pean market as a result of digitization. In keeping with European ideals, the
route towards the digital decade should reinforce our digital leadership and
support sustainable and human-centered digital policies empowering citizens
and enterprises.[87]
Using DESI (Digital Economy and Society Index) reports from 2014, the Eu-
ropean Commission has been tracking the digital progress of Member States.
Each year, DESI comprises country profiles that assist Member States in iden-
tifying areas requiring urgent attention, as well as theme chapters that give
analysis at the level of all important digital areas, which is crucial for in-
forming policy choices. Digital Technology Integration is comprised of three
subdimensions: digital intensity, corporate adoption of selected technologies,
and e-business.
The Digital Decade Compass targets SMBs with a minimum degree of digital
intensity, use of Big data, the cloud, and artificial intelligence.
These measures might be included in the reports of firms who actively
participate in the energy industry.
For the time being, the EU has asked
merely a broad review, not just of the energy system.
Indicator
Description
Unit
Source
SMEs with at least a basic level
of digital intensity
The digital intensity score is based on counting how many
out of 12 selected technologies are used by enterprises. A
basic level requires usage of at least 4 technologies
% SMEs
Eurostat - European Union survey on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
Electronic information sharing
Enterprises who have in use an ERP (enterprise resource
planning) software package to share information between
different funcional areas (e.g. accounting, planning, production,
marketing)
% enterprises
Eurostat - European Union survey on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
Social media
Enterprises using two or more of the following social media:
social networks, enterprise’s blog or microblog, multimedia
content sharing websites, wiki-based knowledge sharing tools.
Using social media means that the enterprise has a user profile,
an account or a user license depending on the requirements and
the type of the social media.
% enterprises
Eurostat - European Union survey on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
Big data
Enterprises analysing big data from any data source %
% enterprises
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
Cloud
Enterprises buying sophisticated or intermediate cloud computing
services
% enterprises
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
AI
Enterprises using any AI technology
% enterprises
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
ICT for envirnmental sustainability
The indicator measures the level of support that adopted ICT
technologies offered to enterprises to engage in more
environmentally-friendly actions. The level of intensity is measured
based on the number of environmental actions (max 10) reported by
enterprises to have been facilitated by use of ICT. The following
categorisation was achieved: low intensity (0 to 4 actions), medium
intensity (5 to 7 actions) and high intensity (8 to 10 actions)
% enterprises
having
medium/high
intensity of green
action through ICT
Survey of businesses on the use of digital
technologies by Ipsos and iCite
e-Invoices
Enterprises sending e-invoices, suitable for automated processing
% enterprises
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
SMEs selling online
SMEs selling online (at least 1% of turnover)
% SMEs
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
e-Commerce turnover
SMEs’ total turnover from e-commerce
% SMEs turnover
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
Selling online cross-border
SMEs that carried out electronic sales to other EU countries
% SMEs
Eurostat - European Union survey
on ICT usage and eCommerce in Enterprises
Table 7.1: Indicators used by UE to calculate the DESI Index[88].
==PAGE:76==
68
7 Policies suggested
7.1.2
Action Plan for the digital transformation of the
energy industry
Specifically for the energy industry, the European Commission released a road
map on July 23 in preparation for an action plan on the sector’s own digital-
ization that is expected for the following year.
The idea derives from the 2020 Communication titled “An EU strategy for
the integration of energy systems”, which gives a vision of a new integrated
system that is more electrified, more eﬀicient, more adaptable, and uses in-
frastructure more “smartly” (sustainably). The Communication outlined key
actions to drive the energy transition, including an action plan for the digital-
isation of energy at system level, which could speed up the implementation
of digital solutions and the integration of the energy system across multiple
energy carriers, infrastructures, and consumption sectors.
The digitalisation of the energy industry may contribute to the creation of
growth and jobs, increase European competitiveness and innovation, open
up new worldwide markets for products and services, and promote creative
solutions by stimulating the development of trustworthy technology. It also
introduces new diﬀiculties, such as those connected to cybersecurity, data
access control, data protection and privacy, and the rising energy consumption
of the IT industry.
The action plan that emerges from the exercise will contribute to two Commis-
sion priorities: the European Green Deal and a Europe that is digitally-ready.
It will supplement the measures contained in the Delivering the European
Green Deal package by ensuring that the digitalisation of the energy system
is fully integrated into the green transition, in accordance with the Commis-
sion’s vision for the digital transformation by 2030, as outlined in the “Digital
Decade” Communication adopted on 9 March 2021.
Among the points of interest inherent to our study, the one we consider most
pertinent to our thesis is that digitisation is leading to an increase in the overall
energy consumption of information and communication technology (ICT) that
may not be sustainable without a substantial improvement in energy eﬀiciency
and a transition to a fully decarbonized and renewable energy supply.
The action plan focuses on five areas, one of which is to assist the development
and deployment of climate-neutral solutions for the ICT sector, complement-
ing the Digital Strategy for Europe, which emphasizes measures that foster
cooperation between the energy and digital sectors.[89]
==PAGE:77==
7.2 The roll of policies in sustainable energy transition
69
7.2
The roll of policies in sustainable energy
transition
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) is an in-
ternational Organization of economic research for member nations with market
economies. Instead, IEA (International Energy Agency) is an independent in-
ternational organization created by the OECD will assure the availability and
usage of energy for member nations and the international community. It is an
autonomous organization that strives to provide dependable, affordable, and
sustainable energy to its 28 member nations and beyond. The initial objective
of the IEA, which was established in response to the 1973–1974 oil crisis, was
to assist nations in coordinating a collective reaction to large interruptions in
oil supply through the release of emergency oil inventories. However, not all
OECD nations are now members of the IEA.
In the IEA’s Digitalization & Energy report [48] , technology advancements
and falling prices are cited as the primary drivers of the digital transformation
of energy systems. However, policy and market design are essential for guiding
the digital transformation along a safe and sustainable course. Digitization
is viewed as the mechanism through which particular policy goals, such as
energy access, sustainability, and energy security, might be attained.
The
paper then investigates how digital technologies might improve policymaking
and summarises the lessons learned on the implementation of well-considered
and integrated policy frameworks from the full research. The report closes
with a number of no-regrets suggestions designed to assist policymakers in
navigating the inherently unpredictable future of the rising digitalisation of
energy.
This research discusses many ways in which digitalization might assist policy-
makers in reducing the environmental effect of energy systems. Among these
are energy usage in transportation, buildings, and industries, which can aid
in lowering air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. For instance, in the
industrial sector, which was responsible for 24% of total carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions in 2014, there is an obvious benefit in digitization to increase energy
and material usage eﬀiciency. Drones and data analysis can enhance the iden-
tification and monitoring of methane emissions in oil and gas operations at a
lower cost. Digitisation can help better integrate renewables such as wind and
solar, emphasizing the potential to prevent 240 million tonnes of CO2 emis-
sions in the EU alone by 2040. In the meanwhile, ICT businesses, including
some that have pledged to 100% renewable energy, play a significant role in
==PAGE:78==
70
7 Policies suggested
renewable energy investments.
However, under some conditions, digitalization might increase energy usage
and emissions. Self-driving vehicles, for example, may stimulate more travel.
Digitalisation will not only cut the cost of wind energy production, but also
the cost of coal. Smart controllers and linked gadgets drain energy even while
in standby mode to maintain connectivity. Additionally, the manufacture and
disposal of connected devices have an energy and environmental impact (e.g.
e-waste).
Therefore, it is crucial that policymakers keep in mind that the effects of
digitalization may not always be compatible with environmental preservation,
and that well-considered regulations must take all of these dynamics into con-
sideration.
Some specific technologies that are essential for sustainability may also have
a substantial influence on sustainability. Take, for instance, the capability of
carbon capture and storage (CCS) to cut CO2 emissions from electricity and
industry. Every aspect of the CCS value chain might reap substantial benefits
from technological advancements.
There is also enough opportunity for businesses and politicians to employ
digital technology more creatively to promote environmental sustainability.
For instance, many cities assess air pollution with static monitoring stations,
but their implementation may be hampered by expensive prices. Through the
addition of sensors to cars, pilot projects are expanding this network to the
Internet of Things (IoT). In addition, Google has started a new program to
measure air pollution in its Streetview map.
National space agency efforts to increase monitoring, reporting, and verifica-
tion of greenhouse gas emissions are an innovative illustration of how digital
technology may promote sustainability policy aims. Verification techniques
and the integrity of carbon certification programs necessitate more precise
accounting.
The United Nations and the World Bank have both financed
programs that investigate the potential for big data to bring new informa-
tion on climate change monitoring, analysis, and adaptation. Launched in
March 2017, the UN’s Data for Climate Action program pushes both public
and commercial data-rich organizations to make big data publicly available.
In turn, scientists, academics, and businesspeople might utilize these data
streams to uncover new insights and methods to affect human behavior and
climate change.
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Use of data centers for improved statistics
71
7.3
Use of data centers for improved statistics
The collecting and utilization of digital data has the potential to transform
our understanding of energy and throw fresh light on how and why energy is
utilized. The quality, timeliness, and availability of energy data may be im-
proved via digital data access and innovative data collection and combination
techniques. This, in turn, can enhance the decision-making of decision-makers,
corporations, and other actors.
Consider the generation and utilization of power. If energy generators cap-
ture real-time data in digital format, this data might possibly be submitted
to oﬀicial energy statistics institutes under the correct circumstances. This
might help make near-real-time oﬀicial statistics on generating and fuel input
possible.
Data is a commonly-used word with a variety of meanings. In the context of
digitization, it is important to evaluate the following three interrelated but
distinct definitions:
• Statistics are facts, such as a country’s yearly energy balance, or, more
oﬀicially, “numerical statements of facts in any area of investigation set
in relation to each other.”
• Structured data are huge, organized datasets that are typically created
by state administrations, such as data on feed-in-tariffs or energy audits.
Structured data can also originate from the energy business, for example,
measurements from electric metering devices.
• Big data refers to massive quantities of data collected from a variety of
sources, sometimes in near real-time. ICT consultancy Gartner defines
big data as “high-volume, high-speed, and/or diverse information assets
that require new forms of processing to enable better decision-making,
detailed information discovery, and process optimisation” due to the
fact that data can be collected through business or control processes
that were not designed specifically for data analysis.
Data aggregation, as its name implies, tries to aggregate and manage many
data sources and use them to create a better knowledge of the energy system.
One example is the United Kingdom’s efforts to link data on local regions’
yearly electricity and/or gas use with information on building stock (kind of
buildings, floor area, age), energy audits, and socio-economic factors. As evi-
denced by the UK’s National Energy Eﬀiciency Data Framework, the ensuing
==PAGE:80==
72
7 Policies suggested
analysis may be economically relevant and assist in comprehending the impact
and targeting of energy eﬀiciency initiatives (NEED). A second example are
the data centers that are being established in the Nordic nations to increase
competition in the retail energy markets by bringing all data to a single access
point in order to improve switching and other market processes for customers
and other market participants. On its Energi Data Service, the Danish power
grid operator EnergiNet.dk is now storing very detailed, anonymous data in
near-real-time. These are then made accessible as open aggregated data on
energy consumption, production by source, trade, CO2 emissions, transmis-
sion line capacity, and wholesale market pricing in an effort to facilitate the
creation of new products and statistical analysis.
An integral component of any data fusion is a stringent validation procedure,
which creates high-quality data for further usage. Data sets formed by inte-
grating many data sources must be reproducible, and statistics of this type
require metadata to describe how they were constructed and where uncer-
tainty exists. The representativeness and completeness of data continue to be
of the utmost importance. Only if policymakers and business enable access
to these new data sources will the opportunity presented by digitalisation to
enhance energy statistics be realized. Data aggregation, as its name implies,
tries to aggregate and manage many data sources and use them to create a
better knowledge of the energy system. The development of the principles
and systems that will make this possible still requires substantial effort. Re-
cent policy publications from the European Commission give a comprehensive
review of the fundamental concerns and a number of potential solutions.[48]
7.4
Recommendations pertaining to the
energy transition
The enthusiasm for digitalisation is warranted: this development includes
higher energy savings, yet it also carries with it significant threats and enor-
mous potential. Indeed, how Europe decides to manage digitalization may
have a good or negative effect on future energy consumption trends.
For this reason, the Coalition for Energy Savings [90], an alliance of businesses,
local governments, cooperatives, and civil society organizations working to cre-
ate a sustainable European Union, has formulated four key recommendations
for the energy transition of our continent:
==PAGE:81==
7.4 Recommendations pertaining to the energy transition
73
• Implement the maxim “energy eﬀiciency first” in all future energy-related
policies
• Promote the implementation of directives established at the European
level and the enforcement of existing regulations
• Create planning standards for future infrastructure
• Analyzing social trends and researching their optimal utilization (start-
ing with digitalization)
Andrea Voigt, a member of the Coalition for Energy Savings, drew attention to
a significant paradox regarding digitisation: this social trend has the potential
to facilitate the achievement of energy eﬀiciency, but at the same time, it
necessitates a great deal of energy consumption, with the risk of going in the
opposite direction of consumption reduction.
One need just examine the massive data centres located across the globe,
whose energy consumption is substantial due to the enormous amount of in-
coming data that must be processed, stored, and analyzed, as well as the
amount of energy necessary to counterbalance the enormous heat produced.
Another example is smart homes: their automation and integration with a
worldwide network of other smart buildings, which continually exchange data,
will undoubtedly consume a huge quantity of energy.
Lastly, we must not ignore all the other digitalisation-related changes and
their effects on energy demand (e.g. Artificial Intelligence, sharing economy
and prosumerism) Almut Bonhage, the project manager for the Coalition for
Energy Savings, stated that digitization is essential if the EU is to accomplish
the energy transition, as it provides a potent lever for reducing energy usage
and increasing end-use eﬀiciency. Case in point:
It can facilitate communication, collaboration, and automation in the trans-
portation sector. Moreover, digital truck solutions might lower energy usage
for road transport by 20-25%.
In buildings, intelligent controls will enhance the comfort of occupants and
fundamentally alter the manner in which energy is used to power them.
Digital energy management systems will offer real-time data and controls in
the industrial sector, resulting in a 10-20% reduction in energy use.
Moreover, digitisation can unleash other potential in the energy system as a
whole: consider smart houses, which, when put in an interconnected network,
will cease to be simple energy consumers and will play numerous functions
==PAGE:82==
74
7 Policies suggested
(e.g. with solar energy, the citizen becomes a producer of energy that will be
made available to other buildings).
The European Association of Electrical Contractors [91] stated that in order
to design the most suitable energy solutions for infrastructure and buildings,
electrical contractors need the appropriate digital skills, and urged member
states to find a way to provide them with digital training courses (e.g. via
online platforms).
European Energy Retailers, on the other hand, empha-
sized their critical role in collecting real-time data on energy consumption via
digital tools - such as the latest generation of meters - and their subsequent
use to raise customer awareness on the conscious use of energy by revealing
their consumption patterns and how to optimize them to reduce waste (thus
decreasing the cost of their bills).
Lastly, First Solar’s Leah Charpentier noted that ”the method we create solar
energy is not as eﬀicient as it might be”: too much clean energy is squandered
since it is not put into any infrastructure so that it may circulate to other
buildings.
The solution to this serious ineﬀiciency is once again digitalization: by in-
stalling solar panels on buildings and connecting them to distribution and
transmission grids, citizens can generate their own energy, manage it, and
eventually circulate the excess, thereby creating the flexibility to respond to
the fluctuating energy needs of the markets.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusions and
future works
In this thesis work, a study is carried out on the impact of digital technologies,
used in the energy sector, on environmental sustainability.
To carry out this analysis, a systematic literature study was initially con-
ducted, resulting in 48 articles, which were later supplemented with reports
and news items for a total of 91 references. In particular, the study begins
with an analysis of the current energy sector, emphasising the importance of
digitalization as a key tool for achieving the decarbonization targets promoted
by current energy policies.
As digitalization is a non-trivial transformation process, there is no clear and
uniform definition in the literature. On the contrary, the term is widely used
with definitions that often differ from each other and are confused with similar
concepts such as digitisation and digital transformation. A clear distinction
between these concepts is provided along with an overview of currently used
digital technologies:
• Internet of things
• Artificial intelligence and Big Data
• Blockchain
• Robotics
• Cloud Computing
Subsequently, an analysis is made of the impacts of the identified technologies
and the relevant metrics used to quantify them. Both positive and negative
impacts emerge from the literature and are carefully classified and described.
==PAGE:84==
76
8 Conclusions and future works
Although the positive impacts are well documented, based on the literature re-
viewed, little is known about the negative impacts and the associated rebound
effect on environmental sustainability.
Particular interest has been devoted to the study of the negative impacts of
data centre use and its evaluation metrics. This is because such technology
is considered at the basis of all those mentioned in the study and also has
a significant impact on environmental sustainability in terms of energy con-
sumption (1% of global energy consumption) and greenhouse gas emissions
(2.3% of global emissions).
Finally, the study concludes with an exploration of policies and their short-
comings to ensure a sustainable digital transition. In particular, it emerges
that there is still no policy framework adaptable to all digital technologies in
Europe to measure the harmful effects on environmental sustainability, espe-
cially in the energy sector.
New digital technologies have the potential to reshape, modernise and change
the European energy system into a sustainable and climate-neutral one. How-
ever, as reported in this study, they have several negative impacts and re-
bound effects that may affect environmental sustainability. Despite increas-
ing amount of work on the broad effect of digitalization, under-standing the
effects of digital technology on environmental sustainability remains a chal-
lenging task. As digital technology increasing becomes an integral part of the
energy system, systematically assessing these diverse, dynamic, and subtle
effects in the context of sustainability is particularly important to add new
knowledge to existing literature.
In the near future, the adoption of these technologies will grow exponentially,
so more research is needed on the accurate identification and quantification
of these negative impacts and the development of policies that are able to
contain their rebound effects.
==PAGE:85==
List of Figures
1.1
Guide for the reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Traditional electricity grid [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Smart electricity grid [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
The overarching aim of the European Green Deal [3] . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
17 Sustainable Development Goals [7]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
Number of papers published per year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Document types in the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Document types in the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Number of papers per publisher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Number of the most found keywords . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
Concept of Sustainability [45] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
List of Tables
2.1
Definitions and their authors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1
% of Document types in the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Number of papers per publisher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Number of the most found keywords . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Definitions of IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Definitions of AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Cloud Computer Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:86==
78
List of Tables
6.1
Metrics for DC facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.1
Indicators used by UE to calculate the DESI Index[88] . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
Terna. Contesto ed evoluzione del sistema energetico. 2019. url: https:
//download.terna.it/terna/Contesto%20ed%20evoluzione%20del%
20Sistema%20Elettrico_8d75639fa148d01.pdf.
[2]
energysage. Understanding the electrical grid. url: https://www.energysage.
com/electricity/understanding-electrical-grid/.
[3]
European Parliament. European Green Deal. 2019. url: https://euinasean.
eu/eu-green-deal/.
[4]
P Glavic, ZN Pintaric, and M Bogataj. Process Design and Sustainable
Development—A European Perspective. Processes 2021, 9, 148. 2021.
[5]
Alexandros Nikas et al. “Perspective of comprehensive and comprehen-
sible multi-model energy and climate science in Europe.” In: Energy 215
(2021), page 119153.
[6]
Alicja Sikora. “European Green Deal–legal and financial challenges of
the climate change.” In: Era Forum. Volume 21. 4. Springer. 2021, pages 681–
697.
[7]
United Nations. 17 Sustainable Development Goals. 2018. url: https:
//sdgs.un.org/goals.
[8]
Arnulf Grubler. “Energy transitions research: Insights and cautionary
tales.” In: Energy policy 50 (2012), pages 8–16.
[9]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook. 2012. url: https:
//www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2012.
[10]
Benjamin K Sovacool. The history and politics of energy transitions:
Comparing contested views and finding common ground. Technical re-
port. WIDER working paper, 2016.
[11]
Global Carbon Project. 2022. url: https://www.globalcarbonproject.
org/.
==PAGE:88==
80
Bibliography
[12]
Jonas J Monast. “The Ends and Means of Decarbonization.” In: Envi-
ronmental Law 50.1 (2020), pages 21–43.
[13]
Peter Weill and Stephanie Woerner. What’s your digital business model?:
six questions to help you build the next-generation enterprise. Harvard
Business Press, 2018.
[14]
Wim Coreynen, Paul Matthyssens, and Wouter Van Bockhaven. “Boost-
ing servitization through digitization: Pathways and dynamic resource
configurations for manufacturers.” In: Industrial marketing management
60 (2017), pages 42–53.
[15]
J Scott Brennen and Daniel Kreiss. “Digitalization.” In: The interna-
tional encyclopedia of communication theory and philosophy (2016),
pages 1–11.
[16]
J Ross. “Don’t Confuse Digital with Digitization. 2017.” In: URL https://sloanreview.
mit. edu/article/dont-confuse-digital-with-digitization ().
[17]
Conoscenza pratica della trasformazione digitale: comprendere il cambi-
amento, sviluppare soluzioni, aumentare il valore.
[18]
Kerstin Fritzsche, Silke Niehoff, and Grischa Beier. “Industry 4.0 and cli-
mate change—Exploring the science-policy gap.” In: Sustainability 10.12
(2018), page 4511.
[19]
Ward Van Heddeghem et al. “Trends in worldwide ICT electricity con-
sumption from 2007 to 2012.” In: Computer Communications 50 (2014),
pages 64–76.
[20]
Jason Bloomberg. “Digitization, digitalization, and digital transforma-
tion: confuse them at your peril.” In: Forbes. Retrieved on August 28
(2018), page 2019.
[21]
Gartner’s glossary. Definition of Digitalization. url: https : / / www .
gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/digitalization.
[22]
IRENA. Enabling Technologies: Innovation Landscape briefs. url: https:
//www.irena.org/publications/2019/Sep/Enabling-Technologies.
[23]
Wenjing Lyu and Jin Liu. “Artificial Intelligence and emerging digi-
tal technologies in the energy sector.” In: Applied Energy 303 (2021),
page 117615.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
81
[24]
Muhammad Saidu Aliero et al. “An Overview of Internet of Things:
Understanding the Issues and Challenges of a More Connected World.”
In: International Journal of Computing and Communication Networks
2.1 (2020), pages 1–11.
[25]
Hannes Tschofenig et al. Architectural considerations in smart object
networking. Technical report. 2015.
[26]
Marco Zennaro. “Introduction to the Internet of Things.” In: Telecom-
munication and ICT4D Lab, The Abdus Salam International Centre for
Theoretical Physics Trieste, Italy (2017), pages 1–48.
[27]
Oxford. Oxford’s Dixtionary. url: https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.
com/.
[28]
John McCarthy. “Artificial intelligence, logic and formalizing common
sense.” In: Philosophical logic and artificial intelligence. Springer, 1989,
pages 161–190.
[29]
Encyclopedia Britannica. Encyclopedia Britannica. url: https://www.
britannica.com/.
[30]
Elaine Rich. “Artificial intelligence and the humanities.” In: Computers
and the Humanities (1985), pages 117–122.
[31]
Philip Russom et al. “Big data analytics.” In: TDWI best practices report,
fourth quarter 19.4 (2011), pages 1–34.
[32]
James Manyika et al. Big data: The next frontier for innovation, com-
petition, and productivity. McKinsey Global Institute, 2011.
[33]
MGCSA Walport et al. “Distributed ledger technology: Beyond blockchain.”
In: UK Government Oﬀice for Science 1 (2016), pages 1–88.
[34]
Rajkumar Buyya et al. “Cloud Computing and Emerging IT Platforms:
Vision, Hype, and Reality for Delivering Computing as the 5th Utility.”
In: Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 25.6 (June 2009), pages 599–616. issn:
0167-739X. doi: 10.1016/j.future.2008.12.001. url: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.future.2008.12.001.
[35]
Lizhe Wang et al. “Scientific cloud computing: Early definition and expe-
rience.” In: 2008 10th ieee international conference on high performance
computing and communications. Ieee. 2008, pages 825–830.
[36]
Sarvesh Kumar. “Virtualization, The Great Thing and Issues in Cloud
Computing.” In: (June 2013).
==PAGE:90==
82
Bibliography
[37]
Carl Hewitt. “ORGs for scalable, robust, privacy-friendly client cloud
computing.” In: IEEE internet computing 12.5 (2008), pages 96–99.
[38]
Michael Armbrust et al. Above the clouds: A berkeley view of cloud com-
puting. Technical report. Technical Report UCB/EECS-2009-28, EECS
Department, University of California …, 2009.
[39]
Markus Klems, Jens Nimis, and Stefan Tai. “Do clouds compute? a
framework for estimating the value of cloud computing.” In: Workshop
on E-Business. Springer. 2008, pages 110–123.
[40]
Anand Tikotekar et al. “Effects of virtualization on a scientific appli-
cation running a hyperspectral radiative transfer code on virtual ma-
chines.” In: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on System-level virtualiza-
tion for high performance computing. 2008, pages 16–23.
[41]
Peter Mell, Tim Grance, et al. “The NIST definition of cloud computing.”
In: (2011).
[42]
Nuno Santos, Krishna P Gummadi, Rodrigo Rodrigues, et al. “Towards
Trusted Cloud Computing.” In: HotCloud 9.9 (2009), page 3.
[43]
Justin M Grimes, Paul T Jaeger, and Jimmy Lin. “Weathering the storm:
The policy implications of cloud computing.” In: (2009).
[44]
Ling Qian et al. “Cloud computing: An overview.” In: IEEE international
conference on cloud computing. Springer. 2009, pages 626–631.
[45]
PakTech. The pillars of sustainability. url: https://blog.paktech-
opi.com/the-pillars-of-sustainability.
[46]
Luca Valera. “La sostenibilità: un concetto da chiarire.” In: La sosteni-
bilità: un concetto da chiarire (2012), pages 39–53.
[47]
Taryn Leigh Reddy and RJ Thomson. “Environmental, social and eco-
nomic sustainability: implications for actuarial science.” In: Actuaries
Institute (2015), pages 23–27.
[48]
IEA. Digitalisation and Energy. 2017. url: https://www.iea.org/
reports/digitalisation-and-energy.
[49]
Jiangquan Wang et al. “Impacts of digital technology on energy sustain-
ability: China case study.” In: Applied Energy 323 (2022), page 119329.
[50]
Sean Dieter Tebje Kelly, Nagender Kumar Suryadevara, and Subhas
Chandra Mukhopadhyay. “Towards the implementation of IoT for en-
vironmental condition monitoring in homes.” In: IEEE sensors journal
13.10 (2013), pages 3846–3853.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
83
[51]
Girolamo Di Francia. “The development of sensor applications in the
sectors of energy and environment in Italy, 1976–2015.” In: Sensors 17.4
(2017), page 793.
[52]
Types of Sensors that Coalesce Perfectly with an IoT App. 2019. url:
https://www.itfirms.co/8-types-of-sensors-that-coalesce-
perfectly-with-an-iot-app/.
[53]
Luis Pérez-Lombard, José Ortiz, and Christine Pout. “A review on build-
ings energy consumption information.” In: Energy and buildings 40.3
(2008), pages 394–398.
[54]
Naser Hossein Motlagh et al. “An IoT-based automation system for older
homes: A use case for lighting system.” In: 2018 IEEE 11th Conference
on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA). IEEE. 2018,
pages 1–6.
[55]
Indra Riyanto et al. “Motion sensor application on building lighting
installation for energy saving and carbon reduction joint crediting mech-
anism.” In: Applied System Innovation 1.3 (2018), page 23.
[56]
Wooyoung Kim et al. “On target tracking with binary proximity sen-
sors.” In: IPSN 2005. Fourth International Symposium on Information
Processing in Sensor Networks, 2005. IEEE. 2005, pages 301–308.
[57]
Arun Ramamurthy and Pramod Jain. “The internet of things in the
power sector opportunities in Asia and the Pacific.” In: (2017).
[58]
AR Al-Ali. “Internet of things role in the renewable energy resources.”
In: Energy Procedia 100 (2016), pages 34–38.
[59]
Stamatis Karnouskos. “The cooperative internet of things enabled smart
grid.” In: Proceedings of the 14th IEEE international symposium on
consumer electronics (ISCE2010), June. 2010, pages 07–10.
[60]
Bernd Teufel, Anton Sentic, and Mathias Barmet. “Blockchain energy:
Blockchain in future energy systems.” In: Journal of Electronic Science
and Technology 17.4 (2019), page 100011.
[61]
Pornpit Wongthongtham et al. “Blockchain-enabled Peer-to-Peer energy
trading.” In: Computers & Electrical Engineering 94 (2021), page 107299.
[62]
Michael Mylrea and Sri Nikhil Gupta Gourisetti. “Blockchain for smart
grid resilience: Exchanging distributed energy at speed, scale and secu-
rity.” In: 2017 Resilience Week (RWS). IEEE. 2017, pages 18–23.
==PAGE:92==
84
Bibliography
[63]
Esther Mengelkamp et al. “Designing microgrid energy markets: A case
study: The Brooklyn Microgrid.” In: Applied Energy 210 (2018), pages 870–
880.
[64]
Pierre Pinson et al. “The emergence of consumer-centric electricity mar-
kets.” In: Distribution & Utilization 34.12 (2017), pages 27–31.
[65]
Eurelectric. Eurelectric launches expert discussion platform on blockchain.
2017. url: http://www.eurelectric.org/news/2017/eurelectric-
launches-expert-discussionplatform-on-blockchain/.
[66]
William Frere Lawless and Donald A Sofge. “Evaluations: autonomy and
artificial intelligence: a threat or savior?” In: Autonomy and artificial
intelligence: a threat or savior? Springer, 2017, pages 295–316.
[67]
Deloitte. Blockchain enigma paradox opportunity. 2017. url: https://
%20www2 . deloitte . com / content / dam / Deloitte / uk / Documents /
Innovation/deloitteuk-blockchain-full-report.pdf.
[68]
Lucian Stefanita Grigore et al. “The Integration of Collaborative Robot
Systems and Their Environmental Impacts.” In: Processes 8.4 (2020),
page 494.
[69]
Accenture. Cloud computing and Sustainability: The Environmental Ben-
efits of Moving to the Cloud. 2017. url: http://www.wspenvironmental.
com/media/docs/newsroom/Cloud_computing_and_Sustainability_-
_Whitepaper_-_Nov_2010.pdf.
[70]
Ricardo Bianchini and Ram Rajamony. “Power and energy management
for server systems.” In: Computer 37.11 (2004), pages 68–76.
[71]
Suzanne Rivoire et al. “JouleSort: a balanced energy-eﬀiciency bench-
mark.” In: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMOD international confer-
ence on Management of data. 2007, pages 365–376.
[72]
Jan CT Bieser and Lorenz M Hilty. “An approach to assess indirect
environmental effects of digitalization based on a time-use perspective.”
In: Advances and new trends in environmental Informatics. Springer,
2018, pages 67–78.
[73]
GeSI:SMARTer2030. ICT Solutions for 21st Century Challenges. 2015.
url: https://gesi.org/research/smarter2030-ict-solutions-
for-21st-century-challenges.
[74]
Cédric Gossart. “Rebound effects and ICT: a review of the literature.”
In: ICT innovations for sustainability (2015), pages 435–448.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
85
[75]
Lorenz M Hilty. Information technology and sustainability: Essays on the
relationship between information technology and sustainable development.
BoD–Books on Demand, 2011.
[76]
Network Digital 360. The environmental impact of data centres: ap-
proaches and challenges for sustainable development. 2022. url: https:
//www.agendadigitale.eu/smart-city/limpatto-ambientale-dei-
datacenter-approcci-e-sfide-per-uno-sviluppo-sostenibile/.
[77]
EPA. Report Datacenter congress. url: https : / / www . energystar .
gov/ia/partners/prod_development/downloads/EPA_Datacenter_
Report_Congress_Final1.pdf.
[78]
Mauricio Arregoces and Maurizio Portolani. Data center fundamentals.
Cisco Press, 2003.
[79]
Xiaobo Fan, Wolf-Dietrich Weber, and Luiz Andre Barroso. “Power pro-
visioning for a warehouse-sized computer.” In: ACM SIGARCH computer
architecture news 35.2 (2007), pages 13–23.
[80]
GREEN GRID DATA. “Center power eﬀiciency metrics: Pue and dcie.”
In: (2008).
[81]
Steve Greenberg et al. “Best practices for data centers: Lessons learned
from benchmarking 22 data centers.” In: Proceedings of the ACEEE Sum-
mer Study on Energy Eﬀiciency in Buildings in Asilomar, CA. ACEEE,
August 3 (2006), pages 76–87.
[82]
Microsoft. Microsoft—creating a greener data center. 2009. url: http:
//www.microsoft.com/presspass/features/2009/%20apr09/04-
02Greendatacenters.mspx.
[83]
Gustavo Callou et al. “Estimating sustainability impact of high depend-
able data centers: a comparative study between brazilian and us energy
mixes.” In: Computing 95.12 (2013), pages 1137–1170.
[84]
Robert Pepper. “Cisco visual networking index (VNI) global mobile data
traﬀic forecast update.” In: Technical report, Cisco, Tech. Rep. (2013).
[85]
René Itten et al. “Digital transformation—life cycle assessment of digital
services, multifunctional devices and cloud computing.” In: The Interna-
tional Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 25.10 (2020), pages 2093–2098.
[86]
European Commission. Digitalisation of the European Energy System.
url: https://digital- strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/
digitalisation-energy.
==PAGE:94==
86
Bibliography
[87]
European Commission. Digital Decade. 2022. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_4503.
[88]
European Commission. Digital Economy and Society Index. url: https:
//digital-agenda-data.eu/datasets/desi/indicators.
[89]
European Commission. Action plan on the digitalisation of the energy
sector. 2021. url: https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/action-plan-
digitalisation-energy-sector-roadmap-launched-2021-jul-27_
en.
[90]
Coalition for Energy Savings. url: https://energycoalition.eu/.
[91]
European Association of Electrical Contractors. url: https://europe-
on.org/.
