==PAGE:1==
Technical University of DenmarkMSc Sustainable Energy T
DTU Management
Optimization of PtX fuel production in different 
locations taking local resources into account 
Green ammonia production with concentration of solar power
Supervisors
Author
Marie Münster - Professor MSO, Department of Technology, Management and 
Economics Energy Economics and Modelling
Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion – PhD Candidate, DTU Management
José Tomás Figueroa Bruce - s202685
August 29th 2022
==PAGE:2==
Optimization of PtX fuel production in different locations
taking local resources into account
Green ammonia production with concentration of solar power
Jos´e Tom´as Figueroa Bruce
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Abstract
In light of international concerns towards climate change, green transition, and most recently energy independence, countries
aim to maximize their share of own renewable energy. To some countries, this is an interesting opportunity to become net exporters
through local production of e-fuels such as Hydrogen (H2) and Ammonia (NH3). This paper investigates the production of green
ammonia in Chile’s Atacama desert, a place known for its strong solar radiation [1]. A techno-economic Linear Programming
(LP) model is developed for a 1000 kt/NH3 per year fuel plant, with the optimized combination of wind power and both solar
photovoltaic (PV) and concentration of solar power (CSP). Hourly profiles for solar and wind energy have been considered and an
83% capacity factor CSP plant has been simulated. Results showed that under a baseline case of only solar photovoltaic and wind,
the cost of supplying demanded fuel is 750 €2020/tNH3 and installed capacity is predominantly photovoltaic. While considering
CSP in the optimization, cost reduced to 735 €2020/tNH3 mostly by replacing the energy storage from batteries for molten salt
thermal energy storage (TES) from the CSP, that powers ammonia production overnight. Results show that technology cost for
CSP are still limiting, but with a potential decrease of 35% of it’s investment cost, CSP and PV could complementary supply a
cheaper and more efficient system with less over sizing of the electrolyzer and thereby achieving more full load hours. Further
improvements in CSP stability and decrease in costs could potentially result in fully independence of batteries and reducing the
installed capacity of electrolyzer by 50%.
Keywords: Energy Transition, Renewable Energy, Power To X, Green Ammonia, CSP
1. Introduction
The year 2022 has been a record-breaking year for wild-
fires, droughts, and high temperatures across the globe. This
evidence validates the potentially catastrophic consequences of
climate change. Therefore substantial greenhouse gas emission
reductions, have to be achieved with urgency, to achieve net
zero and fulfil Paris agreement commitments [2]. To achieve
this carbon-free scenario by 2050, extensive electrification and
massive deployment of renewable power in needed. Though
electrification is needed to attain long term goals, it is a chal-
lenge to electrify energy intensive sectors such as industries and
heavy transport. These sectors are expected to shift from fossil
fuels towards green hydrogen and other bigger molecules de-
rived from it. At the same time, the conversion from renewable
electricity to storable chemicals can provide flexibility and sta-
bility to a system highly penetrated by variable energy sources
[3].
Interest in Power to X (PtX), or converting power into any
other energy carrier has grown immensely, and electrolysis of
water has become the corner stone of the energy transition.
Green hydrogen is expected to supply more than 12% of the
total energy consumption by 2050 [4], therefore policymakers
are already creating road-maps and plans to encourage the de-
velopment of the hydrogen economy worldwide [5] [6]. The
production of green hydrogen is highly dependent on the char-
acteristics of the renewable resource such as solar, wind, hy-
dro or others. Therefore, many researchers have focused their
investigations in finding the best and most feasible locations,
with top quality local resources and conditions to accomplish
minimal costs of production of the green fuels and gain a com-
petitive advantage by being front runners.
Hybridization of solar PV and wind energy has been studied
by Armijo and Philibert [7] in Chile, and a detailed model for
green ammonia was presented with the conclusion that combin-
ing PV and wind is more favourable when there is upgrading of
hydrogen to ammonia. This is due to the lower flexibility of
the ammonia synthesis process, in which, with hybridization,
the required intermediate storage gets minimized. On the con-
trary, hydrogen production can cope up better with a variable
power supply. Also Gallardo et al [8], determined the Atacama
desert as an strategical point for global green fuels export and
the primary focus was on the supply chain cost calculations and
included ammonia only as a intermediate carrier towards Japan.
Similar studies of solar ammonia in desertic areas prognosticate
a decrease in levelized cost of the fuel from 718 USD/tNH3 to
about 450 USD/tNH3 considering PV as power supply together
with intermediate storage of molten salt [9]. In addition DTU,
[10] has performed a very detailed study of the current pro-
Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates
August 29, 2022
==PAGE:3==
duction methods of different relevant fuels and configurations
where green ammonia from renewable sources is also calcu-
lated in Chile. The study conducted utilizes a similar location
to this study, with similar solar resource but with lower wind
speeds. However, the study did not include CSP technology in
their model.
Since CSP with thermal energy storage for electricity pro-
duction at utility scale is not yet as mature as PV or wind, there
is a lack of information on how these three technologies com-
bine and how they can complement each other in powering a
green fuel power plant. Even though many outlooks foresee
this technology to play a relevant role in dispatchable energy,
information is not yet available [3].
Ammonia is currently the second most widely produced in-
dustrial chemical with an annual global production of more than
140 million tons, of which the majority is destined for the man-
ufacture of nitrogen compounds and several fertilizing prod-
ucts, is also used as a refrigerant and explosive components.
The ammonia production itself represents 1.4% of the worlds
carbon dioxide emissions and around 2% of the final energy
consumption [11][12]. This existent market and industry can
immediately react and demand green ammonia displacing the
production of fossil hydrogen and ammonia. For example mak-
ing the transition from CO2 intensive fertilizer and thus food
products, to a completely sustainable food chain.
From the whole NH3 market around 20 millions tons are
already being traded and transported by ships [12]. Meaning
that despite the toxicity, this fuel has had an established safety
record in both industry and transport, including some special-
ized ports and tanker ships. This would make the deployment of
bulk green ammonia easier than other fuels such as hydrogen.
But ships are not only carrying enormous amounts of fuels
and chemicals in intercontinental voyages, but are also respon-
sible for around 3% of all the carbon emission of the world.
Mainly due to its high dependence on crude oil, which is one of
the least refined fossil fuels [12].
Green fuels such as methanol and ammonia are considered to
be the future of zero carbon shipping due to their energy den-
sity and lower storage cost when compared to pure H2. But
ammonia is proving to be more attractive due to the null car-
bon content and therefore the exclusion of carbon capture cost
versus e-methanol. Some approximations foresee the need of
more than 180 million tones of ammonia by 2050 to decar-
bonize supply of only 43% of shipping sector [13] [14]. This
represents more than the global current production of the fuel.
Therefore immense effort in electrolysis capacity is still needed
to to stay in line with the Paris Agreement, decarbonize ship-
ping among others and avoid temperature increase of more than
1.5◦C. Due to massive interest in power-to-ammonia concept,
resources have been allocated to investigate the best way of
pairing variable renewable energy with production of this fuel,
for example Iqbal et al [15] provides analysis on how flexible
the production of ammonia on a Haber-Bosch reactor can be
without damaging the catalyst and shutting down the process
reactor, thereby understanding the limits of the process regard-
ing the intermittency of renewable power and green hydrogen
supply.
Chile has been identified among the best and key strategical
locations for developing a green hydrogen economy [4][16],
thanks to the abundant renewable energy.
Especially in the
north, the extensive land receives the highest global horizontal
irradiation (GHI) of the world which is more than 2500 kWh/m2
per year. Similarly, direct normal irradiation (DNI) is as im-
pressive with annual values of more than 3500 kWh/m2 making
it the perfect location for concentration of solar power (CSP)
[1] [17]. This solar resource is currently allowing utility scale
PV to achieve one of the highest capacity factors (CFs) in the
world, over 33% [18]. The abundant resource has led Chile
into deploying, up to July 2022, an amount of 7.6 GW of solar
photovoltaic with 3 GW more under construction and 20 GW
approved or waiting for environmental approval [19]. In addi-
tion to the solar resource in the northern quarter of the country,
onshore wind energy is also relevant, due to the geography of
the zone, achieving capacity factors of more than 30% . Figure
1 shows these capacity factors where the Antofagasta region
shows fewer land restrictions and high potential of photovoltaic
capacity factors, as well as some moderate wind resource in the
high altitudes. The site chosen for the investigation, shown in a
black dot, is in precisely where both wind and solar show higher
capacity factors.
Despite low radiation, the southernmost region features ex-
ceptional wind resource, creating another hot spot for hydro-
gen generation. This country-level resource has taken Chile
to launch one of the first national green hydrogen strategies
in South America, during late 2020. Developed with ambi-
tious short and long term goals for developing 5 GW of elec-
trolysis by 2025 and 25 GW by 2030. Additionally, the coun-
try also aims to produce the world’s cheapest hydrogen, under
1.5 USD/kg before 2030 alongside with being within the top 3
green fuel exporters of the world by 2040. The same has been
politically agreed to support this two locations and bolster the
green hydrogen development, thereby supporting the industry
to create an increasing demand of this fuel [20].
Atacama region is the third northern most region of Chile but
one of the biggest with more than 126.000 square kilometers. Is
a desert area, not densely populated, but heavily influenced by
extensive copper mining industry, facilities that require big and
stable energy demand, and possible demand of e-fuels to tran-
sition to greener economies . In addition to proximity to ports,
roads and electrical grid and chemical demand makes this loca-
tion suitable for big, extensive plants that harvest solar energy.
It is considered to have more that 15.000 square kilometers to
deploy CSP technology, even accounting for land restrictions
[17]. The location has flat and extensive terrains without natu-
ral disturbances, that are required for projects of this kind.
A complete analysis of CSP technology and hybridization
with more variable renewable energy to produce green ammo-
nia in Chile is still nonexistent. Relevant to pave the way for
new green fuel facilities and gain a competitive advantage now.
The aim of this paper is to create a generalized approach for
calculating the minimal cost setup of a green ammonia power
plant in 2022, with a mix of variable renewable energy, but fo-
cusing on the novel inclusion of CSP, and how can this tech-
nology influence the fuel plant configuration and dynamics, for
2
==PAGE:4==
example in terms of installed capacities and overall costs. It is
believed that this kind of techno-economical assessments can
provide valuable insights to support policy makers in Chile to
develop financial support schemes and ensure technological de-
velopment strategies to achieve carbon neutrality.
2. CSP Solar Tower
A CSP solar tower power plant has mainly four components,
heliostat field, tower thermal receiver, thermal energy storage
(TES) and power block. These systems are usually deployed in
areas with high direct normal irradiance. The principle behind
is reflecting the incoming solar radiation and concentrating it to
generate heat into a heat transfer fluid (typically an oil or more
recently, molten salts). This heat is later exchanged to produce
steam and run a conventional Rankine-cycle to generate elec-
tricity similar to other thermal power plants. Hence they are
also known as solar thermal power plants.
Concentrated solar power plants built together with thermal
energy storage are being considered as one of the most prospec-
tive power plants in the future of green energy systems. This,
since with this configuration a plant, can deliver low cost, dis-
patchable electricity from the intermittent solar radiation, thus
making it a valid base-load technology. The addition of high
temperature TES has over the years increased the efficiency of
the systems allowing configurations of point focusing such as
central tower receivers to reach higher temperatures and there-
fore higher efficiencies than most widely deployed linear focus-
ing CSP systems [21].
Today, new solar thermal power plants are almost exclusively
including storage systems. The decreasing cost of these units,
reached to about 10% of the total investment, and these are
allowing the decoupling of the generation from the sunlight
hours, therefore achieving more profitable markets [22]. De-
signs of this systems have converged into two-tanks, high and
low temperature of molten salt expected to be the benchmark
for central tower CSP electricity generation [23]. In line with
this projections, Chile´s energy planing authority stated that on
a favorable case PV with CSP coupled with TES, should ac-
count for more that 50% of the electricity production by 2050,
achieving installations capacities of more that 11.5 GW in CSP
[24]. CSP technology has over the last ten years decreased the
costs in 50% even though the storage times have constantly in-
creased. And is expected to keep decreasing with new projects
coming online and new data and knowledge gained. In Chile
for example, according to Chilean Association for Renewable
Energy and Storage (ACERA since its name in Spanish), there
are more than 2.4 GW of CSP projects approved and more than
0.6 GW being assessed for approval. The characteristics of this
technology makes it a good choice when talking about remote
areas and working as a dedicated source for further projects, big
industrial demand or fuel synthesis. Additionally powering PtX
plant without a carbon intensive grid, the fuel produced will be
100% carbon free in terms of power supply [19].
3. Methodology
An off grid power-to-ammonia plant was studied with renew-
able energy power supply, wind, solar photovoltaic and concen-
tration of solar power. The configuration of the plant is shown
in figure 2 and consists on three main systems; power gener-
ating capacity, displayed in circles, power demanding systems,
shown in rectangles, where most relevant are electrolysis unit
and ammonia synthesis unit, and finally intermediate storage
shown as ovals, including batteries and hydrogen storage.
3.1. CSP model
Since it was out of the scope of this investigation to analyze
the thermo-electrical performance of CSP CT power plant, a
power profile has been simulated taking as starting point an ex-
isting facility in the Atacama region in Chile, the Cerro Dom-
inador. It is a state of the art power plant with central tower
receiver of over 250m height, with a nominal electrical power
of 110 MW. It has 10600 heliostats of 140 m2 each, totaling a
solar field of 148.5 hectares [25]. In order to generate an overall
more stable production profile over the day, Cerro Dominador
also has a 100 MW utility scale horizontal single axis tracking
(HSAT) solar photovoltaic plant. This PV power plant has been
highly recognized for achieving the highest capacity factor of
the country despite the fact that was build in 2015. Both years
2020 and 2021, the PV plant managed to achieve capacity fac-
tors above 34% which can be considered as a benchmark on
what is achievable in the Atacama desert for further references
[18].
In order to simulate the yearly power profile of the 110 MW
CSP plant, relevant parameters from the industry and literature
have been gathered, important yet debatable values for the total
system efficiency has been found and have been tabulated in ta-
ble 1. Most relevant parameters needed were the efficiencies of
the different sub systems of the CSP plant, being them heliostat
field, central tower receiver, TES and power block. Rodriguez
Sanchez et al [26] ad Pacheco et al [27], have conducted exper-
imental analysis to obtain efficiencies of the components but in
smaller scale, for a 15 MW power plant Solar Two. Also Gen-
tile et al [28] has similar investigation for a Spanish CSP CT of
20 MWe with comparable results.
Table 1: CSP efficiency assumptions [26][28]
Efficiencies
Value
Heliostats
ηHelios
60%
Thermal receiver
ηRec
76%
Power block
ηPB
39%
Piping
ηPip
99%
Table 2: Cerro Dominador parameters assumptions [25]
Nominal power (MW)
110
Storage time (h)
17.5
Heliostat field area (km2)
148.4
3
==PAGE:5==
Figure 1: Potential capacity factors for wind and axis tracking PV, left map corresponds to no land constraints and right considers land constraints [17]
Alkaline 
Electrolyzer
NH3 Synthesis  
+ ASU
Batteries
H2 Storage
Solar CSP 
+TES
Solar PV
Wind
H2
NH3
Desalination Plant
H2O
Figure 2: Fuel plant diagram
The simulation of power output begins from the plant pa-
rameters, namely, the heliostat field area, which is the starting
point, reflecting the DNI into the tower receiver. After three
efficiencies are considered the thermal energy can be stored in
the reservoir, respective calculation and efficiencies considered
are shown in equation 1.
EnergyS tored = DNI · Heliostatarea · ηHelios · ηRec · ηpip
(1)
Where DNI is a value expressed in kWh/m2, Heliostatarea is
also modified to be m2, therefore energy output is in kWh.
Since the energy stored is calculated hourly it can also be re-
ferred as a charging power per every hour. To produce at nom-
inal power a total of 110 MWhe, considerable more thermal
energy has to leave the storage tank towards the heat exchanger
and the steam turbine. This hourly maximum thermal energy
requirement is computed with equation 2, and needed to di-
mension the storage tank. Where Energynom is the nominal
110MWhe as electricity output.
Energymax = Energynom
ηpip · ηPB
(2)
Other plant parameter used is maximum thermal energy stor-
age time, which was reported to be 17.5 hrs of full load opera-
tion of the power unit. This was calculated in equation 3 below
and results of a storage level of 5000 MWht which will be used
as upper limit in the simulation.
S toragemax = Energymax · S toragetime
(3)
Some assumption and simplification have been taken, for ex-
ample no minimal load on any of the components was consid-
ered. ηHelios and ηRec were used as fixed values when they are
dependent on the solar radiation and atmospheric conditions
[28]. The simulation involves a perfect foresight of the solar
resource, which is not at all inaccurate considering the good
solar prediction models used currently and the clear skies of
Atacama
In a spreadsheet, starting from the hourly DNI, the thermal
energy received in the heliostats is calculated, then the energy
absorbed by the receiver, and finally the generation for every
hour is added to the TES. For every hour the simulated con-
trol will act on whether it foresees there will be enough solar
radiation to store energy for running the steam turbine at rated
power during nighttime, or not. If not, a fixed decrease in power
is chosen to minimize the non-operating hours of the plant with-
out reducing the overall capacity factor to less than the expected
80% for this plant [22]. Simultaneously, more logical formula-
tions are used to keep the storage within limits and making sure
it discharges whenever is full, to minimize energy spillage.
The simulation was not an optimization, yet it aimed to re-
produce a determined capacity factor, minimizing plant shut-
down and energy spillage, maximizing night operation to cou-
ple with solar PV, and constrained by operational parameters
mentioned before.
The result of the simulation is a normalized hourly profile for
110 MWe CSP + TES technology for year 2020 that can be in-
cluded in the optimization model alongside the other renewable
power inputs.
A 83% capacity factor was the result, slightly over IRENA
report [22] but on the conservative side compared to other re-
4
==PAGE:6==
2000
2050
2100
2150
2200
Time (hours)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized power output
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Storage
CSP Power
CSP Storage (MWht)
Figure 3: CSP+TES behaviour, in Antofagasta
cent sources that estimates new commissioned CSP plants in
Atacama desert to provide values of around 90% capacity fac-
tors [8][29]. Nonetheless the system simulated does not pro-
duce a 100% stable profile, for example and as seen in the figure
above 3 the storage is initially working stable but after a point,
potentially cloudy days, the system goes down in generation for
some hours.
3.2. Main Tool (LP)
The optimization of the green ammonia power plant is built
on and existing linear programming (LP) model carried out by
DTU researchers [30]. This tool is a deterministic minimum
cost model that optimizes both investment and operational costs
under constraints, by handling the hourly flows of electricity,
heat, products and byproducts between all the system compo-
nents, such as power plants, storage units, electrolyzer, ammo-
nia plant and others. Resulting in optimal capacities, hourly
flows for a year of operation, total investment and O&M costs,
plus cost of fuel and average cost of electricity.
As seen in figure 4 the inputs parameters for the model are
essentially the local renewable hourly power profiles, techno-
economic data for all system components, financial informa-
tion, by-products prices and in case of being grid connected,
grid prices as well. Some of the parameters and data are further
explained in subsection 4.
Figure 4: Optimization model schematic [30]
The existing model provides a useful flexibility in terms of
renewable power inputs, fuel outputs, on grid or off grid con-
figuration, so the studied configuration, is a 100% off grid am-
monia only fuel plant, with both onshore and offshore wind,
photovoltaic solar power, CSP through a central tower receiver
(CT) power plant, batteries, H2 storage, alkaline electrolysis,
desalinization and a Haber Bosh (HB) ammonia unit with air
separation unit (ASU) for the nitrogen production. The chosen
configuration’s objective function is shown in equation 4.
Minimize
X
Units,Time
VariableO&Mu · Xu,t+
X
Units
(Investmentu · AnnuityFactor + FixedO&Mu) · Capu
(4)
U stands for units and represent the different components
in the system mentioned above. Xu,t is a variable and repre-
sents the output mass or energy from unit u at time t, Capu
is the variable representing the installed capacity of the unit.
VariableO&M, FixedO&M and Investment are parameters
displayed in section 4 and AnnuityFactor is calculated using
the CRF formula in equation 13.
The most important constraints for this optimization are di-
vided into demand, load, ramping, power production and the
general form in presented underneath.
X
Time
Xu,t = Demandu = 1000 kt NH3
∀t,u=NH3Plant
(5)
Capu ∗MinLoadu ≤Xu,t ≤Capu ∗MaxLoadu
∀t,u
(6)
Xu,t −X−u,t−1 ≤RampUpu ∗Capu
∀t,u
(7)
Xu,t−1 −X−u,t ≤RampDownu ∗Capu
∀t,u
(8)
Xu,t = RenewablePoweru,t ∗Capu
∀t,u=PowerGen.
(9)
Where MinLoad is the required minimal operational load of
each unit, RampUp and RampDown are the maximum hourly,
upwards or downwards rate of change of the power output as
a percentage of the total capacity, and equation 9 forces the
output from power generating capacity to be the one provided in
profile input, just multiplied by the capacity. Other constraints
related to the mass an energy balance are also utilized together
with some balancing constraints for the storage units such as
batteries and intermediate hydrogen storage.
For comparison between different scenarios in the investi-
gation, a representative cost of ammonia (CoA) has been con-
sidered, where the total yearly O&M costs and the annualized
value investment per technology of the whole system has been
summed and is expressed per unit of tons of ammonia output.
Formula is simplified in equation 10 and is calculated for one
year of operation. Results are fixed to be in €2020 /tNH3
5
==PAGE:7==
CoA =
P
U(Investmentu · AnnuityFactoru) + P
T,U O&Mu,t
P
T NH3t
(10)
Similarly, and using the formula on equation 11, a weighted
average cost of electricity (CoE) was calculated for every sce-
nario, to determine the final cost of the produced electricity
overall. Where all the yearly cost of each unit is added. An-
nualized investment plus both fixed and variable O&M, divided
by the total electricity required by the whole system on a year.
CoE =
P
U(TotInvestmentu · Annuityfactoru + O&Mu)
P
U,T ElectricityProducedu,t
(11)
The software employed for the linear optimization was Julia
together with Gurobi optimizing packages and, Excel files were
both used as input and output data for the model.
4. Data and assumptions
In the current section information is recollected from differ-
ent sources, presented and discussed to be later used in the op-
timization model.
4.1. Power profiles
Local renewable power profile are maybe the most interest-
ing inputs for the model and the ones that may determine the
overall feasibility of an energy project. The location, seen in
figure 1 correspond to the Antofagasta province in Chile. In ta-
ble 3, the coordinates of the selected areas of interest for each
technology are presented, using the same area for both CSP and
PV where extensive unpopulated and flat area with both high
DNI and GHI is found. For onshore the location chosen is a
slightly exploited zone with one 112 MW wind farm showing
good results, and offshore location was chosen 28 km offshore
west in front of the Mejillones peninsula for its relatively higher
wind speeds.
Table 3: Coordinates of interest area for renewable power generation
Name
Latitude
Longitude
Solar Farm
-22.95
-69.71
Onshore Wind Farm
-22.97
-69.21
Offshore Wind Farm
-23.24
-70.94
For every power source a levelized cost of electricity (LCOE)
was calculated, using the simplified version written in equation
14, utilizing the capital recovery factor (CRF) to annualize the
investment cost over its lifetime considering the value of money
or weighted average cost of capital (WACC).
LCOE =
Pn
t=1
Capex+Opext
(1+WACC)t
Pn
t=1
EnergyProducett
(1+WACC)t
(12)
CRF = (1 + WACC)n · WACC
(1 + WACC)n −1
(13)
LCOE = I0 · CRF + M
q
(14)
Where n is the number of years expected for lifetime of each
technology, I0 is the investment cost, M is the total maintenance
cost over a year and q is the total amount of energy produced
yearly. This again is a simplification assuming constant opera-
tion during the lifetime of the project.
4.1.1. Wind Data
Wind energy power profiles were obtained thanks to DTU
CorRES model [31], a tool developed by DTU Wind depart-
ment, that generates wind farms power production.
It uses
several wind turbines power curves databases, updated ERA5
weather data and a wake loss machine learning model to pro-
duce normalized hourly generation worldwide.
Initially, three onshore locations within the province were
studied, following certain criteria that includes average wind
speeds, distance to populated areas, roads and natural reserves
and also proximity to the chosen solar location, which is ex-
pected to be the predominant technology to produce hydrogen
in this region [20]. The available land for wind energy projects
after land restrictions was studied from [17].
Two different
wind turbine models were recommended for the zone, creating
therefore six possible onshore wind scenarios for the optimiza-
tion model, whose main technical characteristics are shown in
table 4 together with respective CAPEX.
For offshore wind, the situation is similar, with two wind tur-
bine models or power curves, with higher hub heights and rated
power were included, generating 4 more scenarios for the algo-
rithm to choose from. Again, the technical information of the
wind turbine is shown in figure 4. Since for both onshore and
offshore there was only one location with consistently higher
wind speeds, therefore better capacity factors, only one loca-
tion was chosen, to reduce the number of scenarios from 10 to
4. The results for capacity factors of all the scenarios are shown
in table A.13 on the Appendix. The best locations for onshore
and offshore in terms of capacity factor were chosen (onshore 2
and offshore 1) and are shown in table 6.
It is worth mentioning that for the CorRES tool was utilized
with an extra input parameter of the mean wind speed at 100 m
from Global Wind Atlas [34], in order to increase reliability of
the model, mostly developed for European wind speeds.
CAPEX data from table 4 is assumed from [32] being it
more conservative, with respect of local cost estimation from
Chilean national energy commission (CNE in Spanish) [35].
CNE reports the weighted average costs of more than 9.6 GW
of onshore energy projects being constructed or, in its major-
ity developed, where mean investment cost are of 1248 US/kW
(1094 €2020/kW). This data is further in line with the cost cal-
culated by IRENA on the 2020 report for power generation of
1607 USD/kW or equivalent to 1409 €2020/kW, for the south-
ern American continent, excluding Brazil [23].
Operational
and maintenance cost was chosen to be 2% from the Chilean
database and is believed to be more conservative than a 1.1%
proposed, and more in line with the local energy development.
6
==PAGE:8==
Table 4: Wind turbine model specifications [32] [33]
WT Model
Rated Power
(MW)
Rotor
Diameter (m)
Specific Power
(W/m2)
Hub height
(m)
CAPEX
(€2020/kW)
SP277-HH100
3.6
117
277
100
1250
SP335-HH100
3.45
126
335
100
1140
SP316-HH150
8
180
316
150
5288
SP370-HH150
8
165
370
150
4823
Table 5: Wind operational parameters
Fixed O&M (%CAPEX)
2%
Variable O&M (€2020 /MWh)
1.59
Lifetime (years)
27
Furthermore, Offshore wind in Chile is still nonexistent,
mostly because of the deepness off the pacific ocean and the
low maturity and high cost of floating wind turbines. The as-
sumption of floating wind was considered from IEA [33]. And
the low winds and low feasibility of the offshore wind farms in
the north of the country is in line with what was studied by C.
Mattar, stating that with current cost trends, floating offshore
would be more likely to be deployed in the southern most part
of Chile, not in the Antofagasta region [36].
Using equation 13 and 14 together with the techno economic
information from tables 4, and 5 a Capital Recovery Factor
(CRF) was calculated, and afterwards it was utilized to deter-
mine a simplified LCOE for every wind turbine. Values are
shown in table 6 together will the other wind turbines LCOEs.
For onshore levelized cost of electricity a value of 42
€2020/MWh or equal to 48 USD2020/MWh is inline with similar
studies made in neighbouring locations as Taltal and Calama [7]
and accurately in line with the South American average stated
by the international renewable energy agency (IRENA) of 44
USD2020/MWh [23].
Table 6: Wind energy LCOEs
WT Model
Type
Cap.
LCOE €
Factor
€2020/MWh
SP277-HH100
Onshore
35.1%
43.62
SP335-HH100
Onshore
32.0%
43.65
SP316-HH150
Offshore
37.5%
181.3
SP370-HH150
Offshore
34.3%
184.8
4.1.2. Solar Data
As mentioned before, photovoltaic power plants are the
benchmark of northern part of Chile, having probably the best
solar radiation of the world and totaling 7.6 GW up to June
2022 [19]. Most of the new utility scale PV plants are build
on a single axis following the sun, this configurations increases
the costs but also generates a higher capacity factor and there-
fore lower levelized cost of electricity [30]. Accordingly, the
same tracking setting (HSAT) was chosen for the hypothetical
PV plant utilized in this investigation,
Two sources were initially studied to provide the needed so-
lar energy profile, CorRES [31] and Renewables.ninja [37].
Both were utilized to simulate a 1-axis tracking utility scale
PV power plant, 10% losses were assumed in both tools, but
very different capacity factors came out as a result, 25.2%
and 33.8% respectively, showing more than 30% deviation.
Relevant sources, mostly local, were studied and showed that
capacity factors are already above 30% and are expected to
be consistently above this value for new upcoming projects.
[7][8][17][18][29]
Similarly, ” Explorador solar ” or Solar explorer [38][39], a
tool from Chilean Ministry of energy to analyze solar energy re-
source, was further used to cross check the results and Renew-
ables.ninja was chosen as the most reliable source for having
consistently similar results to both Chilean explorer and Global
Solar Atlas [1]. About the location resource, the average yearly
DNI and GHI are 3931 kWh/m2/y and 2671 kWh/m2/y on an
altitude of 1599 masl [38].
Opposite as for wind energy operational parameters, infor-
mation for solar technology has been extracted fully from CNE
[35], from an average of 12.6 GW of new projects mostly in
development phase that are being added to the existent capacity
of 7.6 GW of photovoltaic. The parameters shown in table 7
are further used to calculate LCOE of the technology to a fi-
nal value of 21 €2020/MWh equivalent to 24 USD2020/MWh.
Again literature investigating the potential renewable resource
of the north of Chile are in line with the results where [7] and
[8] calculates value of 26.8 USD/MWh and 22 USD2020/MWh
respectively.
Table 7: Single axis tracking PV costs and operational parameters [35]
CAPEX (€2020/kW)
717.4
Fixed O&M (%CAPEX)
1,0%
Variable O&M (€2020/kWh)
0
Lifetime (years)
35
Cap. Factor
33.8%
LCOE (€2020/MWh)
21.13
Hereafter when referring to PV is considered to be a single
axis tracking photovoltaic power system
4.1.3. CSP technology
Investment costs for central tower CSP have been assumen
from international renewable energy agency (IRENA) [23]
where it was mention that this technology with 10 hours or
7
==PAGE:9==
more worth of storage fell between 4126 USD/kW and 5154
USD/kW , mainly for projects being developed in China dur-
ing 2018 to 2020. The average value of this cost was consid-
ered as the selected CSP+TES investment cost. And again in
the conservative side considering China does not have as much
as radiation as Chile. From the same source, operational ex-
penditure was assumed from locations where similar radiation
was shared and technology has a level of development as well,
therefore values for Saudi Arabia were considered more ade-
quate to Chile rather than global average. Fixed cost has been
included accounting for the capacity factor of the technology
and put together with variable cost.
Table 8: CSP technology costs and parameters [23]
CAPEX (€2020/kW)
4069
O&M (€2020/MWh)
8.77
Lifetime (years)
30
Cap. Factor
83%
LCOE (€2020/MWh)
53.8
Investment cost of this plant includes all components includ-
ing thermal energy storage, power block, heliostat field, ther-
mal receiver and all auxiliaries. Is worth noticing that the stor-
age cost is the cheaper of the whole system with 10%, being
the most expensive the solar field with approximate 28%, the
the power block 16% then receiver and owner costs with 14%,
the rest is divided among contingencies Balancing of plant and
tower construction [22]. Lifetime of this projects was investi-
gated in recently built Cerro Dominador and in one more up-
coming project’s of the same business group called Likana so-
lar. Data was withdrawn from their environmental impact as-
sessments, presented for environmental evaluation in Chile’s
environmental evaluation system of open access [40] [41].
Recently one of the evaluated CSP plants, and already ap-
proved for construction, Likana Solar, with three solar tow-
ers and 150 MWe each, bid 33.99 USD2022/MWh during this
year public tenders, being it considered the lowest bid of a CSP
plant in the world. This bid can indirectly be compared to a
LCOE cost, and places the simulated plant with a more expen-
sive energy production. This was considered to be in line with
the technology development considering Likana has not started
construction yet. This value can provide a further estimation
for the coming years.
In figure 5 all the normalized power profiles can be seen to-
gether, it is easily to determine the daily cycle of photovoltaic
power, versus the slightly more variable profile for onshore
wind that overlaps toward the end of sunlight hours with PV,
offshore wind provides more consistent winds with lower non-
operating hours, but it is CSP which provides baseload power
mostly around 80% to 90% of the nominal capacity.
4.2. Storage
As shown in the diagram of figure 2 two kinds of storage have
been included in the modelling in order to increase availability
of the HB, fuel synthesis and minimize plant shutdowns that
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
Time (hours)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized power output
CSP
Onshore (SP277-HH100)
Offshore (SP316-HH150)
Solar PV
Figure 5: Normalized renewable power production in Antofagasta
could harm the reactor catalyst and thus reduce its efficiency
and lifetime.
Lithium ion battery pack has been chosen and is available for
the optimization to store energy when needed. Is worth men-
tioning that a charging and discharging efficiency of 96% and
95% respectively have been considered together with a mini-
mum load of 20% of total energy capacity [10].
Table 9: Storage costs [42], [43]
Batteries
H2 Pipes
CAPEX (€/kWh)
364
13.92
Fixed O&M (€/kWh/y)
5.1
0.03
Lifetime (years)
20
50
Hydrogen storage is also included as a possible component
of the plant. Natural cavern storage is considered the cheapest
when discussing big scale storage but having no clear infor-
mation whether the underground morphology has salt or rock
caverns, underground pressurized pipes have been considered.
Values ranging from 460 to 540 €2020/kgH2 [43] depending of
the tubing configurations has been found and the optimal con-
figuration in term of cost was chosen.
Compressor costs downstream the electrolyzer were also in-
cluded as mentioned in [30] . Assumptions for costs are pre-
sented in table 9
4.3. Alkaline Electrolysis
Electrolysis type considered was alkaline electrolysis mainly
because of its low cost, maturity and technology readiness level.
Additionally is already on the multi MW commercial ranges,
has longer lifetime and provides 100% flexibility to cope with
variable renewable energy [7][44].
Production of utility-scale electrolyzers is a novel market, but
despite its growth, there is still a difficulty to find relevant and
trustworthy data in terms of cost. Projects are still limited in
size and in quantity. Data is uncertain due to companies or alike
would not publicly reveal their overall costs in order to keep,
or increase, their competitive advantages in this dynamically
evolving market. Studies and world outlook have done approx-
imations but with wide ranges of capital investments. Exam-
ple is Fraunhoffer that prognosticated that alkaline electrolyzer
(AEC) specific costs will be between 680 to 950 €2020/kW for
8
==PAGE:10==
big capacities over 100MW, and specific consumption will be in
the orders of 52.8 kWh/kgH2 , stating a slightly high value, due
to accounting for more high voltage transformer losses [44].
UK based study of state of the art AEC locates new specific in-
vestment between 470 to 790 €2020/kW for capacities under 10
MW, similarly reports very positive improvements in specific
energy consumption of the cells to being in the lower side of a
range from 50 to 70 kWh/kgH2 [45] .
IRENA global outlook of electrolysis costs [46] stays in line
with its analysis for bigger systems over 10 MW, where AC
consumption is between 50-78 kWh/kgH2 but expected to de-
crease below 45 in the next 25 years. And the investment cost
are again broad from 500 to 1000 USD equivalent to 438 to 877
€2020/kW.
Figure 6: Capex literature distribution of Alkaline El. [6] [10] [44] [45] [47]
[46] [48]
The CAPEX value of electrolyzer of 718 €2020/MWh is cal-
culated as an average of five most relevant sources found and
mentioned above, the impact of the uncertainty of this value is
further analyzed in a sensitivity analysis in section 5. In figure
6 a bar plot of all the alkaline electrolyzer CAPEX values, in-
cluding outer ranges, is found. Finding the inter quartile range
between 579 and 836 with a median of 789, the value assumed
is below this average, below the median and inside the middle
50% of the data, therefore is in line with the literature.
Furthermore the stack lifetime is conservatively assumed
as 10 years which is in line with most prediction of 60,000-
100,000 , since the electrolyzer is expected to behave flexible,
following renewable power units generations. In equation 15
the CAPEX of the electrolyzer is modified to include two stack
changes and to account for annualized value of that future in-
vestment in present time. Stack share of the total cost of the
alkaline electrolysis system is considered to be 50% fixed dur-
ing the whole lifetime, in line with the literature presented.
CAPEXreplace = CAPEX + 0.5 · CAPEX
(1 + WACC)10 + 0.5 · CAPEX
(1 + WACC)20
(15)
Following the methodology and data management of the
main model, technical parameters for the model are shown in
the required units, for example electrolyzer capacity is stated
per kgH2/h [30] .
Table 10: Alkaline electrolyzer technoeconomic parameters
CAPEX (€2020/kW)
910
AC consumption (kWh/kgH2)
51.5
Water consumption (kgH2O/kgH2
15
Stack life (years)
10
CAPEX €2020/kgH2/h
46,863
4.4. Ammonia synthesis and Air Separation Unit
For the ammonia production system a Haber Bosch (HB)
synthesis loop has been considered, together with a cryogenic
air separation unit (ASU), for the required production of nitro-
gen. Both have been modelled as a single unit in order to reduce
the complexity of the problem. Both processes are mature and
developed technologies therefore uncertainty about this values
is believed to lay only in the addition of both systems costs to-
gether. Several sources agree with values of technical and eco-
nomical parameters [47]. But data from MarEfuel report, DTU
where the combination of both units has been calculated, has
been utilized as model input. This data is shown in table 11.
Table 11: Ammonia + ASU production techno-economic parameters [10]
CAPEX (€2020/kgNH3/h)
4316
Fixed O&M (€2020/kgNH3/h)
605
Production rate (kgNH3/kgH2)
5.29
Electrical consumption (kWh/kgNH3)
0.64
Lifetime (years)
25
Minimal load (% of capacity)
40%
Data for sea water desalinization is also assumed from the
same source, MarEfuel report, DTU and is included for sup-
plying water to the electrolyzer, input data is shown in table
A.14b.
4.5. Scenarios
The analysis was carried out for six scenarios, in order to
study firts the individual effect of each technology in the sys-
tem before choosing the optimal configuration forcing the pen-
etration of CSP into the mix, in scenario 6 by adding a 35%
CAPEX reduction.
1. PV only
2. Wind only
3. PV + Wind
4. CSP only
5. CSP + PV + Wind
6. CSP with 35% CAPEX reduction + PV + Wind
9
==PAGE:11==
4.6. Financial
All currency reported in this article is referred to €2020, val-
ues have been therefore adjusted to respective inflation using
online tools [49].
Weighted average cost of capital was assumed as 7% in line
with some publications and comparable with the rate assumed
by the International Renewable Energy agency (IRENA) to
evaluate OCDE countries. Nonetheless, this value is relative
and depends on the share of equity and debt and their respec-
tive values together with the corporate taxation value. Values
particular for every project developer. Therefore is considered
relevant for a sensitivity analysis.
5. Results
The techno-economic optimization is carried out for each of
the 6 scenarios mentioned in section 4.5, the established model
calculated installed capacities of all units, hourly flow dynam-
ics, and the aforementioned cost of ammonia and cost of elec-
tricity. The total ammonia demand is fixed at 1000 kt per year
or 5.2 TWh. More results of each scenario are available tabu-
lated and graphically in Appendix B.
In Scenario 1, considering only one axis tracking PV, which
is the cheapest technology to install and to operate. The sys-
tem gets considerably oversized in terms of the alkaline elec-
trolyzer and solar capacity, this in mainly to generate and store
hydrogen during sunlight hours, to run the ammonia produc-
tion overnight. PV compared to electrolyzer capacity is also
oversized being it 1.4 times bigger, in order to overcome for
the relatively low capacity factor (34%). Similarly, the addition
of batteries is of paramount importance to be able to run the
Haber Bosch process at more than the minimal load required
overnight, being run on average at 77% load during night, to
meet demand. Therefore the battery pack is the biggest of all
the scenarios, totaling roughly 1.3 GW. Comparison of each
scenario storage capacities can be seen in B.14 in Appendix.
The system dynamics are cyclical due to the solar cycle, see
figure C.15 in Appendix, and solely dependent on the radia-
tion, therefore the maximum storage capacities are determined
maybe by the longest night in winter or the cloudiest day, when-
ever PV production is the least of the year.
Unlike solar radiation, wind profiles are more variable and
unpredictable, therefore, having some periods of calm weather
and lower wind speeds that need to be accounted, mainly with
hydrogen pipes storage and over sizing the wind farm. Despite
having higher capacity factor than of solar PV, it requires 25%
more electrolyzer installation and twice as much H2 stored.
Over sizing the electrolyzer to more than 3.5 GW and operating
and maintaining a 4 GW wind farm makes running the system
as in scenario 2, only with onshore wind, the most expensive
configuration and the most expensive CoA. Figure C.16 in Ap-
pendix, shows the energy and mass flows, and in those selected
days, a stable wind generation is seen in the afternoons, where
wind charges batteries, and through electrolysis fills the hydro-
gen storage, which its state of charge is shown in discontinued
black line. Storage level that is kept at more than half the total
capacity waiting for the calmer winds. While batteries do get
discharged daily to allow electrolysis and ammonia synthesis
when no wind is available.
Scenario 3, results of hybridizing the system with wind and
solar PV, does not make considerable improvement to having
only PV. In fact, the costs of wind turbine and the fact that en-
ergy profiles do not complement each other (see figure 5) in-
stead, the production cycles overlaps, solar energy is mostly
preferred over wind, as wind has a LCOE almost double of PV.
Optimizing the ammonia production with only CSP technol-
ogy, scenario 4, resulted in the least amount of installed power
capacity, seen in figure 7 with respect to other scenarios, and
the smallest electrolyzer capacity. Furthermore, the ratio of in-
stalled renewable power capacity to electrolyzer capacity is 1.2
. And as seen in figure 10 the operation is stable achieving very
high full load hours for the main units such as electrolysis and
ammonia synthesis (refer to table B.15 in Appendix B). But
there is still a relevant requirement for hydrogen storage that
is dimensioned only to provide fuel in certain occasions during
the winter. Where CSP simulated power plant is running out of
storage for some nights in a row, thus requiring more hydrogen
backup than PV dominated scenarios. Figure C.18 in Appendix
provides a clear visualization of when the power drop occurs,
almost the entire hydrogen storage needs to be discharged to
keep the system running. Hence, this eventful week has deter-
mined the high storage capacities. Even though the power pro-
file was down some hours the inclusion of it made a decrease
in electrolyzing capacity, versus a PV+Wind scenario, of 52%,
moreover battery capacity decrease by 48%, bringing down the
cost of ammonia by 2%.
Scenario 5 provides similar outcomes as scenario 1 and 3 as
shown in figure 7, since its economically favorable to dominate
the power production with solar photovoltaic with key differ-
ence being that complementing the system with only 2% CSP
of the total power capacity allows the reduction of batteries re-
quirement in more than 60%. The high level of investment and
operational cost relegate this technology to limited participation
in the PtX plant.
23 
48 
23 
58 
25 
33 
 -
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 -
 500
 1,000
 1,500
 2,000
 2,500
 3,000
 3,500
 4,000
 4,500
 Only PV
 Only Wind
  PV + Wind
 Only CSP
 PV+Wind+CSP
 PV+Wind+CSP(-35%
Capex)
 Scenario 1
 Scenario 2
 Scenario 3
 Scenario 4
 Scenario 5
 Scenario 6
Cost of electricity (€/MWh)
Intalled Capacity (MW)
Solar PV
CSP
Wind
CoE
Figure 7: Installed power capacity for a 1 Mt NH3 per year
Finally the last scenario analyzed was simulating an invest-
ment subsidy for CSP technology, with a 35% reduction on it’s
cost. In such manner, it was ensured that more penetration into
the energy mix was possible, and effects could be analyzed. As
a result an increase in total power capacity was noted, from
10
==PAGE:12==
nearly 2% to 30%. For that reason both storage system de-
creased in the order of 10%, together with electrolyzer capacity
decreasing by 28% and with 50% more full load hours of op-
eration. NH3 synthesis is decreased to 5% less capacity and
around the same increment in full load hours (FLH).
For comparing the CoA (cost of ammonia) explained in sec-
tion 3.2, it is relevant to analyze the composition of this for
each scenario, showed in figure 8. As seen, the biggest compo-
nent of CoA are the patterned bars representing the annualized
investment, averaging 76% of CoA among all scenarios. Out
of this value, it is the annuity of energy generation and elec-
trolyzer capacity that is of more relevance, displacing storage
and ammonia unit values to only around 11% of the CoA, with-
out much deviation among study cases. But electrolyzer annu-
alized investment cost for PV dominated scenarios (1,3 and 5)
rounds up to a third of the total cost of the fuel, if adding the re-
spective operational and maintenance cost, the influence of the
electrolyzer in the cost raises to 40% in these studied scenarios.
OPEX costs distribution are further displayed in figure B.13 in
appendix, and the most impactful operational cost comes from
the ammonia synthesis plant, being stable among all scenarios
due to fixed demand, representing on average more than 44% of
the operational costs and 11% of the CoA, decreasing its share
only in cases were expensive operation of CSP is considered or
massive deployment of wind is also considered, for example, in
scenario 2.
The influence of CSP in these cases is better seen in scenario
6 where the total cost of ammonia is most competitive due to
the reduction in investment cost. But analyzing only the impact
of other units affected by the CSP inclusion, the capacity was
decreased for alkaline electrolyzer, HB process and storage, the
effect was a reduction of 94 €2020/tNH3 equivalent to a 13% of
the total CoA, only considering those units variations.
Cost of electricity, together with cost of ammonia is depicted
in figure 9 and with exception of a only wind powered ammo-
nia, the cheaper the electricity cost, will mean cheaper hydro-
gen cost and therefore cheaper ammonia. Powering HB, ASU
and hydrogen storage will indirectly be cheaper as well, due to
the energy consumption of compression systems.
Considering that the simulated CSP profile, provides one
week where power supply is very unstable, instead of providing
a flat profile all year long as expected [8], the effect of CSP as
baseload technology in the mix of renewable power cannot be
fully understood.
That is why a new scenario 5 was analyzed, but this time with
a lower, but extreme flat generation at 80% power throughout
the whole year. The main difference of this hypothetical case
with scenario 5 presented, is that no battery storage at all was
required and the CSP capacity installed increased from 60 MW
to 114 MW, replacing additionally all wind power existing be-
fore. Cost of ammonia decreased marginally and PV capacity
as well, 1.3 % and 2% respectively. All other installed capaci-
ties remained the same. Still, the low penetration of CSP is due
to high investment cost.
5.1. Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis was performed, to assess in a quantita-
tive manner, the effects of the most uncertain parameters con-
sidered in the investigation. As mentioned in section 4 electrol-
ysis cost remain a true challenge to evaluate, regularly finding
projections of cost within wide ranges. Figure 11 shows pre-
cisely the relative variation of a base CoA of 735 €2020/tNH3
for scenario 5, with respect to investment costs of, batteries, hy-
drogen storage and electrolyzer, simultaneously with weighted
average cost of capital (WACC).
Sensitivity limits are chosen based on literature review where
WACC is found from 3% to 10%. Hydrogen storage is aug-
mented to twice its value to evaluate a hypothetical case of
going from underground pipes to tank storage, where cost are
about twice as much per kilogram of the fuel and lowered to
emulate the cheaper cost of underground cavern storage [43].
Battery and electrolysis are varied considering upper and lower
limits found in literature, where most of data values lie within
approximately ± 30%.
As expected, it is the alkaline electrolyzer that shows the
steepest curves, in line with the fact that it represents around
30% of the total cost. WACC can be seen as relevant as elec-
trolysis costs showing the same tendency, remarking that with
a 3% WACC the rate of change of CoA is considerably bigger,
and decreasing radically. Storage cost, as they account together
for around 11% contribution to the cost of ammonia, don’t im-
pact the result as much, is also worth noticing that scenario 5
does not have the biggest storage installed so this could be more
impactful for systems that rely more on this units, such scenar-
ios 2 and 4. Even the extreme case of doubling the cost of
storage, or storing in steel tanks instead of underground piping,
the final cost of the fuel increases in just five percentual points.
For offshore wind technology, the high capital investment
and high operational cost, added to the lower than 40% capacity
factors, will require massive reduction of cost for offshore wind
to play a role in the system, they would have to decrease to the
level of onshore investment cost which is highly unlikely.
Furthermore, it should be noted that desalinization has not
been discussed because its cost does not have a significant in-
fluence (less than 1%) on the overall CoA. However the heavy
industrialized zone of the project location could provide even
cheaper water desalinization than expected, making the water
reverse osmosis even more negligible.
6. Discussion
An optimal configuration of renewable capacity is found at
a particular location in Antofagasta with the addition of a CSP
simulated power profile. There is a low penetration of this tech-
nology mostly for its high investment cost. But a subsidy of
35% on the investment cost was found to increase the penetra-
tion from 2% to 30% of the mix having positive impacts on
the system units. For example considerable reduction on the
battery pack and most important lower requirement of alkaline
electrolyzer capacity was required due to being able to operate
at higher full load hours. Further improvements can occur if
11
==PAGE:13==
 -
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1,000
 1,200
 Only PV
 Only wind
  PV + Wind
 Only CSP
 PV + Wind + CSP
 PV+ Wind+ CSP ( -
35%Capex)
 Scenario 1
 Scenario 2
 Scenario 3
 Scenario 4
 Scenario 5
 Scenario 6
€/tonNH3
NH3 Plant
Alkaline El.
H2 storage
Solar PV
CSP
Wind
Batteries
Figure 8: Cost of ammonia distribution for a 1Mt NH3 per year. Full bars represent O&M and patterned bars represent annualized investment
Figure 9: Cost of electricity and cost of ammonia
CSP profile were to be more stable than computed, as expected
by the literature [8].
Result values of the CoA may not be accurately compared to
the LCOAs, since CoA does not solve the issue with different
units lifetime and re-investing on capacity, whereas LCOA is
expected to sum over all the lifetime of all units joint together
in a system. But trends from both indicators are comparable.
Armijo
et
al
[7],
found
LCOA
to
be
around
521
USD2020/tNH3 for Calama, same region.
But he provides a
28% cheaper and more efficient electrolyzer, consuming 7%
less electricity per kg of output. That may explain the big differ-
ence in cost. Gallardo et al [8], does not exactly concludes on
a CoA but agrees that for 2020 the production of fuels will be
dominated by mostly PV instead of expensive but higher capac-
ity factor CSP+TES even in high radiation places like Antofa-
gasta region. Inline with what is reported here. Osman et al [9],
produces electrolytic ammonia in a desertic location in United
Arab Emirates but does not provide DNI information, so its
hard to compare. But together with Armijo et all, concludes
that CSP will not provide much electricity due to higher costs,
and instead is PV over sizing that will gain the whole share of
generation. The LCOA they have reported, 718 USD2020/tNH3
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
Time (hours)
0
5
10
15
Electricity flows (MWh)
105
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Mass flows (t)
105
Battery SOC [MWh]
CSP [MWh]
NH3 [t]
H2 SOC [t]
AEC H2 [t]
Figure 10: System flows only CSP
is more in line with what was concluded in this studio for the
optimal mix (for scenario 5) 735€2020/tNH3
The methodology applied in this investigation can be cer-
tainly used in any location of the world, preferably with high
solar resource, to compute optimal configuration for an green
ammonia power plant. The novelty is the addition of a simula-
tion and further incorporation of concentration of solar power
with thermal energy storage into the mix, which can provide
substantial difference when having a competitive cost. This in-
clusion can reduce the capacity installed of electrolysis by 50%
and batteries by 48%, bringing down the cost of the fuel con-
siderable .
The model could further be improved to provide a full opti-
mization of the CSP power plant in a segmented manner, op-
timizing the heliostat field, the TES and the power block units
all individually to provide the best configuration to that partic-
ular PtX plant with the least cost. Adding as well constraints
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 11: Ammonia relative change with respect to uncertain costs, Scenario
5
to make sure the power does not go down to zero several night
in a row that resulted in over sizing hydrogen storage. Other
improvement that would make the tool more realistic would be
adding the market sale of side products such as oxygen, that for
scenario 5 adds up to 1400 kton/O2 that can be sold to mining
or healthcare industry, similarly a heat market could be found
for neighbouring mining industry and could be analyzed.
Further specialization can be achieved by adding more wind
turbine models into the data set, where depending on the wind
profile some units could behave better than others and the model
could choose freely between more than two. In the same line
a more detailed analysis of the geography and the area of the
wind farm could be conduced to determine which turbine class
fits better to the wind resource. Lastly, an interconnection with
Chilean national electric system (SEN in Spanish) could be
studied, to provide power when needed therefore decreasing
storage capabilities, green PPA agreements to guarantee car-
bon free fuels could as well be included since Chilean electrical
market is growing in this regard [18].
Further analysis to calculate precisely the LCOA may be in-
cluded, accounting for the re-investment and residual costs of
technologies with different lifetime that others. Since that was
the limitation found.
The initial goal was to supply 1 Mt/NH3 and to achieve that
install around 1 GW of electrolysis together with the required
CSP power, as seen in scenario 4 where 1.6 GW of CSP power
and 1.3 GW of alkaline water dissociation is found. But for
the rest of the cases, for example scenarios 1 and 2 , 4 GW of
tracking PV and 4 GW of onshore wind respectively, in a single
project seems too extensive and unfeasible to develop.
New technologies as central tower CSP and electrolysis are
fairly new and not yet deployed at massive scale therefore costs
and performance are yet to be studied and data collected to give
certainty to the values. The data from CSP partial efficiencies
is considered uncertain but in the conservative side since were
tested in facilities around a fifth of the size considered in the
simulation, and scaling up is expected to produce better results.
7. Conclusions
In this investigation a generalized techno-economic assess-
ment of the production of green ammonia in Chile year 2020
is performed. With a simulation and inclusion of novel tech-
nology of concentration of solar power (CSP). The system is
optimized using various energy sources as wind, solar PV and
solar CSP together with alkaline electrolysis, intermediate en-
ergy storage and Haber Bosch (HB) process for ammonia syn-
thesis.
As a general summary the results show that CSP is still too
expensive to play a fundamental role in the generation of elec-
tricity for this purpose, but when utilized alone it can decrease
the most relevant investment cost, that of hydrogen production
to 50% and ensure higher full load hours of the unit. Therefore
is expected to play a significant role when cost decreases in the
upcoming years. Nonetheless a value of 35% CAPEC subsidy
was found to increase the penetration of CSP+TES from 2% to
30% achieving substantial decrease of 28% on the electrolizer
capacity due to doubling its full load hours.
Similarly when joining optimal PV and wind with only 2%
of CSP capacity in the mix, intermediate battery capacity is re-
duced in more than 60%. Optimal configuration for the least
cost production of ammonia is achieved thanks to over sizing
the cheap PV capacity and over sizing the electrolyzer to pro-
duce enough hydrogen and electricity during the day and store
overnight, to supply the HB process mostly from both stor-
ages. A configuration of 97% single axis tracking PV, 2% of
CSP and 1% of onshore wind is the optimal mix. Achieving
a Cost of ammonia of around 735 €2020/tNH3. Further, it was
noted that optimization will dimension the intermediate stor-
age for the worst generation day of the year, with perfect fore-
sight of the resources, therefore a stable production of CSP is
of paramount importance to potentially decrease the electricity
storage to zero.
8. Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor Marie M¨unster and spe-
cially my co-supervisor Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion for pro-
viding me with valuable insights, several meetings to help with
the understanding of the main model behaviour, and support-
ing with meaningful advice when needed. I would like to ac-
knowledge Christoffer Lythcke-Elberling for being consistently
interested in the progress and outcomes of the investigation, and
being an important part of the starting point and motivation to
do the study.
References
[1] Global Solar Atlas.
URL https://globalsolaratlas.info/map?s=-22.95,-69.71&
m=site&c=-23.219893,-69.526978,9
[2] IPCC, Global warming of 1.5◦C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts
of global warming of 1.5◦C above pre-industrial levels and related global
greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development,
and efforts to eradicate poverty, Tech. rep. (2018).
13
==PAGE:15==
[3] I. Renewable Energy Agency, World Energy Transitions Outlook 2022:
1.5◦C Pathway, 2022.
URL www.irena.org
[4] International Renewable Energy Agency, Geopolitics of the energy trans-
formation : the hydrogen factor.
[5] International Energy Agency, World Energy Outlook 2021, Tech. rep.
(2021).
URL www.iea.org/weo
[6] I. International Energy Agency, Global Hydrogen Review 2021, Tech.
rep.
URL www.iea.org/t&c/
[7] J. Armijo, C. Philibert, Flexible production of green hydrogen and
ammonia from variable solar and wind energy: Case study of Chile
and Argentina, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 45 (3) (2020)
1541–1558. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.11.028.
URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0360319919342089
[8] F. I. Gallardo, A. Monforti Ferrario, M. Lamagna, E. Bocci, D. Asti-
aso Garcia, T. E. Baeza-Jeria, A Techno-Economic Analysis of solar hy-
drogen production by electrolysis in the north of Chile and the case of ex-
portation from Atacama Desert to Japan, International Journal of Hydro-
gen Energy 46 (26) (2021) 13709–13728. doi:10.1016/J.IJHYDENE.
2020.07.050.
[9] O. Osman, S. Sgouridis, A. Sleptchenko, Scaling the production of re-
newable ammonia: A techno-economic optimization applied in regions
with high insolation, Journal of Cleaner Production 271 (10 2020). doi:
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121627.
[10] H. Nami, G. Butera, N. J. B. Campion, H. L. Frandsen, P. V. Hendriksen,
MarE-fuel: Energy efficiencies in synthesising green fuels and their ex-
pected cost, MarE-fuel project report 9/9-2021, DTU Energy, Tech. rep.
[11] I. Energy Agency, Ammonia Technology Roadmap Towards more sus-
tainable nitrogen fertiliser production.
URL www.iea.org/t&c/
[12] Jesse Fahnestock, K. Søgaard, E. Lawson, H. Kilemo, H. Anton Tvete,
D. Magnus Jordahl, D. Dorthe Jacobsen, M. Energy Solutions Kaj Portin,
W. Egil Hystad, W. Kjetil Hjelle, W. Mikael Paludan-Nylykke,
Knut
Ola Skotvedt, D. Alexander Savabini, D. Christopher Rex, D. Ship Fi-
nance Murali Srinivasan, Y. International Rob Stevens, Y. International
Claus Winter Graugaard, M. Mc-Kinney Moller, NoGAPS: Nordic Green
Ammonia Powered Ship.
[13] I. Renewable Energy Agency, A pathway to decarbonise the shipping sec-
tor by 2050, 2021.
URL www.irena.org
[14] H. Blanco, B. Jinks, E. Bianco, U. Sezer, INNOVATION OUTLOOK
RENEWABLE AMMONIA in partnership with About IRENA Valuable
review and feedback was also provided by IRENA colleagues RENEW-
ABLE AMMONIA 3 CONTENTS, 2022.
URL www.irena.org
[15] I. Iqbal, C. Abc, U. Krewer, Operating envelope of Haber-Bosch process
design for power-to-ammonia † (2018). doi:10.1039/c8ra06821f.
[16] IRENA, Global hydrogen trade to meet the 1.5◦C climate goal: Part III
– Green hydrogen cost and potential, International Renewable Energy
Agency, Abu Dhabi, 2022.
URL www.irena.org/publications
[17] Santana C, Falvey M, Ibarra M, Garc´ıa M, Minergia/GIZ, Energ´ıas Ren-
ovables en Chile. El potencial eolico, solar e hidroel´ectrico de Arica a
Chiloe, Santiago, Chile, 2014.
URL www.minenergia.cl
[18] ReporteSostenibilidad-CerroDominador-2020 (2020).
[19] A. Asociaci´on Chilena de Energ´ıas Renovable y Almacenamiento, Es-
tad´ısticas, Sector de Generaci´on de Energ´ıa El´ectrica Renovable (7 2022).
URL www.acera.cl/centro-de-informacion
[20] G. o. C. Ministry of Energy, Chile, a clean energy provider for a carbon
neutral planet GREEN HYDROGEN STRATEGY, Tech. rep. (2020).
[21] W. Ding, T. Bauer, Progress in Research and Development of Molten
Chloride Salt Technology for Next Generation Concentrated Solar Power
Plants, Engineering 7 (3) (2021) 334–347. doi:10.1016/J.ENG.2020.
06.027.
[22] International Renewable Energy Agency, Renewable power generation
costs in 2021, 2022.
URL www.irena.org
[23] Irena, Renewable Power Generation Costs 2020, 2021.
URL www.irena.org
[24] Ministerio de Energ´ıa, Proyecciones El´ectricas — Ministerio de Energ´ıa.
URL
https://energia.gob.cl/pelp/
proyecciones-electricas
[25] Ficha-fotovoltaica-1 Cerro dominadorPV.
[26] M. R. Rodriguez-Sanchez, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, D. Santana, Revised re-
ceiver efficiency of molten-salt power towers (12 2015). doi:10.1016/
j.rser.2015.08.004.
[27] R. W. Bradshaw, D. B. Dawson, W. De la Rosa, R. Gilbert, S. H. Goods,
M. J. Hale, P. Jacobs, S. a. Jones, G. J. Kolb, J. E. Pacheco, M. R. Prairie,
H. E. Reilly, S. K. Showalter, L. L. Vant-Hull, Final Test and Evaluation
Results from the Solar Two Project, Contract (January) (2002) 294. doi:
10.2172/793226.
[28] G. Gentile, G. Manzolini, The Value of CSP with Thermal En-
ergy Storage in Providing Flexible Electric Powerdoi:10.1007/
978-3-030-76221-6{\_}15.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-76221-6_15
[29] F. Gallardo, L. Prattic`o, C. Toro, A thermo-economic assessment of
CSP+TES in the north of Chile for current and future grid scenarios, in:
AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 2126, American Institute of Physics
Inc., 2019. doi:10.1063/1.5117535.
[30] N. Campion, M. Backer, P. Swisher, M. M¨unster, MarE-fuel: LCOE and
optimal electricity supply strategies for P2X plants, Tech. rep. (2021).
[31] M. Koivisto, K. Das, F. Guo, P. Sørensen, E. Nu˜no, N. Cutululis, P. Maule,
Using time series simulation tools for assessing the effects of variable
renewable energy generation on power and energy systems (5 2019).
doi:10.1002/wene.329.
[32] P. Swisher, J. P. Murcia Leon, J. Gea-Berm´udez, M. Koivisto, H. A. Mad-
sen, M. M¨unster, Competitiveness of a low specific power, low cut-out
wind speed wind turbine in North and Central Europe towards 2050, Ap-
plied Energy 306 (1 2022). doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.118043.
[33] International Energy Agency, Offshore Wind Outlook 2019: World En-
ergy Outlook Special Report, Tech. rep.
URL www.iea.org/t&c/
[34] Global Wind Atlas.
URL https://globalwindatlas.info/
[35] Comision
Nacional
de
Electricidad,
ICTG-Abril-
2022 CNE Informe deCostos tec gen.
[36] C. Mattar, C. Guzm An-Ibarra, A techno-economic assessment of off-
shore wind energy in Chile (2017). doi:10.1016/j.energy.2017.
05.099.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.05.099
[37] S. Pfenninger, I. Staffell, Long-term patterns of European PV output us-
ing 30 years of validated hourly reanalysis and satellite data, Energy 114
(2016) 1251–1265. doi:10.1016/J.ENERGY.2016.08.060.
[38] Explorador Solar.
URL https://solar.minenergia.cl/exploracion
[39] A. Molina, M. Falvey, R. Rondanelli, A solar radiation database for Chile
OPENdoi:10.1038/s41598-017-13761-x.
URL www.nature.com/scientificreports
[40] Sustentable
S.A,
DECLARACI ´ON
DE
IMPACTO
AMBIENTAL
PROYECTO ”PLANTA SOLAR CERRO DOMINADOR”, Tech. rep.,
Abengoa solar Chile (2013).
URL www.sustentable.cl
[41] WorleyParsons,
DECLARACI ´ON
DE
IMPACTO
AMBIENTAL
PLANTA DE CONCENTRACI ´ON SOLAR DE POTENCIA LIKANA
SOLAR, Tech. rep., LIKANA SOLAR (2016).
[42] International Renewable Energy Agency, ELECTRICITY STORAGE
AND RENEWABLES: COSTS AND MARKETS TO 2030, 2017.
URL www.irena.org
[43] D. D. Papadias, R. K. Ahluwalia, Bulk storage of hydrogen, Interna-
tional Journal of Hydrogen Energy 46 (70) (2021) 34527–34541. doi:
10.1016/J.IJHYDENE.2021.08.028.
[44] M. Holst, S. Aschbrenner, T. Smolinka, C. Voglst¨atter, G. Grimm, Fraun-
hofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE, COST FORECAST FOR
LOW TEMPERATURE ELECTROLYSIS-TECHNOLOGY DRIVEN
BOTTOM-UP PROGNOSIS FOR PEM AND ALKALINE WATER
ELECTROLYSIS SYSTEMS (2021).
[45] A. Patonia, R. Poudineh, The Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, Cost-
competitive green hydrogen: how to lower the cost of electrolysers?,
14
==PAGE:16==
2022.
[46] International Renewable Energy Agency, Green Hydrogen Cost Reduc-
tion: Scaling up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5C Climate Goal, Abu Dhabi,
2020.
URL www.irena.org/publications
[47] Z. Cesaro, M. Ives, R. Nayak-Luke, M. Mason, R. Ba˜nares-Alc´antara,
Ammonia to Power: Forecasting the Levelized Cost of Electricity from
Green Ammonia in Large-scale Power Plants, Tech. rep.
[48] I. Energy Agency-IEA, The Future of Hydrogen, Tech. rep.
[49] €100 in 2019 →2020 — Euro Inflation Calculator.
URL
https://www.in2013dollars.com/europe/inflation/
2019?endYear=2020&amount=100#formulas
15
==PAGE:17==
Appendix A. Additional Data used
Table A.12: Values for Sensitivity analysis
Base Values
WACC (%)
-30%
-27%
0.07
14%
43%
CoA (€/tNH3)
573
654
735
781
879
Battery cost (€/kWh)
-30%
-10%
362
10%
30%
CoA (€/tNH3)
731
734
735
736
739
Alkaline Ele. Cost (€/kgH2)
-29%
-15%
51163
15%
29%
CoA (€/tNH3)
643
687
735
782
827
H2 Storage Cost(€/kgH2)
-30%
-10%
461
10%
30%
100%
CoA (€/tNH3)
730
734
735
736
739
782
Table A.13: Wind locations and Capacity factors
Locations
SP277-HH100
SP335-HH100
SP316-HH150
SP370-HH150
Onshore 1
25.3%
22.7%
-
-
Onshore 2
35.1%
32.0%
-
-
Onshore 3
23.4%
21.3%
-
-
Offshore 1
-
-
37.5%
34.4%
Offshore 2
-
-
32.2%
29.3%
(a) H2 Storage costs per kg [43]
H2 Pipes Storage
CAPEX (€2020/kgH2)
464
Fixed O&M (€2020/kgH2/y)
1.0
lifetime (years)
50
(b) Reverse osmosis desalinization cost [30]
Desalinization
CAPEX (€2020kgH2O/h)
26.3
Variable O&M(€2020/kg H2O )
0.0003
Specific consumption (kWh/kgH2O)
0.04
Table A.14: Hydrogen and Desalinization cost parameters
16
==PAGE:18==
Appendix B. More results
751 
1,114 
750 
924 
735 
722 
 -
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1,000
 1,200
 -
 2,000
 4,000
 6,000
 8,000
 10,000
 12,000
 Only PV
 Only wind
  PV + Wind
 Only CSP
 PV + Wind + CSP
 PV+ Wind+ CSP (-
35%Capex)
 Scenario 1
 Scenario 2
 Scenario 3
 Scenario 4
 Scenario 5
 Scenario 6
Cost of Ammonia (€/t NH3)
Investment Cost (M€ )
NH3 Plant
Alkaline El.
H2 storage
Solar PV
CSP
Wind
Batteries
CoA
Figure B.12: Investment cost for 1Mt NH3 plant
 -
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 Only PV
 Only Wind
  PV + Wind
 Only CSP
 PV+Wind+CSP
 PV+Wind+CSP(-35%Capex)
 Scenario 1
 Scenario 2
 Scenario 3
 Scenario 4
 Scenario 5
 Scenario 6
yearly O&M Cost(M€) 
NH3 Plant
Alkaline El.
H2 Storage
Solar PV
CSP
Wind
Batteries
Figure B.13: O&M cost for 1Mt NH3 plant
17
==PAGE:19==
2.8 
3.5 
2.8 
1.3 
2.8 
2.0 
 -
 0.5
 1.0
 1.5
 2.0
 2.5
 3.0
 3.5
 4.0
 -
 5,000
 10,000
 15,000
 20,000
 25,000
 Only PV
 Only Wind
  PV + Wind
 Only CSP
 PV + Wind + CSP
 PV + Wind + CSP( -35%
Capex)
 Scenario 1
 Scenario 2
 Scenario 3
 Scenario 4
 Scenario 5
 Scenario 6
Electrolyzer Capacity (GW)
Energy Storage Capacity (MWh)
H2 storage
Batteries
Alkaline El.
Figure B.14: Storage capacities and electrolyzer size for 1Mt NH3 plant
Table B.15: Load Average, or capacity factor
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Only PV
Only Wind
PV + Wind
Only CSP
PV + Wind + CSP
PV+Wind+CSP(-35% Capex)
NH3 plant + ASU
88%
78%
88%
96%
89%
93%
Alkaline El.
44%
35%
44%
92%
44%
61%
Table B.16: Investment cost distribution and weighted average cost of ammonia and electricity
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Only PV
Only Wind
PV+Wind
Only CSP
PV+Wind+CSP
PV+Wind+CSP(-35%Capex)
Tot. Invest.
M€
6,923
9,765
6,905
8,804
6,784
6,493
NH3 Plant
M€
605
679
604
556
601
572
Desalination
M€
21
27
21
10
21
15
Alkaline El.
M€
2,811
3,511
2,802
1,340
2,809
2,011
H2 storage
M€
157
313
157
196
157
136
Solar PV
M€
2,866
2,814
2,728
1,344
CSP
M€
-
6,485
246
2,180
Wind
M€
4,960
85
-
42
73
Batteries
M€
462
273
422
217
180
161
CoE
€/MWh
23
48
23
58
25
33
CoA
€/tNH3
751
1,114
750
924
735
722
18
==PAGE:20==
Table B.17: Yearly O&M costs distribution and annualized investment
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Only PV
Only wind
PV + Wind
Only CSP
PV+Wind+CSP
PV+Wind+CSP(-35%Capex)
NH3 Plant
M€
86.7
97.4
86.6
79.7
86.1
82.0
Desalination
M€
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
Alkaline El.
M€
56.2
70.2
56.0
26.8
56.2
40.2
H2 Storage
M€
0.34
0.67
0.34
0.42
0.34
0.29
Solar PV
M€
28.7
-
28.1
-
27.3
13.4
CSP
M€
-
-
-
92.2
3.5
47.7
Wind
M€
-
116.7
2.0
-
1.0
1.7
Batteries
M€
7.1
4.1
6.5
3.4
2.8
2.4
Total O&M
M€
180
290
180
203
178
189
Ann. Invest.
M€
571
824
570
721
557
534
Table B.18: Optimal plant capacities
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Only PV
Only Wind
PV+Wind
Only CSP
PV+Wind+CSP
PV+Wind+CSP(-35% Capex)
NH3 Plant
tNH3/h
144
162
144
133
143
136
Desalination
t/h
820
1,024
817
391
819
587
Alkaline El.
tH2/h
55
69
55
26
55
39
Alkaline El.
MW
2,829
3,534
2,821
1,349
2,827
2,025
H2 storage
tH2
340
680
340
425
340
295
H2 storage
MWh
11,342
22,670
11,330
14,153
11,347
9,820
Solar PV
MW
3,996
-
3,922
3,803
1,873
CSP
MW
-
-
1,594
61
824
Wind
MW
3,968
68
-
34
58
Batteries
MWh
1,278
756
1,165
601
497
446
19
==PAGE:21==
Appendix C. Flow dynamics examples
400
420
440
460
480
Time (hours)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Electricity flows (kWh)
106
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Mass flows (Kg)
105
Battery SOC [kWh]
PV [kWh]
NH3 [kg]
H2 SOC [kg]
AEC H2 [kg]
Figure C.15: System flows for scenario 1 only one axis tracking PV
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
Time (hours)
0
1
2
3
4
Electricity flows (kWh)
106
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mass flows (Kg)
105
Battery SOC [kWh]
Wind [kWh]
NH3 [Kg]
H2 SOC [Kg]
AEC H2 [Kg]
Figure C.16: System flows for scenario 2 only onshore Wind, turbine SP277-HH100
20
==PAGE:22==
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
Time (hours)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Electricity flows (kWh)
106
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Mass flows (Kg)
105
Battery SOC [kWh]
PV [kWh]
Wind [kWh]
CSP [kWh]
NH3 [Kg]
H2 SOC [Kg]
AEC H2 [Kg]
Figure C.17: System flows for scenario 5, all technologies combined
3600
3800
4000
4200
4400
4600
4800
5000
Time (hours)
0
5
10
15
Electricity flows (kWh)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mass flows (Kg)
Battery SOC [kWh]
CSP [kWh]
NH3 [Kg]
H2 SOC [Kg]
AEC H2 [Kg]
Figure C.18: System flows for scenario 4 only CSP considered,drop in power event
21
