==PAGE:1==
 
Master of Science in 
Technology Entrepreneurship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tensions in relationship between corporations and 
deep tech startups and how to manage them 
 
 
Author:  Seeyar Amiri 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor: Assistant Professor, Euiji Jeon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CENTRE FOR TECHNOLOGY ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
The Centre is an enabling force for innovation and social and economic change through entrepreneurial 
capability development across different facets of society - education, industry, government, and DTU. 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
Diplomvej 
Buildings 371 & 372, 2nd floor 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby  
==PAGE:3==
 
 
i 
Acknowledgement 
I wish to express my sincerest appreciation to my supervisor, Assistant Professor, Euiji Jeon. For all 
the inspiration and assistance provided throughout my thesis. Your knowledge and experience on 
this topic amazes me and has been crucial for my understanding. With your help and guidance, the 
thesis has been exactly defined as the motivation I had, and still have, for the topic, when I first 
approached you. Thank you for making my time used on this thesis, a time I will gladly look back on 
with a smile on my face. 
 
I wish to acknowledge all the support and love that my family has provided me. My parents, for 
sacrificing so much to create a better and more peaceful life for me and our family. This was not 
possible without any of you. To both my sisters, my brother and all my dearest nieces and nephew. 
Thank you for your constant support and love. No amount of distance will tear the bond that we 
have. To my girlfriend, that I enjoy every second with. The journey that we are on and the life we 
are building together is something that I could only have wished for. I love each and every one of 
you from the bottom of my heart.  
 
Lastly, I want to thank all the people and organizations who has helped me gather all the valuable 
data that has been needed for my research. Also, to the organization and respondent that is 
confidential and anonymized, you are not forgotten. Without your openness and willingness to help, 
this would not have been possible. Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
ii
Abstract 
This study aims to shed light and contribute to the growing literature on tensions in relationship 
between corporations and deep tech startups. The phenomenon is growing at incredible speed, but 
as important as it is, relationships are rife with tensions. In reality, these relationships have low 
success rates, less than 25% in some cases, because tensions that may be latent, can become salient 
under circumstances such as environmental conditions and individual approaches. 
 
The term “tension” is defined as being “contradictory” and can be managed by either a collective 
and/or individual approach that is defined in the paradox literature. Some of the ways tensions have 
been managed is through change of leadership i.e., (i) shifting the mind-set from an “either/or” to 
a “both/and” mind-set, by (ii) seeing the benefits of inconsistencies and recognizing that resources 
are not always finite, and (iii) embracing change rather than chasing stability. 
 
This study aims to answer the following two research questions:  
1. Which tensions are created in relationships between corporate and deep tech startups? 
2. How are these tensions managed? 
 
Through eight semi-structured interviews and the analysis of the qualitative data, the findings 
identified eight tensions in relationships between corporations and deep tech startups. While most 
of the tensions faced by the corporates and deep tech startups complements the identified tensions 
in this study’s literature review. The research done in this study, proposes two new tensions that 
were identified i.e. (i) “Power Distance” – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating 
unequal startup relationships, and (ii) the tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup 
resources. 
 
By combining this study’s findings and understanding on tensions in relationship between 
corporations and deep tech startups with the paradox literature, it will expand the knowledge and 
understanding of why, how and when contradictory elements results in tensions and how these 
tensions can be managed. 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
iii 
Table of Contents 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ............................................................................................................................. I 
ABSTRACT .............................................................................................................................................. II 
1. 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................................. 1 
2. 
LITERATURE REVIEW ...................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1 
DEEP TECH, HIGH TECH AND GENERAL TECH ............................................................................................... 9 
2.2 
CORPORATE AND DEEP TECH STARTUP RELATIONSHIPS ............................................................................... 14 
2.2.1 
Benefits for corporates in a relationship with deep tech startups ............................................. 14 
2.2.2 
Benefits for deep tech startups in a relationship with corporate ............................................... 19 
2.2.3 
Review of tensions and the paradox theory ............................................................................... 21 
2.2.4 
Tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech startups ..................................... 30 
2.2.5 
The tension between very attractive resources and high misappropriation risks...................... 30 
2.2.6 
Deep tech startups as attractive opportunity vs. risky and costly.............................................. 33 
2.2.7 
Relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility .................................... 35 
2.2.7.1 
Relationship as a way of reaching proof of concept vs. risk of never going to market ...................36 
2.2.7.2 
Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech startup long-term horizon .......................37 
2.2.7.3 
Top-down culture vs. Bottom-up culture .........................................................................................37 
2.2.7.4 
Joint innovation vs. risk of “Not-Invented-Here” syndrome ............................................................39 
2.2.7.5 
Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing relationship vision .......................................40 
2.2.8 
Opportunities for emerging technology vs. threats ................................................................... 40 
2.2.8.1 
Relationship as a path to get product to market vs. risk of creating a non-scalable solution .........41 
2.2.9 
Corporate core business-focused exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration ...................... 41 
3. 
METHODOLOGY ........................................................................................................................... 43 
3.1 
SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS ............................................................................................................. 43 
3.2 
VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY ..................................................................................................................... 48 
4. 
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS ............................................................................................................. 49 
4.1 
TOP-DOWN CULTURE VS. BOTTOM-UP CULTURE ....................................................................................... 53 
4.2 
RELATIONSHIP AS BUREAUCRATIC PROCESS VS. RISK OF LOSING STARTUP AGILITY ............................................ 58 
4.3 
CORPORATE STRATEGIC UNPREDICTABILITY VS. RISK OF LOSING STARTUP RELATIONSHIP VISION ........................ 63 
4.4 
TENSION OF CORPORATE SHORT-TERM HORIZON VS. DEEP TECH LONG-TERM HORIZON ................................... 65 
4.5 
TENSION BETWEEN VERY ATTRACTIVE RESOURCES AND HIGH MISAPPROPRIATION RISKS................................... 68 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
iv
4.6 
POWER DISTANCE – THE TENSION OF CORPORATE POWER AND RISK OF CREATING UNEQUAL STARTUP 
RELATIONSHIPS (NEW TENSION) .......................................................................................................................... 69 
4.7 
TENSION ON ROADMAP AND RISK OF MISALIGNMENT WITH STARTUP RESOURCES (NEW TENSION) .................... 73 
4.8 
CORPORATE CORE-BUSINESS EXPLOITATION VS. INNOVATION-BASED EXPLORATION ........................................ 75 
5. 
CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................... 77 
5.1 
LIMITATIONS AND AVENUES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH .................................................................................. 79 
APPENDIX ............................................................................................................................................ 82 
A. 
DETAILED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS ........................................................................................................... 83 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ..................................................................................................................................... 85 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
1 of 93 
CHAPTER 1 
1. Introduction 
 
The largest corporates in the world are collaborating with startups to innovate in the deep tech field 
– “A ‘Deep’ Technology was impossible yesterday, is barely feasible today, and will quickly become 
so pervasive and impactful that it is difficult to remember life without. Deep Tech solutions are 
reimaginations of fundamental capabilities that are faithful to real and significant problems or 
opportunities, rather than to one discipline” (Siegel & Krishnan, 2020: 8). Deep tech is characterized 
by innovation that are disruptive solutions built around unique, protected or hard-to-reproduce 
technological or scientific advances (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). 
Relationships between startups and corporates are growing in importance and has grown 
significantly in recent years, as companies of all sizes try to rapidly respond to shifts in the 
marketplace (McKinsey & Company, 2020). Corporates are looking for the next source of deep tech 
innovation, which will fuel the next industrial revolution. The phenomenon is increasing at 
incredible speed. Deep tech startups have gained increased attention from corporates, 
entrepreneurs, investors, and media. Over a five-year period, investment in deep tech startups has 
more than quadrupled from 2016 to more than US$60 billion in 2020 (Siota & Prats, 2021). In recent 
years, there has been a steady increase in corporate-startup relationships. One way of creating 
relationship between corporates and startups is through strategic investment. In a report that 
looked into how many active corporate venture capitals1 there are globally, the findings showed 
that in the past ten years, active corporate venture capitals grew from 182 in 2010 to 1.177 in 2020 
– an increase of 547% (Gallagher & Eggen, 2021). Looking at the projections for the near future, a 
study based on 77 interviews with innovation executives across the largest corporations in east and 
southeast Asia, it is expected that corporates will increase their corporate venture in deep tech by 
71% in the next five years (Siota & Prats, 2021).  
Relationships have been done for many years, but only now behaviours are starting to change. Most 
corporates have been well-knowledgeable in regards to collaborating and acquiring startups, when 
 
1 The report defines corporates venture capitals as active when at least two investments per year is completed. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
2 of 93 
the startups had been built and proven its value (Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016). But 
corporates and startups have begun working together in new ways with focus on flexible, early-
stage and open-ended relationships. Corporates are seeking relationships with startups, in a way 
that both sides are willing to take risk and share the reward (KPMG, 2015; Imaginatik and 
MassChallenge, 2016).  
 
Because deep tech startups have a strong research base, they create value by developing new 
solutions and not only by disrupting business models. But being a technological innovator is not easy 
and deep tech startups face unique challenges, such as funding, market access, technical and 
business expertise, lengthy time-to-market, technological risk and complexity, and yet-to-be-
developed commercial applications (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017; Larkin & 
O'Halloran, 2018; Siota & Prats, 2021).  In order to access the resources for overcoming all their 
challenges, deep tech startups rely on several stakeholders and each stakeholder addressing specific 
needs. (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). Corporates – midsize, large and 
enterprise size specifically, compared to entities such as private venture capitals, universities and 
public sector – are the only partner and stakeholder that can meet all the needs of a deep tech 
startup, because they can combine technical, industrial, and commercial visions, knowledge and 
skills. This also explains why 97% of deep tech startups are interested in long-term relationship with 
a corporate, as the findings show in a report that conducted an in-depth survey from 400 deep tech 
startups representing ten different sectors in more than 70 countries (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, 
Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). 
 
The term “tension” is defined as being “contradictory” and has opposing elements, such as, goals, 
interests, perspectives and identities among others (Smith & Tushman, 2005). These tensions can 
be managed by either a collective and/or individual approach (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017). 
Some of the ways tensions have been managed is through changing leadership in regards to (i) 
shifting the mind-set from an “either/or” to a “both/and” mind-set, by (ii) seeing the benefits of 
inconsistencies and recognizing that resources are not always finite, and (iii) embracing change 
rather than chasing stability. This means, nurturing the unique aspects of competing constituencies 
and strategies while finding ways to unite them (Smith, Lewis, & Tushman, 2016). 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
3 of 93 
In times like this with high demands on relationships from corporates and deep tech startups, it is 
interesting to see, after millions in investment, time used to develop both the technology and 
relationship, if these relationships pay off. In reality however, the relationship success rate is low, 
with some cases showing less than 25% satisfaction level between corporates and deep tech 
startups (McKinsey & Company, 2020). With international, billion-dollar corporates not slowing 
down in regards to collaborating with deep tech startups, even with high risks and possibility of 
failing, it is crucial for both corporates and deep tech startups to recognize and overcome the 
barriers in order to create successful relationships (Siota & Prats, 2022). 
 
The study’s aim is to shed light on tensions and management of tensions with the help of paradox 
literature, for both corporates and for deep tech startups when in relationship, in order to create 
the best strategy moving forward. The research is conducted with the focus of two areas, 1) to 
discover which tensions are appearing in relationships between corporations and deep tech 
startups, and 2) how corporates and deep tech startups can manage these tensions. Understanding 
this area will help corporates and deep tech startups create better relationships with each other to 
achieve innovation, opportunities, new radical solutions, and to solve the biggest societal and 
environmental challenges of our time. Furthermore, to fully understand why tensions in 
relationships between deep tech startups and corporates are created, it is critical to understand 
both corporates and startups. Only then, it is possible to manage these tensions and create more 
successful relationships – whether you are a startup, trying to gain access to a specific market, 
knowledge or capital, or a corporate trying to increase your innovation level, keep up to date with 
modern technologies, talent or innovative business models.  
 
There has been done extensive research on the area on corporate and startup relationships, but not 
with focus on deep tech startups. The term “deep tech” was first introduced in 2014 by Swati 
Chaturvedi, CEO of Propel(x), with a definition that purposefully allowed for interpretation – 
“companies founded on a scientific discovery or true technological innovation” (Siegel & Krishnan, 
2020). Since 2014, many authors have tried to understand and clearly define our understanding of 
deep tech. Literature on tensions between corporate and startups has mostly focused on corporate 
relationships with high-tech and general-tech startups. But high-tech and general-tech startups 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
4 of 93 
does not face the same challenges and needs as deep tech startups, which are time-to-market, 
capital, technology risk and complexity, and long gestation periods – more than five years (Siota & 
Prats, 2021; Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017).  
Based on this study’s literature review, the tensions faced in relationships between corporates and 
startups are listed below. And while the trend for corporate and deep tech startup relationships is 
only expected to grow in the future, it is immensely relevant to address the gap that has been 
identified in this study.  
 
• “Sharks dilemma” - the tension between very attractive resources and high 
misappropriation risks 
• Deep tech startups as attractive opportunity vs. risky and costly 
• Relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility and spirit 
o Relationship as a way of reaching proof of concept vs. risk of never going to market 
o Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech startup long-term horizon 
o Tension of top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
o Joint innovation vs. risk of “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome” 
o Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing relationship vision 
• Opportunities for emerging technology vs. threats 
o Relationship as a path to get product to market vs. risk of creating a non-universal 
and scalable solution 
 
Given the above introduction and problem statement, the research questions of this study are as 
follows: 
 
3. Which tensions are created in relationships between corporate and deep tech startups? 
4. How are these tensions managed? 
 
The research was carried out in the approach of semi-structured interviews with deep tech startups 
and corporates across various industries. In total, eight interviews were conducted representing 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
5 of 93 
four corporates – Coloplast, Alfa Laval, Insurance Company2 and Maersk Drilling – three deep tech 
startup – Techvolver, FÆRM and Reshape Biotech – and one intermediary – Scoutely – that was 
interviewed because of extensive knowledge within the research area from both perspectives of 
corporates and deep tech startups. The interviewed organizations are, furthermore, representing 
the eight different industries i.e., Medical Equipment Manufacturing, Industrial Machinery 
Manufacturing, Automation Machinery Manufacturing, Insurance, Software, Biotech, Food tech, 
and Oil and Gas.  
 
The findings of the qualitative data of this study identified eight tensions faced in relationships by 
corporations and deep tech startups. Although, the findings from the qualitative data mostly also 
correlates with the findings of the literature review, two new tensions were identified based on the 
interviews – (i) “Power Distance” – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating unequal 
startup relationships, and (ii) tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources.  
The analysis showed that every organization interviewed had experienced at least two tensions, 
while the most tensions identified within one organization was five. The average amount of tensions 
faced by the corporates and deep tech startups interviewed was 3,3 tensions. The most faced 
tensions were number 2) relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility, 
which occurred in 87,5% of the interviews, 4) short-term horizon vs. long-term horizon, which 
occurred in 50% of the interviews, and 8) corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based 
exploration, which also occurred in 50% of the interviews.  
By answering the research question this study contributes to the literature by offering empirical 
insights into the tensions in relationship between corporates and deep tech startups. The eight 
identified tensions from the interviews are as follows: 
 
• Top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
• Relationship as bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility 
• Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing startup relationship vision 
• Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech long-term horizon 
 
2 Anonymized for confidentiality 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
6 of 93 
• Sharks dilemma – the tension between very attractive resources and high misappropriation 
risks   
• Power distance – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating unequal startup 
relationships (new tension)  
• Tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources (new tension) 
• Corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration 
 
The thesis is structured in five chapters:  
• Chapter 1 – The introduction chapter sheds light on the interested research area, the 
problematics, what is known from previous research, and what the goal of the study is. 
• Chapter 2 – The literature review chapter will examine and present the most relevant 
findings on the difference between deep tech, high tech and general tech. Furthermore, the 
four main tensions identified will be presented, which are 1) sharks dilemma – the tension 
between very attractive resources and high misappropriation risks, 2) relationship as a 
bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility and spirit, 3) organization level 
opportunities vs. threats and 4) opportunities for emerging technology vs. threats. Also, how 
these tensions can be managed using the literature on tensions and paradox theory will be 
presented.  
• Chapter 3 – The method chapter will explain how the research process was conducted, how 
the qualitative data was collected, and which methods were used for the analysis. 
• Chapter 4 – The findings chapter will focus on the findings and analysis of qualitative data 
with the aim of providing answers to the research questions and to shed light on the research 
topic.  
• Chapter 5 – The conclusion chapter will present and summarize the study, including 
limitations and avenues for future research.  
 
Thesis contribution to research area 
The main purpose of this paper is to shed light and contribute to the growing literatures on tensions 
in relationship between corporates and startup, with the focus on deep tech startup, while also 
understanding how to manage these tensions. The research and findings presented in this study 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
7 of 93 
complements the existing literature on the research area of tensions in relationships between 
corporations and deep tech startups, but also adds additional new and interesting tensions that was 
not found in the literature review. This contribution will fill the identified gap in the literature on 
tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech startups, since most of the previous 
studies are focusing on high-tech and general-tech startups because of the term “deep tech” was 
introduced quite recently. Furthermore, the findings of this study, can be used as a starting point 
for future research within the same area, as the newly identified tensions, and also the management 
of these tensions, should be further investigated. Furthermore, the study gives insights into mainly 
the identified tensions between corporates and deep tech startups in Denmark, which could 
possibly be different from deep tech startups in e.g. the rest of Europe, America or Asia.  
 
The practical contributions of this study are relevant and can be used by corporates, startups and 
intermediary organizations that promotes businesses such as, incubators, accelerators, 
municipalities and universities.  
For corporates, it can be used when implementing their innovation strategy. It is for the corporates 
and top management that want to start their exploration journey but need to understand the 
tensions that can appear with deep tech startups. It is for the decision-makers that want to open 
doors for startups, but do not have the support from top management yet. And it is for the 
employees throughout the corporate that are seeking inspiration and ideas to create relationships 
with external innovators. 
For startups, founders and future entrepreneurs when at the stage of scaling their business together 
with corporates, it can be used when searching and picking their right corporate relationship 
partner. Being aware of the tensions that may be in a corporate relationship and how to manage 
them and minimizing the risks of failure. 
For intermediary organizations, such as incubators, accelerators, universities and the public sector, 
that can create change for several organizations, it can be used to create processes to help and ease 
the relationship for both corporates and deep tech startups.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
8 of 93 
CHAPTER 2 
2. Literature review 
 
There are no questions as to why corporate partnerships with deep tech startups make sense and 
also the other way around: the startups can benefit from corporate funding, resources, and 
customer and market access, while corporates gains insights into innovative new technologies, 
staying ahead of competitors and on top the markets (McKinsey & Company, 2020). But do these 
relationships pay off for deep tech startups and corporates? One could assume, that because of all 
the investments and time used to find the right relationship the success rate would be relatively 
high. But in reality, the relationships have low success rates (less than 25% in some cases) with the 
majority of corporate venture capitals stop investing after two to three years. Asking the startups 
about their satisfaction levels, only 28% said they are satisfied with their relationship (McKinsey & 
Company, 2020). A report that surveyed 46 international companies, the data showed that almost 
69% of all startup-corporate initiatives failed to deliver their expected results (Siota & Prats, 2022). 
Another report from 500 Startups, discovered that both startups and corporates are highly active in 
collaborating, yet it is less than 25% of initial pilots that are successful and scaled into a solution that 
can be taken to market (Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019). From 2016, another report showed that 
despite all the reason startups want to collaborate with a corporate, the startups expressed plenty 
of frustrations – with 50% of the startups saying that their experience interacting with corporates 
was mediocre or worse and another 8% responding “Don’t know / not sure” (Imaginatik and 
MassChallenge, 2016). When asked about their success rate, the corporate respondents said that 
45% of relationships were not successful – while the 40% of the startups said that their relationships 
were not successful (Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016).  With all the low success rates and 
frustrations for both startups and corporates, it is interesting to see that it is projected that 
corporates are expecting to increase corporate venturing within deep tech in the next five years by 
71% (Siota & Prats, 2021). That is why Toyota has backed the autonomous mobility startup Pony.ai, 
Samsung has invested in quantum computing startup IonQ, Lenovo partnered with lithium-ion 
battery startup CosMX, and LG Group created LG Technology Venture, a corporate venture capital 
arm, that has invested more than US$400 million in deep tech startups. However, if corporates want 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
9 of 93 
to capture the all benefits of deep tech startups, they need to recognize and overcome all the 
tensions to success (Siota & Prats, 2022).  
 
The literature review section will look into two parts – 1) deep tech, high tech and general tech. This 
part will examine what deep tech is and how to distinguish between the different types of 
technological startups. And 2) relationship between corporate and deep tech startups, which will 
focus on (i) the benefits of a corporate-startup relationship. Understanding the benefits of each side 
of the relationship, will help both startups and corporates to strategically align the relationship, (ii) 
what tension and paradox theory is, and (iii) the four main tensions identified through reviewing 
the literature on corporate-startup tensions and how to manage them.  
 
2.1 Deep tech, high tech and general tech 
To understand the tensions in partnerships between startups and corporates, it is important to first 
understand and distinguish between the types of technological startups dealing with. By 
understanding the types of technological startup dealing with, it is easier for corporates to 
understand the needs and challenges a startup has and will also help corporates ease their 
relationship process. 
 
The term deep tech has for many years been commonly used by practitioners in three different 
ways, either 1) as a type of technology, 2) as an innovation approach or 3) as a category of startup 
(Siota & Prats, 2021; Rotolo, Hick, & Martin, 2015). Over the years, many have tried to define the 
term deep tech, but also needed to research and compare with well-established concepts such as 
technology transfer, scientific commercialization, and linked or pull innovation (Siota, 2017; Siota & 
Prats, 2021). So, the definition has been allowing for flexibility, because a scientific discovery that 
once were challenging to develop and defined as deep tech, may not be in 20 years and can be 
mainstream today (Siota & Prats, 2021; Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). This 
study will use the term deep tech as a type of technology – or technologies.  
 
One example of a definition that has been used often is that “deep tech is a group of emerging 
technologies based on scientific discoveries or meaningful engineering innovations, offering a 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
10 of 93 
substantial advance over established technologies, and seeking to tackle some of the world’s 
fundamental challenges” (Siota & Prats, 2021: 14).  
 
But taking the previous paragraph mentioned into account, the better and maybe more fitting 
definition of deep tech should be that “A “Deep” Technology was impossible yesterday, is barely 
feasible today, and will quickly become so pervasive and impactful that it is difficult to remember 
life without. Deep Tech solutions are reimaginations of fundamental capabilities that are faithful to 
real and significant problems or opportunities, rather than to one discipline” (Siegel & Krishnan, 
2020: 8). This is also the definition that the study will be based upon.  
 
Today, deep tech is being considered as the 4th wave of innovation. In a report from Boston 
Consulting Group and Hello Tomorrow, deep tech is characterized by four main attributes. 1) Deep 
tech startups are problem-oriented, not technology-driven. 2) They are positioned at the 
convergence of technologies. Their data shows, that 96% of deep tech startups use at least two 
technologies and 66% use more than one advanced technology. 3) Deep tech startups has shifted 
away from the digital revolution towards the physical one. 83% of deep tech startups are building a 
product or solution with hardware components. Lastly, 4) deep tech startups are highly dependent 
on a deeply interconnected ecosystem of accelerators, without which deep tech startups cannot 
thrive  (BCG and Hello Tomorrow, 2021).  
 
So, how does deep tech differentiate from high tech and general tech startups? Figure 1 illustrates 
the difference between the three levels of tech. Following six variables are into play when defining 
the tech level of a startup (Siota & Prats, 2021). 
 
1. Adoption of the technological product 
2. Perceived value by the customer 
3. Hard to reproduce (science-based related) 
4. Time and capital required 
5. Technical expertise relevance 
6. Gestation period 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
11 of 93 
 
The 1) adoption of the technological product is based on the life cycle of adoption rate for specific 
technology throughout its development journey. The illustration starts with no adoption and is 
followed by early adopters that are okay with imperfections and challenges with the technology. 
The majority and late adopters, on the other hand, require the technology to be perfect and with 
no challenges (Siota & Prats, 2021). Every technology goes through the adoption curve. But the 
argument that deep tech might not be deep tech in 20 years, argues that when deep tech leaves 
the adaptation curve after “early adopter”, the deep tech product will be recognized as high-tech 
(Siegel & Krishnan, 2020). The second aspect – 2) perceived value by the customers – which is also 
termed the “Kano State” – shows how a technology is perceived as a delighter/Exciter to later 
become basic need as adaptation and familiarities increases to the majority and late adopters (Siota 
& Prats, 2021; Kano, Seraku, Takahasi, & Tsuji, 1984). The same thing appears with the second 
aspect, as with the first aspect. Deep tech products are recognized as deep tech when it is delighter 
(Siegel & Krishnan, 2020). It is proved, that deep tech products usually have scientific discoveries 
and engineering innovation, developed by highly qualified experts, such as Ph.D. and post-graduate, 
that required multiple thorough trials and regular approvals. This also indicates that the product 
being developed is 3) hard to reproduce (Siota & Prats, 2021; Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & 
Duportet, 2017). Furthermore, several research papers have described the unique challenges faced 
by deep tech startups, such as 4) time to market being long (above five years) and requires large 
capital to cover the everything during development phase (Siota & Prats, 2021; Tour, Soussan, Harlé, 
Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). Second to last, is 5) the technical expertise being highly relevant 
because of the technology being risky and often complex (Siota & Prats, 2021; Tour, Soussan, Harlé, 
Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). The last variable, 6), is the gestation period that show deep tech 
startups need more than 5 years, while high tech startups need 1 to 3 years and general tech 
needing fewer than 2 years (Siota & Prats, 2021; Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). 
In short, if a product has high level of hard-to-reproduce, time and capital requirement, technical 
expertise and has a gestation period of more than five years and is adopted by early adopters and 
perceived as a delighter/exciter value by the customer it will be characterized as deep tech.  
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
12 of 93 
Figure 1: Common differences in the product (or service) of deep-, high- and general-tech startups 
 
Source 1: (Siota & Prats, 2021: 15) 
 
Technological advances, innovations and revolutions are not new to the world. The 1st wave of 
innovation consisted of the first and second industrial revolutions. Corporate labs such as IBM, 
Xerox Parc mainly led the 2nd wave, all having high-calibre multi-disciplinary teams and strongly 
involving the scientific community. The 3rd wave saw the “Silicon Valley” model that focused mostly 
on IT, digital and biotechnology and was the emergence of small disruptive firms. But the first 
supersonic plane, the synthetic biology revolution, flying taxis and the vaccine for COVID developed 
in nine months with a novel mRNA approach are all innovations that have one thing in common – 
they are all founded by deep tech ventures – the 4th wave of innovation. And this is showing us what 
startups and scaleups within deep tech can achieve today (BCG and Hello Tomorrow, 2021).  But 
also shows us, that the massive shift in demand led by megatrends, such as global climate change, 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
13 of 93 
demographic shifts, resource scarcity, aging population and scientific progress are impacting all 
industries, which means that deep-tech innovations is at the heart of the next technological 
revolution (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). Because, when deep tech solution 
works, it creates a platform technology that allows for disruption across markets and invents new 
industries. (Nedayvoda, Mockel, & Graf, 2020). While deep tech may transform business and 
operations at the core, not all benefits of deep tech are economically driven. Deep tech startups are 
solving societal challenges by creating new capabilities and developing new business in yet 
untapped global markets. A survey of 8.600 global deep tech companies, more than half was aiming 
to tackle at least one of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (Portincaso & Tour, 
2019).  
 
Artificial intelligence, Advanced materials, Biotechnology, Blockchain, Robotics and drone, 
Photonics and electronics, and Quantum computing are some common deep tech categories (Siota 
& Prats, 2021).  
 
Table 1. Seven common deep tech categories with definitions 
Artificial intelligence 
The ability of a machine or computer system 
to perform cognitive functions that are 
usually associated with humans. 
Advanced materials 
New materials and modifications to the 
existing ones to reach a superior 
performance. 
Biotechnology 
Technology that aims to create or develop 
existing products by the use of living 
processes and organisms. 
Blockchain 
Shared and immutable ledger that stores 
transactions and tack assets, enhancing 
security and transparency. 
Robotics and drones 
The use of machines to perform automated 
tasks. As a subcategory, drones are remotely 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
14 of 93 
piloted flying crafts employed in several 
activities such as maintenance and 
transportation. 
Photonics and electronics 
Technology that enhances the properties of 
photons, the quantum unit of light, to 
transmit information in milliseconds. As a 
subset, a similar process is followed by 
electronics with electrodes. 
Quantum computing 
Another way of processing information, 
leveraging the properties of matter at 
nanoscale. 
Source 2: Siota & Prats, 2021 
 
2.2 Corporate and deep tech startup relationships  
This part of the literature review will be divided into two areas of a relationship. First, the benefits 
for startups and corporates. Understanding the benefits of each side of the relationship, will help 
both startups and corporates to strategically align the relationship, reduce challenges and increase 
satisfaction rate in relationships. Second, tensions created in startup-corporate relationship both 
from a startup point of view and from a corporate point of view. The section will include both direct 
tensions and indirect tensions that may have an influence in the corporate-startup relationship in 
the future. Direct tensions are tension directly between corporates and startups, while indirect 
tensions can be tensions within an organization only but may influence negatively on a future 
relationship. The indirect tensions will be mentioned, but not discussed as it is only the direct 
tensions that this study will focus upon. 
 
2.2.1 Benefits for corporates in a relationship with deep tech startups 
There are many reasons as to why corporates want to start a relationship with deep tech startups. 
A large majority of corporates have multiple goals, and collaborate and invests in startups for a 
variety of purposes not only for financial returns but also to achieve strategic benefits. These 
benefits include 1) exploring and gaining access to new technology and/or business model, 2) 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
15 of 93 
gaining insight into emerging industry trends, 3) developing potential acquisition targets, 4) creating 
new revenue streams, new business lines, and new customers, 5) to demonstrate that the corporate 
is innovative, entrepreneurial and agile, 6) to help execute a pivot or transformation, and 7) getting 
access to entrepreneurial talent and energy (Basu, Phelps, & Kotha, 2016; Jeon & Maula, 2022; 
Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019). Research also shows that relationships take 
place, because corporates believe there is an opportunity to speed up the innovation and co-
develop new solutions together with startups (Oxford Research & TechBBQ, 2019). Furthermore, 
also showing that relationships with startups was found to be positively affecting the corporates’ 
development of dynamic capabilities and business transformation (Steiber & Alänge, 2020).  
 
It is worth spending some time on understanding one’s own motivations, as well as the other side’s 
interests and constraints (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). The literature review done has been 
synthesized and shows that the benefits for corporates are the following: 
 
• Explore and gain access to new technology and/or business model 
• Gain insights into emerging industry trends 
• Developing potential acquisition targets 
• New revenue streams, new business lines, and new customers 
• To demonstrate that the corporate is innovative, entrepreneurial and agile 
• To help execute a pivot or transformation 
• Access to entrepreneurial talent and energy 
 
Explore and gain access to new technology and/or business model 
Several researchers have highlighted the limits of established corporates to generate innovations 
internally. And it is also a well-established fact that corporates face difficulties in generating ground 
breaking and radical innovations, because of the constraint on the creation and sharing of 
knowledge within a single organization. Thus, corporates may find that they lack the necessary 
knowledge to innovate. To overcome these difficulties, corporates seek to exploit knowledge 
externally (Dushnitsky & Lenox, 2005).  
==PAGE:22==
 
 
16 of 93 
Studies have shown and advanced the idea that entrepreneurial ventures are likely to be a source 
of highly valuable and innovative ideas. And because of this, top scientists and innovators are 
choosing profit sharing, i.e. founding own ventures, over fixed salary i.e. as an employee in 
corporate environment. Consequently, resulting in why deep tech startups can create disruptive 
technologies and business models that corporate cannot do (Dushnitsky & Lenox, 2005). 
Corporates learn and gain access to new technologies and business models through knowledge-
sharing and spill-over, which has been shown to be positively affecting the innovativeness of 
corporates. Furthermore, Stuart (2000) argues that corporates’ patenting rates increase the more 
technology advanced their alliance partners are (Dushnitsky & Lenox, 2005). 
 
So, for corporates to protect their strategic position, they need to be aware of market shifts caused 
by new technology or innovation in their core or adjacent business fields. External innovators, such 
as startups, have more freedom to develop truly disruptive solutions. Corporates may discover 
value, not only in increasing revenues and margins in their core businesses, but also in the expansion 
to emerging business fields. Successful innovation through relationship with startups, secures a 
future competitive advantage. Innovation that comes internally from the corporate, is often 
hampered because of the corporate wanting to protect their core business. Acquisition or a 
relationship with a startup may facilitate the necessary disruption of the core business model, which 
is difficult to achieve from within (Siegel, Siegel, & MacMillan, 1988; Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; 
Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019). 
 
Gain insights into emerging industry trends 
Working with innovative startups will allow corporates to better track changes in the market that 
may bring disruption. For some studies this variable was the second highest reason with up to 45% 
responding as to why corporates want to collaborate with startups (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; 
Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019). 
 
New revenue streams, new business lines, and new customers 
A startup using AI and sensor technologies may offer car manufacturers a solution for a fully 
automated driving experience. This is one example of how startups allow a corporate to offer new 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
17 of 93 
and creative services to their clients (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 
2016). It is also argued, that if corporates work only with established tech providers, they risk 
missing out on potential new sources of revenue. In a report that examined and asked corporates 
to list the reasons as to why they want to collaborate with startups, 45% of the corporates 
mentioned that getting access to new customers was a reason for relationship (Younis, Desai, & 
Sigal, 2019).  
That being said, if they buy from an innovative startup, it may give a corporate competitive edge, 
because startup can simply outperform existing solution provider to corporate clients. They can do 
this because startups have less overhead costs and a stronger innovation focus. (Larkin & 
O'Halloran, 2018; Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019)  
 
To demonstrate that the corporate is innovative, entrepreneurial and agile 
In today’s fast-changing business environment, it is strategically imperative to actively foster a 
culture of openness that allows for innovation as much as for failures on the way to new solutions 
(Hitt, Keats, & DeMarie, 1998; Nadler & Tushman, 1999). Larkin and O’Halloran argue (2018), that 
working with startups can bring back more openness to innovation and intrapreneurship (Imaginatik 
and MassChallenge, 2016). One of the way this happens is through the mechanism of strategic 
adaptation. The adaptive capability of a corporate is the ability to alter its alignment with the 
environment (Garret & Covin, 2007).  
Because startups are not as standard process-driven as established corporates, they tend to 
innovate closer to customer needs. Adapting and customizing more easily, while allowing the 
corporate to serve its customer better. This will show corporate clients that they are being 
innovative and customer focused (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019). 
 
To help execute a pivot or transformation 
In a research paper, that examined corporate-startup relationship and the effects on the case 
companies’ capabilities and outcome in regards to their business transformations, found that 
relationships with startups had a positive effect on the corporates’ business transformation (Steiber 
& Alänge, 2020). Asking over 100 corporates to list their reasons as to why they want to collaborate 
with startups to better understand how these companies are working with startups, 56% of the 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
18 of 93 
corporates mentioned that they are interested in executing a pivot or transformation (Younis, Desai, 
& Sigal, 2019). 
 
Access to entrepreneurial talent and energy 
In recent times, the largest corporates created a new strategy in pursuit of their innovation policies. 
Acquihiring is the term that is the process between the acquisition of an startup and hiring human 
resources. This approach has become one of the most used for corporates that want to innovate 
and incorporate in their knowledge capital new skills and competences, and strengthen their 
position as market leaders (Fantasia, 2016; Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Imaginatik and 
MassChallenge, 2016; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019).  
 
But all these drivers, purposes and reasons as to why corporates want to collaborate with startups 
may be the very first problem and first reason as to why tensions are created. 
In the book: Hvad kan startups, som vi ikke kan? En guide til bæredygtig vækst i partnerskab 
(translated:” What can startups do, that we cannot? A guide to sustainable growth in partnership”) 
written by Freja Ludvigsen (2022) she questions why it makes sense to open up for relationships 
with startups. The typical purposes for corporates to enter a relationship are many of the same ones 
as mentioned above. And in her view, these are all important and relevant purposes, but they all 
have one problem in common. They are all formulated with a clear focus in what the corporate can 
get out of it on the bottom line (Ludvigsen, 2022). From her point of view, it is the biggest mistake 
a corporate can make when creating a startup relationship and what she believes to be one of the 
reasons on why a relationship is not the success they wished for (Ludvigsen, 2022). By entering a 
relationship based on purposes for own success, Freja believes the corporates signals the wrong 
values. Values such as (Ludvigsen, 2022): 
 
• A self-interested maximising approach to their relationship partners 
• A lack of interest for their relationship partners’ goals, success criteria and dilemmas 
• That the relationship will be based on the corporates premise and that decisions will be 
decided in a way which ensures the corporates interests  
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
19 of 93 
The paradoxes of innovation within exploration-exploitation (discussed later), agrees with the 
above-mentioned beliefs. Andriopoulos and Lewis (2009), shows that focusing on profit emphasis, 
including ensure stable revenues via repeat clients and careful resource allocation that fosters 
efficiency is not a strategy for exploration. The strategy indicates that corporates are focusing on 
business core-related exploitation rather than innovation-related exploration. As mention in this 
paper, research shows that deep tech startups are not only economically driven, and many deep 
tech startups are aiming to tackle at least one of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
(Portincaso & Tour, 2019). If corporates are having an economically driven purpose only, it may 
create a tension within a relationship, because the purpose in regards to developing a 
product/solution will be contradictory from a startups purpose point of view. This tension does need 
to be research more upon, which can be avenue for future research. 
Furthermore, the days of unpaid pilots are behind deep tech startups (KPMG, 2015). The 
relationship will fail if it is based upon the interests and premise of the corporate and no 
commitment is shown towards the deep tech startup. It is shown that commitment is related to the 
perception that the other party is dedicated to strengthening both its own position and the 
collaborators position (Tidström, 2014).  
 
Having contradictory goals with the startups creates tensions during the relationship. In the end, 
this can be one of the reasons as to why the success rates on startup-corporate relationship is so 
low.  
 
2.2.2 Benefits for deep tech startups in a relationship with corporate 
For deep tech startups the benefits are more focused on developing their products and scaling. In 
the literature review the following five benefits for deep tech startups were found: 
 
• Funding, revenues and independence from external capital 
• Access to market and customers 
• Success story for future sales 
• Access to proprietary assets  
• Access to corporate complementary assets  
==PAGE:26==
 
 
20 of 93 
 
Funding, revenues and independence from external capital 
For every startup, funding and revenue is often a key incentive. Big corporates can usually invest 
significant amount of money towards products, which means corporates can free startups from the 
need to seek outside investments. The road to market often also shortens, as the corporate usually 
becomes the first customer for the startup (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Kohler, 2016; Harlé, Soussan, 
& Tour, 2017).  
Furthermore, the long-term interest that corporates can have, may stabilize a startup and help them 
reach break-even or even profits very early. This approach will allow startups to achieve sustainable 
growth, independently from scarce venture capital (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Kohler, 2016; Harlé, 
Soussan, & Tour, 2017; Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016) 
 
Access to market and customers 
For deep tech startups, a corporate can be the ideal target customer as they have enough people, 
budget and opportunity to scale. (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). Furthermore, corporate have 
extensive knowledge and long-term experience of their market by operating for years in that’s 
specific market. Startups can gain insights, enter the market and the customers within the market, 
with the help from corporates and their resources. Furthermore, knowledge and experience can be 
tapped into in the form of mentoring (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 
2016; Kohler, 2016; Harlé, Soussan, & Tour, 2017).  
Another perspective of getting access to new markets is through the relationship with corporate 
headquarters that will offer the possibility to expand into other countries by partnering with the 
corporates subsidiaries. This way, startups will get the possibility of refining and optimizing their 
products when testing with large user bases (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). This could result in a less 
risky alternative, than expanding into other countries as a startup alone.  
 
Success story for future sales 
Being a partner with a well-known corporate substantially enhances the reputation of startups and 
therefore serve as a reference case for future sales, relationships and/or investments. Just like the 
chicken-and-egg problem, the same goes here. It is often seen that key corporate departments may 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
21 of 93 
not want to work with a startup and their unproven products if they cannot provide references from 
other corporates before engaging in a relationship – this also triggers a network effect (Kohler, 2016; 
Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). In this case, the transformation of the sales process from a pitch into 
reference selling may become a key success factor for a startup (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018).  
 
Access to proprietary assets  
Collaborating with corporate can enable startups to exploit and explore underutilized corporate 
assets such as data that would otherwise no the accessible and thereby create new business 
opportunities (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Harlé, Soussan, & Tour, 2017; Kohler, 2016). 
 
Access to corporate complementary assets 
Beside the above-mentioned benefits, startup typically form relationships to gain access to 
complementary physical corporate resources, such as, manufacturing, testing facilities, and sales 
and/or marketing channels (Hallen, Katila, & Rosenberger, 2014). Specifically manufacturing and 
marketing are the two primary resources discussed in the literature. Deep tech startups, which are 
highly capital-intensive, are likely to require greater manufacturing assets to commercialize their 
products. Furthermore, the marketing resource was measured, by the advertising intensity. If the 
intensity in the industry is high, the “product commercialization is likely to be marketing-intensive 
and will require joint exploitation of marketing resources and new technology” (Katila, Rosenberger, 
& Eisenhardt, 2008: 310).  
Lastly, there are more complementary assets that startups can access with corporates, that is not 
possible with e.g. private venture capitals. These beneficiary assets include 1) longer time span, 2) 
the scale, 3) the management of strategic complements, and 4) the ability to learn from venture 
failures (Chesbrough, 2000).  
 
2.2.3 Review of tensions and the paradox theory 
Understanding the relevant theory and definitions on tensions is important, in order to review and 
identify the tensions between corporate-startup relationships. The term “tension” has been used 
often in literature and many times tensions has been interchanged with the term “paradox” (Raza-
Ullah, Bengtsson, & Kock, 2013). The term “tension” is defined as being “contradictory” and has 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
22 of 93 
opposing elements, such as, goals, interests, perspectives, identities, etc. The exploration and 
exploitation tension (discussed later) have opposing routines, structures, and cultures (Smith & 
Tushman, 2005). These tensions can be managed by changing leadership in regards to (i) shifting 
the mind-set from an “either/or” to a “both/and” mind-set, by (ii) seeing the benefits of 
inconsistencies and recognizing that resources are not always finite, and (iii) embracing change 
rather than chasing stability. This means, nurturing the unique aspects of competing constituencies 
and strategies while finding ways to unite them (Smith, Lewis, & Tushman, 2016).  
Meanwhile, “paradox theory is a meta-theory that offers a lens” (Jeon & Maula, 2022: 3) through 
which the tensions in corporate-startup relationships resulting from, such as, contradictory goals, 
values and misappropriation risks can be understood. Sharks dilemma is a tension that many 
corporates and startups seek to manage and is an example of a corporate-startup relationship 
tension that has been researched extensively (Jeon & Maula, 2022). When tensions are 
“contradictory between simultaneously existing elements”, it is considered to be paradoxical (Jeon 
& Maula, 2022: 3). Paradox and the concept was formally defined as “contradictory yet interrelated 
elements that exist simultaneously and persist over time” (Smith & Lewis, 2011: 382; Cunha & 
Putnam, 2019) and highlights two components of paradox. The first being, underlying tensions – 
that is “elements that seem logical individually, but inconsistent and even absurd when juxtaposed” 
(Smith & Lewis, 2011: 382) and the second being, “reponses that embrace tensions simultaneously” 
(Smith & Lewis, 2011: 382). 
 
The building blocks of a paradox meta-theory is built upon the following six themes and three 
categories, (i) Nature, which encompasses research and describes the underlying aspects i.e., types 
and relationships, (ii) Approaches, which includes research that explains how actors address 
paradoxical tensions i.e., collective and individual, and (iii) Impact, which deepens the 
understanding of the influence of distinct approaches i.e., outcomes and dynamics (Schad, Lewis, 
Raisch, & Smith, 2017). Table 2, below, illustrates and summarizes the contents of the three 
categories.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
23 of 93 
Table 2: The categories and building blocks of paradox meta-theory 
Nature 
Approaches 
Impact 
Types 
Relationships 
Collective 
Individual 
Outcome 
Dynamics 
“Nature: 
Types 
identifies 
and 
categorizes 
tensions that 
spark anxiety 
and a tug-of-
war 
experience” 
(Schad, 
Lewis, & 
Smith, 2017: 
19) 
“Nature: 
Relationships 
examine the 
interplay 
between 
interdependent 
contradictions” 
(Schad, Lewis, 
& Smith, 2017: 
19). 
“Approaches: 
Collective 
approaches 
emphasize 
responses that 
involve inter-
organizational, 
organizational, 
and group 
practices” 
(Schad, Lewis, 
& Smith, 2017: 
19), which 
includes four 
approaches to 
paradox, 
being  
1) opposition, 
2) spatial 
separation,  
3) temporal 
separation, 
and  
4) synthesis. 
“Approaches:  
Individual 
responses 
explore 
individual 
actors’ 
capabilities, 
cognition, 
and 
emotional 
responses” 
(Schad, 
Lewis, & 
Smith, 2017: 
28). 
“Impact: 
Outcomes 
describe 
consequences 
of varied 
responses” 
(Schad, Lewis, 
& Smith, 
2017: 19). 
“Impact: 
dynamics 
elaborate 
cyclical 
processes 
that emerge 
as 
approaches 
address 
persistent 
tensions” 
(Schad, 
Lewis, & 
Smith, 2017: 
19). 
74%3 
42% 
46% 
30% 
36% 
18% 
 
3 The percentages at the bottom of Table 2: The categories and building blocks of paradox meta-theory, indicates how 
many studies have been done in that specific theme for the past 25 years from 1990-2014. The total sample analysis 
in that period is 133 paradox studies (Schad, Lewis and Smith, 2017). 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
24 of 93 
 
The analysis by Schad, Lewis and Smith (2017), that examined 133 paradox studies in the past 25 
years (1990-2014), reveals that the studies on paradox research has emphasised mostly on studying 
types (accounting for 74%), collective approaches (accounting for 46%) and outcomes (accounting 
for 36%). This indicates that the research appears to apply a linear epistemology, or knowledge, to 
the paradoxical phenomena, as the problem is identified, the organizational responses are 
proposed, and the consequences are examined. But it is argued that the themes of relationships, 
individual approaches, and dynamics are vital, as these highlight the non-linear nature of paradox, 
as they “involve inextricable links and cyclical interactions” (Schad, Lewis and Smith, 2017: 33). The 
authors further argue, that the themes that has been under-researched, extend the richness of the 
lens, but are also more challenging to address. It is, therefore, proposed that the themes, 
relationships, individual approaches, and dynamics, should be further studied in the next 25 years 
(Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
 
Nature: Types  
As mentioned above types “identifies and categorizes tensions that spark anxiety and a tug-of-war 
experience” (Schad, Lewis and Smith, 2017: 19). Research examining types focus on the diversity of 
levels, domains and phenomena of paradox inquiry. Paradox is treated as a noun, a concrete, 
discernible tension between distinct elements, and highlights their contradictory and oppositional 
nature. Paradox can surface on the levels of field, organizations, teams, individuals and multi-level. 
Researchers further describes categories to group types of tensions that exist in the categories of 
learning, organizing, belonging and performing (Smith & Lewis, 2011; Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 
2017).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
25 of 93 
Table 3: At what level does paradox surface? 
Field 
Organizations 
Teams 
Individual 
Multilevel 
(Andriopoulos 
& Lewis, 
2009) 
Academic/ 
practitioner  
(Bartunek & Rynes, 
2014) 
Ambidexterity/Change/ 
Innovation 
 (Andriopoulos & Lewis, 
2009) 
Creativity  
(Andriopoulos 
C. , 2003) 
Creativity  
(Miron-
Spektor, 
Erez, & 
Naveh, 
2011) 
Governance/Strategy  
(Dameron & Torset, 
2014) 
Interorganizational 
ties  
(Chung & Beamish, 
2010) 
Leadership  
(Denison, 
Hooijberg, & 
Quinn, 1995) 
Social enterprise/Social 
responsibility 
(Jay, 2013) 
Goals  
(Ellis, Mai, & 
Christian, 
2013) 
National culture  
(Fang, 2012) 
Identity/Culture  
(Ashforth & Reingen, 
2014) 
Everyday 
work  
(Lüscher & 
Lewis, 2008) 
Routines/Practices  
(Orlikowski, 1992) 
 
Table 4: What categories of paradoxes exists? 
Learning 
Organizing 
Belonging 
Performing 
Exploration vs. 
exploitation  
(Andriopoulos & 
Lewis, 2009) 
Alignment vs. 
flexibility 
(Smith & Tushman, 
2005) 
Competing identities 
(Ashforth & Reingen, 
2014) 
Cooperation vs. 
competition 
(Chung & Beamish, 
2010) 
Stability vs. change 
(Farjoun, 2010) 
Control vs. 
autonomy/ 
empowerment 
(Gebert, Boerner, & 
Kearney, 2010) 
Individual vs. 
collective 
(Deephouse, 1999) 
Multiple objectives 
and stakeholders 
(Das & Teng, 2000) 
Short-term vs. long-
term 
(Das & Teng, 2000) 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
26 of 93 
Nature: Relationships 
As previously mentioned, “relationships examine the interplay between interdependent 
contradictions” (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017: 19). The theme refers to paradox as a verb, 
emphasizing the persistent interactions between opposing elements and shows the nature of 
competing demands, such as, structure and action, materiality and discourse, and change and 
stability. It was found that latent paradoxical tensions become salient in case of environmental 
changes and individual approaches (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
 
Table 5: How do paradoxical relationships become salient? 
Environmental Conditions 
Individual Approaches 
Plurality/Competition  
(Adler, Goldoftas, & Levine, 1999) 
Paradoxical inquiry/framing  
(Lüscher & Lewis, 2008) 
Using meta-theory  
(Orlikowski, 1992) 
Change/Innovation  
(Chung & Beamish, 2010) 
Views that encompasses both poles  
(Bradach, 1997) 
Scarcity  
(Smith & Tushman, 2005) 
Influence of culture and world views 
(Chen, 2014) 
 
Approach: Collective  
As mentioned the “collective approaches emphasize responses that involve inter-organizational, 
organizational, and group practices” (Schad, Lewis and Smith, 2017: 19). Researchers addressing 
collective approaches explain organizational practices, processes, and structures and collective 
strategies at various levels, such as, population (O'Neill, Pouder, & Buchholtz, 1998), inter-
organizational (Chung & Beamish, 2010), organizational (O'Reilly & Tushman, 2008),  and teams 
(Miron-Spektor, Erez, & Naveh, 2011). The early studies four approaches were proposed to paradox, 
1) opposition, 2) spatial separation, 3) temporal separation, and 4) synthesis (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, 
& Smith, 2017).  
 
Opposition, which is also often termed “acceptance”, indicates “accepting the paradox and 
learning to live with it” (Schad, Lewis and Smith, 2017: 25). An example is found with middle 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
27 of 93 
managers that could more effectively live with the tensions between stability and change by 
implementing paradoxical inquiry practices and asking themselves how they could address both 
elements simultaneously. This allowed for a strategy to move forward, rather than getting stuck of 
the paradoxical tension. (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017) 
 
Spatial separation explains levels of analysis to separate competing, yet co-existing 
demands, processes and perspectives. Research found that tensions between an organization’s 
need for internal alignment and market pressures for adaptation can be managed by separating the 
connected tasks into separate business units. This structural separation can minimize conflicts and 
avoid inactivity, but can also create imbalances in power, if on pole begins to dominate (Schad, 
Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).   
 
Temporal separation distributes competing demands to sequential time periods, which 
encourages for a temporary focus on one pole rather than the other, depending on current demands 
for efficiency and incremental innovation versus change and radical innovation (Schad, Lewis, 
Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
 
Synthesis includes identifying an innovative solution that takes both paradoxical elements 
into account. This could, for example, be done by a combination of multiple strategies to 
accommodate the dual forces of flexibility and efficiency (Adler, Goldoftas, & Levine, 1999; Schad, 
Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017). 
 
Furthermore, research shows how approaches to managing competing demands over time 
involves combination of these various strategies. The proposed dynamic equilibrium model of 
managing paradox, by Smith and Lewis (2011), involves accepting paradoxical tensions in the long 
term, while either finding synergies between competing demands and/or providing “back-and-
forth” support between elements in the short term (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017). More 
recently, a longitudinal study by Raisch and Tushman (2016), followed and compared six cases of 
large firm in regards to how they scale their exploratory businesses. Their findings show that 
exploratory units initially pursue parent alignment (integration with their corporate parent; 
differentiation from their corporate peer units), but then subsequently shifting to peer alignment 
(integration with their peer units; differentiation from their corporate parent) (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, 
& Smith, 2017: 28).  
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
28 of 93 
Approach: Individual 
Individual approaches explore the micro-level responses to paradox as in individual actors’ 
cognitive, emotional, and behavioural capabilities and reactions to paradoxes. The studies exploring 
individual approaches focuses on leaders as the key actors in engaging in paradox management, 
including senior leaders, general managers, and middle managers (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 
2017). Often paradoxes in the individual approach are addressed by defensiveness/discomfort 
(Ashforth & Reingen, 2014), paradoxical thinking/sensemaking (Hahn, Preuss, Pinkse, & Figge, 
2014), reflexivity/disruptive thinking (Dameron & Torset, 2014), behavioral complexity (Denison, 
Hooijberg, & Quinn, 1995), humour (Hatch, 1997), rhetorical skills (Andriopoulos & Lewis, 2009), 
and/or response informed by national culture (Adler, Goldoftas, & Levine, 1999; Schad, Lewis, 
Raisch, & Smith, 2017). 
 
Impact: Outcomes 
Even with the persistent nature of paradoxes, studies often examine specific consequences of 
paradox and its management – or its mismanagement. Studies show that defensive individual or 
collective responses, which is pulling towards one extreme or avoiding engagement with paradox, 
can have undesired consequences, fostering ambivalence and cause chaos. If not managed 
effectively, the paradoxical forces can neutralize each other’s benefits, spark conflict or 
organizational decline (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017). On the positive side, managing 
paradoxes effectively can result to virtuous cycles (Smith & Lewis, 2011). The benefits of working 
through paradox, rather than against, results in enabling innovation or ambidexterity. It was also 
demonstrated how engaging in paradoxical tensions fosters creativity, increases effectiveness of 
teams and individual managers, learning, legitimacy, and sustainability and long term performance 
(Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
 
Impact: Dynamics 
As mentioned earlier, “dynamics elaborate cyclical processes that emerge as approaches address 
persistent tensions” (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017: 19). It is argued that, the relationship 
between “contradictory and interdependent elements consistently shift, intensifying tensions 
and/or opening new possibilities, and triggering responses in an ongoing, iterative process” (Schad, 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
29 of 93 
Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017: 31). The paradoxes persist over time, but often remain undiscovered 
until “contextual conditions of plurality, change, and scarcity and/or processes of social 
constructions raise actors’ awareness” (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017: 31).  
Multiple stakeholders with various goals can spur dynamics when one stakeholder points out on 
element, provoking equally emphatic, defensive reactions by another stakeholder preferring the 
opposing element (Fiol, Pratt, & O'Connor, 2009). Changes in firm ownership (Chung & Beamish, 
2010) or internal organization processes can also trigger dynamics by contrasting conflicting goals, 
priorities, and practices. Scarcity can spark resource allocation challenges between contradictory 
yet co-existing needs, such as, financial, temporal, and human (Smith W. K., 2014). Furthermore, 
studies have examined the role of discourse in surfacing undiscovered tensions (Schad, Lewis, 
Raisch, & Smith, 2017). For example, a study highlighted managers’ actively raising questions about 
power tensions during a change effort (Voyer, 1994; Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
Research studies describes paradoxes unfolding in cyclical and dialectical processes, building from 
foundational work to conceptual studies now further elaborated on the dynamics of vicious and 
virtuous cycles (Smith & Lewis, 2011; Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017) 
 
How does framing drive dynamics? 
How do paradoxes unfold? 
Attend to change frequency and timing 
(Klarner & Raisch, 2013) 
Dialectical process/Synthesis 
(Harvey, 2014) 
Discourse surfaces tensions 
(Chreim, 2005) 
Negative and positive feedback cycles 
(Stacey, 1995) 
Shifts understanding of outcomes 
(Jay, 2013) 
Oscillation between poles 
(Ashforth & Reingen, 2014) 
Redefines issues as paradoxical 
(Lüscher & Lewis, 2008) 
Vicious cycles/Escalation 
 Sundaramurthy 2003 
Virtuous cycles/Dynamic equilibrium 
(Smith & Lewis, 2011) 
Source 3: Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017: 76 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
30 of 93 
2.2.4 Tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech startups 
The study identified four main tensions in relationship between corporates and deep tech startups 
based on a synthesis approached literature review. The tensions identified are the following: 
 
• “Sharks dilemma” - the tension between very attractive resources and high 
misappropriation risks 
• Deep tech startups as attractive opportunity vs. risky and costly 
• Relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility and spirit 
o Relationship as a way of reaching proof of concept vs. risk of never going to market 
o Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech startup long-term horizon 
o Tension of top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
o Joint innovation vs. risk of “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome” 
o Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing relationship vision 
• Opportunities for emerging technology vs. threats 
o Relationship as a path to get product to market vs. risk of creating a non-universal 
and scalable solution 
 
There is not universal method or process to go through that will help startups and corporates 
manage the tensions created. Every startup and every corporate will try to take different 
approaches to create a successful relationship. But understanding what has been tried before and 
how other corporates and startups have successfully collaborated, will help create best practises 
for how to run corporate-startup relationships in the future.  
 
2.2.5 The tension between very attractive resources and high misappropriation risks 
In the field of organization and strategy research, the main question is how corporates can gain 
resources. Researchers identified several approaches including acquisition of other firms and 
organic development (Katila, Rosenberger, & Eisenhardt, 2008). But when acquisitions can be too 
expensive and organic development too slow, relationships between organizations is a very 
attractive way of obtaining resources, especially for startups who want to access the attractive 
resources from corporates, such as capital, complementary assets and endorsement (Katila, 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
31 of 93 
Rosenberger, & Eisenhardt, 2008; Jeon & Maula, 2022; Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). Corporates and 
startups considering forming a relationship face a fundamental tension. Corporates and startups, 
on the one hand, are pushed toward forming a relationship by their dependence on others for 
needed resources (Katila, Rosenberger, & Eisenhardt, 2008). On the other hand, “entrepreneurs can 
distrust corporate investors because they will control their ventures to satisfy corporate objectives 
at the expense of ventures’ well-being” (Hellman, 2002: 286). Startups are, therefore, pushed away 
from relationships by the concerns about possibly damaging misappropriation of their own 
resources, such as technologies, intellectual properties etc., posed by their partners, which stifles 
innovation, prevents growth by intervening in startup management, and limits partnering 
opportunities with other corporates (Katila, Rosenberger, & Eisenhardt, 2008; Alvarez & Barney, 
2001). The tension between very attractive resource and high misappropriation risks is the tension 
that has been termed “Sharks dilemma” and is the second most studied tension in the corporate 
venture capital literature, accounting for 26% of all tensions for corporate venture capitals (Jeon & 
Maula, 2022). Corporate venture capital is often structured as a dedicated program within the 
parent corporation, which also means that multiple levels of managers are involved in the decision-
making process. In many cases, the investment committees are combined of senior and business 
unit managers to oversee their activities and approve changes in the investment. The business units, 
R&D, and corporate development managers discuss the roadmap for the technology of the parent 
firm and the strategic priorities of the corporate venture capital program. Generally, they support 
the activities by taking part in the due diligence processes, monitoring, advising, or managing the 
portfolio startups (Jeon & Maula, 2022; Basu, Phelps, & Kotha, 2016). Overall, the corporate venture 
capital is very dependent of the current strategy of the parent firm, which means that they have to 
follow the agenda of the corporate, unlike their counterpart i.e. an independent venture capital. 
This means that the literature on corporate venture capital is relevant for this thesis. 
 
From a startup point of view, managing the tension that is sharks dilemma, research shows that 
startups can set up various legal defence mechanisms, including, enforcing trade secrets, patents, 
timing defence (Katila, Rosenberger, & Eisenhardt, 2008) accepting later-stage funding, limiting 
corporate investors’ ownership stakes, board seats and social defences such as disciplining and 
aligning (Jeon & Maula, 2022; Colombo & Shafi, 2016; Hallen, Katila, & Rosenberger, 2014). It is also 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
32 of 93 
argued that even obtaining investments from other trustworthy venture capitalists prior to entering 
a relationship with corporates will help manage this tension, because several venture capitalists 
believe startups are too vulnerable in their early stages to do it alone (Katila, Rosenberger, & 
Eisenhardt, 2008; Colombo & Shafi, 2016). From a corporate point of view, sharks dilemma is the 
tension “between learning new technologies from startups and staying attractive to potential 
portfolio startups” (Jeon & Maula, 2022: 17). The extensive research is suggesting that corporates 
can manage the tension by following below four approaches (Jeon & Maula, 2022): 
 
1. Creating attractive corporate resources and corporate venture capital programs 
2. Creating effective organizational structures 
3. Creating collaborative tools and channels between corporate and startups 
4. Creating a protective environment by safeguarding startup’s IPR 
 
First, creating attractive corporate resources and corporate venture capital programs, corporates 
can gain access to a deal flow of high quality deep tech startup (Jeon & Maula, 2022). Research 
shows that corporates are significantly better at “commerce building” than independent venture 
capitals (Maula & Murray, 2005). Commerce building is not focused on the structure and 
organization, but rather on the areas of production, product and market with the “ability to forge 
revenue-generating opportunities from its contractual relationship with both customers and 
suppliers” (Maula & Murray, 2005: 16). Furthermore, by creating attractive corporate venture 
capital programs, corporates can build reputations and endorse their deep tech startups to 
independent venture capitals through networking (Jeon & Maula, 2022).  
Second, creating and setting up effective organizational structures and formal corporate venture 
capital subsidiaries will allow corporates to signal long-term commitment both for their internal 
venturing department and for startups by relieving the misappropriation concerns (Jeon & Maula, 
2022).  
Third, creating collaborative tools and channels that can be managed between corporate and 
startups, will allow corporate venture capitals to develop blueprints (Basu, Phelps, & Kotha, 2016) 
together with portfolio startups by creating business agreements during investments (Basu, Phelps, 
& Kotha, 2016; Jeon & Maula, 2022). The corporates can, furthermore, communicate needs and 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
33 of 93 
interests with their relationship startups and build a long-term relationship, while developing 
relation-specific assets and knowledge-sharing routines as well (Jeon & Maula, 2022).  
Fourth, creating a protective environment for deep tech startups can be done by safeguarding their 
intellectual property rights, avoiding investments in portfolio competitors and thereby protecting 
corporate portfolio startups (Basu, Phelps, & Kotha, 2016; Jeon & Maula, 2022).  
When the term “Sharks dilemma” was first introduced, it was assumed that the tension occurs 
during the corporate-startup tie formation, but now it can and should be understood as an “ongoing 
paradoxical tension that persists even after the tie is formed and that must be managed over time” 
(Jeon & Maula, 2022: 17).  
 
2.2.6 Deep tech startups as attractive opportunity vs. risky and costly  
Stepping in the shoes of senior managers within corporates, deep tech startups are very attractive 
opportunity as they bring novel technology, innovative business models, insight into nascent 
markets and revenue streams (Imaginatik and MassChallenge, 2016). But deep tech startups bring 
some unique challenges with them, such as long time to market, capital intensity, and technology 
risk and complexity, that needs to be accepted by corporates for a successful relationship (Siota & 
Prats, 2021). And many startups fail, so the investment risk for corporates is high compared to 
projects that corporates usually invests into (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). Another risk that 
corporates mention, is the risk of reputational damage that exist when failure in the product 
development process is involving either corporate or client data (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018).  
From a corporate point of view, risk aversion is about the high risks that deep tech startups are often 
associated with. This can cause corporate leaders to block efforts to adopt and catalyse external 
innovation, because they much more look at the risks than the future gains (BCG and Hello 
Tomorrow, 2021). But with an effective strategy and processes, corporates can create better 
innovation decisions and not miss out in potential rewarding opportunities.  
 
Risk management is the answer and solution to the tension of attractive resources vs. risky and 
costly. Reports argues that executives can assign different risk profiles to several corporate venture 
mechanisms (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). They see a startup acquisition, 
corporate venture capital and venture builders as high risk. On the other hand, scouting, 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
34 of 93 
hackathons, and challenge prizes are seen as low risk. So, when considering which corporate 
venture mechanisms to use and combine, an evaluation is important, that takes into account the 
amount of risk the senior management are willing to take and choose mechanisms that match it 
(Siota & Prats, 2022).  
 
Another way of demonstrating the value of proposed investments or initiatives, is to create a 
sandbox or a living lab to develop minimum proof of concepts – or another low-risk/low-cost testing 
environment that is available for deep tech startups (Siota & Prats, 2022). This is also a way of 
managing and de-risking the technology before involving the technology into the business 
operations. Corporates can protect their business from early stage technology risks by having a 
steering team that tests projects for a defined period of time, until it is safely handed over to the 
business (Tour, Soussan, Harlé, Chevalier, & Duportet, 2017). Examples can be learned from the 
leading deep tech incubator and accelerator in Denmark - Futurebox at DTU Science Park4. Deep 
tech startups incubated here have the chance to test their products and solutions in a real 
environment while creating their proof of concept. Whether a startup needs to test fluid balances 
in patients, or test the buildings electricity or energy efficiency, the incubator has opened up for 
deep tech startups to test their solutions. Futurebox might not be a corporate, but it can analogously 
be applied in the context of managing the tension in corporate-startup relationship. The commercial 
bank of Thailand created a sandbox that mirrored their real environment and was open for external 
developers and entrepreneurs to test and validate their ideas and solutions (Siota & Prats, 2022).  
 
When a corporate decides to test internally an innovative solution created by a startup, it is called 
a pilot. A report on corporate-startup relationship, that published their data based on a survey 
completion by over 100 corporate innovation professionals, vastly from U.S., but also with strong 
representation from Europe and Asia, showed that the most effective corporates are drastically 
scaling their startup-corporate approach by running more than 50 pilots every year. The 
respondents all worked in Fortune 1000 companies, and was most frequently at the Director, 
Manager, or VP level, working directly with innovation (Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019). It was 
explained that the corporates that are running such high volume of pilots, not only increase their 
 
4 https://dtusciencepark.com/futurebox/ (accessed August 5th 2022) 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
35 of 93 
chances of success, but are also “perceived as successful internally, generating the most data and 
increasing their access to resources” (Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 2019: 25). 
 
Lastly, it is a good idea to de-risk investments by allocating resources in a progressive approach.  
Staged investments limit the financial downside if the worst-case scenario should happen and will 
also help ease the uncertainties from senior executives (Siota & Prats, 2022).  
 
2.2.7 Relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility  
Established large corporates are usually in an environment that is structured with a centralized 
decision-making and standardized processes (Siota & Prats, 2022). They have a strong business and 
operation core while being financially stable (Ludvigsen, 2022). But in the case of a relationship with 
a deep tech startup, the structured environment can be a risk for both the startup and the 
relationship. If the decision-making is heavily dependent of the corporate, there is a high risk of 
losing the agile spirit startups have. While also risking losing the people involved (Larkin & 
O'Halloran, 2018). Another issue with the bureaucratic processes is the risk of several corporate 
departments wanting to formulate different requirements for the relationship with the startup. But 
unfortunately, this often leads to delays, which are hard to financially handle for a startup (Larkin & 
O'Halloran, 2018).  
Furthermore, the technology evaluation and various departments can be threatening obstructions 
in regards to slowing down relationships. The three top departments that can slow down 
relationships are 1) finance, 2) legal and 3) R&D (Siota & Prats, 2021).  
To manage this tension, corporates can reduce deal complexities by responding quickly to 
investment opportunities, closing deal faster, short NDA process, and simplifying and minimizing 
the terms and conditions (Jeon & Maula, 2022; Basu, Phelps, & Kotha, 2016; Younis, Desai, & Sigal, 
2019). Corporates has access to its own legal department. That cannot be said about startups. Often, 
they are too small or lack the resources to handle the necessary processes and, therefore, need to 
rely on costly lawyers or even do the time-consuming work themselves (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018).  
Basu et al. (2016) investigated, through an inductive study, 17 corporates venture capitals to answer 
largely unexplored question of how to effectively achieve external knowledge search and 
integration of their initiatives. Their findings showed, that several corporates saw that simplifying 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
36 of 93 
the process resulted in investments more quickly, more transparently and less restrictively for the 
startups, while making other potential startups more open to form a relationship (Basu, Phelps, & 
Kotha, 2016).  
 
2.2.7.1 Relationship as a way of reaching proof of concept vs. risk of never going to market 
Corporates often have great resources and technical expertise within and are good at giving advice 
for deep tech startups on the technology, while also helping building commercial credibility and 
capacity. (Maula & Murray, 2005). This results in corporate relationships helping deep tech startups 
reach their proof of concept stage much quicker than, for example, with a venture capital – their 
counterpart.  
But the gap between working with a corporates innovation department on proof of concept at the 
start of a relationship, and working with the core business units after their trial runs can be huge 
and problematic (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). With no plan to scale in terms of resources, 
stakeholder buy-ins etc., this is one of the reasons, the relationship will end up in a holding pattern 
which frustrates startups. Often the decision and the budget are not clearly allocated among the 
corporate business units. And at the end of the day, if no one is in charge to make the final decision 
and allocate the resources accordingly, the startups get stuck after the proof-of-concept phase. 
Which results in the relationship being held up in an awaiting situation (Garcia-Herrera, Perkmann, 
& Childs, 2018; McKinsey & Company, 2020). Corporates need to show and prove that a concept 
can scale. Testing and creating pilots with deep tech startups is not enough. There has to be a 
strategic plan for the full development life cycle. The pilot is there to give a good proof of concept 
and the confidence about a product-market fit that can eventually enter the market and move on 
to something bigger (McKinsey & Company, 2020).  
Another of reason is the limited speed for running a proof of concept. In corporations, there are 
many layers of bureaucracy and the number of approvals can often be high (Siota & Prats, 2021). 
Knowing that the gestation period of deep tech startup are already long, how can the development 
of proof of concept in a corporate-startup relationship be sped up?  
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
37 of 93 
2.2.7.2 Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech startup long-term horizon  
Startups need to generate revenue on the short-term and corporates’ long sales cycles conflicts with 
that. Each bet a startup does for a corporate deal is a risk of running out of cash if the deal is lost or 
the sales cycle takes too long. The startup team is small so they are taking the highest risks when 
collaborating (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). Some of the important questions that needs answering 
when corporates decide to do startup relationship are how can corporates convince business units 
to consider long-term growth, in addition to the quarterly short-term results? What if a long-term 
plan and vision is missing? Deep tech startups often need long gestation period, which means that 
a short-term perspective can be a bottleneck when doing a relationship (Siota & Prats, 2021).  
Another aspect that is important, is managing expectations of shareholders. In the corporate world, 
there are many shareholders to manage and also their expectations. This could be the trade-off 
between the tension of short-term interest and long-term benefits of an investment strategy. 
Managing expectation will help corporate shareholders with being aligned of the expectations from 
the relationship with the deep tech startup – which also creates transparency (Larkin & O'Halloran, 
2018). 
 
2.2.7.3 Top-down culture vs. Bottom-up culture 
Top-down culture begins with a strategic direction from the top management, that wants to 
accomplish certain objectives on a defined timeline. These objectives can be 1) bringing a new 
product to market, 2) providing enhancements to current products, 3) eliminating some segments 
of the product line, 4) meeting customer requirements (Haynor, 2013). It can be defined that the 
top-down driven approach is triggered by the vision of top management, supported by employees, 
and fuelled by processes and ambition (Siota & Prats, 2021).  
The bottom-up culture is exactly what the term indicates. Innovation that can originate from 
anyplace and by anyone in an organization (Haynor, 2013). It is a culture that that begins by a staff 
idea, is supported by management, and fuelled by an entrepreneurial culture in the organization 
(Siota & Prats, 2021).  
 
It can be challenging for a startup to be taken seriously and perceived as a serious business, if they 
are treated in a top-down way instead of at eye-level – and startups often feel treated this way 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
38 of 93 
(Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). Corporates with top-down culture that features centralized decision-
making and standardized processes, can quickly restrain ideas originating in the front line and 
destroy a startup team’s motivation. Corporates are highly hierarchical, with their vision, objectives, 
and implementation plans flowing down from the top of the company, this is a big barrier that 
corporates need to overcome when collaborating with deep tech startups.  (Siota & Prats, 2022). 
And if the management in charge lacks expertise in deep tech, it makes it even more difficult to 
secure the buy-in from the executive committee, which in the end will slow down decision-making 
and communication (Siota & Prats, 2022; McKinsey & Company, 2020). Also, if there is a lack of 
senior management support, the collaborative innovation may fail. It’s argued that for long-term 
success, a strategic decision to foster innovation and making it a solid part of the business strategy 
is therefore a key element (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018).  
 
Furthermore, the entrepreneurial culture should be in place in a corporate, which can be achieved 
through a bottom-up innovation culture (Siota & Prats, 2022). Corporate culture differs a lot from 
startups. Within corporates, if the entrepreneurial culture is not in place, the appearance of failure 
has a heavy cost for those involved, and thus, failures are both avoided from the outset and not 
openly acknowledged when they happen. The key challenge for C-level managers is to structure and 
sensitize their organization to take collaborative approaches seriously and give deep tech startups 
the support they need to become a success (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). This includes having the 
right internal impact tracking and KPI’s in place, which is often forgotten in corporate relationships 
(McKinsey & Company, 2020; Siota & Prats, 2021). 
Changing a whole corporate culture, that clashes with the entrepreneurial culture, is most unlikely 
to happen for a corporate venture department, but they can use influential internal advocates, such 
as an executive committee member or a business unit head to help make a convincing case to their 
senior management team. External corporate innovation experts can also be used to help with the 
case (Siota & Prats, 2022).  
Another way of changing the top-down corporate culture, is to integrate policies that will provide 
some degree of autonomy and freedom for corporate venture departments. This can be done by 
having an ambassador in the executive committee in the corporate venture team who is 
empowered to shortcut approvals for venturing. Other corporates, such as Samsung Ventures, has 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
39 of 93 
set a ceiling for deep tech investments, below which the involvement of upper management and a 
business unit may not be required. This will help the corporate venture teams work faster when 
making smaller investments (Siota & Prats, 2022).   
 
2.2.7.4 Joint innovation vs. risk of “Not-Invented-Here” syndrome 
One of the cons of top-down culture is the motivational variable for the employees in a corporate. 
Employees may lack incentive and motivation as they cannot choose the projects they want (Siota 
& Prats, 2021). As the employees are not incentivised or motivated to initiate innovation, this can 
result in a “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome” making R&D teams more reluctant to work with external 
innovators (Antons & Piller, 2015; Haynor, 2013). 
 
Internally for corporates it can be difficult to adopt inventions that were developed in relationship 
with startups (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018). It is often seen, that R&D departments and teams prefer 
to develop technology internally, rather than collaborate with externals such as startups. Thus, 
when external innovation is proposed to bridge an internal technology gap or open a new growth 
avenue, R&D resists (Siota & Prats, 2022).  The argument, is that the resistance often comes from 
the fear of losing control of the technology or R&D teams are in doubt of the capabilities of the 
startup. No matter the case, a relationship proposal can be rejected without further analysis and 
growth opportunities are lost (Siota & Prats, 2022).  
 
To lay the groundwork for a successful relationship, it is crucial to counter the not-invented-here 
syndrome and help R&D teams not fear collaborating with external partners and deep tech startups. 
This can be done by 1) securing the right technical expertise to evaluate deep tech opportunities, 2) 
eliminate internal biases against external innovations, 3) rotating team members, 4) restructuring 
teams and departments, 5) gaining experience with external knowledge and 6) establishing 
adequate incentive systems (Antons & Piller, 2015; Siota & Prats, 2022). The technical expertise 
evaluating can come from either the R&D department, the corporate venturing department, or an 
external expert with independent perspective. Take for example, LG Technology Ventures, the 
corporate venture capital of LG Group. They have invested over US$400 million in deep tech 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
40 of 93 
startups and, here, internal due diligence is complemented with an external expert report whenever 
there is a threat or risk of internal bias against external opportunities (Siota & Prats, 2022).  
Other companies would give out mandating power between the R&D team, corporate venture team 
and/or a shared leader with experience in both disciplines. This way, they eliminate internal biases 
and individual decision-making, while encouraging the involved parties to make choices that are 
best for the corporate as a whole (Siota & Prats, 2022; Antons & Piller, 2015).  
 
2.2.7.5 Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing relationship vision 
The strategic unpredictability is another variable to keep in mind. If leaders are changed frequently 
in a corporate organization (this is often seen in Asian corporations), there is going to be a tension 
in the vision of the relationship. Changing a leader may change the strategy and vision of the 
corporates, which means possibly eroding long-term signed agreements with deep tech startups, 
whose gestation period is longer. Think of it like this – a corporate invests, based on their strategy 
and vision, in a deep tech startup. The strategy changes, because of change in management, and 
the corporate is no longer interested in the deep tech startup. Meanwhile, the corporate does not 
want to leave their equity and investment, because of the fear that a competitor may profit from 
an investment and insight. This will result in limiting the growth of the deep tech startup (Siota & 
Prats, 2021; McKinsey & Company, 2020).  
 
2.2.8 Opportunities for emerging technology vs. threats 
Just like a relationship can be an opportunity and threat for deep tech startup as an organization. 
There is also a tension created with the aspect of the emerging technology from the deep tech 
startup.  
It has been shown that corporates are more effective within the area of production, product and 
market, which is a great opportunity for deep tech startups that needs access to market, technical 
expertise and proprietary assets (Maula & Murray, 2005; Kohler, 2016; Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; 
Harlé, Soussan, & Tour, 2017).  
This section will be examining the two underlying tensions of 1) reaching proof of concept, which 
deep tech startups are looking for, but with a risk of never going to market because of a corporate 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
41 of 93 
relationship and 2) deep tech startups getting their technology to market, but with a risk of creating 
a non-universal and scalable solution. 
 
2.2.8.1 Relationship as a path to get product to market vs. risk of creating a non-scalable 
solution 
When collaborating with corporates on a proof of concept, the corporates are often also the first 
customers, which means deep tech startups can get their product to market. But the technology 
development can sometimes lead to custom requirements from the corporate for their product or 
solution. Resulting in a compromise between building a standard universal product and the risk of 
creating a custom product that is not a scalable solution (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018; Siota & Prats, 
2021). Unfortunately, there is not much research on this topic, which can be an avenue for future 
study.  
 
2.2.9 Corporate core business-focused exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration 
The view on exploitation vs. exploration is an indirect tension for this study, because it is a tension 
within the organization. It does not directly influence the corporate-startup relationship, but can 
potentially influence a relationship with deep tech startups in the future if not managed. Corporates 
that strategically inform and incorporate innovation-based exploration within the company, which 
could be incentivizing corporate employees, may create e.g., “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome”, which 
creates a tension and possibly hurting future relationships with deep tech startups.  
The topic will be discussed as it is important and also the most researched tension accounting for 
55% of all tensions in corporate venture capital. Exploration-exploitation is a tension that many 
organizations seek to manage through organizational ambidexterity (Jeon & Maula, 2022). 
 
“Organizational ambidexterity refers to the ability of an organization to both explore and exploit – 
to compete in mature technologies and markets where efficiency, control, and incremental 
improvement are prized and to also compete in new technologies and markets where flexibility, 
autonomy, and experimentation are needed” (O'Reilly III & Tushman, 2013: 324).  
 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
42 of 93 
In order to both explore and exploit, it is important for corporates to have the right strategy and 
know-how on how to manage the tension. Ambidexterity can be achieved either by 1) sequential 
ambidexterity, 2) simultaneous or structural ambidexterity or 3) contextual ambidexterity (O'Reilly 
III & Tushman, 2013). Not managing the tension creates a lack of strategic clarity of what is trying 
to be accomplished, when corporates want to explore with external innovators, such as deep tech 
startups. It is often seen, that many corporates know they need to innovate, and know the 
technology trends, but do not know or have not translated that into what they practically need to 
do or how to accomplish their objectives with the help of external ecosystem (McKinsey & Company, 
2020). When corporates have decided to explore with deep tech startups the strategy needs to be 
implemented throughout the organization. For startups it can be a jungle to navigate through the 
corporate organization and business units are often shielded by innovation departments or 
managers that refuse to talk to startups because of the strategy has not been implemented or there 
is a high level of top-down culture. Startups should be able to navigate the corporate organization, 
ensuring that they are speaking with the right unit or people to enable the execution of a 
relationship. If the strategy for innovation-based exploration is not in place, there is a risk of losing 
a potential rewarding relationship (Larkin & O'Halloran, 2018).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
43 of 93 
CHAPTER 3  
3. Methodology  
3.1 Semi-structured interviews 
To deepen the understanding on tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech 
startup, the study strives to give empirical insights on successful and unsuccessful startup-corporate 
relationships, which tensions they faced and how they were managed. The specific topic on tensions 
in relationship between corporates and deep tech startups has very limited research. Because of 
this, a qualitative approach to explore the research topic was chosen to gather deeper insights to 
either find new data or complement the existing literature review. Multiple interviews were 
conducted in different corporates and deep tech startups and each organization within different 
industries, to gain insights into tensions in relationship between corporates and deep tech startups 
and how the tensions were managed. Some of the first interviews with corporates, showed that 
there was no real strategy for startup relationship, even when doing startup relationship in the field 
of deep tech. This proved the main purpose of this study, and will help reveal and understand the 
tensions and also how to manage them.  
 
In order to preserve the integrity of the research, all the interviews have followed the four main 
ethical principles that must be avoided as presented by Bell, Bryman & Harley (2022). The four 
ethical principles are 1) Harm to participants, 2) Lack of informed consent, 3) Invasion of privacy, 
and 4) Deception. 
 
A set of criteria was set in place in order to qualify the corporates and startups to increase the quality 
of the insights received. The criteria were 1) seniority of the interviewee, 2) large sized corporates 
to increase the chances of having innovation activities with deep tech startups, 3) startups must be 
deep tech, 4) the deep tech startups have relationship experience with corporates, and 5) 
corporates must have done partnership with deep tech startups before.  
The interviews were conducted with the author as the interviewer and focused on why corporates 
and startups are doing relationships to begin with, their goals and strategies. Furthermore, going 
into the tensions seen when doing relationship and how those tensions were managed. All the 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
44 of 93 
interviewees were chosen according to their relatedness and understanding of doing corporate-
startup relationships.  
 
In total, 8 interviews were conducted, over the period from June – August 2022, in two countries, 
several industries, companies and types of relationships. The full overview of the interviews can be 
seen below (Table 6: Overview of interviews). It is important to mention, that one of the startups 
interviewed (Scoutely), has been chosen even if they are not directly in a relationship with a 
corporate. They are an intermediary/facilitator for relationships between corporates and startups. 
The founder interviewed, has a long history and career within both corporates and experience as 
an entrepreneur, which is the background of the startup. Based on this, it was concluded that they 
have enough knowledge and experience, within the field of the research area, to contribute the 
study based on their experience. This is the only case from the interviews, that is not directly a 
startup that collaborates with a corporate.  
In order to retrieve more information regarding each startup and corporate and validate some of 
the data collected through the interviews, a secondary data has been collected, via mainly the 
websites or LinkedIn pages of the startup or corporate.  
 
Table 6: Overview of interviews 
 
Company 
name 
Type 
Interviewees 
position 
Industry 
Description 
No. of 
employees 
Platform 
#1 
Scoutely 
Startup 
Founding 
Partner 
Software 
 
Scoutely is a 
Startup 
Discovery & 
Relationship 
Management 
Platform. 
 
11-50 
Microsoft 
Teams 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
45 of 93 
#2 
Coloplast 
Corporate 
Vice 
President, 
New 
Business 
Innovation 
Medical 
Equipment 
Manufacturing 
 
Coloplast 
develops 
products and 
services to 
make life 
easier for 
people with 
deeply 
personal and 
private 
medical 
conditions. 
 
10.000+ 
Microsoft 
Teams 
#3 
Insurance 
company5 
Corporate 
Head of 
Exploration 
Insurance 
 
The 
innovation 
hub of a 
confidential 
insurance 
company. 
 
501-1.000 
Microsoft 
Teams 
#4 
Alfa Laval 
Corporate 
Head of 
Innovation 
Industrial 
Machinery 
Manufacturing 
 
Alfa Laval is a 
leading 
global 
provider of 
first-rate 
products in 
the areas of 
heat 
transfer, 
separation 
and fluid 
handling. 
 
10.000+ 
Microsoft 
Teams 
 
5 The corporate participant wishes the interview to be confidential and has therefore been anonymized 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
46 of 93 
#5 
Techvolver 
Startup 
Founder, 
CEO 
Automation 
Machinery 
Manufacturing 
 
Transforming 
pipette 
calibration 
from a 
manual 
activity to an 
automated 
solution 
digitizing 
data 
handling, 
eliminating 
EHS risks, 
improving 
data 
integrity & 
increasing 
the bottom 
line. 
 
11-50 
Microsoft 
Teams 
#6 
FÆRM 
Startup 
Founder, 
CEO 
Food tech 
 
FÆRM uses 
science to 
further 
traditional 
cheese 
production 
methods, 
creating the 
future of 
non-dairy 
products. 
 
2-10 
Microsoft 
Teams 
#7 
Reshape 
Biotech 
Startup 
Founder, 
CEO 
Biotechnology 
 
Reshape 
Biotech is 
building the 
next 
generation 
of lab 
automation 
robots. 
 
11-50 
Microsoft 
Teams 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
47 of 93 
#8 
Maersk 
Drilling 
Corporate 
Innovation 
Ecosystem 
Lead 
Oil and Gas 
 
Maersk 
Drilling 
provides 
responsible 
drilling 
services to 
energy 
companies 
worldwide. 
 
1.001-
5.000 
Microsoft 
Teams 
  
The majority of the companies are located in Denmark, but there was one startup located in Holland. 
Furthermore, the corporates interviewed are all well-established and does relationships with deep 
tech startups regularly in order to access innovation, gain technological insights and be on top of 
the market.  
All the interviews are based on a semi-structured interview guideline with pre-defined interview 
questions. The approach is practical when undertaking in-depth conversations. It allows for further 
follow up questions, and even all verbal and non-verbal responses may turn to be helpful in the final 
data analysis extracted from the interviews. For the interviewee, the interactive nature of semi-
structured approach provides room for free responses. The semi-structured interviews resulted in 
a common approach and the discussion of the same topic in different interviews, while allowing 
that deviation from the pre-defined questions was acceptable, if the topic could further clarify an 
interesting or new area of the overall research question. The detailed interview questions can be 
found in the appendix (see appendix A – Detailed interview questions). The interview questions 
would be slightly changed in regards to who the receiver was e.g. corporate or startup. But the 
overall main areas, would be the same i.e. risks, challenges, faced tensions, and how or if they were 
managed etc. The interviews lasted approximately 60 minutes and in accordance with the 
interviewees, the interviews were recorded for further analysis. The interviews started by 
introducing the interviewer, the topic and the relevance of the research area in today’s world. Then 
the background information about the interviewee, their title and responsibility within the 
company, and their experience with collaborating with deep tech startups were gathered. After 
developing an understanding of how the organizations works with relationships, it was also 
examined why they wanted to collaborate with deep tech startups in the first place. Afterwards the 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
48 of 93 
grounds of the potential tensions faced in each relationship, and how and if the collaborators 
managed the tensions were discussed. From a research point of view, the information regarding the 
stages of the startups were also gathered, to see whether or not the findings would show if a certain 
or specific stage in a startup journey is better for a relationship.  
 
The collected data from the interviews was analysed by using a coding system. The definition is that 
“codes are tags or labels for assigning units of meaning to the descriptive or inferential information 
compiled during a study” (Miles & Huberman, 1994: 56). As a first step, the relevant codes were 
deduced, based on the literature review and assigned to the interviews. Afterwards, further codes 
and themes were added based on the interview analysis. Themes is defined as being a common, 
recurring pattern across dataset, clustered around a central organized concept (Braun & Clarke, 
2006). The coding type has been a flexible combination between grounded, or emerging, theory and 
framework analysis. This allows to find and capture the learnings from the literature review, while 
being open to new things e.g. something surprising and unexpected coming out of the data, which 
then creates new codes and/or themes to capture the that.   
 
3.2 Validity and Reliability 
Validating the accuracy of the information from the findings occurs throughout the process of the 
research in the steps when organizing and preparing data for analysis, and when interpreting the 
meaning of themes/descriptions. The term reliability, refers to the extent to which indicates that 
the researcher’s approach is consistent across different researchers and different projects (Creswell 
& Creswell, 2018).  
In order to ensure the validity and reliability for this thesis, different data sources have been used 
to build a consistent presentation and description of the findings. The dependability has been 
assured by using the same interview guide and following it for each interviewee, deviating only from 
it according to the development of the interview, while still covering all the major areas.  
The literature review and identification of tensions should have been done first to get the most out 
of the interviews, but unfortunately, due to circumstances, the literature review on tensions were 
not fully completed before doing the qualitative interviews. Which resulted in some of the tensions 
later found not to be discussed at all, if the interviewees had not mentioned or faced them. 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
49 of 93 
CHAPTER 4  
4. Analysis and findings 
 
Following the described approach, the analysis of the qualitative data revealed not only some of the 
tensions that were identified in the literature review, but also identified new tensions that should 
be investigated more in the future. The interviews revealed eight tensions, while two of them are 
new discoveries. The newly identified tensions are (i) “Power Distance” – the tension of corporate 
power and risk of creating unequal startup relationships and (ii) tension on roadmap and risk of 
misalignment with startup resources. Furthermore, the indirect tension of exploitation vs. 
exploration, as described in the literature review, was also identified during the interviews to 
influencing the corporate and startup relationships. The tension that was mostly mentioned by the 
interviewees, was the tension of relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup 
agility, which accounts for 87,5% of the organizations interviewed. All the tensions are listed and 
can be seen below, while the tensions identified within each organization interviewed are 
distributed in Table 7: Identified tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech startups 
in interviewed organizations. 
 
• Top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
• Relationship as bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility 
• Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing startup relationship vision 
• Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech long-term horizon 
• Sharks dilemma – the tension between very attractive resources and high misappropriation 
risks   
• Power distance – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating unequal startup 
relationships (new tension)  
• Tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources (new tension) 
• Corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
50 of 93 
All the interviewed organizations beside two, expressed that they were facing difficulties in their 
corporate-startup relationship. When interviewing the founding partner at Scoutely, that has great 
hands-on experience within the area of corporate-startup relationships, it was mentioned that after 
doing extensive research on the area he said that there was a recurring pattern, which is also why 
he started Scoutely – to help corporates and startups start off on the best possible way. The 
following are what the respondents from three different organizations said.  
 “When looking at all the research on this topic, there is a recurring pattern that 
shows that they [ed. corporate and startups] are not happy with the outcomes. 
There is never happiness, there is always trouble. There is no easy way to make it 
work. Even between life-like companies [ed. corporate-corporate relationships], it 
is very difficult. So, when looking at collaboration with big companies and small 
companies and the asymmetries, the complexity factor is the double” (Interview 
by Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 07:30, respondent taking corporte 
perspective). 
“We have tried to partner with startups in the very early stages [ed. of startup 
collaboration] but it seems very difficult for us.” (Interview by Head of Exploration 
at Insurance Company, 2022, 06:34, respondent taking corporte perspective) 
“I’ve seen a lot of the same things that you described, that it is very difficult to 
make this startup-corporate collaboration work.” (Interview by Gilbro, Innovation 
Ecosystem Lead at Maersk Drilling, 2022, 03:51, respondent taking corporte 
perspective) 
 
Even when the complexity factor doubles when relationship with startups, it is even more difficult 
for corporates, when working with deep tech startups if the right competencies are not present 
within the corporate. These challenges were mentioned by taking the corporates’ perspective and 
resonates back on the importance absorptive capacity. Cohen and Levinthal (1990) argues that the 
ability to identify the value of new, external innovation, assimilate it, and apply it to commercial 
ends is critical for a firm’s innovative capabilities. The capability was labelled absorptive capacity, 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
51 of 93 
and suggests that it is essentially a function of the firm’s level of prior related knowledge (Cohen & 
Levinthal, 1990).  
“…and for a corporate it's even more tricky because although everyone thinks that 
it's all about deep tech today, one of the big difficulties for big companies is to 
assess if the technology, if the startups deep technology is all worth it. Because 
how do you assess technology if you have no experience in this?” (Interview by 
Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 25:07, respondent taking corporte 
perspective) 
“When it comes to deep tech, it's getting a bit more complicated because as a 
corporate, you also need the proficiency for understanding this deep tech” 
(Interview by Karakaya, VP New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 31:08, 
respondent taking corporte perspective). 
 
It is interesting to see, based on Table 7, that every organization interviewed had experienced at 
least two identified tensions, while the most tensions identified within one organization was five. 
The average amount of tensions faced by the corporates and deep tech startups interviewed was 
3,3 tensions. The most faced tensions were number 2) relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk 
of losing startup agility, which occurred in 87,5% of the interviews, 4) short-term horizon vs. long-
term horizon, which occurred in 50% of the interviews, and 8) corporate core-business exploitation 
vs. innovation-based exploration, which also occurred in 50% of the interviews. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
52 of 93 
Tension6 Org. A7 
Org. B 
Org. C 
Org. D 
Org. E Org. F Org. G 
Org. H 
Sum 
% 
1 
x 
x 
 
x 
 
 
 
 
3 
37,5% 
2 
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
7 
87,5% 
3 
 
x 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
2 
25% 
4 
 
x 
 
x 
 
 
x 
x 
4 
50% 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
x 
 
2 
25% 
6 
 
 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
3 
37,5% 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
x 
2 
25% 
8 
x 
 
x 
x 
 
 
 
x 
4 
50% 
Sum 
2 
4 
2 
4 
2 
4 
4 
5 
 
 
Table 7: Identified tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech startups in interviewed organizations 
But even with all the complications and tensions in relationships between corporates and deep tech 
startups, it does not slow down corporates in continuing collaborating with deep tech startups. 
Because doing radical innovations that are too high a risk for corporates, is a little less risky through 
a relationship with deep tech startups, as one of the interviewee argued. 
“We can do a lot of development on our own. We have many patents filed over 
many years. So, it's not that we do not do innovations or new development. But it 
might be more gap fillers. You can say extending a range to new platforms and 
less radical innovation. Where we basically are utilizing our startups and their 
crazy thoughts of going into something that from our perspective, is too high a risk 
for a large company” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 
15:09, respondent taking corporte perspective). 
 
 
6 The tensions related to the listed numbers are 1) Top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture, 2) Relationship as 
bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility, 3) Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing relationship 
vision, 4) Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech long-term horizon, 5) Tension between very attractive 
resources and high misappropriation risks, 6) “Power distance” – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating 
unequal startup relationships, 7) Tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources, and 8) Corporate 
core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration. 
7 The organizations related to the listed alphabets are Org. A) Scoutely, Org. B) Coloplast, Org. C) Insurance Company, 
Org. D) Alfa Laval, Org. E) Techvolver, Org. F) FÆRM, Org. G) Reshape Biotech, and Org. H) Maersk Drilling 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
53 of 93 
4.1 Top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
According to the analysis, two organizations were identified with facing the tension of top-down 
culture vs. bottom-up culture that had a negative influence on relationship between corporates and 
deep tech startups. The tension of top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture surfaces on the 
organizational level and involves the top management from the corporates, while influencing actors 
across the corporate and their relationships with deep tech startups. The tension arises under 
uncertain circumstances, such as environmental changes, and spurs through the decisions from top 
management wanting to focus on predictable outcomes, rather than risky and unpredictable. The 
tension of top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture may also trigger other challenges, such as risk of 
internal corporate clash and risk of “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome”, which was identified from the 
interviews and also seen in the literature review. They all affect deep tech startups, as they might 
not be prioritised for the corporate.  
The two organization were Org. A, Org. B and Org. D and despite being very different organizations 
they all faced similar situations. It was argued that corporates are made for control and hierarchy, 
that especially during uncertain times, the controlling and hierarchical culture can become a 
problem.  
“There is always a chain of command. And if the tide is changing as we are 
currently facing due to the war [ed. Russia-Ukraine], energy crisis etc., I bet that 
the whole notion of working together [ed. with startups] will be curtailed. They'll 
be scaled back because there's always these hierarchies that are in place” 
(Interview by Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 08:45, respondent taking 
corporte perspective). 
When asking more regarding the tension, it was mentioned that one the biggest challenges is that 
the culture has not been incorporated in the way of working with innovation thoroughly within the 
corporate.  
“if it's not really on the agenda of any CEO. if the CEO is not explicitly stating ‘we 
are not a close company, we like to open up.’ It will never fly” (Interview by Blonk, 
Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 09:17, respondent taking corporte 
perspective). 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
54 of 93 
One of the ways that the tension of top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture can be managed and 
incorporated in a corporate is an example from one of the interviewee and their past experience 
when working for Philips – another large corporate with over 80.000 employees and that is 
commonly known for their consumer products, now has shifting industry to hospitals and health 
care8. It was stated that as a way of encouraging and incentivising their employees to do innovation, 
the top management would often create internal competition with the focus of the challenges that 
the corporate currently faced. 
“An internal competition within Phillips, there has been some business challenges 
posed by the business and then we proposed an idea” (Interview by Karakaya, VP 
New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 07:47, respondent taking corporte 
perspective). 
Another successful example can be found at the corporate Haier and their way of working with 
innovation. When interviewing the founding partner of Scoutely, he was taking great inspiration 
from the way the Chinese corporate Haier Group does innovation. Haier Group is a large corporate 
within the Electronics Manufacturing industry with over 100.000 employees. And that also shows in 
the corporates impressive achievements with more than 4000 entrepreneurial projects, 38 
specialized and sophisticated companies, 7 unicorn companies and 5 listed companies, all having 
relationship with Haier Group9. In the same interview, he also mentioned his own experience when 
working with corporates and why they are not succeeding with startup relationships.  
“They [ed. Haier] constantly exchange ideas and work together and have a 
procedure that it should be of interests to both sides. That both sides profit from 
this” (Interview by Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 10:38, respondent 
taking corporte perspective). 
“Most companies that I know of and that I've worked with, they take collaboration, 
something as anomaly on the side. It's not baked in their souls, and for that reason 
 
8 https://www.philips.com/a-w/about.html (accessed 31st of August, 2022) 
9 https://www.haier.com/global/haier-ecosystem/?spm=net.32002_pc.header_150046_20200720.2 (accessed 25th of 
August, 2022) 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
55 of 93 
it will never be a smooth ride” (Interview by Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 
2022, 10:43, respondent taking corporte perspective). 
 
Risk of “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome” 
As mentioned above, one of the challenges of the tension top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
is the risk of starting “Not-Invented-Here Syndrome”. During the interviews, there were several 
indications that if the innovation strategy of the corporate was not in order, there would be internal 
conflict on the whether or not to collaborate with a startup. Many times, when helping corporates 
assessing the startup relationship, the founding partner of Scoutely would experience many signs 
of contradiction internally. The risk of not-invented here syndrome were identified within Org. A 
and Org. D.  
“I've also come across situations whereby during an assessment, one of the R&D 
engineer ‘says this is a lovely great new agri/food technology that you've 
developed with protein and whatever’. And you have the other saying ‘no, that it 
will never work’. So, some of these people will tend to be very optimistic and ones 
tend to be very pessimistic. So, you never know what's true and what's not what 
isn't true” (Interview by Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 25:30, 
respondent taking corporte perspective). 
Many reasons could lead to a corporate or a person to say no or to stop a relationship. The founding 
partner of Scoutely mentioned three reasons and all of them were related to the employees not 
having the support from top management. During the literature review that examined the 
categories of paradoxes that exists, showed the category of organizing paradox that included 
corporates competing elements, such as controlling and empowering employees (Gebert, Boerner, 
& Kearney, 2010; Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  The support can come in several ways, such 
as incentivizing the employees and/or managers, but if the strategy is focusing on measures that 
are short-term, then the likelihood of succeeding in a relationship is not very high.  
“There are lots of reasons for big company or the people in the big company to say 
no [ed. to a relationship with deep tech startups]. 1) Not invented here. 2) It 
doesn't bring me any good. 3) It's not on my priority list to work with this startup. 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
56 of 93 
All these kind of reasons, human factors I would call this, to say no. And startups 
understands that and startups feels it because startups should be very cautious 
and picky [ed. when choosing a corporate relationship partner]” (Interview by 
Blonk, Founding Partner at Scoutely, 2022, 29:58, respondent taking corporte 
perspective). 
“If your boss gets paid or incentivized for something that you can measure today, 
then open innovation probably will not fly” (Interview by Blonk, Founding Partner 
at Scoutely, 2022, 48:22, respondent taking corporte perspective). 
 
And the Head of Innovation of Alfa Laval was not in doubt when talking about the syndrome of 
not-invented-here even if he had not experienced it himself.  
“I'm 100% sure, this happened here as well, but it's not something I have seen.” 
(Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 39:54, respondent 
taking corporte perspective) 
One of the reason the tension was not visible within Alfa Laval anymore is because of the strategy 
and support from the top management being in place. It was clear from the top management, that 
being such a large corporate they also had a responsibility of being a part of the solution for the 
fundamental challenges that the world is facing. And this has been accepted through the 
organization.  
“With the global climate changes and the energy landscape changing, we are a 
lucky company because it seems like we have many of the components, many of 
the technologies and also the knowledge needed to be part of the [ed. solution]. 
We cannot just stand on the side line and expect somebody else to do something. 
If we want to be part of this. Then we start to act, take the responsibility. And I 
think the acceptance is coming through the organization.” (Interview by Røssel, 
Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 32:48, respondent taking corporte 
perspective) 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
57 of 93 
Risk of internal corporate clash 
The last challenge seen by the tension of top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture, that was 
identified and will be analysed is the risk of internal corporate clash and how it may negatively 
influence deep tech startup relationship, when identifying the wrong deep tech startup for the 
relationship. The risk was identified in a corporate environment and a deep tech startup, while the 
interviewee of the corporate had faced the tension in several other corporates as well.  
“One of the biggest is the misalignments between the corporate VC arms and then 
the corporate business units, because we see the arms are operated by people who 
are coming from finance background and they know how to do the investments, 
they know how to use venture capital, but they are not necessarily technology 
proficient. This is one thing. And then the second thing is they do not necessarily 
shape the business strategy, they are just sitting on a pile of money which has been 
assigned by the corporate and then they act like the venture capitalist” (Interview 
by Karakaya, VP New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 14:23, respondent 
taking corporate perspective). 
The above quote from the interview is just one example of an internal corporate clash between 
corporate venture capital and business units. As seen from the literature review, it may seem that 
the corporate is using spatial separation by isolating competing, yet co-existing demands from the 
business units. While spatial separation can minimize conflicts, it can also create power imbalances 
(Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017: 26). But this clash does not necessarily appear between 
corporate venture capitals and business units. Not all corporates have a venture capital arm, which 
means that a clash between business units, decision-makers, or innovation departments can create 
the tension. The main challenge of the tension is if the decision-makers within corporates have are 
lacking the knowledge about technology, while also deciding which startups to collaborate with.  
“Trying to work with startups that is kind of similar to what the core business is 
doing and then they unnecessarily create tensions with the core business unit 
because the core business units see these type of things is kind of threat because 
it is so close (edit to the core business unit). It is not necessarily complementing, 
but it is really close enough so that there is always a bit of rejection or hesitation 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
58 of 93 
from the core business unit to work with the startups” (Interview by Karakaya, VP 
New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 15:00, respondent taking corporate 
perspective). 
“Or it is not necessarily relevant at all because the technology in-proficiency of this 
venture capital team has found something kind of a shiny object, but it is not 
recognized by the business side” (Interview by Karakaya, VP New Business 
Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 15:30, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
The founder and CEO of Reshape Biotech explained during the interview how bad experience they 
have had with corporates that did have innovation departments, but internally the strategy was not 
clear, while the employees had a difficult time of pinpointing which business unit would benefit 
from a potential relationship. 
“I know both of them [ed. corporates] have innovation departments. We spoke 
with both of them, but they were not helpful at all. Generally, they were really bad 
at like pinpointing where in the company it would be valuable” (Interview by Grøn, 
Founder and CEO of Reshape Biotech, 2022, 22:29, respondent taking startup 
perspective). 
 
4.2 Relationship as bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility 
The tension on relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility is the most 
mentioned tension from the collected interviews, accounting for 87,5% of the organizations that 
has faced it. Many factors are in play when wanting to collaborate with startups, while also wanting 
to be agile in a corporate environment. The innovation department can try to be agile to match the 
startups, but if the processes and requirements from other business units and management are not 
accommodating for innovation, it can slow down and negatively influence the relationships with 
deep tech startups by risking the emerging technology by 1) not reaching market and 2) not creating 
a universal and scalable solution. 
 “The thing that was very hard for us was the long process because we are a 
corporate but we’re an also insurance company and those two together, that will 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
59 of 93 
make very long processes” (Interview by Head of Exploration at Insurance 
Company, 2022, 27:28, respondent taking corporte perspective). 
The founder and CEO of Reshape Biotech explained during the interview how bad experience they 
have had with corporates that did have innovation departments, but internally the strategy was not 
clear, while the employees had a difficult time of pinpointing which business unit would benefit 
from a potential relationship. 
“I know both of them [ed. corporates] have innovation departments. We spoke 
with both of them, but they were not helpful at all. Generally, they were really bad 
at like pinpointing where in the company it would be valuable” (Interview by Grøn, 
Founder and CEO of Reshape Biotech, 2022, 22:29, respondent taking startup 
perspective). 
But it is not only other internal factors for innovation departments that can negatively influence the 
startup relationship. It can be that corporates and innovation departments are just lacking 
experience. Which means that e.g. assessing a potential startup relationship or helping their 
portfolio startups might take longer than expected.  
“We are slow moving company. So, we take our time, we need to understand the 
potential, the risk, the opportunity, what it actually requires? So, it takes time” 
(Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 41:58, respondent 
taking corporte perspective). 
“We experienced that we didn't have the right experience, we didn't have the right 
knowledge to help the startups to grow, because we didn't we don't know anything 
about the certifications or all the things that they actually needed” (Interview by 
Head of Exploration at Insurance Company, 2022, 07:44, respondent taking 
corporte perspective). 
One of the main challenges that was heavily mentioned by the interviewees were the long decision-
making processes and even sometimes the lack of it. Several of the interviewees believed this factor 
to be the most difficult to achieve within a corporate.  
==PAGE:66==
 
 
60 of 93 
 “How can we drive decisions in a corporate environment, which is the most 
difficult thing to do” (Interview by Karakaya, VP New Business Innovation at 
Coloplast, 2022, 10:01, respondent taking corporte perspective). 
“One of our difficulties in the past was the decision process. Because when we 
spotted a startup that could be very good to partner with, we didn't know how the 
decision process, who has the mandate to take the decision. So that was one of 
our big challenges.” (Interview by Head of Exploration at Insurance Company, 
2022, 33:24, respondent taking corporte perspective) 
“It was very difficult to figure out who's actually responsible. You ended up almost 
at the level of the CEO. Today we have our pool management, our division 
structure and then we have 13 business units. And they all seen as individual 
companies within the company. And that is a challenge, by itself, because they 
want to perform, short term, basically to survive. So therefore, focus is more on 
short term strategy execution and delivering the best possible result.” (Interview 
by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 37:28, respondent taking 
corporte perspective) 
Another example is for the corporate Alfa Laval and how their mentality has shifted when they used 
to look at startup relationships from the wrong perspective. In the past, they bureaucratic 
environment used to influence how they should work with startups, but quickly found out that it 
was all killing points for startups who basically have two objectives 1) develop the technology and 
2) get it to market.   
“We have always been the big player, with a more mentality of saying ‘you need 
to be able to scale up. We need to look at terms and conditions and lower prices 
but they are all killing points for startups, who basically want to develop their 
technology and get it to the market” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at 
Alfa Laval, 2022, 31:43, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
61 of 93 
“And I think often it has not been very fruitful in terms of getting a good feeling 
and experience from both parties” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa 
Laval, 2022, 32:12, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
 
From a deep tech startup point of view, it has been clear that the bureaucratic processes of 
corporates are a challenge when deep tech startups are working agile and do not want to waste 
time waiting on approvals, feedbacks etc. It was argued from corporates’ decision-making process 
is very different because of the hierarchical structure that required several actors from the 
corporate to be involved, whether it was from purchasing orders, to feedback meetings.  
“Their [ed. corporates’] decision-making process is just different” (Interview by 
Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 19:15, respondent taking 
startup perspective). 
“In general, we move very quickly because we're a startup and we don’t all have 
these people to go through. We can sometimes get annoyed when we're like ‘we 
sent you guys an e-mail like 10 days to go. Why has nobody replied’?” (Interview 
by Donau, Founder and CEO of FÆRM, 2022, 38:32, respondent taking startup 
perspective) 
“Longer invoicing process with purchasing orders and the purchasing department 
that wants to talk to you, that is also a major hassle.” (Interview by Grøn, Founder 
and CEO of Reshape Biotech, 2022, 11:42, respondent taking startup perspective) 
When interviewing Maersk Drilling in regards to how they as a corporate manages the tension of 
relationship as bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility, it was explained that they try to 
be agile by training the business units on how to work with innovation process and tools for being 
more agile. One of the way they train their business units is by sending a partner from the innovation 
department to take part in project and help run it in a different way. But it was still unsure whether 
or not they actually had managed the tension of bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility.  
 
“I feel like saying we don't [ed. handle the tension]. I guess the way we deal with 
it is that in general we are working to train the organization and to become more 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
62 of 93 
agile” (Interview by Gilbro, Innovation Ecosystem Lead at Maersk Drilling, 2022, 
26:47, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
 
Risk of deep tech startup technology not reaching market 
“Unless you're very clear on what they [ed. corporates] have to deliver, then you 
can easily end up in a situation where time just passes and they have all the time 
in the world and you can't afford to wait anymore” (Interview by Skjaerlund, 
Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 45:21, respondent taking startup 
perspective). 
Two of the deep tech startups that were interviewed had faced the risks of working with corporates 
on the emerging technology and risking of not reaching full potential of the startup technology. Slow 
bureaucratic processes and decision-making from corporates could lead to the risk for deep tech 
startup of not reaching market. Luckily for both deep tech startups interviewed, they did reach the 
market, because they both had a way of managing the tension. They were very clear on what they 
wanted from their relationship with corporates and both startups were getting paid to doing the 
relationship. If there were delay because of internal discussion or bureaucratic processes from the 
corporate side, it was within the contract that the startup could invoice the corporate for lost time. 
Getting payment from corporates for the relationship, would also decrease the risk going into a 
relationship with the wrong partner that actually do not need or want the technology.  
 “It takes them [ed. corporates] a lot of time to take some easy decision, and all 
the while they are discussing that internally and they don't pay you, the startup 
will die from the waiting time and the corporate doesn't really. So, then we will 
invoice them and they will have to pay. So, for every delay caused by them not 
being able to decide or something” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of 
Techvolver, 2022, 46:29, respondent taking startup perspective). 
“I think the biggest pitfall is definitely like developing something with someone 
that doesn't actually want it. I would never recommend to anyone to do like a 
development with a company without getting payment for it” (Interview by Grøn, 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
63 of 93 
Founder and CEO of Reshape Biotech, 2022, 30:21, respondent taking startup 
perspective). 
 
Risk of creating a non-universal deep tech startup technology  
The second risk within the tension of relationship as bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup 
agility, is the risk of creating a custom solution for the corporates based on corporate feedback 
meetings, that could result in a non-universal and not scalable solution. And one of the deep tech 
startups, Techvolver, was in a dilemma when choosing how to manage the risk. Either they could 
raise a lot of money, from e.g. a venture capital, to develop a solution that requires a lot of market 
research knowledge, or they could work together with a corporate that already has the market 
knowledge whilst being aware of the risk. The deep tech startup chose to manage the risk, by 
deciding to enter a relationship with a corporate to reduce the time for gathering market 
knowledge.  
“Yes, very much so, but it was decision we kind of took consciously because all we 
had was either decide if we should raise a lot of money, make what we thought 
was the perfect solution without any market knowledge, or do a collaboration 
approach” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 50:59, 
respondent taking startup perspective). 
 
4.3 Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing startup relationship vision 
The analysis of the tension on corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing startup 
relationship vision is another interesting area that clashes in the relationship with deep tech 
startups. As we have already identified, the gestation period for deep tech startups are more than 
five years. This is correlating with the data gathered from the interviews and also correlates with 
the clash of the corporate strategic unpredictability. We saw in the tension of top-down vs. bottom-
up that in uncertain times such as wars, relationships with startups tend to be down prioritized from 
top management. But risking losing the relationship vision also does appear when there is a shift in 
leadership, management or strategy is changed for various reasons. The interviews analysed 
showed changing roles happens every three to five years. Which means that several people over 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
64 of 93 
time will be involved in the relationship and that may not have been the same people that found 
the deep tech startup interesting in the first place. This also correlates with the literature review on 
changes in firm ownership (Chung & Beamish, 2010), that triggers dynamics by juxtaposing 
conflicting goals, priorities, and/or practices (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017). 
“In the corporate management is a bunch of people who are changing their roles 
and every three to five years. Where a startup, has to have a lifespan of, I mean 
up until your scale level, you probably go are going to spend 5 to 10 years.” 
(Interview by Karakaya, VP New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 19:20, 
respondent taking corporate perspective) 
“The people who have found you and found you promising at the first instance are 
not necessarily the same people who are going to on board you in when you are 
ready to scale.” (Interview by Karakaya, VP New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 
2022, 19:43, respondent taking corporate perspective) 
The Innovation Ecosystem Lead at Maersk Drilling explained an episode when giving a talk to an 
institution about corporate-startup relationships and how startups should be aware of the problem 
of strategic unpredictability from the corporate side. The unpredictability could be a reorganization 
of structure within the corporate or there might be layoffs. These are changes that will may 
influence the deep tech startup relationships negatively if corporates and startups are not aware of 
it. This could result in that new management will end a relationship with deep tech startup because 
they don’t see the relationship vision as the people that started the relationship. This is highly 
frustrating for deep tech startups as they need the long gestation time to actually develop and scale 
their technology.  
“if there's like a reorganization of structure of the whole organization or someone 
gets fired or someone moves to new department. And about a week after that talk, 
it was announced here that we [ed. the corporate] would be merging with a 
different company and everything changed. All priorities changed.” (Interview by 
Gilbro, Innovation Ecosystem Lead at Maersk Drilling, 2022, 41:49, respondent 
taking corporate perspective) 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
65 of 93 
“It's kind of annoying for startups to work with someone who says ‘well you know 
we don't know, because every quarter we sit down and we see, do we want to 
continue or do we not?’ and it's difficult to really give them [ed. the startups] 
anything” (Interview by Gilbro, Innovation Ecosystem Lead at Maersk Drilling, 
2022, 12:38, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
Another interesting perspective is in this tension, which arose during one of the interviews, was the 
unpredictability of deep tech startups. This does also correlates with the uncertainty aspect from 
corporates. The perspective looks into corporates and their requirement of predictability from their 
portfolio startups. It was argued, that if corporates are met with constant wrong predictions, such 
as time frames, outcomes etc., the corporate are likely to end the relationship. The predictions are 
done together with the deep tech startups, but if the corporate is lacking proficient employees that 
understands of the technology, they may end up with the wrong predictions.  
“Corporates require predictability. If the predictability is not there or is constantly 
proven to be wrong, all the estimates, all the time frames, all the outcomes, the 
corporate is going to kill it [ed. the relationship].” (Interview by Karakaya, VP New 
Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 48:36, respondent taking corporate 
perspective) 
Unfortunately, the interviews did not discuss how the tension of corporate strategic unpredictability 
vs. risk of losing startup relationship vision is managed or could be. But based on the literature 
review on tensions can be managed, one way of addressing the tension is through the collective 
approach, opposition/accepting. It has been shown that accepting to live with the tensions between 
stability and change by implementing paradoxical inquiry practices. This way, the corporate 
managers can address both elements simultaneously by allowing for strategy to move forward 
(Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
 
4.4 Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech long-term horizon 
In a corporate environment, there will always be short-term goals and needs to focused on in order 
for the corporate to survive within their core business. So, when starting relationships with deep 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
66 of 93 
tech startups, that has long-term horizon, there will be a conflict of interest. Corporates often need 
to report quarterly and optimize their time to make the best possible profit.  
 “The problem is the conflict of interest. Startup time horizon is five plus years, 
whereas the business time horizon is less than three years” (Interview by Karakaya, 
VP New Business Innovation at Coloplast, 2022, 37:05, respondent taking 
corporate perspective). 
 “It is a challenge because you can say we have the stock market and the reporting 
on a quarterly basis in Stockholm. And so of course we have to optimize our time 
to the make best possible profit” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa 
Laval, 2022, 11:35, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
“I think we have that [ed. facing the tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. 
deep tech long-term horizon] quite often still” (Interview by Grøn, Founder and 
CEO of Reshape Biotech, 2022, 51:31, respondent taking startup perspective). 
In Alfa Laval, the main challenge was the business units having short-term focus when working with 
deep tech startups. The business units needed to see some kind of benefit or revenue for the 
corporate within 12 to 24 months. And that is conflict of interest with deep tech startups as they 
need much longer time.  
“The focus in our business units is basically short term, meaning that if they cannot 
see any kind of business advantage, revenue or something that can have a positive 
influence on the [ed. core] business within reasonable time and normally I would 
say that is from 12 to 24 months. The attention is going out but it doesn't mean 
that they [ed. startups] are not supported, they're just not a prioritization within 
the business rooms” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 
12:01, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
 “Just a few years back, I felt that that there was an interest from the business unit. 
But when they realized, that this is not going to pay off, then immediately they 
shut down” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 13:05, 
respondent taking corporate perspective). 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
67 of 93 
But this is not how the innovation operation is run today in Alfa Laval. The tension has been more 
or less managed. Support from CEO and top management has been driven through the organization 
and is now more accepted that spending time on relationships that does not pay off in the short-
term. But it does take a long time for the strategy and acceptance to be in place, much more than 
it was expected. But as it was simply put from the Head of Innovation: “we are not here to do a 
sprint. We are here to do a marathon” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022), 
just illustrates how the organization is looking at relationships with deep tech startups.  
“This is not the case today. It's more accepted. We have been lucky by having 
support from our CEO and also the Division manager for Energy Division, saying 
we need to collaborate to a much higher extent that we have done in the past. And 
then slowly, it will flow down through the organization and say, yeah, it is actually 
accepted that we spent time working on something that doesn't pay off in the 
short term” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 13:19, 
respondent taking corporate perspective). 
“It takes time and it takes much more time than I thought, but again you can say 
we're not here to do a sprint. We're here to do a marathon. And we have 140 years 
of history, we believe we will be here for many years to come” (Interview by Røssel, 
Head of Innovation at Alfa Laval, 2022, 14:40, respondent taking corporate 
perspective). 
But it is not every interviewed organization that has managed to the tension of short-term horizon 
vs. long-term horizon. During the interview, the question was raised of how Maersk Drilling is 
managing or dealing with the tension. It was unclear whether or not they were dealing with the 
tension, but it could seem like they are worsening the tension. An interesting comment during the 
interview was that they were looking into individual relationship on a very short-term. And when a 
deep tech startup had developed something interesting or substantial, the department could 
dedicate half a year at least to work on it. This could sound like that Maersk Drilling is using a real-
option approach, that can include “decisions to expand, defer or wait, or abandon a project entirely” 
(Hayes, 2022). Based on the information gathered and the literature review, dedicating half a year 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
68 of 93 
to a relationship with deep tech startup is not nearly enough to make it work. Something that 
Maersk Drilling need to still manage.  
“Yeah. Are we dealing with that? I don't know how other departments work. I don't 
think they necessarily work in quarters like that. They have more long term. They 
have some short-term goals and more long-term goals and we also in our 
department have a long-term strategy. But when we sit on the individual projects 
[ed. relationships with deep tech startups], then it's much shorter term until they 
develop something so substantial that we can say ‘let's dedicate at least six 
months on working on this’.” (Interview by Gilbro, Innovation Ecosystem Lead at 
Maersk Drilling, 2022, 37:30, respondent taking corporate perspective) 
 
4.5 Tension between very attractive resources and high misappropriation risks   
The tension between very attractive resources (provided by corporates) and high misappropriation 
risks (posed by corporates) which is also called “Sharks Dilemma” is a very known tension. So, 
identifying the tension was not a big surprise, when interviewing the organizations. Especially one 
deep tech startups did face the tension, while another interview showed that corporates are 
actually trying to manage and decrease the risks of Sharks dilemma that are posed by the 
corporates.  
“One of them [ed. corporates] did not behave as we would like. And did not prove 
to have the right values and intentions very early on” (Interview by Donau, Founder 
and CEO of FÆRM, 2022, 09:47, respondent taking startup perspective). 
One of the of the deep tech startups interviewed noticed, when they were having meetings with 
several corporates when trying to form a formal relationship, that a specific corporate did not have 
the right intentions very early on. Not surprisingly, the relationship failed even before it began. It 
was clear from the interview, that the intention from the corporate was to learn more about the 
technology of the deep tech startup, but had no intention of actually forming a relationship. Now 
the corporate is left with a bad reputation, while also has risked attracting potential future deep 
tech startups relationships. After the experience, the deep tech startup took steps towards ensuring 
the protection of their technology towards future risk of misappropriations. The first thing was to 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
69 of 93 
patent their technology, whilst also securing longer contracts with any relationship partner to 
reduce the risk.  
“One of the things that we did to de-risk that [ed. tension] was to patent our 
technology” (Interview by Donau, Founder and CEO of FÆRM, 2022, 25:29, 
respondent taking startup perspective). 
“It's a risk for us as well to kind of tell someone our secret, which is why we want 
the security over the long contract” (Interview by Donau, Founder and CEO of 
FÆRM, 2022, 17:24, respondent taking startup perspective). 
But not all corporates have bad intentions when it comes to forming a relationship with deep tech 
startups. As Reshape Biotech, another deep tech startup interviewed, had experienced several 
times, was that corporates are very much looking into if their potential portfolio startups have 
intellectual property rights before forming a relationship.  
“I think definitely IP is a big thing because for a lot of big companies they care very 
much about having that” (Interview by Grøn, Founder and CEO of Reshape Biotech, 
2022, 29:32, respondent taking startup perspective). 
 
4.6 Power distance – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating unequal startup 
relationships (new tension) 
The tension of “Power distance” is not to be mistaken with Geert Hofstede and his cultural 
dimension of power distance. As the reality is, corporates are bigger, have more capital, have more 
employees, have more knowledge, more experience. This means that the relationship will never be 
equal on those variables. The tension is about the all the power that can be provided by the 
corporates and also about the risk of creating unequal startup relationships that is also posed by 
the corporates if the powers were to be exploited. This was seen from the deep tech startup, Færm, 
when they were trying to form a relationship with a corporate.  
“We should be helping each other. It should be going both ways and for this [ed. 
relationship] it just didn't. It was very obvious right from the beginning that they 
[ed. the corporate] thought they could steal from us because we [ed. deep tech 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
70 of 93 
startup] were so young and inexperienced” (Interview by Donau, Founder and CEO 
of FÆRM, 2022, 12:03, respondent taking startup perspective). 
But based on the interviews, it may indicate that the relationship between corporates and deep 
tech startups need to be equal in order for both sides to thrive. “Power distance” is the tension of 
corporate power and risk of creating unequal startup relationships that the author has termed and 
was seen throughout all the deep tech startups that were interviewed. The analysis of the interviews 
revealed two instances whereas, the first, showed how the startups created equal relationships, 
and the second shows how corporates can create equal relationships. 
“When doing partnerships, not least with corporates, it's important to have an 
equal relationship” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 
2022, 08:58, respondent taking startup perspective). 
During the interview with one of the deep tech startups, it was argued that they were quite 
innovative on how they created equal relationships compared to their peers. The deep tech startup 
was very aware of the risks argued, that being in a relationship where the one side has more power 
than the other will not benefit the startup. But being in a relationship that creates mutual 
recognition, trust and commitment to both sides should increase the chances of success. The 
literature on this topic shows that high-level of trust may reduce the potential for tensions and 
conflict, while increases greater partner satisfaction and enhancing cooperative behaviour 
(Tidström, 2014). Commitment on the other hand, is the desire to maintain the valued relationship, 
and committing to a long-term orientation (Tidström, 2014). Furthermore, Morris, Kocak and Özer  
(2007) showed that commitment seemed to correlate with the perception that each side of the 
relationship is dedicated to strengthening both its own and the relationship’s position in the market.  
This also correlates with the earlier findings of the Chinese corporate Haier Group, that has shown 
several successful relationships and what was stated from the founding partner of Scoutely. 
“We cannot benefit from that [ed. one having more power than the other]. We can 
benefit from a situation where the where the interaction is to a pretty wide extent 
on an equal basis” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 
09:39, respondent taking startup perspective). 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
71 of 93 
“So, this does obviously not mean that we are equal in terms, neither of size or age 
or financial power or anything. But there's a mutual recognition on both sides of 
the table that each company is dependent on the other, in order to have this 
specific project that we do together to become a success” (Interview by Skjaerlund, 
Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 09:50, respondent taking startup 
perspective). 
For the deep tech startup, Techvolver, they are very much aware of joining an equal relationship 
with a corporate, that shows mutual understanding and joint interest for both sides of the 
relationship. If they cannot create an equal relationship, they would much rather walk away from 
the relationship.  
“It's not really about a power struggle in our experience. It's about moving away 
from traditional position-based power into network-based power” (Interview by 
Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 15:32, respondent taking 
startup perspective). 
“If we cannot create an equal relationship, where there's some kind of mutual 
understanding of a joint interest and both parties, kind of looking out for each 
other, then it will never work anyway, so we would walk away from such 
collaborations” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 
16:36, respondent taking startup perspective). 
Techvolver uses two variables in order to create equal relationships with corporates – 1) financial 
factor and 2) communication factor. The financial factor is all about setting up agreements that 
financially supports the startups by the corporate. No free rides, as also seen from the approach 
taken by interviewed startup, Reshape Biotech. For Techvolver, it is not just about getting paid, but 
it is as important that the corporate giving the startup enough trust that they want to pay.  
“From a contractual perspective, which is one perspective, we set up agreements 
where we as a startup are supported financially by the corporate that has more 
muscle. So, no free rides [ed. for corporates]” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder 
and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 10:39, respondent taking startup perspective). 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
72 of 93 
“And for us, it's not just important with the money, but it's more important as the 
gesture of them [ed. the corporate] trusting us enough and wanting the 
collaboration enough for them to actually pay something up front” (Interview by 
Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 11:23, respondent taking 
startup perspective). 
The communication factor is about avoiding indications that they, as startup, less important than 
the corporates in any way. They try to avoid being “impressed” when making relationships, so 
making announcements or similar is always phrased neutral to not indicate that they as startup 
worships this relationship. This also came into play when taking about mentorship and if they as a 
startup gained market knowledge through corporate relationship. They would never have mentors 
from the corporate side, as it would create an unequal relationship, because this indicates that one 
side of the relationship is better or more knowledgeable about an area than the other side. 
“We would never communicate on social media or anywhere, that we were kind 
of indicating that we would be lower or less important than them or that we would 
be overly grateful or anything” (Interview by Skjaerlund, Founder and CEO of 
Techvolver, 2022, 14:33, respondent taking startup perspective). 
“We would never engage in any kind of mentoring or advising in any relationship 
because that would not be an equal relationship” (Interview by Skjaerlund, 
Founder and CEO of Techvolver, 2022, 37:03, respondent taking startup 
perspective). 
And Techvolver is not the only deep tech startup, that was looking at the financial factor. Both Færm 
and Reshape Biotech, went through it in two different ways. Reshape Biotech also had a similar 
approach to Techvolver, but in regards to Færm relationship, it was actually a corporate initiative 
that created value towards the start not only in terms of economics, but also in terms of trust and 
commitment. When Færm was collaborating with one of their corporates, the corporate said that 
during market testing period, the corporate would take only a small margin of the revenue. Instead 
Færm could keep most of it because they knew financially a startup is much more critical on that 
point than the corporate is. 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
73 of 93 
“Outlining exactly what will be done in what time and then once every milestone 
is reached, there's like an evaluation period and then a certain amount of new 
money is released to keep developing this project. And from my point of view it's 
very important to get paid for what you're doing” (Interview by Grøn, Founder and 
CEO of Reshape Biotech, 2022, 7:11, respondent taking startup perspective). 
 “They [ed. corporate partner] told us that they're not actually interested in making 
money from this until they can make a lot of money from this. So, what that means 
is that the upscaling period, where they'll be kind of testing the market. They'll be 
willing to pay us, instead of maybe 5% or 10% of the sales price, but pay us around 
80% to 90% of the sales price to keep us afloat because they know that liquidity 
and runway is a lot more important for us, or critical at least, than it is for them” 
(Interview by Donau, Founder and CEO of FÆRM, 2022, 29:05, respondent taking 
startup perspective). 
This approach may be a beneficial in some relationships, but it is important for deep tech startups 
to understand how the corporate is doing relationships as well. When interviewing Insurance 
Company, it was brought up from the interviewee that in their corporate business model, they 
cannot pay every startup relationship they have.  
“When the startup have a business model that says we need to pay license for 
everybody using this technology or this solution, but in our business model it can't 
be done that like that” (Interview by Head of Exploration at Insurance Company, 
2022, 36:24, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
But this could also mean that the corporate exploration strategy is not optimally described, if they 
expect to have “free rides” with their startup relationships. No matter what, this is definitely an 
interesting tension and perspective that should be investigated further in the future. 
 
4.7 Tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources (new tension) 
The second newly identified tension based on the analysis of the interviews is the tension on 
roadmap and misalignment with startup resources. Forming a relationship with a corporate, may 
be a way for deep tech startup to speed up their roadmap planning and execution with the help 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
74 of 93 
provided by the corporate. But while there may be many ambitious goals and milestones, some 
corporates and/or deep tech startups may forget the limited resources deep tech startups have to 
actually deliver on their end, which creates the tension. While it was not possible to analyse more 
on why and how the tension arises, this is should be investigated more in the future.  
“We were starting to speak about how to do stuff. And then because we're a 
startup, we don't necessarily have the right amount of capital to do something 
about it or to execute.” (Interview by Donau, Founder and CEO of FÆRM, 2022, 
32:27, respondent taking startup perspective) 
When interviewing Maersk Drilling, it was clear that they would ask the questions that needed to 
be answered in order to create a roadmap going forward with their portfolio startups. These 
questions would help them to create several scenarios and plans if something were to go wrong or 
not quite like plan. 
“From the corporate perspective. Well, can they deliver? Do they have the 
resources if a person suddenly quits and we can't get what we're looking for? Will 
they get the funding they need?” (Interview by Gilbro, Innovation Ecosystem Lead 
at Maersk Drilling, 2022, 19:22, respondent taking corporate perspective) 
One of the challenges that limited startup resources also bring is the risk of slowing down the 
relationship. Færm has first-hand experience from the increased prices on steel and because they 
lack the resources and capital to get a hold of equipment, their relationship is at the moment not 
able to move forward. 
“That's very true. Very, very true. Right now, we're in the market for homogenizer. 
Their equipment really isn't cheap at all, especially with the steel prices at the 
moment and we really need one to be able to move our partnership ahead.” 
(Interview by Donau, Founder and CEO of FÆRM, 2022, 38:03, respondent taking 
startup perspective) 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
75 of 93 
4.8 Corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration 
“You need to find your strategy and focus otherwise you don't get anywhere” 
(Interview by Head of Exploration at Insurance Company, 2022, 51:16, respondent 
taking corporate perspective). 
The tension between corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration is also 
well-known tension, as it has already been identified in the literature review. But the tension is not 
directly between corporates and deep tech startups. It is seen as an indirect tension, that may 
influence the startup relationship in the future, if an exploration strategy is not in place. So, again, 
it was no surprise that it could be identified during the analysis of the interviews. Many of the 
interviewees argued, that having better exploration strategy would positively influence the startup 
relationships in the future. But it is not as easy as it may sound. Sander, the founding partner of 
Scoutely, argues that bringing innovation-based exploration closer to the business is essential to get 
serious outcomes with deep tech startup relationships, but it is also the most difficult factor.  
“If you want to get serious outcomes, you have to bring it [ed. exploration] closer 
to the business. You have to work on the internal alignment and getting the buy 
in. That's the most difficult factor” (Interview by Blonk, Founding Partner at 
Scoutely, 2022, 36:55, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
Based on the interview it seemed that the Insurance Company was using ‘structural ambidexterity’ 
by assigning exploration and exploitation efforts to specific business units. The business units are 
held together by a common strategic intent (O'Reilly III & Tushman, 2013), which has helped the 
exploration business unit to use the strategy to focus and be more precise when assessing deep 
tech startup relationships and deciding whether or not to actually start doing a relationship. This 
creates more agility for them, while shortening their decision-making process. 
“One of the things we are working very hard to do is to have a strategy. We have 
three missions and for every mission, we have a strategy so if a startup want to 
meet us then we very quickly can say no your work is not in our focus” (Interview 
by Head of Exploration at Insurance Company, 2022, 48:16, respondent taking 
corporate perspective). 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
76 of 93 
While the Innovation House of Alfa Laval was only established three and a half years ago, the 
corporate has had many startup relationships before that. But that has surprised the Head of 
Innovation, because there has never been a structure in place for an exploration business unit. 
Which can be both confusing internally through the organization but also for deep tech startups 
who want to know the possibilities.  
 “There has been no structure basically, no common place to go for startups and 
say this is actually what we do. So, it was often a surprise to say we had kind of 
collaboration with the with a startup” (Interview by Røssel, Head of Innovation at 
Alfa Laval, 2022, 31:15, respondent taking corporate perspective). 
Based on the literature organizational ambidexterity can be achieved through sequential 
ambidexterity, structural ambidexterity and contextual ambidexterity (O'Reilly III & Tushman, 
2013). Smith (2014), also found that the top management teams of a corporation, effectively can 
manage exploration and exploitation through dynamic decision-making. Furthermore, some studies 
of ambidexterity showed that spatial separation, when addressing paradox collectively, was similar 
to structural ambidexterity (Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
77 of 93 
Chapter 5 
5. Conclusion  
 
Relationships between corporations and deep tech startups are growing at incredible speed. But 
the phenomenon is rife with tensions. The literature on tensions in relationships between corporate 
and startups has mainly focused on high-tech and general-tech startups, as the term “deep tech” 
was first introduced in 2014. Thus, the main focus of this paper is to shed light on the literature on 
tensions in corporate relationships, with focus on deep tech startups.  
There are no questions as to why corporate and deep tech startup relationships makes 
sense. Deep tech startups can benefit from attractive corporate resources such as funding, 
knowledge, and customer and market access, while corporates gains insights into emerging 
technologies, staying ahead of competitors and on top the markets.  But in reality, these 
relationships have low success rates – less than 25% in some cases, because of tensions that may 
be latent, can become salient under certain circumstances such as environmental conditions and 
individual approaches.  
 
The term “tension” is defined as being “contradictory” and has opposing elements (Smith & 
Tushman, 2005). Based on paradox literature on managing tensions, it is found that tensions can be 
managed by either a collective approach i.e., opposition, spatial separation, temporal separation, 
and synthesis, and/or individual approach i.e., defensiveness, paradoxical thinking, reflexivity, 
behavioural complexity, humour, rhetorical skills, and/or responses informed by national culture 
(Schad, Lewis, Raisch, & Smith, 2017). Some of the instances that tensions Some examples of 
tensions that have been managed is through changing leadership in regards to (i) shifting the mind-
set from an “either/or” to a “both/and” mind-set, by (ii) seeing the benefits of inconsistencies and 
recognizing that resources are not always finite, and (iii) embracing change rather than chasing 
stability. This means, nurturing the unique aspects of competing constituencies and strategies while 
finding ways to unite them (Smith, Lewis, & Tushman, 2016). 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
78 of 93 
Through eight semi-structured interviews with three deep tech startups, four corporates and one 
intermediary organization across eight industries, the findings of this study identified eight tensions 
that surfaced in relationships by corporations and deep tech startups. In average, each organization 
had faced, or is facing, over three tensions each. The most identified tensions throughout the 
organizations were (i) relationship as a bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility, which 
occurred in 87,5% of the interviews, (ii) short-term horizon vs. long-term horizon, which occurred 
in 50% of the interviews, and (iii) corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based 
exploration, which also occurred in 50% of the interviews.  
 
• Top-down culture vs. bottom-up culture 
• Relationship as bureaucratic process vs. risk of losing startup agility 
• Corporate strategic unpredictability vs. risk of losing startup relationship vision 
• Tension of corporate short-term horizon vs. deep tech long-term horizon 
• Sharks dilemma – the tension between very attractive resources and high misappropriation 
risks   
• Power distance – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating unequal startup 
relationships (new tension)  
• Tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources (new tension) 
• Corporate core-business exploitation vs. innovation-based exploration 
 
Most of the tensions identified from the qualitative data correlates and complements the literature 
review, but two new tensions were identified based on the interviews that adds and contributes to 
the growing literature of tensions in relationships between corporations and deep tech startups. 
“Power Distance” – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating unequal startup 
relationships, and the tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup resources are the 
new tensions identified based on the interviews.  
 
Power distance the tension in regards to the all the power that can be provided by the corporates, 
such as size and experience among others, and about the risk of creating unequal startup 
relationships, that is also posed by the corporates, if the powers were to be exploited towards 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
79 of 93 
inexperienced deep tech startups and founders. The tension was faced by all deep tech startups 
interviewed and was managed by setting up different mechanisms such as (i) financial/contractual, 
that will ensure trust and commitment from the corporate to the deep tech startup, and (ii) 
communication created by deep tech startups that will create an eye-level relationship towards the 
corporate.  
 
Forming a relationship with a corporate, may be a way for deep tech startup to speed up their 
roadmap planning and execution with the help provided by the corporate. But the ambitious goals 
and milestones may be misaligned with the limited resources that deep tech startups has by some 
corporates and/or deep tech startups. This is the tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with 
startup resources. And while the tensions were not managed by any of the interviews, this can be 
an avenue for future research. 
 
Combining the findings of this study with the paradox literature, it expands the knowledge and 
understanding of why, how and when contradictory elements, such as goals and perspectives, 
results in tensions and how these tensions can be managed. The research done in this study, 
contributes and adds to the literature on tensions in relationship between corporations and deep 
tech startups. Hopefully with the result of guiding and helping both corporations and deep tech 
startups to increase their relationship successes in the future, as these relationships are essential to 
developing emerging technologies, which will be a part of the solutions towards solving the most 
fundamental challenges in the world.  
 
5.1 Limitations and avenues for future research  
The empirical findings and results of this study should be considered in the light of some limitations. 
Throughout the study two limitations has been identified. The first being insufficient sample size 
and the second being method used to collect data. Each of these limitations will be discussed as to 
how it might limit the research and findings. Furthermore, there will be given recommendations of 
how the limitations can be addressed while paving avenues for future research. 
 
Insufficient sample size – when conducting a study, a sufficient sample size is important in 
order to draw valid conclusions. The larger the size of the sample, the more precise the results and 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
80 of 93 
findings will be. The sample size of this study is eight interviews, which could be considered too 
small with the difficulty of identifying significant relationships and correlations in the data. It is 
recommended that this limitation can be addressed either by (i) doing a longitudinal study, with the 
focus of fewer cases, or by (ii) interviews with a larger sample size. Longitudinal studies have the 
advantages of following both corporations and deep tech startups over longer time. This will allow 
the research to better establish the sequence of events in which tensions becomes salient, while 
also allowing to study and gain insights of the approaches taken by both sides of the relationship 
and the potential positive and/or negative outcomes may have occurred based on the approaches. 
Longitudinal studies, on the other hand, are more time consuming that requires commitment and 
resources to be effective. It may also be more expensive than other types of studies. 
 
Method used to collect data – in order to be as efficient as possible and due to time 
constraints, the interviews were conducted over Microsoft Teams. In reflection, these interviews 
should have been conducted face-to-face in order to get all the advantages of the semi-structured 
method applied. It would have been easier to analyse the non-verbal gestures that could potentially 
be valuable insights. This was hard to achieve during this study, as the disadvantages of online 
interviews came into play such as delay and connection issues that were seen in very few instances. 
Furthermore, the order of the interviews conducted and the literature review completed was 
mismatched, as this study had not fully concluded the literature review on tensions in relationships 
between corporations and deep tech startups and how to manage them. This resulted in lack of 
finding some of the tensions that might have been in the interviewed corporates, deep tech 
startups, and intermediary. For future research, it is recommended that the literature review is 
completed before gathering qualitative data and by doing the interviews face-to-face, which will 
allow for more in-depth interviews and potentially identifying more tensions.  
 
The avenues for future research that has been found are further research within the two new 
identified tensions (i) “Power Distance” – the tension of corporate power and risk of creating 
unequal startup relationships, and (ii) the tension on roadmap and risk of misalignment with startup 
resources. The future research should further examine how and why these tensions arise, and how 
to effectively manage the tensions. It should also be researched if some of the tensions identified 
could be understood as an ongoing “paradoxical tensions”, as uncertain changes can appear any 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
81 of 93 
time and can influence corporate leaders to down-prioritise deep tech startup relationships. This 
could mean that the paradoxical tension persists even after the relationship is formed with the 
corporate and that must be managed over time. But this is definitely an area can should be 
investigated more. The last avenue for future research is an area that was not discussed as much in 
this study, but may be relevant to further examine. The area is the misalignment on capital and 
commitment between corporates and deep tech startups. All the interviewed deep tech startups 
expressed that there is “no more free rides”, and are expecting to get paid for the time used in the 
relationship. But this might create challenges and potential tension with some corporation that 
under some circumstances cannot or does not want to pay.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
82 of 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
83 of 93 
A. Detailed interview questions 
Before any questions to the interviewee, a short introduction was given to the overall research area, 
how it is relevant and why it is important to understand and improve. 
 
1. Name, company and title? 
2. (For corporates) What is your experience with working with startups? 
3. (For startups) What is your experience with working with corporates? 
4. (For intermediary) What is your experience with relationships between corporates and deep 
tech startups? 
5. (For corporates and intermediary) What are the (if any) differences in relationships from 
deep tech startups compared to other tech startups? 
6. (For corporates and intermediary) Which type of relationships do you see more often?  
7. (For corporates) Which startup stage do you often create relationship with and why? 
a. (For corporates and intermediary) Do you see startups in a specific stage to be more 
successful in relationships? 
8. (For startups) Which stage were you in when creating a corporate relationship? 
9. (For corporates) Why do you work with startups?  
a. (For corporates and intermediary) Is this something that you see happen more in 
the future? 
10. (For corporates) How do you work with startups?  
a. Active, passive? 
11. (For corporates, startups and intermediary) What are the risks and challenges that both 
parties need to be aware of when starting a relationship, in your opinion?  
12. (For corporates, startups and intermediary) In your experience, how well are these 
relationships? How well has your relationship with corporates/startups been? Are you happy 
about the relationship? Do you think the corporate/startup is also happy about it? 
a. Yes, why? What was good about it? 
b. No, why (under this section the identified tension would be asked directly)? Why did 
it go wrong? In your opinion, what could have been better?  
==PAGE:90==
 
 
84 of 93 
13. (For corporates, startups and intermediary) In regards to the (identified tensions before). 
How well were the tensions managed?  
a. How can the resolution of tensions be improved? 
b. What can corporate/startups do to contribute to a more successful partnership? 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
85 of 93 
Bibliography 
Adler, P. S., Goldoftas, B., & Levine, D. I. (1999). Flexibility versus efficiency? A case study of model 
changeovers in the Toyota production system. Organization Science, 10(1), 43-68. 
Alvarez, S. A., & Barney, J. B. (2001). How entrepreneurial firms can benefit from alliances with large 
partners. Academy of Management Executive, 15(1), 139-148. 
Alvarez, S. A., Ireland, D. R., & Reuer, J. J. (2006). Entrepreneurship and strategic alliances. Journal 
of Business Venturing, 21(4), 401-404. 
Andriopoulos, C. (2003). Six paradoxes in managing creativity: An embracing act. Long Range 
Planning, 36(4), 375-388. 
Andriopoulos, C., & Lewis, M. W. (2009). Exploitation-Exploration Tensions and Organizational 
Ambidexterity: Managing Paradoxes of Innovation. Organization Science, 20(4), 696-717. 
Antons, D., & Piller, F. T. (2015). Opening The Black Box of "Not-Invented-Here": Attitudes, Decision 
Biases, and Behavioural Consequences. Academy of Management Perspectives, 29(2), 193-
217. 
Ashforth, B. E., & Reingen, P. H. (2014). Functions of dysfunction: Managing the dynamics of an 
organizational duality in a natural food cooperative. Administrative Science Quarterly, 59(3), 
474-516. 
Bartunek, J. M., & Rynes, S. L. (2014). Academics and practitioners are alike and unlike: The 
paradoxes of academic-practitioner relationships. Journal of Management, 40(5), 1181-
1201. 
Basu, S., Phelps, C. C., & Kotha, S. (2016). Search and integration in external venturing: An inductive 
examination of corporate venture capital units. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 129-152. 
BCG and Hello Tomorrow. (2021). Deep Tech: The Great Wave of Innovation. Paris: Hello Tomorrow 
and Boston Consulting Group. 
Bell, E., Bryman, A., & Harley, B. (2022). Business Research Methods (Vol. 6). Oxford, United 
Kingdom: Oxford University Press. 
Benkler, Y. (2006). The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets and freedom. 
New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Blonk, S. v. (2022, June 17). Founding Partner. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
86 of 93 
Bradach, J. L. (1997). Using the plural form in the management of restaurant chains. Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 42(2), 276-303. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology, 3(2), 77-101. 
Caspin-Wagner, K., Ellis, S., & Tishler, A. (2012). Balancing exploration and exploitation for firm's 
superior performance: The role of the environment. Boston: Paper presented at the annual 
meetings of the Academy of Management. 
Chen, M.-J. (2014). Becoming ambicultural: A personal quest, and aspiration for organizations. 
Academy of Management Review, 39(2), 119-137. 
Chesbrough, H. (2000). Designing Corporate Ventures in the Shadow of Private Venture Capital. 
California Management Review, 41(3), 31-49. 
Chreim, S. (2005). The continuity–change duality in narrative texts of organizational identity. Journal 
of Management Studies, 42(3), 567-593. 
Chung, C. C., & Beamish, P. W. (2010). The trap of continual ownership change in international 
equity joint ventures. Organization Science, 21(5), 995-1015. 
Cohen, W., & Levinthal, D. (1990). Absorptive Capacity - A New Perspective on Learning and 
Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128-152. 
Colombo, M. G., & Shafi, K. (2016). Swimming with sharks in Europe: When are they dangerous and 
what can new ventures do to defend themselves? Strategic Management Journal, 2307-
2322. 
Coombs, J., Mudambi, R., & Deeds, D. (2006). An examination of the investments in U.S 
biotechnology firms by foreing and domestic corporate partners. Journal of Business 
Venturing, 21(4), 405-428. 
Creswell, J., & Creswell, J. D. (2018). Research and Design Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed 
Methods Approaches. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Inc. 
Cunha, M. e., & Putnam, L. L. (2019). Paradox theory and the paradox of success. Strategic 
Organization, 17(1), 95-106. 
Dameron, S., & Torset, C. (2014). The discursive construction of strategists’ subjectivities: Towards 
a paradox lens on strategy. Journal of Management Studies, 51(2), 291-319. 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
87 of 93 
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. S. (2000). Instabilities of strategic alliances: An internal tensions perspective. 
Organization Science, 11(1), 77-101. 
Deeds, D. L., DeCarolis, D., & Coombs, J. E. (1997). The impact of firm specific capabilities on the 
amount of capital raised in an initial public offering: evidence from the biotechnology 
industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 12(1), 31-46. 
Deephouse, D. L. (1999). To be different, or to be the same? It's a question (and theory) of strategic 
balance. Strategic Management Journal, 20(2), 147. 
Denison, D. R., Hooijberg, R., & Quinn, R. E. (1995). Paradox and performance: Toward a theory of 
behavioral complexity in managerial leadership. Organization Science, 6(5), 524-540. 
Donau, A. (2022, July 22). Founder & CEO. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Duncan, R. B. (1976). The ambidextrous organization: Designing dual structures for innovation. In R. 
H. Kilmann, L. R. Pondy, & D. Slevin (Eds.). The management of organization design: 
Strategies and implementation, 167-188. 
Dushnitsky, G., & Lenox, M. J. (2005). When do incumbents learn from entreprenurial ventures? 
Corporate venture capital and investing firm innovation rates. Research Policy, 34, 615-639. 
Dyer, J., Kale, P., & Singh, H. (2001). How to make strategic alliances work. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 42(4), 37-43. 
Ellis, A. P., Mai, K. M., & Christian, J. S. (2013). Examining the asymmetrical effects of goal fault lines 
in groups: A categorization-elaboration approach. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98(6), 948-
961. 
Fang, T. (2012). Yin yang: A new perspective on culture. Management and Organization Review, 
8(1), 848-874. 
Fantasia, R. (2016). Acquihiring: A new process for innovation and organizational learning. 
Department of Management, 15, 191-204. 
Farjoun, M. (2010). Beyond dualism: Stability and change as a duality. Academy of Management 
Review, 35(2), 202-225. 
Fiol, C. M., Pratt, M. G., & O'Connor, E. J. (2009). Managing intractable identity conflicts. Academy 
of Management Review, 34(1), 32-55. 
Gallagher, M., & Eggen, P. (2021). The state of CVC: A deep dive into the dynamics of Corporate 
Venture Capital (CVC) ecosystem. Silicon Valley: Silicon Valley Bank & Counterpart. 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
88 of 93 
Garcia-Herrera, C., Perkmann, M., & Childs, P. (2018). Industry-led corporate start-up accelerator 
design: Lesson learned in a maritime port complex. International Design Conference , 1845-
1856. 
Garret, R. P., & Covin, J. G. (2007). A model of corporate entrepreneurship as a strategic adaptation 
mechanism. Entrepreneurial Strategic Processes, 10, 9-31. 
Gebert, D., Boerner, S., & Kearney, E. (2010). Fostering team innovation: Why is it important to 
combine opposing action strategies? Organization Science, 21(3), 593-608. 
Geerts, A., Blindenbach-Drissen, F., & Gemmel, P. (2010, August). Achieving a balance between 
exploration and exploitation in service firms: A longtitude study. Montreal: Paper presented 
at the annual meetings of the Academy of Management. 
Gilbro, C. (2022, August 1). Innovation Ecosystem Lead. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Goosen, M. C., Bazzazian, N., & Phelps, C. (2012). Consistent capricious: The performance effects of 
simultaneous and sequential ambidexterity. Boston: Paper presented at the annual meetings 
of the Academy of Management. 
Grøn, C.-E. (2022, July 25). Founder & CEO. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Hahn, T., Preuss, L., Pinkse, J., & Figge, F. (2014). Cognitive frames in corporate sustainability: 
Managerial sensemaking with paradoxical and business case frames. Academy of 
Management Review, 39(4), 463-487. 
Haier. 
(2022, 
August 
25). 
Haier 
Ecosystem. 
Retrieved 
from 
Haier: 
https://www.haier.com/global/haier-
ecosystem/?to=3&spm=net.32015_pc.header_150046_20200720.3 
Hallen, B. L., Katila, R., & Rosenberger, J. D. (2014). How do social defenses work? A resource 
dependence lens on technology ventures, venture capital investors, and corporate 
relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 57(4), 1078-1101. 
Harlé, N., Soussan, P., & Tour, A. d. (2017). What Deep-Tech Startups Want From Corporate Partners. 
Paris: BCG-Perspective by Boston Consulting Group. 
Harvey, S. (2014). Creative synthesis: Exploring the process of extraordinary group creativity. 
Academy of Management Review, 39(3), 324-343. 
Hatch, M. J. (1997). Irony and the social construction of contradiction in the humor of a management 
team. Organization Science, 8(3), 275-288. 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
89 of 93 
Hayes, 
A. 
(2022, 
08 
31). 
Business. 
Retrieved 
from 
Investopedia: 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/realoption.asp 
Haynor, G. H. (2013). Innovation: Top Down or Bottom Up. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 
41(3), 5-6. 
Hellman, T. (2002). A theory of strategic venture investing. Journal of Financial Economics, 64(2), 
285-314. 
Hitt, M. A., Keats, B. W., & DeMarie, S. M. (1998). Navigating the new competitive landscape: 
Building strategic flexibility and competitive advantage in the 21st century. Academy of 
Management Executive, 12(4), 22-42. 
Imaginatik and MassChallenge. (2016). The state of startup/corporate collaboration. 
Massachussets: Imaginatik and MassChallenge. 
Insurance Company. (2022, July 8). Head of Exploration. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Jay, J. (2013). Navigating paradox as mechanisms of change and innovation in hybrid organizations. 
Academy of Management Journal, 56(1), 137-159. 
Jeon, E., & Maula, M. (2022). Progress toward understanding tensions in corporate venture capital: 
A systematic review. Journal of Business Venturing, 1-30. 
Kale, P., Dyer, J. H., & Singh, H. (2002). Alliance capability, stock market response, and long-term 
alliance success: the role of the alliance function. Strategic Management Journal, 23(8), 747-
767. 
Kano, N., Seraku, N., Takahasi, F., & Tsuji, T. (1984). Attractive Quality and Must-be Quality. Journal 
of the Japanese Society for Quality Control,, 39-48. 
Karakaya, K. (2022, July 6). Vice President, New Business Innovation. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Katila, R., Rosenberger, J. D., & Eisenhardt, K. M. (2008). Swimming with Sharks: Technology 
Ventures, Defense Mechanisms and Corporate Relationships. Administrateive Science 
Quarterly, 295-332. 
Klarner, P., & Raisch, S. (2013). Move to the beat: Rhythms of change and firm performance. 
Academy of Management Journal, 56(1), 160-184. 
Kohler, T. (2016). Corporate accelerators: Building bridges between corporations and startups. 
Business Horizons, 59, 347-357. 
KPMG. (2015). On the road to corporate-startup collaboration. Amstelveen: KPMG. 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
90 of 93 
Larkin, M., & O'Halloran, D. (2018). Collaboration between Start-ups and Corporates: A Practical 
Guide for Mutual Understanding. Cologny/Geneva: World Economic Forum. 
Lüscher, L. S., & Lewis, M. W. (2008). Organizational change and managerial sensemaking: Working 
through paradox. Academy of Management Journal, 51(2), 221-240. 
Lerner, J., Shane, H., & Tsai, A. (1998). Do equity financing cycles matter? Evidence from 
biotechnology alliances. Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 411-446. 
Ludvigsen, F. (2022). Hvad kan startups, som vi ikke kan? En guide til bæredygtig vækst i 
partnerskab. Copenhagen, Denmark: Rethink Business. 
March, J. (1991). Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organizational Science(2), 
71-87. 
Maula, M., & Murray, G. (2005). Corporate Venture Capitalists and Independent Venture Capitalists: 
What do they know, Who do They Know and Should Entrepreneurs Care? Venture Capital: 
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 3-21. 
McKinsey & Company. (2020). Collaboration between corporates and start-ups. Boston: Strategy & 
Corporte Finance Practice. 
Miles, G., Preece, S., & Baetz, M. (1999). Dangers of dependence: the impact of strategic alliance 
use by small technology-based firms. Journal of Small Business Management, 37(2), 20-21. 
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. Sage 
Publications, 338. 
Miron-Spektor, E., Erez, M., & Naveh, E. (2011). The effect of conformist and attentive-to-detail 
members on team innovation: Reconciling the innovation paradox. Academy of 
Management Journal, 54(4), 740-760. 
Moghaddam, K., Bosse, D. A., & Provance, M. (2016). Strategic Alliances of Entreprenuril Firms: 
Value Enhancing Then Value Destroying. Strategic Entreprenurship Journal, 10, 153-168. 
Morris, M., Kocak, A., & Özer, A. (2007). Coopetition as a small business strategy: Implications for 
performance. Journal of Small Business Strategy, 18(1), 35-55. 
Nadler, D., & Tushman, M. (1999). The organization of the future: Strategic imperatives and core 
competencies for the 21st century. Organizational Dynamics,, 28(1), 45-60. 
Nedayvoda, A., Mockel, P., & Graf, L. (2020). Deep Tech Solutions for Emerging Markets. 
International Finance Corporation, 1-8. 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
91 of 93 
O'Neill, H. M., Pouder, R. W., & Buchholtz, A. K. (1998). Patterns in the diffusion of strategies across 
organizations: Insights from the innovation diffusion literature. Academy of Management 
Review, 23(1), 98-114. 
O'Reilly III, C. A., & Tushman, M. L. (2013). Organizational Ambidexterity: Past, Present, and Future 
(Vol. 27). Palo Alto, California, USA: The Academy of Management Perspectives. 
O'Reilly, C. A., & Tushman, M. L. (2008). Ambidexterity as a dynamic capability: Resolving the 
innovator's dilemma. Research in Organizational Behavior, 28, 185-206. 
Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). The duality of technology: Rethinking the concept of technology in 
organizations. Organization Science, 3(3), 398-427. 
Oxford Research & TechBBQ. (2019). Corporate-Startup Collaboration Report. Oxford Research. 
Ozmel, U., Robinson, D. T., & Stuart, T. E. (2013). Strategic alliances, venture capital, and exit 
decisions in early stage high-tech firms. Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 655-670. 
Portincaso, M., & Tour, A. d. (2019). The Dawn of The Deep Tech Ecosystem. Paris: Boston Consulting 
Group & Hello Tommorow. 
Raisch, S., & Tushman, M. L. (2016). Growing new corporate businesses: From initiation to 
graduation. Organization Science, 27(5), 1237-1257. 
Raza-Ullah, T., Bengtsson, M., & Kock, S. (2013). The coopetition paradox and tension in coopetition 
at multiple levels. Industrial Marketing Management, 189-198. 
Røssel, H. J. (2022, July 15). Head of Innovation. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Rotolo, D., Hick, D., & Martin, B. R. (2015). What is an emerging technology? Research Policy, 44(10), 
1827-1843. 
Schad, J., Lewis, M. W., Raisch, S., & Smith, W. K. (2017). Paradox Research in Management Science: 
Looking Back to Move Forward. Academy of Management Annals, 10(1), 5-64. 
Siegel, J. E., & Krishnan, S. (2020). Cultivating Invisible Impact with Deep Technology and Creative 
Destruction. Journal of Innovation Management, 8(3), 6-19. 
Siegel, R., Siegel, E., & MacMillan, I. (1988). Corporate venture capitalists: autonomy, obstacles and 
performance. Journal of Business Venturing , 3, 233-247. 
Siota, J. (2017). Linked Innovation: Commercializing Discoveries at Research Centers. Palgrave 
Macmillian, 1-162. 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
92 of 93 
Siota, J., & Prats, J. (2021). Open Innovation: How Corporate Giants can Better Collaborate with 
Deep-Tech Start-ups. The case of East and Southeast Asia. Navarra: IESE Business School. 
Siota, J., & Prats, M. J. (2022, January 10). Three Internal Barriers for Deep-Tech Corporate 
Venturing. MIT Sloan Management Review, 5. Retrieved August 3, 2022, from MIT Sloan 
Management Review: https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/the-three-internal-barriers-to-
deep-tech-corporate-venturing/ 
Skjaerlund, J. F. (2022, July 22). Founder & CEO. (S. Amiri, Interviewer) 
Smith, W. K. (2014). Dynamic decision making: A model of senior leaders managing strategic 
paradoxes. Academy of Management Journal, 57(6), 1592–1623. 
Smith, W. K., & Lewis, M. W. (2011). Toward a theory of paradox: A dynamic equilibrium model of 
organizing. Academy of Management Review, 36(2), 381-403. 
Smith, W. K., & Tushman, M. L. (2005). Managing strategic contradictions: A top management model 
for managing innovation streams. Organizational Science, 16(5), 522-536. 
Smith, W. K., Lewis, M. W., & Tushman, M. L. (2016). "Both/And" Leadership. Havard Business 
Review , 1-8. 
Soh, P. (2003). The role of networking alliances in inofrmation acquisition and its implications for 
new product performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(6), 727-744. 
Stacey, R. D. (1995). The science of complexity: An alternative perspective for strategic change 
processes. Strategic Management Journal, 16(6), 477-495. 
Steiber, A., & Alänge, S. (2020). Corporate-startup collaboration: effects on large firms' business 
transformation. European Journal of Innovation Management, 24(2), 235-257. 
Stuart, T. (2000). Interoragnizational alliances and the performance of firms: a study of growt & 
innovation rates in a hi-technology industry. Strategic Management Journal, 21(8), 791-811. 
Stuart, T., Hoang, H., & Hybels, R. (1999). Interorganizational endorsements an the performnce of 
entreprenurial ventures. Administrateive Science Quarterly, 44, 315-349. 
Tidström, A. (2014). Managing tensions in coopetition. 261-271. 
Tour, A. d., Soussan, P., Harlé, N., Chevalier, R., & Duportet, X. (2017). From Tech to Deep Tech: 
Fostering collaboration between corporates and startups. Paris: Hello Tomorrow and Boston 
Consulting Group. 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
93 of 93 
Voyer, J. J. (1994). Coercive organizational politics and organizational outcomes: An interpretive 
study. Organization Science, 5(1), 72-85. 
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case Study Research: Design and Methods (Vol. 5). London: SAGE Inc. 
Younis, Z., Desai, A., & Sigal, M. (2019). Unlocking Innovation Through Startup Engagement. San 
Francisco: 500 Startups. 
 
