==PAGE:1==
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Master Project 
Date: 2022-09-04 
 
 
Mechanistic understanding of chemocatalysed glycolysis 
 
Author:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Allan Remi Ejby Hansen 
 
 
 
 
 
Pernille Rose Jensen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sebastian Meier 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface & Acknowledgement 
This master thesis is submitted to fulfill 35 ECTS points to complete the Master of Science 
degree in Applied Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The master 
project was carried out in collaboration with DTU Chemistry and DTU Health-Tech, over the 
period from February - September 2022. For completeness, parts of a 3-weeks course, 
“Relaxation optimized qNMR of CO2 electroreduction products”,  from January 2022 will be 
incorporated. 
 
In this regards, I would like to thank my supervisors for giving me the opportunity to co-work 
on this project. I appreciate your help and guidance as well as your open-door policy 
throughout the project. It has been a pleasure working with you! 
Lastly, I would like to show my gratitude to the people in both departments for their 
hospitality and for letting me use their facilities – thanks for having me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
 
 
List of abbreviations 
Abbreviation 
Explanation 
1D 
1-dimension 
1D-NOESY 
1D-Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy 
2D 
2-dimension 
A 
Pre-exponential factor (Arrhenius equation) 
ADP 
Adenosine diphosphate 
ATP 
Adenosine triphosphate 
BMIM 
1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium 
B0 
External magnetic field 
Da 
Dalton (unit of mass) 
DDH 
2,5-dioxo-6-hydroxyhexanal 
DHA 
Dihydroxyacetone 
DHAP 
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
DMF 
Dimethylfuran 
DMSO2 
Dimethylsulfone 
DMTHF 
Dimethyltetrahydrofuran 
DNP  
Dynamic nuclear polarization 
Ea 
Activation energy 
ED 
Entner-Dourodoff 
EDA 
2-keto-3-deoxygluconate-6-phosphate aldolase 
EDD 
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase 
EMP 
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas 
FID 
Free inductive decay 
FT  
Fourier transformation 
GC-MS 
Gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy 
Gd(III) 
Gd3+ containing complex, here gadoteridol 
HLPC 
High-performance liquid chromatography 
HMBC 
Heteronuclear multiple bond correlation 
HMF 
Hydroxymethylfurfural 
HSQC 
Heteronuclear single quantum coherence 
I 
Spin quantum number 
kr 
Rate constant 
==PAGE:4==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
 
 
LA 
Lactic acid 
M0 
Magnetization at equilibrium 
MQW 
Mili-q water 
Mz 
Bulk magnetization in the z-direction 
NAD+ 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (oxidized) 
NADH 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced) 
NADP+ 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (oxidized) 
NADPH 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced) 
NMR 
Nuclear magnetic resonance 
qHNMR 
Quantitative proton NMR 
qNMR 
Quantitative NMR 
R 
The gas constant 
SOP 
Standard operating procedure 
T1 
Longitudinal relaxation time constant 
T2 
Transverse relaxation time constant 
γ 
Gyromagnetic ratio 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The utilization of biomass in the industrial production of value-added chemicals is expected 
to grow, and thereby reducing the demand for fossil fuels. Highly selective processes for 
conversion of biomass to these chemicals is a challenge, as complex pathways, resulting from 
the multifunctionality of reactants in biobased material, remain sparsely investigated. 
Examples of such value-added chemicals are lactate and furanics, both exhibiting wide 
application in production of e.g., biodegradable plastics, biofuels, food stuff, and medical 
equipment. Here, high-resolution NMR spectroscopy was employed to study chemocatalytic 
conversion of carbohydrates by Ba(OH)2 and SnCl4. In Ba(OH)2 experiments on mainly 
hexose conversion, enol species and dihydroxyacetone were observed as intermediates in the 
pathway towards lactate formation, similar to the biochemical glycolysis seen for the 
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. Additionally, longer analogues of 2-hydroxy-3deoxy 
acids (C4-C6) were identified and quantified to similar amounts to those of lactate.  
For SnCl4 experiments, the conversion of pentoses leads to one main acyclic product ((E)-2,5-
dihydroxypent-3-enoic acid ) and two main cyclic 5-membered products (furfural and 4,5-
dihydroxycyclopent-2-en-1-one), with similar distribution between the linear product and 
furfural (~8% carbon). For 5-deoxypentose catalytic conversion, a significant increase in the 
pathway towards the acyclic product (E)-2-hydroxypent-3enoic acid was observed (~30% 
carbon), while the formation of furfural and related furanics was not observed, and in 
addition, the formation of humins was significantly reduced.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Aim of the Project ....................................................................................................... 3 
2 
Background ....................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 
NMR spectroscopy ...................................................................................................... 4 
2.2 
Catalysts and kinetics ................................................................................................ 16 
2.3 
Lewis- and Brønsted acids ........................................................................................ 18 
2.4 
Glycolytic pathways .................................................................................................. 20 
2.5 
Humins and their formation ...................................................................................... 22 
3 
Experimental section ...................................................................................................... 24 
4 
Results .............................................................................................................................. 30 
4.1 
Barium hydroxide catalyzed conversion of carbohydrates ....................................... 30 
4.2 
Tin Chloride catalyzed conversion of carbohydrates ................................................ 41 
4.3 
An insight into deoxy-sugars and protection group strategies. ................................. 49 
5 
Conclusion ....................................................................................................................... 52 
6 
Outlook ............................................................................................................................ 53 
7 
References ........................................................................................................................ 54 
8 
Appendix.......................................................................................................................... 60 
A 
Ba(OH)4 chemocatalytic conversion of carbohydrates (Article draft) .......................... 60 
B 
SnCl4 chemocatalytic conversion of carbohydrates (Article draft) ............................... 87 
C 
Article on Quantitative NMR (qNMR) ....................................................................... 101 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 1 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
On the global scale, the growth in population increases the demand for food, pure water, 
fuels, medicine, and materials in general. There are well known problems related to the 
increased demand for resources such as hunger, global warming, pollution, and diseases. At 
the same time, the chemicals that are currently used for the generation of energy and   
materials derive from fossil resources are unevenly distributed on earth, and thus leading to 
geopolitical conflicts. Furthermore, fossil resources are bound to become eventually 
exhausted.  
In addition, the use of fossil resources especially for combustion leads to an accumulation of 
CO2 with severe impacts on climate and environment that are yet not fully understood. The 
capture, storage and utilization of atmospheric CO2 has been investigated thoroughly[1], as a 
possible solution for the climate and environmental aspect of the problem. This alone will not 
reduce the demand for fossil resources. 
Sustainable green solutions are therefore of utmost importance to solve these problems, and 
scientists are required to develop and optimize methods and technologies for the formation of 
materials and fuels from renewable sources. One way to accommodate parts of these 
problems is to maximize the utilization and potential of biomass.   
Lactic acid (LA) for instance, is a key building block in pharmaceuticals, food industries, 
production of bio-degradable plastics, and in various chemical industries as a component for 
production of other commodity chemicals, e.g.  propanoic acid, ethyl lactate, acrylic acid, 
2,3-pentanedione and propylene oxide [2], [3]. This makes LA production a well-studied 
field and LA a top 12 high-value bio-based industrial precursor (platform molecule) [4]. Most 
of the lactic acid commercially used today is produced by genetically modified bacterial 
fermentation using mainly sugars such as sucrose and glucose as substrates. Although 90% of 
the annual production of LA is done by bacterial fermentation, the method has drawbacks. It 
is expensive, time-consuming fermentation, and the productivity is low, due to pH sensitive 
bacteria [5],[6], [7].  
Research groups around the globe have been seeking viable, green processes for LA 
production with the use of diverse techniques including fermentation, chemical synthesis and 
chemocatalysis. Due to the drawbacks just mentioned chemocatalysis has been actively 
==PAGE:8==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 2 
 
 
 
researched as an alternative to fermentation for future production of LA. Shunguang Xu Et al. 
investigated the chemocatalytic conversion of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin to LA, from 
biomass such as corn straw, apple branches, rice straw and mulberry twigs with yields up to 
66.3% at 240 °C in N2 atmosphere at 20 bar, using HLPC as analytical tool [8]. Soklin Kuy & 
Siwarutt Boonyarattanakalin studied the conversion of starch, from the abundant cassava 
root, into LA also with the application of chemocatalysis and HPLC reaching a maximum 
yield of 30.6% at 240 °C and 40 bar [9]. Rajeesh Kumar et. Al. researched the one pot 
conversion of surplus glycerol, from bio-diesel production, into LA using gold-platinum 
catalyst at 100 °C and 5 bar (O2), with a LA yield of 80% analyzed by HPLC [10].  
Other top-value platform chemicals include furanics. Great effort has been put into research 
investigating the conversion of biomass to furanics, e.g., 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), 
furfural, 2,5-dimethylfuran (DMF) and 2,5-dimethyltetrahydrofuran (DMTHF) as promising 
candidates for the synthesis of biofuels [11]–[14]. Carlini et al. studied the vanadyl-phosphate 
based catalytic dehydration of fructose into HMF at 80°C using GC-MS for sample 
analysis[15], while the conversion of glucose and fructose in water at 100°C using TiO2 and 
ZrO2 as catalysts was analyzed by HPLC in a study by Watanabe et al. [16]. The catalysts 
TiO2 and ZrO2 used by Watanabe et al. are examples of Lewis acids while the vanadyl 
phosphate species containing hydrogens employed by Carlani et al. and Kamiya et al.[17] are 
catalysts that contains both Lewis acidic and Brønsted acidic sites. Lewis and Brønsted acids 
are well known and widely used in chemical synthesis to accelerate reactions by accepting 
lone pair electrons (Lewis acids) and donating protons (Brønsted acids).  
The acidic strength of the Lewis or Brønsted acid has been found to influence the rate and 
selectivity of LA and HMF production from glucose in aqueous and organic media. This was 
investigated by Marianou et al. in 2018 [18]. In a cell-based perspective, the conversion of 
sugars into metabolites occurs via glycolysis. In glycolysis several enzymes catalyze the 
pathway, which are evolved to ensure efficient and specific conversion of sugar to energy 
needed by living cells. The Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) glycolytic pathway is by far the 
most famous metabolic pathway studied, but alternatives do exist, with the Entner-Dourodoff 
pathway (ED) being one. Both pathways encapsule the conversion of sugar to energy, via 
multiple enzyme-catalyzed steps, needed by the host[19], [20]. 
==PAGE:9==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 3 
 
 
 
1.1 Aim of the Project 
The utilization of biomass to produce energy, fuels, and materials in the green transition, to 
reduce the demand for fossil fuels and the implication that follows, has been investigated 
thoroughly in the last decades. An important aspect of converting biomass into useful and 
pure compounds, are the chemical routes involved. To reach the full potential, it is not alone 
enough to identify and quantify products and byproducts from e.g., fermentation processes or 
chemocatalytic reactions. The mechanisms involved have equal or even greater importance if 
one should be able to tweak and optimize the systems to greater yields and higher purity. 
From an economic perspective, it is always desirable for the chemical industries to reach 
higher yields and purity in these processes, as it will increase the economic viability. 
Furthermore, a greater knowledge of the mechanisms and hence the products and byproducts 
will have positive effect on the environment, as a reduction in waste and therefore 
simplification of waste-handling will be acquired. The understanding of these pathways 
remains sparse, though, and this project will therefore study the chemocatalytic conversion of 
carbohydrates, and the pathways involved, using the Brønsted base Ba(OH)2 and the Lewis 
acid SnCl4 as catalysts under relatively mild reaction conditions. Here state of the art high-
resolution 1D and 2D NMR will be used to uncover the possible pathways involved. 
Additionally, DNP NMR will be employed to enhance and identify early intermediates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 4 
 
 
 
2 Background 
In this section the background theory of conventional NMR, qNMR and DNP NMR is 
discussed. Furthermore, catalysts and their effect on reactions as well as the use of Lewis and 
Brønsted acids/bases and finally, glycolytic pathways are introduced. 
2.1 NMR spectroscopy 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a well-developed, versatile, and 
important analytical tool for the organic chemist. Initially, proton magnetic resonance was 
observed in water and paraffin in 1946 [21], [22], and since then there has been an 
unparalleled development and growth in the analytical technique which nowadays is widely 
used in fields of chemistry, medicine, biology, geology and material science [23],[24]. 
Nuclear spin  
Organic material consists of mainly hydrogen- and carbon-atoms, and these are therefore of 
greatest interest for the organic chemist. All atoms possess a nuclear spin quantum number I 
with values greater than or equal to zero. NMR spectroscopy can only be applied for nuclei 
with non-zero spin quantum number, as nuclei with I = 0 have no nuclear spin [23]. The I for 
each nucleus is a physical constant with 2I + 1 measurable spin states (Eigen states).  
Taking 1H as an example, with a spin quantum number I = ½, the allowed number of spin 
states is 2 × (½) + 1 = 2. The spin states are found with integral differences in the range of -I 
to +I, which for 1H leads to the spin states -½ and +½ [24]. For carbon, the most abundant 
natural isotope is 12C (98.9%) This is unfortunate from an NMR perspective, as 12C has a spin 
quantum number equal to zero, which is the case for all  isotopes with an even number of 
protons and an even number of neutrons in the nucleus. For these isotopes the net spin of the 
nucleus becomes 0 and therefore, isotopes with an even number of protons and an even 
number of neutrons in the nucleus cannot exhibit NMR. Fortunately, there is another stable 
isotope of carbon, 13C with a natural abundance of 1.11%, and I = ½. The gyromagnetic ratio 
γ, is a constant that relates spin to magnetism (higher gyromagnetic ration = higher 
magnetism) and is characteristic for particles with spin. For 13C the gyromagnetic ratio is four 
==PAGE:11==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 5 
 
 
 
times lower than for 1H and in conjunction with the low natural abundance, the sensitivity of 
13C NMR becomes roughly 6000 times lower than that of 1H NMR[23]. 
The nuclear spin Eigenstates possess different measurable energies, and when placed in an 
external magnetic field (B0), the spin Eigenstates correspond to an alignment in orientation 
relative to the applied magnetic field. The energy differences for the Eigenstates of I = ½ and 
1 nuclei are illustrated in Figure 1 [23],[24].  
 
Figure 1 - Energy diagram with spin states for nuclei with spin quantum number ½, and 1. Inspiration 
to figure acquired from [23]. 
Pulse 
The nuclei aligned with the magnetic field can be seen as vectors. In the case where I = ½, the 
spin Eigenstate +½ correlates to a vector aligned parallel with B0, and the spin Eigenstate -½ 
correlates to a vector with higher energy, antiparallel to B0. Due to the more favorable (less 
energetic) alignment of nuclear spins with the magnetic field, a surplus of nuclear spins and 
hence nuclear magnetism will be aligned with the magnetic field at equilibrium. This net 
nuclear magnetization can be detected when it is moved away from the direction of the 
instrument magnetic field by a radiofrequency pulse. -Imagine that the external field has the 
direction of the z-axis in a coordinate system, the pulse will then drive the vectors from the z-
axis towards the x-y plane [23]. As soon as the magnetization is not fully aligned with the z-
axis, the vector starts to oscillate around the z-axis with the Larmor frequency. This 
oscillation produced a weak voltage in detector coils, which is the electric signal detected in 
NMR. The recorded NMR signal is known as the free inductive decay (FID), as the 
transverse oscillating magnetization in the x-y plane decays exponentially with a time 
constant known as T2. At the time, the z-magnetization begins to build up and approaches the 
==PAGE:12==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 6 
 
 
 
equilibrium state identical to the state present before the pulse was applied (Figure 2). The z-
magnetization is approached exponentially with a time constant known as T1, where T1 is 
similar to or slightly longer than T2 for small molecules (<1000 Da) in current NMR 
instrument field.  
 
Figure 2 – Spin vectors after exerted to a pulse perpendicular to B0 (z-axis) [23]. 
The highest amount of signal is measured when the vectors reach a 90-degree angle from the 
z-axis, and decays as it returns to equilibrium. This return to equilibrium is referred to as 
relaxation which, if not considered carefully, can lead to wide implication for the analysis, 
for instance an underestimation of signal [23]. 
Time-domain to Frequency domain 
The FID i.e., the signal obtained in an NMR experiment, is a time-dependent oscillation. To 
get the characteristic NMR frequency spectrum, a transformation to a frequency-domain is 
required. Here, computational Fourier-Transformation (FT) is applied, and the well-known 
NMR peaks are obtained in the frequency-domain spectrum (Figure 3)[23], [25]. 
 
Figure 3 – Illustration of the time-domain (FID) on the left, and the frequency domain after Fourier-
Transformation of the FID on the right[23]. 
==PAGE:13==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 7 
 
 
 
Relaxation 
The time it takes for the system to re-establish to equilibrium after a pulse is applied, impacts 
sensitivity and experiment time in NMR. Depending on the size and composition of the 
compounds investigated, this relaxation can vary from seconds to minutes and influence the 
achievable sensitivity and resolution of the experiment, as well as the time that is required to 
obtain NMR experiments that can be interpreted in a quantitative manner (quantitative NMR, 
qNMR). There are two important parameters related to relaxation as shortly mentioned 
above, the longitudinal relaxation and transverse relaxation [23].  
Longitudinal relaxation  
Longitudinal relaxation occurs in the direction towards the +z-axis. The energy is released in 
the form of heat to the surroundings. The recovery of magnetization in the z-axis (Mz) for 
spin-½ nuclei can be described by the Bloch theory, with the exponential expression, 
𝑑𝑀𝑧
𝑑𝑡= (𝑀0 −𝑀𝑧)
𝑇1
 
(1) 
 
where T1 is the time constant known as the longitudinal relaxation time, and M0 is the 
magnetization at thermal equilibrium. If Mz is zero in the beginning of  longitudinal 
relaxation the time dependence of Mz, due to longitudinal relaxation can be described as, 
𝑀𝑧= 𝑀0 (1 −𝑒−𝑡/𝑇1) 
(2) 
 
The formula shows that Mz only approaches M0 exponentially and may be significantly 
lower, if the waiting time t is not large enough compared to T1.  The implications related to 
T1 is hence lack of signal in accumulated NMR spectra if the waiting time t between NMR 
accumulations is insufficient. This implication can have severe effects in a quantitative 
perspective. To obtain full signal from the analyte, the magnetization needs to be fully 
recovered, before a new pulse is applied, if not, the signal will be lost. Therefore, it is 
necessary to wait a period of at least 5×T1, which will give a 99.33% recovery of 
magnetization. This is illustrated in Figure 4 [23] 
==PAGE:14==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 8 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 – Longitudinal magnetization recovery profile. The green arrow indicates full recovery after 
5T1 (99.33%). Figure from [23] with adjustment. 
For some molecules with low 1H density such as formate, 1H T1 values can approach ten 
seconds, which leads to time-consuming NMR experiments. This is neither economically 
feasible nor practical for the industry, and standard operating procedures (SOPs) have been 
developed and are widely used in the industry and in academic research, to obtain more or 
less quantitative NMR data within reasonable time [26]. These SOPs are particularly a 
concern when dealing with the smallest organic substances such as C1 and C2 compounds 
that naturally have high T1 values [27]. This issue is further elaborated upon in the section on 
qNMR. 
Transverse relaxation 
At equilibrium, before the pulse is applied, there is a net magnetization in the x-y plane of 
zero. The order of spins in the transverse direction upon converting z-magnetization to 
transverse magnetization is lost by T2 relaxation. This loss of ordered transverse 
magnetization results in local field differences in the sample, and these differences arise from 
two sources. Instrumental imperfection causing magnetic field inhomogeneity is the first one. 
The ‘shimming’ process prior to NMR analysis aims to reduce this effect. The second source 
to local field differences arise from intermolecular and intramolecular interactions within the 
==PAGE:15==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 9 
 
 
 
sample. The latter is the natural transverse relaxation [23]. Figure 5 illustrates the T2 
relaxation after excitation with rf pulse. 
 
Figure 5 – Illustration of T2 relaxation. Local differences in the sample makes the nuclei precess with 
different frequencies, leading to a transverse magnetization with a net value of zero, when equilibrium 
is reached [23]. 
A central impact of transverse relaxation affects the NMR spectral peaks. The width of the 
peaks is inversely proportional to T2, which means that a short T2 value leads to a broad peak, 
whereas a long T2 value lead to a narrow peak, as seen in Figure 6 [23]. T2 is shorter for 
bigger molecules and in presence of paramagnetic compounds. The latter can also shorten T1. 
 
Figure 6 – Linewidth of peaks due to change in T2. Long T2 values leads to narrow peaks, where short 
T2 values leads to broad peaks [23]. 
NMR in one and two dimensions 
1D NMR spectroscopy as the name imply, is acquisition of spectroscopic data in one 
dimension. In 1D NMR is it only possible to analyze one type of atom per experiment and the 
==PAGE:16==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 10 
 
 
 
obtained spectrum has chemical shift vs. intensity on the axes. In organic chemistry 1H and 
13C are by far the most used atoms for 1D NMR spectroscopy. Each signal in 1D NMR 
correspond to one type of atom [28].  
In 2D NMR spectroscopy, the correlation between atoms in a two-atom group is investigated. 
The spectrum has chemical shift in the first and second dimension, and intensity in a third 
dimension. Here, both homonuclear and heteronuclear experiment are available and usually 
1H-1H or 1H-13C experiments are employed in the field of organic chemistry. The most 
common techniques are illustrated in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7 – Correlation of 2D techniques with a short comment on the principle. Figure with 
adjustment from [23]. 
In real-time NMR experiments on reaction mixtures, stacked 1D NMR spectra can be useful 
to follow reaction mechanisms. This can be acquired in a ‘Pseudo 2D’ manner, where 
chemical shift-domain in the second dimension is replaced with a time-domain. This is 
referred to as Pseudo 2D NMR throughout this project. 
Quantitative NMR and previous work 
For quantitative analytical methods the aim is to define the relative concentrations of analytes 
in a sample, or the absolute level of one or more components with a sufficiently high 
==PAGE:17==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 11 
 
 
 
accuracy. In NMR this is referred to as qNMR, and more specifically qHNMR in the case of 
quantitative 1H NMR [23].  
For 1D NMR the way to quantitative analysis is rather straightforward, as the peak areas are 
directly proportional to the concentrations of the analytes. One needs to keep in mind though, 
that this is only true, if the correct sample parameters are used during the experiment to allow 
full relaxation prior to spectra acquisition[29]. In the last few decades 1D qHNMR has been 
growing as a tool for the analysis of chemicals, natural products, pharmaceuticals and food 
stuffs [30]–[33]. One drawback of 1D NMR is the overcrowding of spectra when dealing 
with complex molecules or solutions with multiple compounds that lie within the same 
chemical shift range. Such congestion of the spectrum complicates the integration and in 
some cases makes quantification impossible[29]. 
A solution to the overcrowding of 1D NMR spectra is the use of 2D heteronuclear NMR, 
although the quantification is complicated, due to resonance site-specific relaxation and 
magnetization transfer efficiencies meanwhile the pulse sequence is running. In 1H-13C 
HSQC experiments, the polarization transfer typically depends on 1JC-H  coupling, and the 
intensity of the signal does not exclusively rely on the C-H coupling constant delay value, but 
also relaxation constants, T1 and T2, peak multiplicity and homonuclear coupling constants. 
All these factors need to be addressed, in the perspective of 2D-qNMR[29]. In 2021 Kim et 
al. investigated the potential of 2D qNMR spectroscopy for distinguishing between chicken 
breeds based on metabolic differences with good results, although a combination of 1D 1H 
NMR and 2D 1H-13C HSQC NMR was required [34].  
In June 2022 our article “Versatile Procedures for Reliable NMR Quantification of CO2 
Electroproduction Products” was published. The work and results of a 3-week course in 
January 2022, performed by the author of this master project, was a part of this article. In this 
work, reliable methods for quantification of the smallest organic C1 and C2 compounds were 
developed. Compounds of interest from CO2 electroreduction include formic acid, 
formaldehyde, methanol and corresponding C2 chemicals. Standard SOPs in metabolomic 
laboratories are typically seen using recovery time of 6.7 seconds (recovery delay = 4s + 
acquisition time = 2.7s), which would require a T1 value for the analytes of ≤ 
6.7
5 = 1.34 s, for 
==PAGE:18==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 12 
 
 
 
full signal to be acquired [26]. In Figure 8 the results of inversion recovery experiments for 
the measurement of 1H T1 values (400MHz) reveals that the 1H T1 values for formic acid, and 
methanol, ethanol and acetate are between 8.1 and 5.3 seconds respectively in aqueous 
solutions without additive. (Figure 8, red values). Using a SOP as just described (6.7s 
recovery time) would for instance lead to a loss of signal of ~40% and ~37% for formic acid 
and methanol respectively. 
 
Figure 8 – 1H T1 values at 298K, 400MHz (9.4 T field) in mixtures of C1 and C2 substances, with 0 
mM (red), 0.4 mM (blue) and 1.0 mM (black) gadoteridol. Figure from Hansen et al. [27]. 
To accommodate this signal loss, addition of paramagnetic contrast agents to samples has 
shown to optimize T1 and T2 values and therefore the corresponding signal intensities. 
Gadolinium chelate complexes are often used in contrast agents, due to the paramagnetic 
electron configuration it possesses. In the ground state gadolinium has the electron 
configuration [Xe]4f75d16s2, whereas the electron configuration of gadolinium(III) ion, is 
[Xe]4f7. In the latter, there are 7 unpaired electrons in the 4f orbital and if these electrons 
remain unpaired (leading to paramagnetism), they will produce a strong magnetic moment, 
which can induce magnetic relaxation in nearby nuclei. This magnetic transfer reduces the T1 
and T2 time constant for the nearby nuclei receiving the magnetic transfer. Gadoteridol, 
referred to as (Gd(III)), is one such chelate complex, commercially used for injections prior 
to MRI scanning in hospitals, to enhance the spectral signals. In Figure 9 the structure of 
gadoteridol is displayed.  
==PAGE:19==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 13 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 – Paramagnetic gadolinium chelate complex, Gadoteridol. 
The effect of paramagnetic contrast agent on 1D 1HNMR, 1D 13CNMR and 2D 1H-13C HSQC 
NMR was tested using various concentrations of Gd(III). For 1H NMR two pulse sequences, 
‘zgcppr’ (90° pulse experiment) and ‘noesypr1d’ (1D-NOESY) were compared for samples 
with 0 mM, 0.4 mM, and 1.0 mM Gd(III), and it was found that 1D-NOESY is not 
quantitative for molecules with short 1H T1 values in cases with relaxation-optimized sample 
conditions (Figure 10). The 90° pulse experiment, in contrast, yielded quantitative results for 
all the small C1 and C2 molecules assayed. Similar quantitative results could be obtained for 
1D 13C NMR and 2D 1H-13C HSQC NMR.  
 
Figure 10 – Signal recovery using 1 mM paramagnetic Gd(III) at 298 K and pH 7.5. The waiting 
period between acquisition are in the range of 0.001 – 60 s. Spectra at 60 s in the absence of Gd(III) 
are set to 100% signal and all other signal recoveries are relative to that. Figure from Hansen et al. 
[27]. 
==PAGE:20==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 14 
 
 
 
The reduction of T2 by Gd(III) influences the signal as the size of the FID acquired in the 
NMR experiment is reduced. As mentioned in the NMR theory section on relaxation, the 
reduced T2 values leads to broader peaks in the NMR spectra. In the presence of 0.4 and 1.0 
mM Gd(III), the broadening in peak width was found acceptable. This is illustrated in Figure 
11, where the peak width at half height is presented for the reference substrate DMSO2. The 
1.1 Hz increase in peak width does not interfere with the neighboring peaks and hence does 
not lead to implication with peak integration.  
 
Figure 11 – Peak broadening by addition of 0.4 mM and 1.0 mM Gd(III) compared to sample where 
Gd(III) is absent[27]. 
Details on this pre-study for reliable quantification of small organic chemicals can be seen in 
the article attached in Appendix C. 
 
DNP 
Due to rather small energy differences over the associated spin transitions, and the 
corresponding small population difference, NMR experiments lack sensitivity when 
compared to other analytical methods. An approach to improve the sensitivity of NMR is to 
enhance the polarization of the nuclei of interest. This approach to increase polarization is 
referred to as hyperpolarization. One method to acquire hyperpolarization is through dynamic 
==PAGE:21==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 15 
 
 
 
nuclear polarization (DNP), where magnetization is transferred from electrons to nuclei of 
interest. 
In the solid-state (e.g., frozen solutions) the polarization transfer from unpaired electrons to 
nuclear spins can directly enhance the sensitivity. This has further been developed to also 
boost the sensitivity of solution-state NMR significantly upon washing the frozen solution 
with hot buffer out of the instrument enhancing polarization (the “Polarizer”). 
The DNP technology relies on a suitable radical being added to the sample, and dispersed 
homogenously in the frozen mixture, typically at 1-2 K (pumped liquid helium bath). This 
allows contact between the radical and the sample analytes where complex mechanisms 
involving spin flips of electron and nuclear spins makes polarization enhancement of nuclear 
spin possible[23], [35]. By placing the sample in a defined magnetic field and irradiating the 
sample with microwaves to drive the spin flips of electrons and nuclei, the process for 
enhancing nuclear polarization is initiated. Usually, the polarization is enhanced over a time-
period of approximately 1 hour. To be useful in high-resolution NMR, the polarization 
acquired in the frozen solid state, needs to be transferred to a solution-state. This is done by 
rapidly removing the sample from the liquid helium bath in the polarizer and dissolving the 
sample in a heated solvent. Subsequently, the solution is injected to a conventional NMR 
instrument for use as a tracer in NMR spectroscopic detection[23]. Immediately after going 
from solid-state to solution-state, the polarization decays over time by usual T1 spin 
relaxation. Time is therefore of an urgent matter in DNP NMR, and usually single-scan 
acquisitions are used[36]. 
In addition, it must be considered that hyperpolarization is consumed by pulsing as 
hyperpolarization creates a non-equilibrium state that is not regenerated upon pulsing. 
With signal enhancements in the range of tens of thousands-fold[23] DNP NMR has recently 
been used in widespread applications such as protein studies[37]–[40], metabolomics [41]–
[43] and ligand binding studies[44], [45].   
==PAGE:22==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 16 
 
 
 
2.2 Catalysts and kinetics 
Time is an important and peculiar aspect of chemical reactions and NMR spectroscopy. For 
conventional NMR experiments within the industry (and research), it is ideal to have fast 
reactions and NMR experiment times to have a high throughput of sample analysis. In real-
time NMR reaction tracking, the ideal situation is to have reactions that are slow enough to 
make analysis of even early intermediates possible, but not so slow that hours or days of 
NMR experiment time is needed. Hence, depending on the situation, the rate constants of 
reactions are important, and tweaking the chemical system to fit the needs are often required. 
One way to accelerate chemical reactions (increase rate constant) is to lower the activation 
energy of reactions by using a catalyst. The activation energy is a measure of the energy it 
requires to turn reactants into products or intermediates dependent on the type of reaction. An 
example of an energy profile for an exothermic reaction is illustrated in Figure 12, where Ea 
is the activation energy which can be lowered by the use of catalysts. 
 
Figure 12 - Exothermic reaction energy profile. The activation energy, Ea  is defined by the energy 
barrier between reactants and products [46]. 
A catalyst is a substance or compound, that accelerates reactions without being chemically 
consumed itself, i.e., without appearing in the net reaction equation.  Alternative routes are 
made possible by catalysts, thus avoiding the slower rate-determining steps of uncatalyzed 
==PAGE:23==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 17 
 
 
 
reactions through pathways with lower energy barriers [46]. The effect of catalyzed reaction 
on the energy profile is presented in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13 - Exothermic reaction energy profile, illustrating reaction with and without the use of 
catalyst[46]. 
 
Enzymes are examples of excellent catalysts. The complex cascade of pathways that takes 
place in cell metabolism, glycolysis in particular, involves multiple enzymes evolved to 
ensure specific and efficient conversion of glucose to energy and compounds required by 
living cells. Surprisingly, entire glycolytic pathways can also be catalyzed by simple 
chemicals such as Brønsted bases [5], and Lewis acids [47]. 
Besides catalysts, temperature can also affect the rate constant of reactions. The rate 
constants in most reactions are temperature dependent, with the rate constant increasing with 
the temperature. Mathematically this can be expressed by the Arrhenius equation, 
𝑙𝑛 𝑘𝑟= 𝑙𝑛 𝐴−𝐸𝑎
𝑅𝑇 
(3) 
or in the alternative form, 
==PAGE:24==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 18 
 
 
 
 𝑘𝑟=  𝐴 𝑒−𝐸𝑎
𝑅𝑇 
(4) 
 
where A, related to the intercept at 1/T = 0, is the pre-exponential factor or the frequency 
factor. Ea is the activation energy, which can be found in the slope seen in Figure 14, kr is the 
temperature specific rate constant, and R is the gas constant[46]. 
 
 
Figure 14 - A plot of the relation between the rate constant ln kr against the inverse temperature. The 
relation can be described by the Arrhenius equation [46]. 
 
An increased reaction temperature will increase the kinetic energy of collisions between 
molecules, thus leading to a higher probability of collisions to lift reactants across the energy 
barrier (activation energy) that needs to be crossed for forming the products according to the 
Arrhenius equation. The temperature dependence of the rate can yield activation energy [46].  
2.3 Lewis- and Brønsted acids 
As mentioned in the introduction and in the previous section, Lewis and Brønsted acids/bases 
are used to induce and/or accelerate chemical reactions, by accepting/donating lone pair 
electron and protons. 
The definitions and examples of Lewis and Brønsted bases are given here: 
==PAGE:25==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 19 
 
 
 
A Lewis acid is a species that accepts a lone pair of electrons. 
Halides of higher oxidation states of metals are often what Lewis acid are made of, such as 
AlCl3, BF3, ZnCl2, TiCl4 and SnCl4 [48] 
A Lewis base is a species that donates a lone pair of electrons. 
Any substrate that contains atoms with lone pair(s) can be defined as Lewis bases. Molecules 
with oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur often acts as Lewis acids. Alcohols (R-OH), carboxylic 
acids (R-COOH), amides (R-CONH2) are examples of Lewis bases [20].   
A Brønsted acid is a species that donates proton(s). 
Examples of Brønsted are HCl, HNO3, H2SO4, and even H2O [49]. 
A Brønsted base is a species that accepts proton(s). 
By the definition, any compound that can accept protons are Brønsted bases. Anions (RO-), 
Hydroxide ion (OH-) and H2O are examples [48].  
The application of Lewis acids and Brønsted bases has recently been investigated. Van de 
Vyver et al. studied the Lewis acid catalyzed carbon-carbon coupling between carbohydrate 
and formaldehyde. Here, the role of the Sn-based Lewis acid was to act as a “linker” between 
the two reactants to get them in close proximity, and thereby activate and catalyze the 
reaction [50]. In another study, Bohle et al. investigated the stabilizing effect of reactive 
primary N-nitrosamides by coordination to Lewis acids [51].  
Esposito et al. and Wang et al. investigated the conversion of sugars to LA by Brønsted bases 
(e.g., Ca(OH)2, Sr(OH)2 and Ba(OH)2). It was suggested that the Brønsted base possessed 
dual functionality in the conversion. OH- was indispensable  for the isomerization of glucose 
to fructose, and additionally in the retro-aldol reaction to C3 intermediates. The metal could 
coordinate with C3 intermediates to facilitate the transformation of C3 sugars (pyruvate and 
dihydroxyacetone) into LA or lactates via 1,2-hydride shifts (Scheme 1) [52], [53].  
==PAGE:26==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 20 
 
 
 
 
Scheme 1 – Brønsted base catalyzed isomerization of glucose to fructose followed by retro-aldol of 
fructose to C3 carbohydrates. M2+coordination to C3 sugar facilitates 1,2-hydride shift with LA as 
final product. 
2.4 Glycolytic pathways 
The pathway for conversion of carbohydrates in biological systems (e.g., cell based 
glycolysis or fermentation processes) is far more complicated, than the chemocatalysed 
glycolysis just seen in Scheme 1. The Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) glycolysis pathway 
involves multiple enzymatic reaction steps for converting glucose into pyruvate. In Scheme 2 
a 10-step pathway for the EMP glycolysis is presented.  
 
Scheme 2 – A 10 step enzyme catalyzed pathway for EMP glycolysis. Inspired from McMurry’s 
Organic Chemistry with Biological Applications, 2nd edition [20]. 
==PAGE:27==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 21 
 
 
 
This pathway (EMP) is known to be used by eukaryotes to produce pyruvate, which is further 
metabolized in the mitochondria. Some bacteria and yeasts synthesize ethanol and CO2 via 
EMP pathway, and tumor cells, lymphocytes and LA-bacteria uses EMP pathway to produce 
LA[54].   
The explanation in the steps from the EMP pathway (Scheme 2) is listed in Table 1 beneath  
Table 1 – Explanation of the pathways involved in the EMP glycolysis. The type of enzyme is 
presented in the right columns (in green). Inspired from McMurry’s Organic Chemistry with 
Biological Applications, 2nd edition [20], and [55]. 
Explanation: 
Type of enzyme 
1. Phosphorylation of glucose by adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) to yield glucose-6-phosphate. 
Hexokinase 
2. Isomerization of glucose-6-phosphate to fructose-6-
phosphate. First by ring opening and subsequently keto-enol 
tautomerization. 
Isomerase 
3. Phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate by ATP to yield 
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate 
Phosphofructokinase 
 
4. Retro-aldol ring opening and cleavage of fructose-1,6-
bisphosphate to yield C3 sugars dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate (DHAP) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.  
Aldolase 
5. Interchange between DHAP and glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate 
- 
6. Oxidation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to carboxylic acid 
by NAD+ with subsequently phosphorylation to yield 1,3-
bisphosphoglycerate. 
Glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphodehydrogenase 
7. Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) is phosphorylated by transfer 
of phosphate from carboxylic acid to yield  3-
phosphoglycerate and ATP. 
Phosphoglycerokinase 
8. Isomerization of 3-phosphoglycerate yield 2-
phosphoglycerate. 
- 
9. Dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate to yield 
phosphoenolpyruvate. 
Enolase 
10. Phosphorylation of ADP by transfer of phosphate from 
phosphoenolpyruvate to yield pyruvate and ATP. 
Pyruvate kinase 
 
Alternative glycolytic strategies are available. The Entner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway are 
commonly used by Enterobacteriaceae including E.coli and S. enterica. These bacteria lack 
the phosphofructokinase and can thereby not use the EMP pathway, hence they use an 
alternative route. In this route, the glucose-6-phosphate (product from step 1 in EMP 
==PAGE:28==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 22 
 
 
 
pathway) becomes oxidized by NADP+ to 6-phosphogluconolactome, and subsequently 
hydrolyzed to 6-phosphogluconate. Hereafter, the enzyme 6-phosphogluconate 
dehydrogenase (EDD) dehydrates 6-phosphogluconate into 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-
phosphogluconate, and finally 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphate aldolase (EDA) cleaves the C6 
substrate into two C3 carbohydrates, pyruvate, and glyderaldehyde-3-phosphate, where the 
latter is also produced after step 4 in EMP pathway (Scheme 2). The deviating route of ED 
glycolysis from EMP glycolysis is presented in Scheme 3. 
 
Scheme 3 – The deviation of the ED pathway from the EMP pathway.  
2.5 Humins and their formation 
The formation of humin is a key issue in economical production of HMF from carbohydrates 
such as glucose and fructose [56]. In conversion of biomass into fuels and chemicals, biomass 
is depolymerized into e.g., glucose (or similar carbohydrate) by catalytic reaction. Glucose is 
subsequently converted to HMF which again can be further converted into formic acid and 
levulinic acid. The latter can be isolated and used and further used as a platform chemical to 
produce fuels and chemicals. A drawback of this method is the co-production of humins [57]. 
Humins are polymers that appear as dark colored (dark yellow to brown in solution) 
substrates in acid catalyzed reaction mixtures. The formation and structure of these humins 
has been investigated by various research groups.  
==PAGE:29==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 23 
 
 
 
Horvat et al. proposed the formation of humins from HMF (Scheme 4), from initial 
rehydration of HMF followed by polymerization of 2,5-dioxo-6-hydroxyhexanal (DDH) [58], 
whereas the formation of humins by polymerization mechanisms between HMF and water-
soluble oligomers of glucose was proposed by Maruani et al. [59]. (Scheme 5).  
 
Scheme 4 - Plausible formation of humins from HMF suggested by Horvat et al. (Scheme produced 
with inspiration from Horvat et al.[58]) 
 
 
Scheme 5 – Plausible formation of humins, from HMF and glucose oligomer, suggested by Maruani et 
al. (Scheme produced with inspiration from Maruani et al. [59].) 
 
I fact, the mechanism of humin formation is poorly understood, although a common idea is, 
that aldol addition/condensation between a mixture of carbohydrates, DDH, HMF and other 
furanic compounds with aldehyde/carboxyl-groups, are involved in the polymerization [60], 
[61]. 
==PAGE:30==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 24 
 
 
 
3 Experimental section 
Chemicals.  
Ba(OH)2, SnCl4, NaOH, CsOH, Ca(OH)2, glucose, mannose, fructose, xylose, arabinose, 5-
deoxy arabinose, glyceraldehyde dimer, threose, erythrulose, dihydroxyacetone, 2-deoxy-
glucose, 1-C13 glucose, deuterium oxide, H2SO4, and NaH2PO4*H2O were obtained from 
Sigma-Aldrich and used without modifications. Gadoteridol was purchased from Bracco. (5 
mL ProHance solution with 279.3 mg/mL).  
Equipment.  
The following equipment was used throughout the thesis work. 
• Scale – Discovery215CD from OHAUS 
• Magnetic stirrer with heat plate + temp. control – IKA RCT basic and IKA ETS-D5 
• pH-meter – PHM210 from RADIOMETER 
• NMR instrument – 800 MHz Bruker Avance III with an Oxford magnet and TCI 
cryoprobe. 
• Centrifuge – LEGEND MICRO 21R form Thermo Scientific 
Chemocatalytic reaction setup 
The DNP NMR experiments on 13C enriched glucose and fructose conversion by Ba(OH)2, as 
well at the SnCl4 catalyzed carbohydrate conversion experiments on arabinose, deoxy-
arabinose and xylose were carried out by the supervisors of this project. Spectral data was 
handed over to the author of the project, for interpretation.  
In general, the reaction setup for Brønsted base catalytic conversion of carbohydrates, can be 
divided into two parts. One for reaction volumes > 5 mL and one for reactions ≤ 5 mL.  
For volumes > 5 mL, the solvent (MQW, 80% of total volume) was added to a round 
bottomed flask equipped with a magnet and kept at desired temperature in a water bath on a 
magnetic stirrer with heater. MQW equivalent to the other 20% of the total volume was 
added to another round bottomed flask equipped with a magnet at room temperature. Each 
flask was stopped with a septum, and degassed with N2 through a syringe for 20 min. In the 
==PAGE:31==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 25 
 
 
 
first flask Ba(OH)2 (or other catalyst) was added after removal of the septum and stirred with 
the magnet for 15 min. The septum was attached again immediately after addition of 
Ba(OH)2, and N2 flushed through for the entire 15 min. The syringe was removed, and the 
flask was sealed with parafilm.  
In the second flask, the same procedure was used for the substrate (e.g., glucose). To 
minimize the contamination from the atmospheric air (mainly O2), a stainless steel canula 
was used in combination with N2 overpressure to transfer the substrate solution to the flask 
with Ba(OH)2 solution. Directly after mixing the two solutions a sample of 600 µL was 
extracted with a syringe and used as the reference for the following samples. While samples 
were extracted, a flow of N2 was applied to prevent contamination. After every following 
sample extraction, N2 flow was maintained for 5 min, before the flask was sealed with 
parafilm. 
In reactions < 5 mL, the complete volume of solvent (MQW) of the reaction was added to a 
round bottomed flask and degassed with N2, as just mentioned above. The catalyst was 
dissolved for 15 min. The septum was quickly removed, and the substrate added directly, 
whereafter the septum was attached again, and the flask flushed with N2 for 5 min. before 
being sealed with parafilm. Transferring the substrate to the catalyst solution in a closed 
system with a transfer needle was not done in these small volume reactions due to the 
assumption that significant ratio of the substrate would not reach the catalyst solution. The 
sample extraction was performed in the same way as mentioned with reactions > 5 mL. 
All samples were prepared with a catalyst OH- concentration of 0.5 M and substrate 
concentrations mainly at 0.1 M. In all the reactions, the change in volume by the addition of 
substrate/catalyst was neglected. 
Samples 
Each sample extraction of 600 µL was quenched with 400 µL phosphate buffer acidified with 
H2SO4. In experiment using barium hydroxide as a catalyst, the Ba2+ ions bind to the SO42- 
and precipitate into a white solid of BaSO4. Both the acidification and the removal of Ba2+ 
==PAGE:32==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 26 
 
 
 
ions have a quenching effect on the reaction. This is the same when Ca(OH)2 is used as a 
catalyst.  
When NaOH and CsOH were used as catalysts the precipitation of the catalyst with sulphate 
does not take place and quenching of the reaction is thought to be less effective. Therefore, 
the samples were kept at ice immediately after sample extraction and throughout the 
following sample workup. 
All samples were pH adjusted with NaOH (10M and 1M) and H2SO4 (0.5M) with a volume of 
max 30 µL equivalent to ~3% of the total volume. The pH was in the range 6.5 – 7.5. and 
subsequently centrifuged for 5 min with 7500 RPM at 4°C. Finally, the samples were all 
spiked with MQW (60 µL) approximately 10 vol% D2O (60 µL)  as an internal reference lock 
substance. Prior to NMR analysis, the samples were stored at -18 °C.  
NMR experiments 
Ba(OH)2 experiments 
Hyperpolarization of [2-13C] fructose and of [U-13C, U-2H] glucose was conducted by 
dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) and subsequent dissolution (D-DNP). Solid state DNP 
was conducted using a mixture of trityl radical OX063 (4.6 mg; Oxford Instruments, 
Abingdon, UK), gadoteridol (3 mg of a 100 µmol/g stock; Bracco Imaging, Italy), MQW 
(80.5 mg) and [2-13C] fructose (106 mg) or [U-2H,13C] glucose (112 mg). 
Preparations (20 mg) were placed in a sample cup and the samples were flash-frozen in liquid 
helium. Polarization transfer from trityl radicals to 13C nuclei was performed at 1.2 K, using 
microwave irradiation at 93.89 GHz with 100 mW in a magnetic field of 3.35 T. This 
approach yielded solid-state polarizations above 30% after one hour. Upon dissolution with 
heated D2O (5 mL), hyperpolarized samples with a final substrate concentration of 12 mM 
hexose were obtained. Of these hyperpolarized samples, 0.15 mL were manually injected into 
0.3 mL of a 0.25 M aqueous solution of barium hydroxide equilibrated to 70 °C inside a 500 
MHz Bruker spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm DCH CryoProbe and a 11.7 T UltraShield 
magnet. This procedure yielded a final concentration of 6.0 mM hyperpolarized glucose in 
the NMR tube. The temperature upon mixing was determined to be approximately 60 °C.  
==PAGE:33==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 27 
 
 
 
Reactions were followed by a series of 13C NMR spectra acquired with excitation by a pulse 
of nominal angle 10° and using both proton and deuterium decoupling. The spectra were 
acquired as pseudo-2D spectra using a receiver gain of 10 by sampling 13C NMR FIDs of 
24096 complex data points for 737 ms every second. The acquisition of NMR data was 
started prior to substrate injection, thus minimizing the experimental dead-time. 
Ex situ 2D NMR experiments were used to assign the chemicals in the reaction mixture. 1H-
13C HSQC were acquired with and without multiplicity editing as data matrices of 1024 (1H) 
× 200 (13C) complex data points sampling the FID for 80 ms and 9 ms respectively. 1H-13C 
HSQC with multiplicity editing  were acquired as matrices of 2048 (1H) × 200 (13C) complex 
data points sampling the FID for 183 ms and 22 ms respectively, with non-uniform sampling 
of 20% were used in the indirect dimension. For 1H-13C HSQC spectra without multiplicity 
editing, acquisition was performed using 1024 (1H) × 200 (13C) complex data points sampling 
the FID for 160 ms and 17 ms respectively, employing non-uniform sampling of 50% in the 
indirect dimension.  
For quantification, one-dimensional 1H NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance III 
800 MHz instrument equipped with a TCI Cryoprobe and a SampleJet sample changer using 
presaturation and composite pulse (zgccppr pulse program) sampling 16384 complex data 
points in the FID for 1.28 s. 
Quantifications of metasaccharinic acids were obtained by integrating C4, C5 and C6 species 
in a 1H-13C HSQC spectrum acquired at 800 MHz to calculate the average length of the 
metasaccharinic acids. The carbon fraction in metasaccharinic acids relative to lactate could 
then be derived from 1H NMR integrals by considering the fraction of the metasaccharinic 
acid methylene signal relative to the lactate methyl signal and taking the number of protons 
into account to get molar ratios. The molar ratios then could be converted to ratios in carbon 
content by considering the length of metasaccharinic acids (approximately 5 carbons on 
average) relative to the three carbon atoms of lactate. 
For the quantification of 13C distributions in lactate, the reaction mixture derived from the 
conversion of 20 mM [1-13C] glucose for 24 hours at 30 °C by 0.25 M Ba(OH)2, was 
subjected to quantitative 13C NMR. To this end, a 13C NMR spectrum using a 30° excitation 
==PAGE:34==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 28 
 
 
 
pulse and inverse gated decoupling was acquired on a Bruker Avance III 800 MHz 
instrument equipped with a TCI Cryoprobe and a SampleJet sample changer. The FID was 
sampled for 1.4 s with 65536 complex data points and an inter-scan relaxation delay of 300 
seconds between 64 accumulations. 
SnCl4 experiments 
The conversion of carbohydrates and deoxy-carbohydrates by Sn(IV) in DMSO/water 
(85%/15%) was directly followed on an 800 MHz Bruker Avance III instrument equipped 
with a 5 mm TCI cryoprobe and an Oxford magnet or on a 600 MHz Bruker Avance III 
instrument equipped with a 5 mm BBO Smart probe. All real-time kinetic NMR tracking was 
implemented in the form of pseudo-2D experiments.  
A time series of 13C NMR spectra (30 flip angle and inverse gated decoupling of 1H) was 
likewise acquired for tracking the conversion of 900 mM [1-13C] xylose by 30 mM (SnCl4??) 
in DMSO/water (85%/15%) at 70 °C by accumulating 128 transients with an interscan 
relaxation delay of 4 seconds and sampling the FID for 0.68 s (32768 complex data points). A 
time series of 13C NMR spectra using natural abundance substrate (and 30 flip angle and 
inverse gated decoupling of 1H) was acquired for tracking the conversion of 900 mM xylose 
by 30 mM in DMSO/water (85%/15%) at 70 °C by accumulating 256 transients with an 
interscan relaxation delay of 3.3 seconds and sampling the FID for 0.68 s (32768 complex 
data points). In this experiment, 2 mM Gd(III) complex was added to the reaction mixture in 
order increase the signal to noise ratio of the experiment. 
Time series of 1H NMR spectra (zgcppr pulse sequence) were acquired by accumulating 80 
transients with an interscan relaxation delay of 2 seconds and sampling the FID for 1.7 s 
(16384 complex data points), yielding a time resolution of 5 min per spectrum. With these 
experiments, the conversion of 300 mM (deoxy)carbohydrate was tracked in the presence of 
30 mM SnCl4·5H2O. 
Compounds were identified using heteronuclear 2D NMR assignment spectra,1H-13C HSQC 
and 1H-13C HMBC on samples of reaction mixtures that had been stabilized by reducing the 
temperature to 298 K. 1H-13C HSQC spectra were acquired by sampling 1024  256 complex 
==PAGE:35==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 29 
 
 
 
data points for 80 and 6 ms in the direct and indirect dimensions, while 1H-13C HMBC spectra 
using a three-fold low-pass J-filter were acquired by sampling 2048  256 complex data 
points for 256 and 6 ms in the direct and indirect dimensions, respectively. 
Quantitative NMR integrals for arabinose and 5-deoxyarabinose were obtained by calibrating 
the 1H NMR response through comparison of integrals in the absence and in the presence of 1 
mM Gd(III) as a relaxation agent for shortening of T1 relaxation. In this manner, 
determinations of soluble carbon balance from arabinose and 5-deoxyarabinose as well as 
selectivities to acyclic unsaturated acids were derived. 
NMR data acquisition and analysis software. 
All non-DNP NMR spectra were acquired using Topspin 3.5 pl 6. The spectra were processed 
with ample zero filling and analyzed in Bruker Topspin 4.0.9. (For DNP, Topspin 4.14) 
Data fitting 
Fits relative to Arrhenius analysis from Ba(OH)2 section and exponential and hyperbolic fits 
of glucose conversion from SnCl4 section were conducted with pro Fit 7 (QuantumSoft). 
Signal areas were plotted in the same software. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 30 
 
 
 
4 Results 
The results are divided into two sections – one section regarding carbohydrate conversion by 
Ba(OH)2 in water and the pathways involved, and another section regarding mechanism and 
effects of loss-of functionality of carbohydrate conversion by SnCl4 in DMSO/water. 
For each of the sections, drafts of possible future reviews and supplemental information are 
attached in Appendix A and B. 
4.1 Barium hydroxide catalyzed conversion of carbohydrates 
Hyperpolarized NMR spectroscopy on carbohydrate  
The pathways of glycolysis can be difficult to follow, due to complex mechanisms, fast 
reaction steps, and low levels of analytes. Therefore, a hyperpolarized NMR experiment 
(DNP) was performed to acquire information on the early-stage pathways for chemocatalytic 
conversion of 13C enriched [U-2H,13C]-glucose and [2-13C]-fructose with non-protonated 13C-
sited to increase T1 values. Ba(OH)2 in 250 mM concentration were used at the catalyst.  
From the glucose experiment it was found that a mechanism with the possible intermediate, 
3-deoxyglucosone, comparable to the mechanism seen in the Entner-Doudoroff (ED) 
pathway, was observed with a plausible CH2 signal at 40.5 ppm. The conversion to lactate 
with a methyl peak at ~20 ppm, was limited over the time-period of the DNP experiment. The 
relatively weak signals from the two compounds can be seen in Figure 15. Here, it can also 
be seen that the signal for CH2 at 40.5 ppm forms prior to lactate, supporting the intermediate 
role towards lactate.  
==PAGE:37==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 31 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15 – Spectrum from hyperpolarized (DNP) experiment showing the [U-2H, 13C] glucose 
fructose conversion by Ba(OH)4. The signal at 40.5 ppm is supported by the inserted sum of the first 
60 spectra acquired, seen at the top of the figure. Reaction conditions: 6 mM [U-2H, 13C] glucose, 
250 mM Ba(OH)4, 60°C in D2O. 
The fructose DNP experiment showed significantly higher conversion rate to lactate. But 
additionally, glucose peaks appeared parallel to lactate peaks, implying a conversion from 
fructose to glucose or an equilibrium between the two. In Figure 16 it can also be seen that 
two peaks form at 149 and 154 ppm, which indicate enol intermediate. 
 
Figure 16 – Spectrum from hyperpolarized (DNP) experiment, illustration the conversion of [2-13C] 
fructose (6 mM), by Ba(OH)2 (250 mM) at 60°C in D2O. C2 positions of fructose and emerging 
compounds are marked. 
These enols are relatively reactive, and their presence can by hard to identify. The hypothesis 
is that they are stabilized by the divalent barium ion. A possible mechanism from fructose to 
lactate, with a stabilized enol intermediate is illustrated in Scheme 6. 
==PAGE:38==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 32 
 
 
 
 
Scheme 6 – Plausible pathway of fructose to lactate via stabilized enol intermediate. 
The fast conversion of fructose to lactate leaves other intermediates difficult or even 
impossible to detect. Therefore, a second fructose DNP experiment was carried out using a 
lower concentration of barium hydroxide (50 mM), to slow down the reaction. In this 
experiment dihydroxyacetone (DHA) was identified with a peak at 214.1 ppm. This indicates 
the pathway through the conventional Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) glycolysis. The 
correlation between the C2 position on fructose and the identified C2 enol species, indicates 
that this position in fructose (and glucose) is crucial for the chemocatalyzed conversion of 
fructose to lactate with Ba(OH)2.  
The  DNP experiments were conducted in open-air NMR tubes, and degradation products 
from carbohydrates by oxidative pathways were therefore observed. The formation of the 
byproducts glycolate and acetate, as well as carbonate appear simultaneously (Figure 17).  
 
Figure 17 – Spectrum from hyperpolarized (DNP) experiment, showing conversion of fructose by 
reduced catalytic concentration at 60°C and 6 mM [2-13C] fructose, in D2O. 
This supports oxidative cleavage of 1,2-dicarbonyl, which can lead to the byproducts 
observed in the Ba(OH)2 system. A possible pathway is presented in Scheme 7. 
==PAGE:39==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 33 
 
 
 
 
Scheme 7 – Plausible pathways to byproducts.  
Notice that formate is included as a product in the Scheme. Although formate was not 
identified in the DNP experiment, it is a known product from carbohydrate conversion[5]. 
Conventional high-resolution NMR spectroscopy on carbohydrates 
High-resolution NMR spectroscopy to track the conversion of glucose by barium hydroxide 
in a pseudo 2D experiment was employed over a period of 24 hours (Figure 18). Here, aside 
from lactate, products with various signals in the aliphatic CH2 specific region were observed. 
 
Figur 18 -  Pseudo 2D 1H-NMR experiment on glucose conversion by barium hydroxide. Acquired on 
800MHz instrument with TCI cryoprobe. 3.1 minutes time-resolution between spectra. Reaction 
conditions: 100 mM glucose, 250 mM Ba(OH)2, H2O/D2O-solvent (90/10%), temperature 30°C. 
==PAGE:40==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 34 
 
 
 
To identify these CH2 containing species in this region, heteronuclear 2D NMR experiments 
were acquired on the reaction mixture, and the identified compounds, including lactate, are 
presented in Figure 19. A collection of  C4-C6 2-hydroxy-3-deoxy species (metasaccharinic 
acids) and one branched C4 species could be identified in the reaction mixture. For these 
compounds, all aliphatic proton and carbon chemical shifts were assigned.  
 
Figure 19 – Proton and carbon chemical shift assignment of lactate (1), metasaccharinic species (2, 
4, 5), and branched product (3). 
The branched compound (3) deviates from the others, as it has a quaternary carbon, which 
was identified. A plausible formation of this product could occur from a 2,3-dicarbonyl 
substrate, through a benzylic acid-like rearrangement. (Scheme 8). 
 
Scheme 8 – A possible mechanism to the formation of the branched compound, seen in figure 19. 
The formation the C4-C6 metasaccharinic acids (lactate analogues), indicates that the 
pathway from the C3 carbohydrates (e.g., seen in EMP after retro aldol step) to lactate, is 
likely to be paralleled for C4, C5, and C6 sugars as well. 
==PAGE:41==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 35 
 
 
 
To acquire a quantitative perspective of the barium hydroxide catalyzed glucose conversion, 
qNMR was applied on reaction samples taken from the reaction mixture with varying time 
intervals. These experiments were performed anaerobe under N2 atmosphere, and in Figure 
20, the spectrum after 6 h reaction time is presented along with identified compounds. The 
identification for all samples (0h, 2h, 4h, 6h and 24h) can be seen in a combined figure in 
Appendix C. Lactate, acetate, and formate are well known products in chemocatalytic [5], 
and biological glycolysis [62], and glucose can isomerize to mannose via fructose via two 
successive hydrogen transfer steps for reversible aldose-to-ketose isomerization.  
 
Figure 20 – High-resolution NMR spectrum from anaerobic chemocatatytic glycolysis using Ba(OH)2 
(250 mM) as catalyst and glucose (100 mM) as the substrate. The spectrum is from a sample taken 6 
hours into the reaction, at 30°C. The signal from formate is inserted top left. 
To test the temperature dependency of the chemocatalytic reaction, a range of temperatures 
was investigated. As could be expected, the reaction rate increased significantly with the 
temperature according to Arrhenius equation and collision theory. Although the rate changes 
with temperature, relative distribution of the products – especially between lactate and 
metasaccharinic acids - did not change significantly between 20 and 50°C. This is illustrated 
in Figure 21. Using qNMR the carbon balance remains above 90% in all cases with lactate 
and metasaccharinic acids accounting for approximately 90% of the total carbon in the 
==PAGE:42==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 36 
 
 
 
products. Notably, although the signal intensity from the metasaccharinic acid is low 
compared to lactate (Figure 20), for structure-specific reasons, the metasaccharinic acids 
contribution to the carbon balance are almost on the same level as lactate, which is in contrast 
with previous HPLC studies[5], where metasaccharinic acids were not identified, possibly 
due to the lack of authentic standard compounds.  
 
Figure 21 – Carbon quantification of glucose conversion at various temperatures. Reaction 
conditions:100 mM glucose, 250 mM Ba(OH)2, temperature at 20°C, 30°C 40°C and 50°C, N2 
atmosphere and H2O/D2O solvent (90/10% v/v) 
From an Arrhenius analysis the activation energy for the conversion of glucose with  
Ba(OH)2 was determined to 102 kJ/mol ± 5 kJ. This was done using Quansoft Pro Fit 7.0 to 
calculate first order fits for glucose conversion for the four different temperatures and extract 
the reaction rate constants (k). Subsequently linear regression on the natural logarithm values 
of k over the inversed temperature was calculated, which can be seen in Figure 22. The slope 
of the linear regression is related to the activation energy as seen in equation (4). 
==PAGE:43==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 37 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22 - Arrhenius plot for the conversion of glucose by Ba(OH)2 at 20°C, 30°C 40°C and 50°C. 
The Arrhenius analysis yielded an energy of activation of 102+/-5 kJ/mol. 
 
The relative fraction between lactate and metasaccharinic acids was not affected significantly 
by the temperature changes. By contrast, the number of carbon atoms in the substrate 
seemingly had a greater effect to the fraction of metasaccharinic acids. Similar to the glucose 
experiment, anaerobic experiments using fructose, mannose, xylose, threose, erythrulose and 
dihydroxyacetone was conducted under similar reaction conditions. Figure 23 presents this 
tendency.  
 
Figure 23 – Distribution of carbon in lactate and C4-C6 metasaccharinic acids from conversion of 
C3-C6 carbohydrates by Ba(OH)2 at 30°C. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
%Carbon
Distribution of C to Lactate and longer 
equivalents
Metasaccharides
Lactate
==PAGE:44==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 38 
 
 
 
 
For C6, C5 and C4 the fraction of metasaccharinic acids seems to increase with decreasing 
number of carbons in the substrate. For erythrulose the fraction of metasaccharinic acid is 
particularly high. The plausible mechanism for the conversion of erythrulose to C4 LA 
analog and the branched specie are seen in Scheme 9. 
 
Scheme 9 – Plausible pathway for conversion of erythrulose to C4 analog of LA and the branched 
specie.  
With the C3 sugar (dihydroxyacetone) the fraction of metasaccharinic acids is considerably 
smaller than the fraction seen for glucose or other C4-C6 carbohydrate substrates. This might 
be explained by a fast conversion of C3 sugars into lactate through the reaction shown in 
Scheme 10. 
 
Scheme 10 – Ba(OH)2 assisted conversion of DHA to LA. 
The mechanistic perspective on anaerobe conversion of glucose by Ba(OH)2  to lactate and 
the metasaccharinic acids is presented in Scheme 11 (here C6). The interpretation is based on 
the experimental results from a combination of DNP NMR and conventional 1D and 2D 
NMR. In the transition from glucose to fructose, an alternative route leading to 3-
==PAGE:45==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 39 
 
 
 
deoxyglucosone and subsequently C6 metasaccharinic acid is possible. Lactate is formed via 
3+3 retro-aldol cleavage of fructose. Due to the reversible keto-enol isomerization between 
fructose and glucose, the chemocatalytic conversion of fructose is also able to yield 
metasaccharinic acid products. 
 
Scheme 11 – Plausible pathway from glucose to C6 metasaccharinic acid and lactate. 
The C2 position on the substrate was mentioned earlier as being crucial to the barium 
hydroxide conversion of glucose to lactate . To test this hypothesis, an experiment with 2-
deoxyglucose was employed. From this experiment, the hypothesis was supported, as 2-
deoxyglucose proved rather stable throughout the entire experiment (24 h). Possibly for the 
reason, that keto-enol isomerization to fructose is prohibited, and hence, the subsequent 
metasaccharinic acid formation as well as the 3+3 retro-aldol cleavage on fructose is blocked. 
This supports the central role of C2 position in the anaerobe conversion of glucose. A 
comparison between the reaction progress in the conversion of glucose and 2-deoxyglucose is 
presented in Figure 24.  
==PAGE:46==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 40 
 
 
 
 
Figure 24 – 1H-NMR spectra from conversion of glucose (top) and 2-deoxyglucose (bottom). The 2-
deoxyglucose experiment showed no or insignificant conversion to lactate, thus supporting the 
importance of C2 hydroxy group in the conversion of glucose.  
To achieve a deeper understanding of the mechanism involved in the conversion of glucose, 
13C isotope tracking was performed. By using [1-13C]-glucose, it was found that 56% and 
38% carbon were distributed in methyl- and carboxylate carbon on lactate respectively, 
leaving 6% remaining for the C2 position (Figure 25). The 6% at the C2 position indicates 
alternative C-C cleavage of fructose than that of a 3+3 retro aldol cleavage, which in turn 
supports the possible pathway to the identified C4 and C5 metasaccharinic acids. 
==PAGE:47==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 41 
 
 
 
 
Figur 25 – 13C-NMR presenting the distribution of 13C in lactate. Reaction conditions: 20 mM [1-13C] 
glucose, 250 mM Ba(OH)2, in H2O/D2O (90/10% v/v), at 30°C under N2 atmosphere. Reaction time 
24h. 
Finally, three other bases (NaOH, CsOH and Ca(OH)2) were tested for their catalytic effect 
on glucose conversion (Figure 26). These experiments indicated that the divalent metal 
catalysts are significantly more effective not only in the degree of glucose conversion, but 
also in selectivity towards lactate.  
  
Figur 26 – Carbon distribution in lactate and metasaccharinic acids by glucose conversion at 30°C 
and 24h reaction time, using Ca(OH)2, CsOH and NaOH. Ba(OH)2  is added for comparison. 
4.2 Tin Chloride catalyzed conversion of carbohydrates 
In this section the conversion of carbohydrates by SnCl4 in DMSO/water will be investigated. 
More specifically, the routes of pentose conversion and the effect of absent functional group 
on deoxy pentose was under the scope of this study. SnCl4 in DMSO/water has been shown 
to convert carbohydrates to a variety of products including acyclic and cyclic chemicals. It 
was hypothesized that the role of the individual hydroxy groups in coordinating the metal for 
0.00%
20.00%
40.00%
60.00%
80.00%
100.00%
Ba(OH)2
Ca(OH)2
CsOH
NaOH
%Carbon
Distribution of C to lactate and longer 
equivalents
Lactate
Metasaccharinic acid
Glucose conversion
==PAGE:48==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 42 
 
 
 
different catalytic pathways can be deciphered by using the different deoxy analogues and 
tracking the effect on the reaction progress with in-situ NMR. 
Initially, the conversion of [1-13C]-xylose by SnCl4 in DMSO/water (85%/15% v/v) was 
employed at 70°C. From a pseudo 2D time series of 13C-NMR, three major products were 
observed. Besides the two cyclic 5-membered products furfural and 4,5-dihydroxycyclopent-
2-en-1-one, an acyclic unsaturated product (E)-2,5-dihydroxypent-3-enoic acid, was 
observed. The reaction progress is presented in Figure 27. 
 
 
Figure 27 – sdhigskgdjhbskjgdhksjgd 
 
To gain mechanistic information, another reaction tracking the conversion (pseudo 2D) using 
natural abundant xylose were performed in else way identical conditions. From this pseudo 
2D experiment real-time conversion of xylose were followed with stacked time-series of 1H-
NMR measurements. Here it was possible to identify intermediates in the early stage of the 
reaction. Two intermediates can be seen in Figure 28.  
==PAGE:49==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 43 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28 - Early intermediates from xylose conversion by SnCl4. The spectrum is 1/800 in a real-time 
pseudo 2D experiment. Reaction conditions: 70°C, DMSO/water (80/20%v/v), catalyst 10 mg and 
substrate 50 mg in 550µL. 
In A) the chemical shift assignment is given along with integrals and coupling for the two 
trans protons at C3 and C4. The J-coupling at 16 Hz manifests the trans bond and the 
integrals correlates with the proton count. Dehydration and enolization of xylose can lead to 
this intermediate, which is the precursor for 2,5-dihydroxy-3-enoic acid (Figure 27). For 2-
hydroxy-2H-pyran-3(6H)-one in B) the two neighboring protons on each side of the double 
bond could be identified. Although the integrals are not perfect matches, possibly due to 
different relaxation times, the coupling at 10 Hz correlate well. This intermediate is the 
precursor for furfural. Dehydration of xylose followed by cyclisation and a second 
dehydration could lead to this intermediate. 
With 1H-13C HSQC and 1H-13C HMBC on the product mixture from the pseudo 2D 
experiment, products from the conversion could be identified and fully assigned. In Figure 
29, the chemical shift assignment and the correlated peaks from the spectrum are presented.  
 
==PAGE:50==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 44 
 
 
 
 
Figure 29 – 1H-13C HSQC NMR spectrum from xylose catalytic xylose conversion by SnCl4. Signals 
from the identified products are marked, and structures and their chemicals shifts are presented. 
 
The plausible pathways towards the products, identified with real-time NMR tracking in 
combination with 1H-13C HSQC and 1H-13C HMBC NMR on the product mixture is 
presented in Scheme 12. Initially a dehydration on C3 of xylose leads to an enol species. This 
species can tautomerize into 3-deoxyglucosone, which is a plausible precursor for all the 
possible cyclic product observed. Alternatively, the 3-deoxyglucosone can undergo an 
additional dehydration, leading to the acyclic intermediate. If this intermediate is the trans-
form, a cyclic pathway is not viable, and the following acyclic product is (E)-2,5-
dihydroxypent-3-enoic acid.  
==PAGE:51==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 45 
 
 
 
 
Scheme 12 – Possible pathway and chemical shifts for compounds in the conversion of xylose (or 
similar pentose sugar) deduced by pseudo 2D real-time NMR in combination with HSQC and HMBC. 
 
Similar pathways were seen for the conversion of the isomeric carbohydrate arabinose by 
SnCl4 at the same reaction conditions. To test the effect of the loss-of function (functional 
group), an experiment with 5-deoxy-arabinose was employed. The reaction conditions were 
similar to those used for xylose and arabinose. Here it was found that hydroxy group on C5 is 
important in the cyclisation event towards the intermediate leading to furfural and other 
cyclic compound along the route. The reason for this is the loss of the nucleophilic oxygen on 
the hydroxy group on C5, thus reducing the possibility for nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl 
carbon that, with natural arabinose or xylose, would lead to the 3-deoxyglucosone (precursor 
for cyclic route). An increase in selectivity towards the acyclic product (E)-2-hydroxypent-3-
enoic acid, equivalent to the product (E)-2,5-dihydroxypent-3-enoic acid seen for arabinose 
and xylose, is hence observed. This is illustrated in Figure 30. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 46 
 
 
 
 
Figure 30 – Comparison between xylose, arabinose and 5-deoxyarabinose after catalytic conversion 
by SnCl4. 
The 5-deoxyarabinose experiment shows selectivity towards the acyclic pathway, the route, 
and thereby the signals for furfural and its precursors are absent. In addition, the often 
unwanted polymeric byproducts (humins), also appear to decrease in formation, when 5-
deoxyarabinose is used as the substrate. In Figure 31 the effect of the 5-OH group on the 
major product and humin formation is presented. Clearly, the picture with NMR tubes shows 
that the sample with 5-deoxyarabinose contains significantly less humin concentration (dark 
substance). 
 
Figure 31 – Illustration of the major products and humin formation from pentose and 5-deoxypentose. 
Additionally, a picture presenting the coloration of the sample due to humin concentration is 
displayed as well. 
==PAGE:53==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 47 
 
 
 
From a quantitative viewpoint, the carbon-% was calculated from qNMR experiments. The 
conversion of arabinose shows that furfural and the linear product (E)-2,5-dihydroxypent-
enoic acid are formed in equal amounts (~8%), and the accumulation of the linear 
intermediate (E)-1,1,5-trihydroxypent-enoic acid is below 0.2% at all times. (Figure 32, top).   
 
Figure 32– Quantitative comparison between SnCl4 catalyzed conversion of arabinose and 5-
deoxyarabinose (top and middle), and similar comparison between 5-deoxyarabinose and 5-
deoxyarabinose + 1 mM Gd(III)(middle and bottom). Reaction conditions: SnCl4 30 mM, substrate 
140 mM, DMSO/water (85/15% v/v) and 70°C. 
==PAGE:54==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 48 
 
 
 
In the conversion of 5-deoxyarabinose, furfural is absent and the selectivity towards the linear 
product (E)-2-hydroxypent-3enoic acid increased with a carbon-% of ~22% (Figure 32, 
middle). Additionally, the accumulation of the intermediate, in the early state of the reaction, 
increases more than 10-fold underlining the selectivity towars the linear route.  
The conjugated system in both product and intermediate limits the number of neighboring 
protons that mediate relaxation, and hence increases the T1 values for the compounds 
Therefore, the addition of Gd(III) in a sample from the 5-deoxyarabinose product mixture, 
showed an aditionally enhancement of signals for the product reaching ~30% and almost 
tripling the intermediate accumulation in the early reaction stage (Figure 32, bottom). 
I terms of kinetics, the rate of conversion of 5-deoxyarabinose exceeds that of arabionose, 
which can also be seen in the substrate curves in Figure 31.. The removal of 5-OH group 
eliminates the stable pyranose forms of 5-deoxyarabinose, and hence increases the rate 
constant for substrate conversion. First order exponential and second order hyperbolic fits 
were performed on 5-deoxyarabinose and second order hyperbolic fitting match better than 
that of a first order exponential fit. A 2:1 coordination of the metal in the catalyst to  
carbohydrate moieties  is a plausible reason for a second order fit. In Figure 33, the kinetic 
fitting and the corresponding residuals for the 5-deoxyarabinose conversion are presented. 
 
 
Figure 33 – Exponential and hyperbolic kinetic fitting of 5-deoxyarabinose conversion.  
==PAGE:55==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 49 
 
 
 
4.3 An insight into deoxy-sugars and protection group strategies. 
In Ba(OH)2 catalyzed conversion of carbohydrates, the loss of C2 OH-group on glucose 
inhibited the conversion of the substrate (Figure 24), as the C2 OH-group is involved in the 
reversible keto-enol isomerization between glucose and fructose. This indicates that fructose 
and the keto-enol intermediate is necessary for in the formation of LA and the observed 
metasaccharinic acids.  
Similarly, the C5 OH-group on arabinose was found to have a key role, in the cyclization 
event taking place in the conversion towards furfural and similar cyclic products. Thus, 
leaving a higher selectivity toward the product formed in the linear pathway, and in addition 
leading to a reduced humin formation (Figure 31). 
These findings encourage to an even deeper research into the loss-of functionality regarding 
carbohydrate conversion into useful platform chemicals, and in this context evaluate 
protection group strategies to control the conversion of natural carbohydrates into the desired 
products. 
A study on the formation of humins during degradation of carbohydrates and furfural 
derivatives in various solvent, were performed by Shi et al. Here, the formation of humins 
from hydrothermal degradation of 2-deoxysugars compared to natural sugars in two solvents, 
water and ethyl acetate, were investigated. The study showed humin formation from 2-
deoxysugars (2-deoxyglucose and 2-deoxyribose) in both solvent, in the range of 1.4% - 
41.2%, compared to 41% - 73.1% for normal sugars (glucose and ribose). Shi et al. 
conclusively suggests that α-carbonyl aldehydes and α,β-unsaturated aldehydes are primary 
precursors for the formation of humins [61].  
The pentose (xylose and arabinose) experiments in this master project, supports this 
conclusion to some extent, as the dehydration in the first step on C3 leads to α-β-unsaturated 
aldehydes, which are the precursors for the pathway towards furanic compounds. Hydration 
or dehydration followed by ring-opening of these furanic compounds, leads to α-carbonyl 
compound and subsequent humins. 
==PAGE:56==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 50 
 
 
 
In the case where 5-deoxy-pentose is used (5-deoxy-arabinose) the formation of an α-β-
unsaturated aldehyde still occurs, while the formation of humins is significantly reduced or 
possible even blocked.  
 
Scheme 13 – Pentose/5-deoxypentose pathway to furanics and humins. The role of C5-OH on the 
conversion is presented. 
This indicates that in addition to an α-carbonyl aldehyde or an α-β-unsaturated aldehyde, a 
nucleophilic group (e.g., -OH) on C5 is necessary for the cyclization events towards humins 
and furanics (Scheme 13).  
As furanics are platform chemicals in bio-fuel production, strategies with selectivity towards 
furanics, without the formation of humins are desirable. A protection group strategy could be 
a plausible solution. Questell-Santiago et al. suggested a carbohydrate stabilization by 
employing formaldehyde in a protection group strategy (Scheme 14)[63].  
 
Scheme 14 -  Protection strategies stabilizing glucose and 5-HMF to prevent degradation. 
 
Although, this strategy prevents carbohydrate degradation to humins, it also reduces the 
formation of  the desired furanics. Xu et al. studied the mechanistic understanding of humin 
==PAGE:57==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 51 
 
 
 
formation in the conversion of glucose and fructose to 5-HMF in organic solvent [BMIM]Cl 
ionic liquid. Here they found, that methylation of hydroxymethyl (protection of -OH group, 
Scheme 14) in 5-HMF lead to a conversion of 5-HMF under 1% [56], hence reducing the 
formation of humins.  
Strategies allowing the conversion of carbohydrates to furanics, while prohibiting the 
formation of humins, indicated by the diagonal arrow in Scheme 14, are needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 52 
 
 
 
5 Conclusion 
In situ NMR assays were devised or used for tracking glycolytic pathways that can be 
catalyzed by simple salts. In the barium hydroxide catalytic conversion of carbohydrates in 
aqueous solutions, NMR observations shows that dihydroxyacetone is the principal 
intermediate on the pathway to lactate, with resemblance to the glycolytic route seen for the 
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. Additionally, the identification of 3-deoxyglucosone 
with DNP, and the more surprising selectivity towards the C4-C6 metasaccharinic acids 
indicate a route that resembles that of the Entner-Dourodoff pathway. Furthermore, the C2 
position of glucose was found to be central to the pathway of glucose conversion, 2-
deoxyglucose proved stable to catalytic conversion by Ba(OH)2. Finally, isotope experiments 
validate that bond breakage occur beyond the retro-aldol 3+3 cleavage of fructose, hence 
supporting the routes to C4 an C5 metasaccharinic acids observed. 
For SnCl4 conversion of pentoses, and deoxy-pentose in DMSO/water (85/15% v/v), the 
hydroxy group on C5 was central to the pathway towards furanic products, as dehydration on 
this site, lead to a significant selectivity towards the acyclic product (E)-2-hydroxypent-3-
enoic acid. Furthermore, the formation of humins was reduced significantly by employing 5-
deoxy-pentose. The assay shows that loss-of-function and blockage or removal of individual 
hydroxy groups can be employed to channel carbohydrates into more selective pathways. 
This observation indicates protection group strategies can be promising in the future green 
processing of carbohydrates in order to make the complexity of pathways more controllable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 53 
 
 
 
6 Outlook 
The results obtained in this project has encouraged to further investigation on carbohydrate 
conversion into value added chemicals. Regarding Ba(OH)2 catalytic conversion of 
carbohydrates, factors which affect the distribution of lactate and metsaccharinic acids would 
be valuable to investigate, as well as the value and possible applications of these 
metasaccharinic acids, and techniques to separate them from the remaining reaction mixture. 
A deeper understanding of the loss-of-function on deoxy-pentose/hexose-conversions, 
employing experiments with a wide range of carbohydrates and their respective deoxy-
variants on all carbon positions would be valuable for both Lewis acid and Brønsted base 
catalyzed carbohydrate conversion towards desired products.  
Application of alternative methods and technologies to understand the exact interactions 
between the catalysts and carbohydrates, to gain more control over the conversions, would 
furthermore be ideal to investigate. 
Finally, additional knowledge of the mechanisms and pathways involved in the humin 
formation, would support the development of methods to block this formation, thus leading to 
economical feasible industries for biomass conversion into valuable chemicals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 54 
 
 
 
7 References 
[1]  Z. Zhang, T. Wang, M. J. Blunt, E. J. Anthony, A.-H. A. Park, R. W. Hughes, P. A. 
Webley, and J. Yan, “Advances in carbon capture, utilization and storage,” Appl. 
Energy, vol. 278, p. 115627, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115627. 
[2]  P. Gallezot, “Conversion of biomass to selected chemical products,” Chem Soc Rev, 
vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1538–1558, 2012, doi: 10.1039/C1CS15147A. 
[3]  A. Corma, S. Iborra, and A. Velty, “Chemical Routes for the Transformation of 
Biomass into Chemicals,” Chem. Rev., vol. 107, no. 6, pp. 2411–2502, Jun. 2007, doi: 
10.1021/cr050989d. 
[4]  J. Ma, D. Jin, Y. Li, D. Xiao, G. Jiao, Q. Liu, Y. Guo, L. Xiao, X. Chen, X. Li, J. 
Zhou, and R. Sun, “Photocatalytic conversion of biomass-based monosaccharides to 
lactic acid by ultrathin porous oxygen doped carbon nitride,” Appl. Catal. B Environ., 
vol. 283, p. 119520, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.apcatb.2020.119520. 
[5]  L. Li, F. Shen, R. L. Smith, and X. Qi, “Quantitative chemocatalytic production of 
lactic acid from glucose under anaerobic conditions at room temperature,” Green 
Chem., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 76–81, 2017, doi: 10.1039/C6GC02443B. 
[6]  K. Okano, T. Tanaka, C. Ogino, H. Fukuda, and A. Kondo, “Biotechnological 
production of enantiomeric pure lactic acid from renewable resources: recent 
achievements, perspectives, and limits,” Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 
413–423, Jan. 2010, doi: 10.1007/s00253-009-2280-5. 
[7]  M. Dusselier, P. Van Wouwe, A. Dewaele, E. Makshina, and B. F. Sels, “Lactic acid 
as a platform chemical in the biobased economy: the role of chemocatalysis,” Energy 
Env. Sci, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1415–1442, 2013, doi: 10.1039/C3EE00069A. 
[8]  S. Xu, Y. Wu, J. Li, T. He, Y. Xiao, C. Zhou, and C. Hu, “Directing the Simultaneous 
Conversion of Hemicellulose and Cellulose in Raw Biomass to Lactic Acid,” ACS 
Sustain. Chem. Eng., vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 4244–4255, Mar. 2020, doi: 
10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b07552. 
[9]  S. Kuy and S. Boonyarattanakalin, “Lactic acid production from alkaline 
hydrothermal reaction of cassava starch,” p. 7, 2019. 
[10]  R. K. P. Purushothaman, J. van Haveren, D. S. van Es, I. Melián-Cabrera, J. D. 
Meeldijk, and H. J. Heeres, “An efficient one pot conversion of glycerol to lactic acid 
using bimetallic gold-platinum catalysts on a nanocrystalline CeO2 support,” Appl. 
Catal. B Environ., vol. 147, pp. 92–100, Apr. 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.apcatb.2013.07.068. 
[11]  N. Viar, J. M. Requies, I. Agirre, A. Iriondo, and P. L. Arias, “Furanic biofuels 
production from biomass using Cu-based heterogeneous catalysts,” Energy, vol. 172, 
pp. 531–544, Apr. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.01.109. 
==PAGE:61==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 55 
 
 
 
[12]  X. Tong, Y. Ma, and Y. Li, “Biomass into chemicals: Conversion of sugars to furan 
derivatives by catalytic processes,” Appl. Catal. Gen., vol. 385, no. 1–2, pp. 1–13, Sep. 
2010, doi: 10.1016/j.apcata.2010.06.049. 
[13]  B. R. Caes, R. E. Teixeira, K. G. Knapp, and R. T. Raines, “Biomass to Furanics: 
Renewable Routes to Chemicals and Fuels,” ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., vol. 3, no. 11, 
pp. 2591–2605, Nov. 2015, doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b00473. 
[14]  J. Cui, J. Tan, T. Deng, X. Cui, Y. Zhu, and Y. Li, “Conversion of carbohydrates to 
furfural via selective cleavage of the carbon–carbon bond: the cooperative effects of 
zeolite and solvent,” Green Chem., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1619–1624, 2016, doi: 
10.1039/C5GC01948F. 
[15]  C. Carlini, P. Patrono, A. M. R. Galletti, and G. Sbrana, “Heterogeneous catalysts 
based on vanadyl phosphate for fructose dehydration to 5-hydroxymethyl-2-
furaldehyde,” Appl. Catal. Gen., vol. 275, no. 1–2, pp. 111–118, Nov. 2004, doi: 
10.1016/j.apcata.2004.07.026. 
[16]  M. Watanabe, Y. Aizawa, T. Iida, R. Nishimura, and H. Inomata, “Catalytic glucose 
and fructose conversions with TiO2 and ZrO2 in water at 473K: Relationship between 
reactivity and acid–base property determined by TPD measurement,” Appl. Catal. Gen., 
vol. 295, no. 2, pp. 150–156, Nov. 2005, doi: 10.1016/j.apcata.2005.08.007. 
[17]  Y. Kamiya, H. Nishiyama, M. Yashiro, A. Satsuma, and T. Hattori, “The Role of 
Brønsted and Lewis Acid Sites of Vanadyl Pyrophosphate Measured by 
Dimethylpyridine-temperature Programmed Desorption in the Selective Oxidation of 
Butane,” J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 62–68, 2003, doi: 10.1627/jpi.46.62. 
[18]  A. A. Marianou, C. M. Michailof, A. Pineda, E. F. Iliopoulou, K. S. Triantafyllidis, 
and A. A. Lappas, “Effect of Lewis and Brønsted acidity on glucose conversion to 5-
HMF and lactic acid in aqueous and organic media,” Appl. Catal. Gen., vol. 555, pp. 
75–87, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.apcata.2018.01.029. 
[19]  B. Ward, “Bacterial Energy Metabolism,” in Molecular Medical Microbiology, 
Elsevier, 2015, pp. 201–233. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-397169-2.00011-1. 
[20]  J. McMurry, Organic Chemistry with Biological Application, 3rd ed. 2014. 
[21]  F. Bloch, W. W. Hansen, and M. Packard, “Nuclear Induction,” Phys. Rev., vol. 69, 
no. 3–4, pp. 127–127, Feb. 1946, doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.69.127. 
[22]  E. M. Purcell, H. C. Torrey, and R. V. Pound, “Resonance Absorption by Nuclear 
Magnetic Moments in a Solid,” Phys. Rev., vol. 69, no. 1–2, pp. 37–38, Jan. 1946, doi: 
10.1103/PhysRev.69.37. 
[23]  T. D. W. Claridge, High-Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemiatry. Elsevier, 
2016. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-099986-9.00001-4. 
==PAGE:62==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 56 
 
 
 
[24]  D. L. Pavia, Ed., Introduction to spectroscopy, 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole, 
Cengage Learning, 2009. 
[25]  J. Keeler, Understanding NMR spectroscopy. Chichester, England ; Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley, 2005. 
[26]  F. A. A. Mulder, L. Tenori, and C. Luchinat, “Fast and Quantitative NMR Metabolite 
Analysis Afforded by a Paramagnetic Co‐Solute,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., vol. 58, no. 
43, pp. 15283–15286, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1002/anie.201908006. 
[27]  A. R. E. Hansen, K. Enemark-Rasmussen, F. A. A. Mulder, P. R. Jensen, and S. 
Meier, “Versatile Procedures for Reliable NMR Quantification of CO 2 Electroreduction 
Products,” J. Phys. Chem. C, vol. 126, no. 27, pp. 11026–11032, Jul. 2022, doi: 
10.1021/acs.jpcc.2c03448. 
[28]  S. Patching, “NMR-Active Nuclei for Biological and Biomedical Applications,” J. 
Diagn. Imaging Ther., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 7–48, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.17229/jdit.2016-0618-
021. 
[29]  F. Fardus-Reid, J. Warren, and A. Le Gresley, “Validating heteronuclear 2D 
quantitative NMR,” Anal. Methods, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 2013–2019, 2016, doi: 
10.1039/C6AY00111D. 
[30]  G. F. Pauli, B. U. Jaki, and D. C. Lankin, “Quantitative 1 H NMR: Development and 
Potential of a Method for Natural Products Analysis,” J. Nat. Prod., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 
133–149, Jan. 2005, doi: 10.1021/np0497301. 
[31]  G. F. Pauli, T. Gödecke, B. U. Jaki, and D. C. Lankin, “Quantitative 1 H NMR. 
Development and Potential of an Analytical Method: An Update,” J. Nat. Prod., vol. 75, 
no. 4, pp. 834–851, Apr. 2012, doi: 10.1021/np200993k. 
[32]  P. Diamantakos, K. Ioannidis, C. Papanikolaou, A. Tsolakou, A. Rigakou, E. Melliou, 
and P. Magiatis, “A New Definition of the Term ‘High-Phenolic Olive Oil’ Based on 
Large Scale Statistical Data of Greek Olive Oils Analyzed by qNMR,” Molecules, vol. 
26, no. 4, p. 1115, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.3390/molecules26041115. 
[33]  B. U. Jaki, A. Bzhelyansky, and G. F. Pauli, “Quantitative NMR (qNMR) for 
pharmaceutical analysis: The pioneering work of George Hanna at the US FDA,” Magn. 
Reson. Chem., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 7–15, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1002/mrc.5099. 
[34]  H. C. Kim, Y.-J. Ko, and C. Jo, “Potential of 2D qNMR spectroscopy for 
distinguishing chicken breeds based on the metabolic differences,” Food Chem., vol. 
342, p. 128316, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128316. 
[35]  R. A. Wind, M. J. Duijvestijn, C. van der Lugt, A. Manenschijn, and J. Vriend, 
“Applications of dynamic nuclear polarization in 13C NMR in solids,” Prog. Nucl. 
Magn. Reson. Spectrosc., vol. 17, pp. 33–67, 1985, doi: 10.1016/0079-6565(85)80005-
4. 
==PAGE:63==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 57 
 
 
 
[36]  M. Negroni, D. Guarin, K. Che, L. M. Epasto, E. Turhan, A. Selimović, F. Kozak, S. 
Cousin, D. Abergel, G. Bodenhausen, and D. Kurzbach, “Inversion of Hyperpolarized 13 
C NMR Signals through Cross-Correlated Cross-Relaxation in Dissolution DNP 
Experiments,” J. Phys. Chem. B, vol. 126, no. 24, pp. 4599–4610, Jun. 2022, doi: 
10.1021/acs.jpcb.2c03375. 
[37]  O. Szekely, G. L. Olsen, I. C. Felli, and L. Frydman, “High-Resolution 2D NMR of 
Disordered Proteins Enhanced by Hyperpolarized Water,” Anal. Chem., vol. 90, no. 10, 
pp. 6169–6177, May 2018, doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00585. 
[38]  M. Ragavan, L. I. Iconaru, C. Park, R. W. Kriwacki, and C. Hilty, “Real‐Time 
Analysis of Folding upon Binding of a Disordered Protein by Using Dissolution DNP 
NMR Spectroscopy,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., vol. 56, no. 25, pp. 7070–7073, Jun. 2017, 
doi: 10.1002/anie.201700464. 
[39]  G. L. Olsen, O. Szekely, B. Mateos, P. Kadeřávek, F. Ferrage, R. Konrat, R. 
Pierattelli, I. C. Felli, G. Bodenhausen, D. Kurzbach, and L. Frydman, “Sensitivity-
enhanced three-dimensional and carbon-detected two-dimensional NMR of proteins 
using hyperpolarized water,” J. Biomol. NMR, vol. 74, no. 2–3, pp. 161–171, Mar. 2020, 
doi: 10.1007/s10858-020-00301-5. 
[40]  D. Kurzbach, E. Canet, A. G. Flamm, A. Jhajharia, E. M. M. Weber, R. Konrat, and 
G. Bodenhausen, “Investigation of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins through Exchange 
with Hyperpolarized Water,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 389–392, Jan. 
2017, doi: 10.1002/anie.201608903. 
[41]  E. Miclet, D. Abergel, A. Bornet, J. Milani, S. Jannin, and G. Bodenhausen, “Toward 
Quantitative Measurements of Enzyme Kinetics by Dissolution Dynamic Nuclear 
Polarization,” J. Phys. Chem. Lett., vol. 5, no. 19, pp. 3290–3295, Oct. 2014, doi: 
10.1021/jz501411d. 
[42]  J.-N. Dumez, J. Milani, B. Vuichoud, A. Bornet, J. Lalande-Martin, I. Tea, M. Yon, 
M. Maucourt, C. Deborde, A. Moing, L. Frydman, G. Bodenhausen, S. Jannin, and P. 
Giraudeau, “Hyperpolarized NMR of plant and cancer cell extracts at natural 
abundance,” The Analyst, vol. 140, no. 17, pp. 5860–5863, 2015, doi: 
10.1039/C5AN01203A. 
[43]  A. Dey, B. Charrier, E. Martineau, C. Deborde, E. Gandriau, A. Moing, D. Jacob, D. 
Eshchenko, M. Schnell, R. Melzi, D. Kurzbach, M. Ceillier, Q. Chappuis, S. F. Cousin, 
J. G. Kempf, S. Jannin, J.-N. Dumez, and P. Giraudeau, “Hyperpolarized NMR 
Metabolomics at Natural 13 C Abundance,” Anal. Chem., vol. 92, no. 22, pp. 14867–
14871, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c03510. 
[44]  T. Kress, A. Walrant, G. Bodenhausen, and D. Kurzbach, “Long-Lived States in 
Hyperpolarized Deuterated Methyl Groups Reveal Weak Binding of Small Molecules to 
Proteins,” J. Phys. Chem. Lett., vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1523–1529, Apr. 2019, doi: 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b00149. 
==PAGE:64==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 58 
 
 
 
[45]  Y. Kim, M. Liu, and C. Hilty, “Parallelized Ligand Screening Using Dissolution 
Dynamic Nuclear Polarization,” Anal. Chem., vol. 88, no. 22, pp. 11178–11183, Nov. 
2016, doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03382. 
[46]  P. Atkins and J. De Paula, Physical Chemistry, 9.th. Oxford University Press, 2010. 
[47]  E. Taarning, I. Sádaba, P. R. Jensen, and S. Meier, “Discovery and Exploration of the 
Efficient Acyclic Dehydration of Hexoses in Dimethyl Sulfoxide/Water,” 
ChemSusChem, vol. 12, no. 23, pp. 5086–5091, Dec. 2019, doi: 
10.1002/cssc.201902322. 
[48]  J. Clayden, N. Greeves, and S. G. Warren, Organic chemistry, 2nd ed. Oxford ; New 
YorK: Oxford University Press, 2012. 
[49]  J. E. McMurry, “Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry,” p. 677. 
[50]  S. Van de Vyver, C. Odermatt, K. Romero, T. Prasomsri, and Y. Román-Leshkov, 
“Solid Lewis Acids Catalyze the Carbon–Carbon Coupling between Carbohydrates and 
Formaldehyde,” ACS Catal., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 972–977, Feb. 2015, doi: 
10.1021/cs5015964. 
[51]  D. S. Bohle, Z. Chua, I. Perepichka, and K. Rosadiuk, “Lewis acid stabilization and 
activation of primary N-nitrosamides,” RSC Adv., vol. 7, no. 14, pp. 8205–8219, 2017, 
doi: 10.1039/C6RA24421A. 
[52]  D. Esposito and M. Antonietti, “Chemical Conversion of Sugars to Lactic Acid by 
Alkaline Hydrothermal Processes,” ChemSusChem, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 989–992, Jun. 
2013, doi: 10.1002/cssc.201300092. 
[53]  Z. Wang, C. Mo, S. Xu, S. Chen, T. Deng, W. Zhu, and H. Wang, “Ca(OH)2 induced 
a controlled-release catalytic system for the efficient conversion of high-concentration 
glucose to lactic acid,” Mol. Catal., vol. 502, p. 111406, Feb. 2021, doi: 
10.1016/j.mcat.2021.111406. 
[54]  A. J. Wolfe, “Glycolysis for Microbiome Generation,” Microbiol. Spectr., vol. 3, no. 
3, p. 3.3.14, Jun. 2015, doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0014-2014. 
[55]  M. Papagianni, “METABOLIC ENGINEERING OF LACTIC ACID BACTERIA 
FOR THE PRODUCTION OF INDUSTRIALLY IMPORTANT COMPOUNDS,” 
Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J., vol. 3, no. 4, p. e201210003, Oct. 2012, doi: 
10.5936/csbj.201210003. 
[56]  Z. Xu, Y. Yang, P. Yan, Z. Xia, X. Liu, and Z. C. Zhang, “Mechanistic understanding 
of humin formation in the conversion of glucose and fructose to 5-
hydroxymethylfurfural in [BMIM]Cl ionic liquid,” RSC Adv., vol. 10, no. 57, pp. 
34732–34737, 2020, doi: 10.1039/D0RA05641C. 
==PAGE:65==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 59 
 
 
 
[57]  S. K. R. Patil, J. Heltzel, and C. R. F. Lund, “Comparison of Structural Features of 
Humins Formed Catalytically from Glucose, Fructose, and 5-
Hydroxymethylfurfuraldehyde,” Energy Fuels, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 5281–5293, Aug. 
2012, doi: 10.1021/ef3007454. 
[58]  J. Horvat, B. Klaic, B. Meletko, and V. Sunjic, “Mechanisms of Levulinic Acid 
Formation in Acid Catalysed Hydrolysis of 2-hydroxymethylfurane and 5-
Hydroxymethylfurane-2-carbaldehyde,” Inst. Dep. Org. Chem. Biochem., 1985. 
[59]  V. Maruani, S. Narayanin-Richenapin, E. Framery, and B. Andrioletti, “Acidic 
Hydrothermal Dehydration of D -Glucose into Humins: Identification and 
Characterization of Intermediates,” ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 13487–
13493, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b03479. 
[60]  S. Dutta, “Catalytic materials that improve selectivity of biomass conversions,” RSC 
Adv., vol. 2, no. 33, p. 12575, 2012, doi: 10.1039/c2ra20922e. 
[61]  N. Shi, Q. Liu, H. Cen, R. Ju, X. He, and L. Ma, “Formation of humins during 
degradation of carbohydrates and furfural derivatives in various solvents,” Biomass 
Convers. Biorefinery, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 277–287, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1007/s13399-019-
00414-4. 
[62]  X. Yang, C. O. Gill, and S. Balamurugan, “Products of Glucose and Lactate 
Fermentation, and Utilization of Amino Acids by Clostridium estertheticum subspp. 
laramiense and estertheticum Growing in Meat Juice Medium,” J. Food Prot., vol. 73, 
no. 7, pp. 1348–1352, Jul. 2010, doi: 10.4315/0362-028X-73.7.1348. 
[63]  Y. M. Questell-Santiago, R. Zambrano-Varela, M. Talebi Amiri, and J. S. 
Luterbacher, “Carbohydrate stabilization extends the kinetic limits of chemical 
polysaccharide depolymerization,” Nat. Chem., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 1222–1228, Dec. 
2018, doi: 10.1038/s41557-018-0134-4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 60 
 
 
 
8 Appendix 
A 
Ba(OH)4 chemocatalytic conversion of carbohydrates (Article draft) 
 
==PAGE:67==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 61 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 62 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 63 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 64 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 65 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 66 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 67 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 68 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 69 
 
 
 
Supporting Information 
 
Pathways and their usage in the conversion of 
carbohydrates by aqueous barium hydroxide: insights from 
hyperpolarized and quantitative NMR 
 
Allan R.E. Hansen,a Pernille R. Jensen,b and Sebastian Meiera* 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 70 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S1. D-DNP experiment showing the conversion of hyperpolarized [U-2H, 13C] glucose 
in the presence of barium hydroxide. A time series of 13C NMR spectra was acquired by 
exciting a 13C NMR spectrum using a 10° flip angle pulse each second. The sum spectrum for 
the first 60 spectra acquired after glucose injection into 0.25 M Ba(OH)2 at 333 K is shown 
on top, clarifying the presence of signal near 40.5 ppm (tentatively assigned to C3 of 3-
deoxyglucosone), a broader population near 37 ppm (tentatively assigned to metasaccharinic 
acid C3) and 20 ppm (lactate C3). Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 6 mM 
hyperpolarized [2-13C] fructose, 60 °C, D2O.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 71 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S2. Selective 1H-13C HMBC acquired on post-reaction material of glucose 
conversion by barium hydroxide. Correlations of alcoholic CH signals at C2 and 
aliphatic groups at C3 to the carboxylic acid groups in lactate and in analogous 
metasaccharinic acids of length C4-C& are shown. Reaction conditions: 250 mM 
Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 30 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, 24 hours. 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 72 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S3. 1H diffusion ordered spectroscopy (DOSY NMR) on the product mixture 
after conversion of glucose in aqueous barium hydroxide, showing the presence of 
minor formic acid in addition to lactic acid and larger metasaccharinic acid signals, 
where the latter show signals of alcohol and methylene groups. Reaction conditions: 
250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 30 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, D2O solvent, 24 
hours. 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S4. Time course of quantified chemicals in the conversion of glucose by 
aqueous barium hydroxide. Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 
20 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, variable time. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 74 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S5. Time course of quantified chemicals in the conversion of glucose by 
aqueous barium hydroxide. Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 
30 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, variable time. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 75 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S6. Time course of quantified chemicals in the conversion of glucose by 
aqueous barium hydroxide. Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 
40 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, variable time. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S7. Time course of quantified chemicals in the conversion of glucose by 
aqueous barium hydroxide. Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 
50 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, variable time. 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S8. Time course for substrate signal area (anomeric Glc−pyr signal) in the 1H -
NMR detected conversion of glucose by aqueous barium hydroxide. Data were 
acquired on an 800 MHz instrument equipped with a TCI cryoprobe with a time 
resolution between individual 1H NMR spectra of 3.1 minutes.  Reaction conditions: 
250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, 30 °C, 90% H2O/10% D2O solvent (500 l). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 78 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S9. Arrhenius plot for the conversion of glucose in aqueous barium hydroxide at 
293 K, 303 K, 313 K and 323 K as shown in Figs. S10-S13. Reaction rate constants 
derive from a first order kinetics (exponential fit) of the substrate signal. Arrhenius 
analysis yields an energy of activation of 102+/-5 kJ/mol.  
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S10. Time course for carbohydrate anomeric signals in the 13C -NMR detected 
conversion of [1-13C] glucose by aqueous barium hydroxide. Data were acquired on 
an 800 MHz instrument equipped with a TCI cryoprobe with a time resolution 
between individual 13C NMR spectra of 12.5 minutes. Reaction conditions: 250 mM 
Ba(OH)2, 100 mM [1-13C] glucose, 40 °C, 90% H2O/10% D2O solvent (500 l). 
 
 
  
 
 
==PAGE:86==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S11. Individual 13C NMR spectrum from the time series shown in Fig. S1 with 
chemicals and 13C positions assigned to the most prominent NMR signals.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 81 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S12. 1H-13C HSQC spectrum for the identification of the characteristic 
dihydroxyacetone CH signal by comparison of the reaction mixture (blue) and 
authentic reference standard (grey). Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 20 mM 
[1-13C] glucose, 30 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, 4 hours reaction time. 
 
==PAGE:88==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 82 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S13. 1H NMR spectra (800 MHz) acquired after the conversion of 100 mM 
glucose at variable temperatures by barium hydroxide. Spectra indicate that 
metasaccharinic acid formation (multiplets between 1.6 and 2.0 ppm) does not 
systematically depend on the substrate concentration. Reaction conditions: 250 mM 
Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, variable temperature as indicated, nitrogen atmosphere, 
H2O, after 24 hours (30, 40, 50 ºC) and after 48 hours for the reaction at 20 ºC. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 83 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S14. 1H NMR spectra (800 MHz) acquired after the conversion of 100 mM 
glucose or xylose and 25 mM erythrose by queous barium hydroxide. Spectra 
indicate that metasaccharinic acid formation (multiplets between 1.6 and 2.0 ppm) 
increase at shorter substrate length relative to lactate (doublet at 1.25 ppm). 
Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM glucose, variable temperature as 
indicated, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O, after 24 hours (30 ºC, 40 ºC, and 50 ºC) and 
after 48 hours for the reaction at 20 ºC. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 84 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S15. 1H NMR spectra (800 MHz) acquired after the conversion of various 
glucose concentrations as indicated by barium hydroxide. Spectra are normalized to 
identical lactate signal areas (doublet at 1.25 ppm) and indicate that metasaccharinic 
acid formation (multiplets between 1.6 and 2.0 ppm) does not strongly depend on the 
substrate concentration. Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, variable glucose 
concentrations as indicated, nitrogen atmosphere, 30 ºC temperature, H2O solvent, 
24 hours. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 85 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S16. 1H -NMR spectrum acquired after the conversion of C4 carbohydrates by 
barium hydroxide, showing the high fraction of metasaccharinic acid (multiplets at 
1.6-2 ppm) and branched byproduct, especially from intrinsically acyclic erythrulose 
substrate. Reaction conditions: 250 mM Ba(OH)2, 100 mM erythrulose or 25 mM 
threose, 30 ºC, nitrogen atmosphere, H2O solvent, 24 hours. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 86 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S17. Relative distributions between lactate and longer 3-deoxy acid products by 
barium hydroxide, showing increasing competition of metasaccharinic acid formation 
with lactate formation for higher acyclic substrate fraction (the fraction of acyclic 
species increases from left to right). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 87 
 
 
 
B 
SnCl4 chemocatalytic conversion of carbohydrates (Article draft) 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 88 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 89 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 90 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 91 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 92 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 93 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 94 
 
 
 
Supporting Information 
Role of individual OH groups in carbohydrate conversion and 
polymerization pathways  
 
Sebastian Meier[#]*, Allan R Hansen,[#] and Pernille Rose Jensen[+] 
 
[#]Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet, Building 207, 2800 Kgs 
Lyngby (Denmark), [+]Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Elektrovej 
349, 2800 Kgs Lyngby (Denmark) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S1. Correlation between the formation of (E)-2,5 dihydroxypentenoic acid (acyclic 
unsaturated acid) or 4,5-dihydroxycyclopent-2-en-1-one (cyclic pentenone) with formation of 
furfural in the experiment of main text Figure 1. A diagonal line corresponding to equal 
amounts of furfural and (E)-2,5 dihydroxypentenoic acid is shown as a guide to the eye. 
Formation of furfural and cyclic pentanone are highly correlated. Formation of acyclic 
unsaturated acid is initially more prominent than furfural formation, which increases upon 
accumulation of the Brønsted acid. 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 96 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S2. Signal of acyclic (E)-2,5 dihydroxypentenoic acid in the 1H-13C HSQC spectra 
obtained after conversion of the four different aldopentoses (arabinose, xylose, ribose, and 
xylose) by Sn(IV) in DMSO/water. Reaction conditions: 300 mM (deoxy)carbohydrate, 30 
mM SnCl4·5H2O, DMSO/water (85%/15%), 70 °C, 40 h. 
 
==PAGE:103==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 97 
 
 
 
 
Figure S3. Intermediates and products identified in the conversion of 5-deoxyarabinose. 1H 
and 13C chemical shift assignments are shown in blue. 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 98 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S4. Kinetic experiments for the conversion of arabinose (A) and 5-deoxyarabinose 
(B) showing the presence of furfural (signals between 5.6 and 9.5 ppm) only in the presence 
of arabinose, while 5-deoxyarabinose yields a much more selective conversion to acyclic 
unsaturated acid. Reaction conditions: 300 mM (deoxy)carbohydrate, 30 mM SnCl4·5H2O, 
DMSO/water (85%/15%), 70 °C, variable time as indicated. 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S5. Formation of humins as evident from discoloration of the reaction mixture upon 
conversion (from left to right) of arabinose, 5-deoxyarabinose, 2-deoxyribose, and ribose. 
Both 5-deoxyarabinose and 2-deoxyribose exhibit less humin formation, indicating that 
hydroxy groups in both positions contribute to the formation of humin polymers. Reaction 
conditions: 300 mM (deoxy)carbohydrate, 30 mM SnCl4·5H2O, DMSO/water (85%/15%), 70 
°C, variable time as indicated. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:106==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S6. Products formed from various deoxysugars as indicated. 1H and 13C chemical 
shift assignments are shown in blue. Reaction conditions: 300 mM (deoxy)carbohydrate, 30 
mM SnCl4·5H2O, DMSO/water  (85%/15%), 70 °C, variable tome as indicated. Reaction 
conditions: 300 mM deoxysugars, 30 mM SnCL4·5H2O, DMSO/water (85%/15%), 70 °C (2-
deoxyribose) or 90 °C (3-deoxyglucose and 2-deoxyglucose), 40 h. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 101 
 
 
 
C 
Article on Quantitative NMR (qNMR) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 102 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 103 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 104 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 105 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 106 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:113==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 108 
 
 
 
Versatile Procedures for the Reliable NMR Quantification 
of CO2 Electroreduction Products 
 
 
 
Allan R.E. Hansen,a Kasper Enemark-Rasmussen,a Frans A.A. Mulder,b Pernille R. 
Jensen,c and Sebastian Meiera* 
aDepartment of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet, Building 207, 2800 Kgs 
Lyngby, Denmark;  
bInstitute of Biochemistry, Johannes Kepler University, 4020 Linz, Austria 
cDepartment of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Elektrovej 349, 2800 Kgs Lyngby, 
Denmark 
*Email: semei@kemi.dtu.dk  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 109 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S1. Selected 1H T1 values (for signals significantly distant from the water signal) at 
298 K (9.4 T field) and pH 7.5 in synthetic mixtures of C1 and C2 compounds at 0 mM (red), 
0.4 mM (blue) and 1.0 mM (black) gadoteridol. Dimethyl sulfone is included as a prospective 
quantification standard. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S2. Representative 1H NMR spectra (400 MHz) in the absence and in the presence of 
gadoteridol indicate that lne broadening effects are easily acceptable at 1.0 mM gadoteridol, 
leading to line widths on the order of 2 Hz. Line widths for the standard DMSO2 are given. 
  
 
==PAGE:117==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S3. 13C T1 values at 298 K (18.7 T field) in a synthetic mixture of C1 and C2 alcohols 
and acids in dependence on the gadoteridol concentration. With increasing Gd(III) 
concentrations, 13C T1 values successively decrease to 3.2-4.9 s (1 mM Gd(III)), 0.4-1.2 s (5 
mM Gd(III)) and 0.2-0.8 s (10 mM Gd(III)). Hence, quantitative 13C NMR spectra could 
employ a pulse-repetition period of 4 seconds (>5T1, longest) at 10 mM Gd(III). 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 112 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S4. Overlay of 1H-13C HSQC spectra recorded on a mixture containing formaldehyde, 
ethylene glycol, methanol and dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2) at 310 K in the absence (top) and 
in the presence of 1.0 mM Gd(III) at various recycle delays. Spectra using different recycle 
delays overlap and are shifted horizontally for clarity (recycle delay 1 s is shifted by 
approximately +0.04 ppm, recycle delay 10 s is shifted by approximately by -0.04 mM). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
Master project 
DTU Health Tech /  DTU Chemistry 
s162003 
 
 
 
Page - 113 
 
 
 
 
Figure S5. Paramagnetic relaxation optimized 1H-13C HSQC spectrum recorded on a mixture 
containing formaldehyde, ethylene glycol, methanol and dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2) at 310 K 
in the presence of 1.0 mM Gd(III) with a recycle delay of 1 s. A spectral width of 1 ppm in 
the 13C dimension was used around the 13C chemical shift of hydrated formaldehyde. In the 
13C dimension, nonuniform sampling of 12.5% of the data points resulted in a SNR of 
approximately 600 for a sample of 8 mM formaldehyde concentration within 6 minutes of 
experiment time, thus providing a lower limit of detection of 40 M formaldehyde. The 13C 
dimension in the 2D spectrum (blue trace) achieves full resolution as evident from 
comparison to a less sensitive and more time consuming 1D 13C NMR spectrum (grey trace). 
 
