==PAGE:1==
 
Easy Configuration of Smart Homes 
by Non-technical Users 
 
Danial Virk 
 
Kongens Lyngby 2022 
 
==PAGE:2==
Page 2 of 36 
 
Abstract 
In this thesis, there will be discussed what the problems is with the current state of smart 
homes for certain types of people. These people are the one who wants to use smart home 
technology but doesn’t have the knowledge to set it up without help. In this project there 
will be looked at openHAB, and what it can provide for these users.  
A research is found out people meet barriers when setting up home automation. This is 
tested with using OpenHAB. OpenHAB is an open-source platform. It communicates 
with the smart devices installed in the house and connect them all to one place. OpenHAB 
has some problems with less technical users. OpenHAB is not user-friendly for people 
with less technical background. With a design idea made in this thesis, an attempt to 
remove the complication, is made. The idea is to automate the setup process and give the 
user predefined settings, which they can edit themselves later on. This helps the user not 
to worry about unnecessary steps, such as giving locations in openHAB two names.  
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Page 3 of 36 
 
Resume 
I dette speciale vil der blive diskuteret omkring problemerne med smart homes for nogle 
typer af mennesker. Disse mennesker som bliver snakket om, er folk som gerne vil have 
smart homes, men ikke har viden nok til at installere det, uden at få hjælp. I dette projekt 
vil der blive kigget på openHAB og hvad den kan tilbyde disse brugere. En forskning har 
fundet frem til at folk møder barrikader når de installerer smart devices hos dem selv. Det 
vil blive testet med openHAB. 
OpenHAB er en open-sourceplatform. Den står for ansvaret om at kommunikere med 
smart devices og tilknytte dem alle sammen til et sted. Et af problemerne med openHAB 
er at den ikke er brugervenlige for folk med mindre teknisk baggrund. Med en ide til et 
design til openHAB er blevet lavet. Idéen bag designet er at fjerne processen hvor brugere 
skal udføre mange forskellige opgaver for at få system op og køre. Dette kan blive gjort 
ved at automatisere processen og fjerne ligegyldige trin som disse bruger ikke behøver at 
bruge tid på.  
 
==PAGE:4==
Page 4 of 36 
 
Contents 
Abstract ........................................................................................................................... 2 
Resume ............................................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................ 5 
1.1 
Project Description .......................................................................................... 5 
1.2 
Problem ............................................................................................................. 6 
1.3 
Requirements ................................................................................................... 6 
1.4 
Project Scope .................................................................................................... 7 
1.5 
Related work .................................................................................................... 7 
1.6 
Report Outline .................................................................................................. 8 
2. 
Methodology ............................................................................................................ 9 
2.1 
Design science ................................................................................................... 9 
2.2 
Literature research ........................................................................................ 13 
3. 
Analysis .................................................................................................................. 14 
3.1 
How to use openHAB ..................................................................................... 14 
3.2 
OpenHAB Technical ...................................................................................... 20 
4. 
Design idea for a solution ..................................................................................... 24 
4.1 
Problems with openHAB ............................................................................... 24 
4.2 
Testing openHAB ........................................................................................... 25 
4.3 
Design solution ............................................................................................... 27 
5. 
Implementation ..................................................................................................... 31 
5.1 
OpenHAB add-on .......................................................................................... 31 
6. 
Discussion .............................................................................................................. 33 
7. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................. 35 
References ..................................................................................................................... 36 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Page 5 of 36 
 
1. Introduction 
This chapter will begin with the description of the project in section 1. The requirements 
are later defined to. The prioritization of each requirement is stated and justified in the 
project scope in section 1.4. Finally, an overview in section 1.6 describes the upcoming 
chapters and how they contribute to achieving the goals. 
1.1  Project Description 
A smart home according to Winkler is a home which can proactively change its 
environment so it can provide services that promote an independent lifestyle for the 
elder generation. Winkler only talks about smart homes for elder generation (Winkler, 
2002). 
Satpathy’s definition of a smart home is: “A home which is smart enough to assist the 
inhabitants to live independently and comfortably with the help of technology is termed 
as smart home. In a smart home, all the mechanical and digital devices are 
interconnected to form a network, which can communicate with each other and with the 
user to create an interactive space” (Satpathy, 2006). However, Satpathy does not 
include remote access.  
We can define a smart home as a home which can be accessed remotely and provide the 
users context aware automated services. This can be in the form of remote home 
control, home automation or ambient intelligence. A smart home should have an 
internal network, intelligent control, and home automation. This can be done by 
products that can control lights, heat, opening or closing windows. The smartness of a 
system is achieved though connecting devices through Internet of Things (Moorhead, 
2013). 
Internal networks can be wire, cable, or wireless networks. Intelligent control is a 
gateway to manage the featured systems, and home automation is products inside the 
home to help the users. 
According to ComfyLiving there have been an estimated total of 41 million smart 
homes in the United State. It is expected to be 84 million smart homes in the EU by the 
end of 2022 and 63 million smart homes in the US (Cvetkovska, 2022). 
==PAGE:6==
Page 6 of 36 
 
1.2  Problem 
According to a research paper made in 2017, it is challenging for users with less 
technological background to setup smart homes because of the configuration interfaces. 
These configuration interfaces are complex, and they need to provide sufficient 
expressiveness to support the users (Brich, Walch, Rietzler, Weber, & Schaub, 2017).  
Another research paper made in 2017, a group of student made a test to see where users 
get stuck when setting up a smart home device. Some of these barriers comes in an early 
stage, which indicates setting up a device is not an easy task for everyone (Kaaz, 2017).  
The problem which this project will be solving is to make it easier for the users to setup 
advanced home automation without being overwhelmed with a configuration interface. 
This problem can be addressed as following: 
“How can a person with almost no technical background, setup a smart home which 
enables advanced home automation” 
To answer this question, few questions have been giving to make it easier to find the 
answer: 
1) What is a smart home? 
2) Which kind of people would be interested to use it? 
3) What are some of their limitations? 
4) How can a solution look like for these people 
1.3  Requirements 
In this section, the requirements will be described. These requirements should be 
achieved during the work of this thesis. It is important that the requirements are clear, so 
it is possible to do analysis.  
Requirement 1: Easy to find devices 
When setting up a smart house, it should be available for the owner to see all the 
devices. The list should contain the Id, the name of the devices if it is possible.  
Requirement 2: Easy to setup rules/room with IOT devices 
When the owner wants to setup a room, they should be able to with creating rules. 
These rules can be created as a hierarchy, where some rules overrule other rules.  
==PAGE:7==
Page 7 of 36 
 
Requirement 3: Easy to add new devices to an existing smart home. 
The owner can buy new devices to add for his house, therefore it should be an easy task 
for them to add it to existing rules.  
Requirement 4: Add unbranded devices 
When creating your own device or buying a 3rd market device with no branding, it 
should be able to be connected to the smart house and be used with other devices.  
Requirement 5: Ensure data privacy 
Smart houses have a lot of devices which can collect data. These data need to be 
protected so only the household have access to them. 
Requirement 6: Insight data 
As mentioned in the goal before, the data needs to be protected but should be able to be 
presented to the owner. 
1.4  Project Scope 
This thesis will mainly focus on the requirements 2 and 3. The goal for the thesis is to 
create an effortless way for non-tech people to create smart homes with their devices. 
Therefor will goal 2 and 3 have the highest priority.  
1.5  Related work 
In a research paper done by a group in Oregon State University, they discussed about 
barriers a user may face when setting up configuration for their smart homes. They ran 
tests and investigated three aspects. Most of their participants faced the barrier when 
they were asked to find the right app, setting up the network and had to follow the 
instructions in the device packaging (Kaaz, 2017). 
They found that the most significant barrier was already at the start, when the 
participants had to install the right app. The reason behind this, was because there are 
many fake apps with close to the same name as the manufacturer. The second barrier the 
participants faced was setting up the device. The devices they needed to setup was 
marked as “play n’ play,” meaning it would be a simple setup, with almost no 
configuration required. But the group discovered the participants weren’t happy with 
how many steps it required to setup various smart devices. The group tested the 
participants on setting the devices up on the network. This came with a lot of confusion 
==PAGE:8==
Page 8 of 36 
 
and frustration. Some of the devices needed to jump between apps, and some apps 
didn’t give clear instructions how to implement the network (Kaaz, 2017).  
1.6  Report Outline 
Throughout this report, there will be a section where which methods has been used, and 
there will be an analysis of openHAB. In this section there will be walk through of how 
to use openHAB. The design of the solution will be discussed and how the design will 
be able to solve. The implementation will explain how the implementation went and 
what has been done. The discussion will be about what is achieved and what can be 
learn, and what is missing. At the end there will be a conclusion about what is achieved.  
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Page 9 of 36 
 
2. Methodology 
This in chapter there will describe what method has been used throughout this thesis. The 
sections will cover design science, what it is, and it will be used in the thesis. 
2.1 Design science 
Design science is a research method, with the focus on the development and validation. 
It is fundamentally a problem-solving paradigm. According to Hevner, the design science 
research seeks to enhance knowledge with design knowledge and creation of innovative 
artifacts through innovative solutions to problems (Hevner, March, Park, & Ram, 2004). 
2.1.1 Design science guidelines 
In 2004 Hevner created the table as seen below, to create guidelines for design sciences 
research. These are guidelines you should follow when setting up your design science 
research protocol. This will help to setting up the design science protocol.  
 
Table 1 - (Hevner, March, Park, & Ram, 2004) 
2.1.2 Design science process 
The design science research methodology process model is shown in figure 1. This 
process has six steps as follows: Problem identification and motivation, define object of 
==PAGE:10==
Page 10 of 36 
 
a solution, design and development, demonstration, evaluation, and communication. 
There is also four entry points as follows: Problem-centred initiation, objective-centred 
solution, design and development-centred initiation and client/context initiation. This 
model is created by Peffers, Tuunanen, Rothenberger and Chatterjee 
 
Figure 1 (Peffers, Tuunanen, Rothenberger, & Chatterjee, 2007) 
Problem identification and motivation:  
This activity defines the specific research problem and justifies the value of a solution. 
This helps the researcher to get more motivated and the audience to pursue the solution 
and appreciate the researcher’s understanding of the problem.  
Define the objectives for a solution: 
Defining the objectives for a solution can be inferred from the problem definition and 
also the knowledge of what can be possible and feasible. The objectives can be either 
quantitative or  qualitative. By quantitative the desirable solution would be better than 
current ones. The qualitative is how a new artifact is expected to support solution to 
problems.  
Design and development.  
An artifact can be any designed object. This includes determining the desired 
functionality and the architecture and then creating the actual artifact.  
Demonstration.  
==PAGE:11==
Page 11 of 36 
 
This activity shows the use of the artifact, which solves one or mode instances of the 
problem. This can be shown as experimentations, simulation, case studies or proof.  
Evaluation.  
The activity evaluation will measure how good or bad the artifact supports a solution to 
the problem. This can be comparing the objectives of a solution to actual observed results 
from the artifact. This can lead to the researcher to go back to step three and try and 
improve or continue to the next step. 
Communication.  
In this activity all the aspects of the problem and designed artifact are communicated to 
the stakeholders.  
2.1.3 Design science framework 
In figure 2 it has been visualized of the design science framework, created by Hevner. 
In the figure there are three pillars. Those pillars are Environment, Design science 
research and Scientific knowledge.  
In the first pillar, which is the environment, it consists of people, organizations, and 
technology that is involved. The second pillar is the design science research. The goal of 
the design science research is to develop or build an artifact. It means whenever you 
design something it has to be relevant for the environment, so for the people that will 
use it and organization that will adopt it and the technology that will be involved. If it is 
not relevant it will not solve any problems.  
 
==PAGE:12==
Page 12 of 36 
 
 
Figure Number 2 
2.1.4 Design science evaluation 
When after creating the artifact, it is important to evaluate it. Hevner and others has 
created a table to guide the users how to evaluate. This table can be seen in the table 
below. This will be used to evaluate the design of the product. This will give enough 
data to determine if the artifact has solved the problem or if it should be redesigned. 
 
Table 2 - (Hevner, March, Park, & Ram, 2004) 
==PAGE:13==
Page 13 of 36 
 
2.2  Literature research 
There has been a few research papers around smart homes and home automation. One 
of these papers has run some test of configuring home automation, and since this project 
is about helping people with less technology knowledge to setup smart homes, it would 
make sense to see what they have found out. The paper is called: “Understanding user 
perceptions of privacy, and configuration challenges in home automation.”  They made  
participants do some setups with some smart devices. This test can be used to find out if 
the new system design is going to be better or not. The group talks about barriers when 
a user gets stuck and needs help to progress in their setup. Another research group has 
made the same discovery about barriers when a user needs to setup smart homes. This 
group released their paper in 2013 (Balta-Ozkan, Davidson, Bicket, & Whitmarsh, 
2013). 
As a reminder the first paper was published in 2017, which makes it 5 years ago from 
today and the other one is 9 years old. A lot have happened since, and technology has 
evolved a lot. To test if this is still an issue, a small test of the same style will be made. 
==PAGE:14==
Page 14 of 36 
 
3. Analysis 
In this chapter there will be described what openHAB is, and what it can provide. The 
first part of the chapter will describe how to use openHAB and how to install various 
device. The next part will be covering the more technical aspect of openHAB. This 
includes how the community is able to be a part of openHAB. 
3.1  How to use openHAB 
After installing openHAB on a raspberry Pi or on a PC, the user needs to create an admin 
login for the first time. After creating the account, the user can login to openHAB and 
start configuring and setting up their smart home. OpenHAB uses role-based access. 
These roles present two different views to users, and it will depend on how they are logged 
in. Regular users don’t need to be logged in. These users can see all of the interactive 
parts and they can open other apps. They do not have access to the administration 
functions through REST API. 
Some of the OpenHAB’s terminology will be described here to make it easier for 
understand the following sections: 
• Binding: Bindings are used to find and connect to the users’ devices.  
• Thing: Thing is a physical device 
• Channels: Channels are capabilities provided by the Thing. Each thing will have 
one or more channels 
• Item: An Item is the link between the thing and channel. 
3.1.1 openHAB setup process 
To setup the smart home, the user needs to connect every smart device to openHAB. In 
the setting page, there are many options for the user to use. In this section there will be a 
smart overview of each section. As seen in the picture below, the sections are as 
following: “Configuration, Automation and Add-ons”. 
==PAGE:15==
Page 15 of 36 
 
 
Picture 1 – Screenshot of openHAB setting page 
3.1.2 Add-ons 
The first section that will be covered is Add-ons. In this section there is a setting called 
“Bindings”. This is an important part of openHAB. Here the user can download add-ons 
made by other developers. Theses add-ons help users to connector their smart devices to 
openHAB. In bindings you will find add-ons for various product such as: Philips, LG TV, 
MQTT etc. These bindings are made to make it easier for the user to connector their 
devices, but some devices still need to be programmed to openHAB, but as time 
progresses many more bindings will be released to openHAB. As seen in the picture 
below, there are two sections in bindings. The first section is bindings which are 
maintained by the openHAB project, and the other section are bindings released by the 
community. 
==PAGE:16==
Page 16 of 36 
 
 
Picture 2 – Screenshot of the binding page of openHAB 
In the automation section, there are also templates and scripting languages the user can 
use for automating some of the functionality they want. Some of the languages which are 
support are: JavaScript, JRuby and Groovy. The community have added block toolbox to 
make it easier for the user to setup an automated function in their smart home. An example 
of the block toolbox can be seen in the picture below.   
 
Picture 3 – Screenshot of one of the script modules 
==PAGE:17==
Page 17 of 36 
 
This is a screenshot of one of the addons made by a community member. This addon is 
called: “Collection of common blocks.” This addon is made to make the code easier to 
read and reduce the complexity of repeating code snippets.  
3.1.3 Configuration 
This section will be covering configuring “Things” and setting up a smart home. To setup 
a device, it is important the user has installed the correct binding for the specified device. 
With the binding the user can use function “scan” to find their device if it is connected to 
the network. In the picture below, we can see the bindings which are already installed. 
This gives us the option to talk with the devices such as: Chromecast, IpCameras and Wi-
Fi LED.  
 
Picture 4 – Screenshot of installing a thing from openHAB 
If the user wants to connect their Wi-Fi LED to openHAB the user will choose the Wi-Fi 
LED binding. Once the user has chosen the WiFi LED binding, they can add the device 
manually or as mentioned before, do a scan.  
 
==PAGE:18==
Page 18 of 36 
 
 
Picture 5 – Screenshot of scanning devices in openHAB 
In the picture above, the user has run a scan and have found the Wi-Fi LED. The name of 
the device is “AK001-ZJ200”. By clicking on the discovered LED, the user can give it a 
name, to make it easier for remember what this LED is going to be used for. Once the 
name is set and the thing is successfully installed, the user will be able to see the Thing 
in openHAB.  
 
Picture 6 – Screenshot of added thing in openHAB 
To use the things which are created, openHAB have added a semantic model. This gives 
the user the option to create a location for the devices and the rooms the devices are in. 
The purpose of the semantic model is to create a physical layout of the user’s smart home 
devices. The locations are saved as groups.  
To add a new location, the user has to navigate to model page in openHAB. Inside this 
page there is a button called “Add location.” Here the user will give a backend name and 
==PAGE:19==
Page 19 of 36 
 
a label for the frontend. In the example below, we have created the ground floor. The 
category section will only display a widget representing the location.  
 
Picture 7 - Screenshot of installing a location 
The model is saved as a hierarchical model, it is possible to add more location inside one 
location. To add a location within the location, the user has to press the “add location” 
when selected the desire location. This gives the user the opportunity to create a physical 
layout of their home. Once the user has added all the location, the model will look 
something like the example below. 
 
Picture 8 – Screenshot of the hierarchical 
To add a Thing to one of the locations, the user selects the location and will be able to 
add it. The user will be able to create equipment from thing or points from thing. 
Equipment represents physical devices and points represents properties of those devices.  
An example of this is, if the user has two motion sensors connected to a single control 
board, openHAB will see it as a thing with two channels. With the semantic model the 
==PAGE:20==
Page 20 of 36 
 
user can choose that the control board will be seen as two motion sensors instead of a 
control board with two channels. This allows the user to setup the motion sensor in two 
different locations instead of one. 
Once one or more things has been added to the semantic model, every device can be seen 
in the home page. OpenHAB provides a page with an overview of the different locations 
and a page with equipment.  
3.1.4 Automation 
After setting up the configuration of the devices and location, it is time to setup the 
automation for the devices. This can be done in openHAB by using rules. These rules can 
be created by the users and be as complicated and advanced as they want. To create a 
rule, the user will define when the rule is trigged, and what action will happen when it is 
trigged. A user can also add a condition to the rule, so it is only possible if the condition 
is matched.  
An example of creating a rule, would be using a motion sensor to detect movement in a 
room and turn on the light. As seen in the picture below, there can be multiple triggers 
and actions. Depending on if the user selects trigger or action, the user has different 
options. The user can select Item, thing, time, or system to what the trigger should be, 
while if the user selects actions the following options are available: Item, script, rules or 
audio and voice.  
So, if the user selects motion sensor as the trigger, they will be able to select item under 
action and select a lightbulb or other items they have installed. But this won’t turn off the 
light, so the user can select to run a script instead. This could be a simple script with a 
timer which resets when the motion sensors get triggered again. 
3.2  OpenHAB Technical 
OpenHab stands for open Home Automation Bus. It is an open-source home automation 
platform, which runs as the centre of a smart house. Some of the strengths openHAB has, 
is as following:  
- 
It has the ability to integrate multiple devices and systems from difference 
manufactures into a single solution. 
==PAGE:21==
Page 21 of 36 
 
- 
It provides a common approach to automation rules across the entire system with 
a uniform interface.   
- 
Gives the user the option to automate their home how they like. 
OpenHAB communicates with smart, and “not-so-smart” devices and it can perform user 
defined actions. It also provides webpages with all the devices, which the users can define 
information and define tools to how to use those devices. To achieve this, openHAB 
segments and compartmentalizes certain functions and operations (OpenHAB, 2022). 
The concepts openHAB has is: “Binding, Things, Channels, Items, Rules and Sitemap”. 
3.2.1 Thing 
In openHAB, things are entities, which can be physically added to a system. This can lead 
to many functionalities in one. Things does not need to be a device. A thing can represent 
a web service or any other manageable source of information and functionality. They are 
relevant for the setup and configuration process, and not for the operation. A thing can 
have configuration properties. These properties can be optional or mandatory. This can 
be basic information such as an IP-address, specific configuration for a device that needs 
to alert the users or an access token for a  web service. 
3.2.2 Channel 
A thing can have “Channels”. A Channel represents different functions the Thing 
provides. The Channel is a concrete function from the Thing, which is a physical entity 
or a source of information. An example of this could be a light bulb, which has a colour 
temperature and a colour. In openHAB, this will be created as two Channels. One channel 
would be colour temperature Channel and the other one would be a colour Channel. Both 
of this functionality provides functionality of the light bulb, which is a Thing. As 
mentioned before a Thing can also be a source of information. This might be the weather 
with information from a web service. This provides multiple Channels. These Channels 
could be Temperature, pressure, humidity, and chances of rain. 
3.2.3 Item 
Items represent capabilities that can be used by applications, either in user interfaces or 
in automation. Some of the following item types are currently available in openHAB are: 
==PAGE:22==
Page 22 of 36 
 
- 
Colour 
- 
Contact 
- 
DateTime 
- 
Group 
- 
Location 
- 
Number 
- 
String 
- 
Switch 
These item types represent functionality that is used by openHAB, that can be linked to a 
channel in order to manage it from openHAB. In the figure below, we can see a LED strip 
as a Thing, with two Channels. These Channels allows the users to control the power and 
the colour of the LED strip. To control the power and the colour Channel, the user needs 
to create a link between the Channels and the items.    
 
Model 1 
3.2.4 Binding 
A binding in openHAB is a software package, which the user can install. The bindings’ 
main purpose is to establish a connection between the users’ device and their Thing. All 
the commands from the users’ devices are translated with the bindings to and from 
openHAB. 
The bindings are available in openHAB, where the users can find the bindings, they need. 
There are currently over several hundred bindings available in openHAB, and many new 
bindings are added regularly. 
==PAGE:23==
Page 23 of 36 
 
For every binding, there are instructions and examples to help and guide the users to 
configure the binding. The users also have to configure the Things which are supported, 
and Channels these Things provide. In most cases, the description also contains a fully 
worked out example that includes a definition of Things and its Channels, Items linked 
to those Channels and the use of these Items in a sitemap 
An example of a binding can be a Wi-Fi Led binding. It has a Thing called Led strip with 
two Channels: Power and Colours.  
 
Model 2 
3.2.5 Bridge 
Some devices cannot connect directly to openHAB. These devices only communicate 
with their manufacturers. These devices can be connected to openHAB via a bridge. A 
bridge is the middleman between openHAB and the device. This allows the user to 
connect to the bridge and then connect to the device and controls it. In the backend, 
openHAB will send commands to the manufacturer via an API, while the user will use 
the device as any other.  
3.2.6 Rules 
“Rules” are used for the automating process in openHAB. Each rule can be triggered, 
which will invoke a script, which will perform a task. These tasks can be turning on the 
light, turning up the thermostat or something different.  
A user can set when a rule should be triggered, and what the actions is going to be, and 
the users can add conditions, so the rule is only triggered if the condition is matched. This 
gives the users the ability to do complicated automations in their home.  
 
==PAGE:24==
Page 24 of 36 
 
4. Design idea for a solution 
In this chapter, the idea behind the solution is described, and the problems with openHAB 
is also defined. These problems are related to the problem trying to be solved in this thesis.  
4.1 Problems with openHAB 
In chapter 1, there was described a problem, that this thesis is trying to solve. The problem 
is to make it easier for people with less technical backgrounds to setup a smart home. A 
current problem with setting up smart homes is there is many different brands and 
manufacturers which produces smart devices for homes. This means the user needs 
different apps to control different products and won’t be able to use two different brands 
to make one action. For example, if a user has bought a motion sensor and wants the light 
to turn on in the garage when someone comes home, and the user uses Philips lights, he 
won’t be able to configure the way he wants.  
In the current openHAB, the user needs to find every single binding for each product and 
device to be able to use them and setup a smart home. This means the user needs to know 
which devices they have, and if there is a binding for it in openHAB. This can lead to a 
barrier for some users, which they need help to continue.  
==PAGE:25==
Page 25 of 36 
 
  
Figure 3 
In figure 3, there has been made an activity diagram of the initializing of openHAB. In 
this scenario, the user has first time setup the openHAB and is ready to setup his smart 
home. The first step is to create an account for openHAB. After logging in, the user will 
first create locations. As mentioned in chapter 4, locations are groups in openHAB which 
mimic rooms in the house. The user will select the desire bindings needed to setup the 
devices in the smart house. After added the device to the smart house, and creating rules, 
they will be all setups. The area that will be focused on is the initializing when starting 
up openHAB. This is the steps from “Setup locations” to “Save setup.” The reason behind 
this is as mentioned in chapter 1, those are the places when the users hit most of their 
barriers.  
4.2 Testing openHAB 
By using the same test method as the group in Oregon University did (Kaaz, 2017), two 
participants are trying to use openHAB. There are a list of tasks they need to complete. 
The tasks they need to do is as following:  
==PAGE:26==
Page 26 of 36 
 
- 
Step 1: Create an account 
- 
Step 2: Create locations 
- 
Step 3: Find the right binding for two of the devices 
- 
Step 4: Login using the bridge 
- 
Step 5: Assign the device to a location 
- 
Step 6: Added a small automation 
The first participants is a male age 59. He has been working as a fireman for 20+ years 
and have been doing DYI as a hobby. Setting up devices is not a problem for this 
participant. He has done it many years, but when talking with the participant, one of the 
big issues they have is, when it comes to technology. Doing configurations and finding 
the right app and device and using different technology can be very hard to understand.  
The second participant is a female age 55. She is a stay-at-home mom. She does not do 
any DYI projects nor work with any technology. Her only experience is working with 
Apple products, such as iPhone and iPad. When talking with her about Apple’s product 
“Home”, she has not used it, and find it very confusing to use.  
Both participants singed in very easily with no problems. One of the first problems they 
encountered was when they were asked to setup locations in openHAB. Because of the 
UI in openHAB, there is a tab called location, but they cannot add or edit locations from 
it. After a few minutes participants 1 found out the models are added via the semantic 
model inside settings. Later on, participant 2 found it as well.  
Creating the model of their house was not a big problem, but some of the settings 
confused them a bit. As mentioned in chapter 3, the locations needs various names and 
categories. 
The participants have to add bindings to their openHAB. Finding the binding page was 
easy enough. They both found the right binding after some time, and quickly added 
them with no problem.  
Step 4 came with a few barriers. One of the first one was when they were introduced to 
thing. Using OpenHAB’s terminology came with a lot of confusing for both of the 
participants. When adding a thing to their openHAB, they had the option to add a 
==PAGE:27==
Page 27 of 36 
 
location. This confusing made them wonder why the location they made weren’t 
avaible.  
4.3 Design solution 
As mentioned in the section above, the focus area will be on the initializing part of setting 
up a smart home. To make it easier for the user with little to no technical knowledge, it 
makes sense to remove the setup part for them. This can be done in multiple ways. Some 
of the ways would be to get an expert to their house and setup it for them or letting 
someone control their cloud and help them online. Another way to help these users would 
be to automate the process for them.  
The first step would be installing openHAB on a raspberry Pi or local server if the user 
has one available. The locations would be predetermined, but the user will be able to add 
or remove locations. The locations would be a simple plan of a house with a common 
setup. This could be two floors, with the ground floor having a kitchen, dining room, 
living room, and the first floor would have two bedrooms and one toilet. This is of course 
not every house in the world, but it would give the user an idea of the setup and can easily 
be changed of their desire.  
After the locations have been setup, the next step would be scanning the devices available 
in the house. As mentioned before, some devices need a bridge to be communicated with 
openHAB. One way of doing this is to ask the user which of its devices brands they know 
of. After the user has selected the brands, the system will know which bridges it needs 
and will ask the user for its login. Scanning for devices would take some time, but after 
scanning a list of devices will be presented to the user. The reason is so that the user can 
chose which devices goes to which location. This need to be manually added because the 
system would not know which location the devices are installed.  
==PAGE:28==
Page 28 of 36 
 
 
Figure 4 
In the figure above, it can see a new activity diagram, with the easy installation. This 
design will have less user interaction and will reduce the barrier the users will encounter. 
By removing the manually configuration with some basic ones, can help the user avoid 
some of the barriers.  
After the setup, the smart device will have some predefined rules they will follow. These 
rules can be changed by the user, so it fits their everyday life better. The predefined 
configuration would be some of the simple configuration to make it easier for the user to 
get started. The configuration would be something similar to turning on the light, when 
someone enters the room, or turning up the thermostat when it’s getting colder.  
These configurations would help the user to set a baseline and help them to start 
developing their own configurations and rules for their devices. The user can set the 
maximum duration the light can be on without any movement, or how much the 
thermostat is allowed to warm up. Smart plugs will also be to be configured to only turn 
on after midnight, to save money when charging their phone or other devices.  
 
==PAGE:29==
Page 29 of 36 
 
When a user wants to add a new device to their smart home, they would need to login to 
openHAB and find the binding and add it manually to the location. With the new design, 
when a user installs a new device, the server will pick it up, and see if there is matching 
device already in the network.  
 
 
Figure 5 
The server starts by checking if there is an already existing device type on the network. 
If there is a device type already installed, the server will add it to the network and then 
ask the user which location the device is and what name the user wants to name the device. 
This process eliminates the user from using openHAB and finding the binding needed to 
add the device. But added an existing device is not the most difficult tasks. The difficult 
part is to add a device which does not exists on the users’ network. Finding and adding 
the binding would take time for the user. With the new system, it will go to a database 
with every device type recorded, and search which type it is. If it does exist in the 
database, there will be a default config for the device, which will be applied when setting 
up the device. The database would contain the device type. If there is no matching device 
type, the system will search for a device with similar sensors and activators. By using 
knowing what type of signal the new device has, it will be possible to use a predefined 
configuration. All of this will still be able to be changed by the user if they don’t seem 
fit.  
==PAGE:30==
Page 30 of 36 
 
If there is no luck on finding any device type which are similar to the new one, a 
notification will be pushed to the user. The user needs to setup the new device manually 
or use a predefined configuration with the most basic instructions. This could be only 
sending a message to the user if any sensors or activators were triggered, or something 
similar.  
This design will solve the problem with users having to setup their smart homes but 
doesn’t have the ability to configure and setup the devices. This also solves the problem 
of users needing to use multiple apps to control various devices. The people who would 
be interested of using this design, is aimed at people with low technical knowledge, or 
people who needs more help setting up and isn’t able to find help.  
 
==PAGE:31==
Page 31 of 36 
 
5. Implementation 
This chapter will be covering the implementation of the design in chapter 5. The design 
process and the problems facing this is also described and what choices have been made.  
5.1 OpenHAB add-on 
OpenHAB is an open-source platform, and it follows a middleware approach (OpenHAB, 
2022). OpenHAB have made guides for developers to help them to create their own 
bindings. OpenHAB is built on Java 11, meaning the language which is going to be used 
in this implementation is Java.  
OpenHAB provide documentation for the following concepts: 
• Bindings 
• Automation engine module 
• Transformation 
• An IO service 
• A Persistence service 
• Natural language processing skill 
• Audio sinks 
The project will mainly focus on bindings. In the beginning, the documentation refers to 
a script which helps the developer to build a skeleton of a binding. The main three 
components are “BaseBridgeHandler, BaseThingHanlder & ThingHandlerService.” 
These services will be handling the tasks and the communication between openHAB and 
the devices. The BaseBridgeHandler will be taking care of the communication between 
the manufacturers API to control the device and openHAB.  
In this case we have a device from Tapo. They have made a smart plug device and it can 
only be controlled by their API’s. To create the binding for this device, a bridge must be 
made between the user and Tapo. The binding will ask for the user’s username and 
password to create a handshake between Tapo and openHAB. The binding which is being 
made is called: EasyInstallation. 
To know which model the users has, a class has been created to contain all the models 
which are available from Tapo. This means there needs to be a class or a list of all the 
==PAGE:32==
Page 32 of 36 
 
devices which needs to be created for openHAB to communicate. But first the user needs 
to login. The device which is being used as an example has an API which can be called. 
This makes it easy to create a handshake and use the access token to control the device 
the user wants. 
To use multiple devices at once, a deviceInfo class has been made to get information of 
the device to know more about it. This lets us check what type of device it is, and if it is 
on, off or what the status is. We will be able to get the hardware version and firmware 
information. This can be used to make updates for the specific devices. Another usage of 
this class is to get the signal strength of the wi-fi signal. This can be used to guess which 
location the device is and be used to compare devices and see if a new device is added 
where it could be.  
One of the functions which wasn’t able to be implemented was the part of automating the 
setup process of the user. The approach taken, wouldn’t make sense, because doing so, 
would mean developing more bridges and adding more things. This would lead to a big 
pile of code with many bridges to different manufacturers and in the future, there would 
be added new bridges as there will be newer devices and maybe even new brands.  
Some of the functionality which would help the user such as running a script to initialize 
the whole setup is not possible with the current state with openHAB. It does not support 
running a script to automate the whole process. At the moment they accept only bindings 
from communities which help them to able to communicate with more devices.  
To make it easier for the user, instead of installing many different bindings, there could 
be one binding, which would be able to do most of the work. This can be done, but 
creating a big binding, but this would also take time, since it should be coded and should 
support many of the smart devices in the world.  
The UI of openHAB already supports custom widgets, which can already help the user to 
have their own look and style of the dashboard. This wouldn’t make sense to work on, 
mainly it already exists, and have good overview of the devices in the home.  
 
 
==PAGE:33==
Page 33 of 36 
 
6. Discussion 
The approach taken to solve the problem, hasn’t been the best. The design of the idea was 
not fully implemented and therefor is not available to be tested to see if the design would 
solve the problem. However, the test made by the group in Oregon State University, who 
tested setup with participants found out where the barrier is. The goal of the design was 
to remove those barriers to minimize the user interaction when setting up the smart home.  
By automating the setup, it would be easy and fast for the user. The only interaction they 
would need is to provide their username and password for the different bridges, which 
are needed to communicate with the devices. In the test made by the group in Oregon 
State University, they had two of the participants who has zero experience with IOT 
devices and home automation. By following these two participants, it can be seen they 
had problems already at the start of the setup, while some of the other participants only 
had problems later on.  
OpenHAB writes in their own documentation, in tutorial overview, that when configuring 
it is more prone to errors, and the syntax for config files can be overwhelming for novice 
users. Their reason behind this is the users’ needs to learn about their concepts and home 
automation technology (OpenHAB, 2022). OpenHAB has provided a UI driven 
configuration, but it is still in an early stage, because many of the features cannot be 
modified via the UI.  
The reason behind choosing openHAB instead of another platform such as home 
assistance, HomeKit by apple or a product like Google Home or Alexa by amazon, is that 
openHAB is an open-source platform. Home assistants is also open source, but it is built 
on Python compared to openHAB which is built on Java. OpenHAB has a documentation 
of how to add binding and create your own binding. These are some of the limitations the 
developers face. By only adding binding, it is not possible to automate the setup process 
create a whole new structure of their model.  
One of the ways this would be possible,  if OpenHAB made it possible to run scripts when 
installing bindings. This can help the users to run a script which will load default settings 
and find the most basic devices and setup a small basic home automation. This will help 
the start of a smart home, and the user will be able to go deeper if they desire to. 
==PAGE:34==
Page 34 of 36 
 
Products like Google Home, Apple HomeKit, and Alexa from Amazon is they will be 
hard to work with and have a default setup process. When installing a new Google Home, 
they need to know the devices that needs to be installed, and only some products are 
support by them. This gives the user limited options to have multiple smart devices from 
many different manufacturers. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Page 35 of 36 
 
7. Conclusion 
To answer the question which was stated in the beginning of the reports was: “How can 
a person with almost no technical background, setup a smart home which enables 
advanced home automation.”, follow up questions were made. The first follow up 
questions was defining a smart home.  
A smart home is a home which can be accessed remotely and provide the user with context 
with automated services. This can be done my having home automation or a home control 
with IoT devices. A smart home has an internal network, intelligent control, and 
automation.  
The next question was which kind of people would be interested to use it? This can be 
anyone who wants to make their life a little easier or if people who wants to save money 
by have the house run is self, so they don’t need to control the thermostat, or if they forgot 
to turn of the light.  
The follow up question was are some of their limitations regarding the smart homes. One 
of the big limitations are when buying multiple devices from different manufacturers, it 
can be a problem to make a home automation, which will work together. OpenHAB is a 
solution to this problem, but it is hard for a user who has limited technical knowledge to 
set it up.  
The final follow up question is how can a solution look like? The answer has been made 
in the design chapter. An attempt to make it easier for people with less technical 
background. The idea behind the design as to remove the complication from the setup in 
openHAB and automate it for the user. The user can after the setup change the settings 
they don’t like and create their own locations, rules etc.  
The final question to be answered is: “How can a person with almost no technical 
background, setup a smart home which enables advanced home automation.” As 
mentioned in above, automating the process for the user and taking control over the 
complicated configuration, can help the user to use openHAB, and skip to setting up rules 
how they prefer. Running a script instead of the user manually typing in location, devices 
and rules would come with barriers. The script would contain most basic information 
which would be easy to edit for the user.  
 
==PAGE:36==
Page 36 of 36 
 
References 
Balta-Ozkan, N., Davidson, R., Bicket, M., & Whitmarsh, L. (2013). Social barriers to 
the adoption of smart homes.  
Brich, J., Walch, M., Rietzler, M., Weber, M., & Schaub, F. (2017). Exploring End 
User Programming Needs in Home Automation. New York, NY, United States: 
Association for Computing Machinery. 
Brush, A. J., Lee, B., Mahajan, R., Agarwal, S., Saroiu, S., & Dixon, C. (2011). Home 
Automation in the Wild: Challenges and Opportunities. Vancouver. 
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). Design science in information 
systems research. MIS Quarterly. 
Kaaz, K. J. (2017). Understanding user perceptions of privacy, and configuration 
challenges in home automation. Corvallis OR: Oregon State University. 
Moorhead, P. (2013, September 26). The Problem With Home Automation's Internet Of 
Things (IoT). Retrieved from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/patrickmoorhead/2013/09/26/the-problem-with-
home-automations-iot/?sh=2785e19c70ec 
OpenHAB. (2022, September 01). About openHAB. Retrieved from openhab: 
https://www.openhab.org/docs/ 
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M., & Chatterjee, S. (2007). A design science 
research methodology for information systems research.  
Satpathy, L. (2006). Smart housing: Technology to aid aging in place. New 
opportunities and challenges. Mississippi State University. 
Winkler, B. (2002). An Implementation of an ultrasonic indoor tracking system 
supporting the OSGi architecture of the ICTA Lab. University of Florida. 
 
