==PAGE:1==
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
Multimodal machine learning based fatigue prediction for
stroke therapy with exoskeletons
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
Multimodal machine learning based fatigue prediction for stroke therapy with exoskeletons
Master Thesis
October, 2022
By
Anders C. Ketelsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Unsplash, Sincerely Media, 2019
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Management, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Business Analytics, MSc Eng.
Anders C. Ketelsen ­ s133195
Signature
Date
ii
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the feasibility of incorperating multimodal fatigue detection into
the ReHyb exoskeleton. To do so, a budget sEMG sensor is used along with a consumer
level camera for data acquisition. The data streams are fused and used in a complimen­
tary way. Traditional fatigue detection parameters are extracted from the sEMG signal
and the elbow joint angle is extracted from the videofeed using machine vision, effec­
tively creating a budget­friendly digital goniometer. The extracted angles are then used
in the post­processing of the sEMG signal. Using this method a dataset of fatiguing cyclic
dynamic contractions is collected, and used for training and evaluating a machine learn­
ing model with the aim of predicting the fatigue level of subjects. While many previous
studies classify fatigue as a binary label, this study uses the normalized time until fatigue,
to create and predict fatigue on a scale from 0­100. Results: It is found that it is possible to
detect this fatigue level variable with MAE of 10.72 [8.45;13.20], leading to the conclusion
that fatigue detection using budget­friendly sEMG equipment is feasible, for as far as the
results of this thesis go, although it is recommended that further studies are conducted
on a more representative group of subjects.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anders C. Ketelsen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz, PhD Student, Supervisor
John Paulin Hansen, Professor, Supervisor
iv
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Muscle Fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Alternative Biomarkers for Muscle Fatigue Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Electromyography (EMG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Signal Processing in sEMG Fatigue Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
State of Research
23
3.1
EMG­based Fatigue Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Method
25
4.1
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Overview of Data Processing and Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Part 1: Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
Part 2: Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5
Part 3: Feature Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.6
Part 5: Predictive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Results
47
5.1
Experiment I (Isometric Contractions)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Experiment II (Dynamic Cyclic Contractions)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3
Predictive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6
Discussion
63
6.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.2
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Bibliography
67
A Code
71
A.1 Metronome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.2 DataCapture.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.3 DynamicPrep.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.4 computeFeatures.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.5 Isometric Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.6 InterTrialAnalysis.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A.7 SingleTrialAnalysis.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
v
==PAGE:8==
A.8 MLfromDB.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.9 MLmodel.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
vi
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Globally there are more than 12.2 million strokes each year, around half of which (6.55
million) have fatal outcomes, making it the second­leading cause of death worldwide.
While around half of the incidences are fatal, the other half ­ the survivors are often left
impaired with 75% of stroke survivors suffering from dysfunctions and 15­30% suffering
from severe disabilities. In fact, strokes are the third­leading cause of death and disability
combined. [1] [2]
One of the disabilities caused by strokes is paralysis [3], with strokes being the leading
cause of paralysis accounting for 33.7% of incidents. It’s often possible to regain at least
some of the lost mobility through stroke rehabilitation therapy, which consists of many
types of therapies, with physical therapy being the primary type [4]. Traditionally physical
therapy requires a physical therapist to be present and guide the patient through the dif­
ferent exercises. This is, however, costly, and so the economical aspect limits the amount
of physical therapy available to each patient.
A way to mitigate this cost is through the use of technology­assisted physical therapy.
One type of technology assisted­physical therapy is robotic rehabilitation, where a robot
aids the patient in performing exercises [5]. This can be used to increase the efficiency of
the physical therapists by allowing them to oversee multiple patients at once being guided
by the robots, either in a clinical setting or even remote with the patients in the comfort of
their homes. With time it could even completely replace the physical therapists, allowing
for much greater capacity and thereby therapy for the individual.
One way of performing robotic­assisted rehabilitation is by using an exoskeleton i.e. a
robotic skeleton worn outside the body. The ReHyb project aims at doing exactly this:
”...the goal of this project is to develop a patient­specific, assist­as­needed device which
maximises the training efficiency during clinical and home­based rehabilitation” ­ (Rehyb
stakeholder identification and use case scenario [3]). For the exoskeleton to work opti­
mally, it needs to be able to sense the patient and adjust its actions accordingly, just as
a real physical therapist would do it. By sensing the patient, through the acquisition of
various biomarkers, the exoskeleton will be able to know how much force to assist with,
how fast, what range of motion, what exercise, when to stop, etc.
In the ReHyb project this is done by creating a digital twin of the patient with various
parameters reflecting the current status of the patient serving as the basis for the decisions
of the exoskeleton. Many different parameters can be considered relevant – one of which
is the patients muscular fatigue status. Knowing the level of muscular fatigue is useful for a
number of different reasons. First, it can be used to know when to stop a certain exercise,
as it has been shown that exercising beyond a certain level of muscular fatigue is harmful.
Second, we may want to induce a certain lower level (not harmful) level of muscular fatigue
in order to stimulate muscle growth. Third, if the patient expresses fatigue it’s useful to
know whether muscular fatigue is also present so as to get a better understanding of
what kind of fatigue the patient is experiencing. It’s therefore very relevant to include the
muscular fatigue status as part of the biomarkers/parameters in the digital twin.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Research Questions
This study aims to examine the feasibility of including sEMG­based fatigue detection in
the ReHyb exoskeleton used for robotic rehabilitation of stroke patients. The key question
being if it’s possible to use budget friendly sEMG detection equipment to detect fatigue.
Furthermore, it is examined if it is possible to use a consumer level camera along with
machine vision as a digital goniometer, to measure the joint angle and use this joint angle
in conjuction with the obtained EMG signal to aid in the detection of fatigue.
1.3
Structure
Figure 1.1: Structure of Thesis, showing interdepenendencies between chapters
In chapter 2 Theory, a short introduction to some of the main topics necessary to under­
stand the contents of thesis is given. These topics include: muscle physiology includ­
ing the underlying mechanisms of muscle fatigue, EMG, signal processing and machine
learning.
In chapter 3, the state of research of the field of EMG­based fatigue prediction is dis­
cussed.
In chapter 4 Method, we describe how the experiments were conducted, how the data
was collected during the experiments, how the data was processed and converted into a
format suitable for machine learning and how the model was finally trained and evaluated.
In chapter 5 Results, the results of the above processes described in the method, are
shown. The processes described in chapter 4, each wrangles and transforms the data set,
leading to intermediate results on the way that informs the next step of data transformation.
Consequently, the real workflow consists of a method, intermediate results, following to
another method and so on. For the sake of the overview we have chosen to divide the
method and the results into two seperate sections, but it should be noted that they are in
fact, interdependant as shown on the figure 1.1.
In chapter 6 the method of chapter 4 and the results of chapter 5 are discussed.
2
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Muscle Fatigue
2.1.1
Physiology of the Skeletal Muscle [6] [7]
2.1.1.1
Skeletal Muscle Structure
To understand localized muscular fatigue, we must first understand muscles, both struc­
turally and functionally. There exist three types of muscles in the human body; Smooth,
cardiac and skeletal. The focus here is on the skeletal muscles, that cause forces to be
exerted on the joints.
(a) Cross section of a skeletal muscle
(b) top: muscle fiber, bottom: myofibril
Figure 2.1: Skeletal muscle structure, from [6]
Skeletal muscles are structured in a hierarchical manner. At a low level a skeletal muscle
is composed of myofibrils, that go together to form a muscle fiber (a muscle fiber is also a
cell), the muscle fibers then go together to form fascicles that are a bundle of fibers, and
lastly the fascicles go together to form a muscle. See figure 2.1a for a depiction of this
structure.
Figure 2.2: Sliding filament model,
from [6]
The myofibril is further divided longitudinally into sar­
comeres as shown in figure 2.1b. It is these sarcom­
eres that contract, causing the contraction of the entire
muscle. The sarcomeres consist of two kind of my­
ofilaments called actin and myosin. These two are ar­
ranged in a way so that they can slide in between each
other, in a process described as the “Sliding filament
model” as shown in figure 2.2.
On the myosin sits something called myosin heads,
that are able to bind to the actin subunits, and move
these, thereby pulling in the actin strands (see figure
2.3). The myosin head performs this movement by
binding to ATP that puts in a charged position, it then
binds to the actin at the actin binding site, this bind­
ing causes the myosin head to move, while bonded to
the actin, moving the actin filament in what is called a
power stroke. During the power stroke the leftover of the ATP is released as ADP and the
myosin head can once again bind a free ATP molecule, causing it to resume its charged
position, once again ready to bind to the actin, use the ATP and perform another power
stroke. This process repeats itself over and over causing a continuous movement of the
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
3
==PAGE:12==
actin relative to the myosin, causing them to slide into each other resulting in a contraction
of the sarcomere and on a grander scale – the muscle.
Figure 2.3: Close­up of myofilaments [6]
With what has been described so far, the mus­
cle would be in a constant state of contraction as
the sliding filament process would just continue
over and over as long as there was ATP avail­
able to drive it. This is, however, not the case.
Much of the time the muscle is in a relaxed state,
where this process does not take place.
This
is because, normally, the actin is protected from
binding to the myosin head by something known
as the tropomyosin attached to the actin by a tro­
ponin (see figure 2.3). As long as the tropomyosin
covers the bindings of the actin, the myosin can­
not attach to it, meaning that the sliding filament
process does not take place and the muscle is in
a relaxed state. It is only when the troponin re­
leases the binding to the actin, thereby releasing the tropomyosin allowing the myosin to
bind to the actin, that the process takes place.
2.1.1.2
Muscle Fiber Excitation
How does the troponin disengage the tropomyosin from the actin? The troponin has three
bindings, one to the actin, one to the tropomyosin and one that binds to Ca2+ ions. When
a neuron stimulates the muscle, a process that will later be described, takes place, result­
ing in the release of Ca2+ ions in the muscle fiber. When these Ca2+ ions are released,
they bind to the troponins causing them to change shape, which results in the tropomyosin
being released from the actin allowing for the sliding filament process, resulting in a con­
traction. As this process goes on, the Ca2+ ions are depleted, and the tropomyosin will
once again bind to the actin stopping the process resulting in a relaxed state, see figure
2.4 below.
Figure 2.4: Excitation of a muscle cell caused by the release of Ca2+
[6]
4
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:13==
2.1.1.3
The Motor Neuron
How does a neural signal from the brain cause the release of Ca2+ ions in the muscle
fiber? To understand this, it is best to start at the origin of the signal. In very basic terms
a signal is formed in the brain and sent via a motor neuron to the muscle, where it causes
the release of the Ca2+ ions that allows for the sliding filament process resulting in a
contraction of the muscle.
Let’s examine this process a little closer to better understand it. To begin with it’s beneficial
to understand how a neuron works. The purpose of a neuron is to transmit a signal
from one place to another, this signal is called an action potential. Most neurons are
unidirectional, meaning that the signal flows from one end to another, and that’s the kind
we will focus on here. That means that there is a beginning and an end of the neuron.
The beginning is where the neuron receives signals from other connected neurons and
the end is where it passes this signal on to other neurons or in the case of motor neurons,
to the muscles, between the two ends is the axon, the axon carries the signal from the
receiving end to the transmitting end. This axon can be more than a meter long.
Figure 2.5: A Neuron
As is the case with other cells, the axon part of the neuron cell has a boundary separating
it from its surroundings called a membrane. In a resting state there is a negative charge
on the inside of the membrane compared to outside of around ­70mV. The charge on the
inside of the membrane is called the membrane potential, and the charge of ­70mV in
the resting state is called the resting membrane potential. The membrane is also said to
be polarized when in this state. The charge is there because there are a lot of Na+ ions
outside, although there are also K+ ions on the inside, it’s in a smaller quantity so the
relative charge is negative on the inside compared to the outside. This state is kept up by
sodium­potassium ion pumps fueled by ATP.
So how is a signal sent through the neuron? In the receiving end of the neuron there
are “arms” called dendrites, that are connected to other neurons via synapses. When
a connected neuron fires, neurotransmitters are released from the other neuron to the
dendrites via the synapse. These neurotransmitters bind to ion channels in the cell mem­
brane, opening the ion channels allowing for an influx of Na+ ions that raise the charge
by a few mVs, this is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) (inhibitory poten­
tials exists too, but is a subject for another matter). If enough EPSPs reach the neuron to
raise the charge to around ­55mV it reaches a threshold where voltage gated ion chan­
nels open allowing for a much greater influx of Na+ ions, triggering the so­called action
potential and thereby “firing the neuron”. If the threshold is not reached the charge will
simply go back down to ­70mV and the neuron will not fire. The neuron therefore either
fires or doesn’t in a binary fashion, this is known as an all­or­none response. When the
threshold is reached, however, a depolarization occurs and the charge goes up locally to
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
5
==PAGE:14==
around 40­50 mV, which then triggers other nearby voltage gated ion channels to open,
raising the charge there, again triggering the next set of voltage gated ion channels and
so the signal/action potential propagates down the axon at a speed of up to 100 m/s.
2.1.1.4
The Neuromuscular Junction
Figure 2.6: The Neuromuscular Junction, from [6]
The neuromuscular junction is where the end of the motorneuron (the axon terminal)
meets and transmits its signal to the muscle, causing it to contract. At the end of the
axon sits the axon terminal, that is connected to a muscle via a synapse. In the axon
terminal there are bubble­like vesicles full of neurotransmitters. As the action potential
reaches the axon terminal it triggers voltage gated calcium channels, letting in calcium
ions that bind to the vesicles, allowing them to merge with axon membrane “bursting the
bubble” so to speak, resulting in the release of the stored neurotransmitters, that can then
pass via a synapse and cause a depolarization of another neuron or muscle fiber.
In the case of a motor neuron, neurotransmitters called ACh are transmitted at the neu­
romuscular junction to the muscle. If the excitation reaches the threshold value, this then
triggers an action potential, in the same way as previously described in the neuron where
a depolarization of the membrane causes voltage gated ion channels to open, causing the
influx of Na+ ions propagating the signal. In the muscle cell, the action potential travels
along the muscle fiber through a network of t­tubules that surround each myofibril. Also
surrounding each myofibril is something called the sarcoplasmic reticulum, this stores
Ca2+ ions, that are released to into the myofibril when the action potential arrives via
the t­tubules. This release of Ca2+ ions, then causes the contraction of the sarcomeres
through the previously described sliding filament model.
2.1.2
Mechanisms of Muscle Fatigue
Fatigue is defined as the decreased ability to maintain or create contractile force in the
muscle. In the previous section, it was described how a chain of events (the motor path­
way) from the excitation of the stem of a motor neuron in the brain, finally led to the
release of Ca2+ ions allowing for cross bridge formation in the muscle cells, resulting in a
contraction. That means that a lot of things must happen correctly for the contraction to
occur, and an obstruction anywhere along this chain of events can impede the contraction
thereby resulting in fatigue. Therefore, there is not just one, but many possible causes of
fatigue. In the following we will focus on what is known as peripheral fatigue, which is the
fatigue that occurs at and distal to the neuromuscular junction.
6
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:15==
As previously described a contraction occurs when the action potential of a motor neuron
causes the release of ACh molecules, that cause an action potential to spread along
the membrane of the muscle, down the t­tubules, causing a release of Ca2+ ions from
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, that allows for cross bridge formation using ATP to drive the
sliding filaments.
2.1.2.1
Signal delivery issues
The arrival of the action potential to the sarcoplasmic reticulum is necessary for the release
of Ca2+ ions. From a peripheral viewpoint it is initiated at neuromuscular junction with the
release of ACh molecules. With repeated firing these neurotransmitters can be depleted
faster than they are generated from the axon terminal.
The spread of the action potential requires the preceding membrane potential, with re­
peated firing K+ ions can leak into the extracellular fluid, reducing the membrane potential
further causing an inhibitory effect.
2.1.2.2
Binding Issues
The cross bridge formation between myosin and actin is dependent on Ca2+ ions for the
release of tropomyosin to free up the myosin binding sites. When ATP is used in the
power stroke, ADP and P is released as waste products. These phosphate ions can
bind to Ca2+, rendering them unavailable for this process. Phosphate can also bind at
the myosin binding sites on the actin subunits, blocking the myosin heads from binding.
Another cause of lack of Ca2+ is the repeated stimulation of the sarcoplasmic reticulum
can cause some of the Ca2+ ions to leak out into the extracellular fluid
2.1.2.3
ATP Issues
ATP is used in the power stroke to fuel the movement of the actin relative to the myosin,
it’s also used to fuel the sodium­potassium ion pumps, that restore the levels of sodium
and potassium after the depolarization. First of there is a small buffer of ATP stored in the
muscle cell, other than that there are 4 ways in which the body can replenish ATP that
vary in their rate and duration of replenishment. In general, there is a negative relationship
between the rate and the duration of replenishment, meaning that the fastest production
methods are also the ones that can sustain the production for the shortest amount of time.
The first ATP used is the ATP already stored in the muscle. This will only last for about
6 seconds depending on the intensity. Then, the cell can use stored creatine­phosphate
to produce ATP at a high rate, but the creatine­phosphate stores are quickly depleted.
The next fastest way to produce ATP is by anaerobic glycolysis where ATP is produced
from glucose, without the use of oxygen. The byproduct of this method is lactic acid. The
third production method is by aerobic glycolysis that also use glucose to make ATP. This
can sustain production for much longer and also has much greater efficiency in terms of
amount of ATP produced per carbohydrate, but requires the presence of oxygen. The
final method is lipolysis, where fat is used to make ATP, this has the slowest production
rate, but can be used once the glycogen levels are depleted.
The onset of fatigue will depend on the intensity of the exercise. High intensity exercises
will require high production rate methods (such as production from creatine­phosphate)
and can therefore only be sustained for as long as these production methods can endure,
whereas lower intensity exercises can be supported by slower production methods such
as aerobic glycolysis or even lipolysis.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.3
Myoelectric Manifestations of Fatigue
Figure 2.7: Examples of fatigueing parameters, showing increasing amplitude and decreasing
frequencies, from [8]
When a muscle contracts, lactic acid is produced as a metabolic product. The lactic acid
can be cleared through blood flow, but if more lactic acid is produced than cleared it will
naturally lead to increasing levels of lactic acid in the muscle. The clearance of lactic acid
is largely dependent on the amount of blood flow through the muscle. The blood flow
is higher in dynamic contractions than isometric, due to a pumping effect of the muscle.
But at higher levels of contractions the blood flow is stopped due to an increase of the
intramuscular pressure at which point the muscle becomes ischemic and there will be
very little clearance of the lactic acid.
If more lactic acid is produced than is cleared due to a combination of the aforementioned
factors, the result is an increased level of lactic acid within the muscle. Due to the acidity
of lactic acid this, leads to a decrease of the pH value within the muscle, which then leads
to a lowering of the muscles conduction velocity (CV), which changes the shape of the
motor unit action potential (MUAP) waveform for each of the motor units. This change is
propagated to the EMG signal, being an interference signal of all the generated MUAPs
combined, where a frequency shift of the power spectrum towards lower frequencies is
observed (often through a decrease of the median frequency (MDF)).
The shift towards lower frequencies, caused by the change in CV, also affects the am­
plitude of the EMG signal observed on the skin, that tends to increase with fatigue. This
happens as the tissue between the muscle and the surface of the skin, acts as a low­
pass filter, so when fatigue results in more of the lower frequencies being produced, more
of the signal is passed through this low­pass filter, increasing the observed amplitude.
This happens, despite EMG measurements showing a decreasing amplitude, inside the
muscles, with fatigue. However, the observed frequency shifts, are often greater than
those predictable by the change in CV, which leads to the hypothesis that other factor
may also contribute to the decreasing frequency. Two especially are hypothesized to be
contributing factors. The first being that the fast motor units fatigue faster thereby leav­
ing a proportionally larger amount of slow motor units that emit lower frequencies. The
second, is that time synchronization may occur between motor units. [8]
8
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Alternative Biomarkers for Muscle Fatigue Detection
Several biomarkers have been used for detecting muscle fatigue, which we will briefly
summarize below. Although many techniques exists and are worth mentioning and con­
sidering, it should also be noted that “EMG has historically been chosen as the most
suitable clinical research tool [for fatigue detection]” [9].
2.2.1
Ultrasound (SMG)
Using ultrasound, it’s possible to detect structural and morphological changes that occur
with the fatiguing process in the muscle. Studies have attempted to use it in conjunction
with EMG, although there have been difficulties with synchronizing the two signals, and
concerns that the use of ultrasound gel may interfere with the sEMG signal.
2.2.2
Near­Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS)
NIRS uses near­infrared spectroscopy to measure the relative levels of oxygenated and
deoxygenated levels of hemoglobin (the protein that transports oxygen to tissue). By
comparing these levels it’s possible to measure oxygenation changes in the fatiguing
muscle indicating changes in blood flow (caused by increased intramuscular pressure)
and deoxygenation of the muscle, that may occur with fatigue (see section 2.1.3.
Studies using NIRS in conjunction with sEMG on the Biceps Brachii, show that while
sEMG is able to demonstrate a linear process of fatigue using parameters tracking the
amplitude and frequency shifts, NIRS measured the velocity of this fatiguing process in­
stead i.e., the derivative of the fatiguing process. Suggesting that it may be useful a
complementary tool to sEMG. [9]
2.2.3
Mechanomyogram (MMG)
The mechanomyogram uses either an accelerometer or a microphone to detect small
movements/vibrations on the surface of the skin during contractions, due to oscillations
of the muscle fibers. Studies using MMG have been shown to be able to detect fatigue,
however the field is still in its infancy. [10][11]
2.2.4
Goniometer
A goniometer is defined as “an instrument for measuring angles” [12]. In the field of
fatigue research, it can be used to track the angle of joints such as the elbow as it flexes.
The joint angle can then be used to track fatigue. An example could be an isometric
experiment where the subject is asked to hold the forearm at 90*, where a drop in this
angle could indicate the subjects inability to maintain the angle because of fatigue. The
goniometer is often used in conjunction with other fatigue­detecting methods where it can
add information to analyze the signal from these. [9], [13]
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3
Electromyography (EMG)
As previously mentioned, EMG is the most well­established way of detecting muscle fa­
tigue in clinical research and it is also the method of choice for this thesis. The EMG
method will therefore be more thoroughly reviewed in the following section.
2.3.1
How EMG Works
Figure 2.8: A motor unit (one mo­
tor neuron intervening several mus­
cle fibers), from [6]
As previously described a muscle fires when a signal
from the brain goes through the spine to a motor neu­
ron that’s connected to a group of muscle fibres in a
specific muscle. Together this motor neuron and its
connected muscle fibres is called a motor unit, see fig­
ure 2.8. A muscle will typically consist of thousands
of muscle fibres and these will then be grouped into
different muscle units each activated by certain motor
neuron. This also acts as a way to modulate the force
exerted by the muscle, in a process known as the mo­
tor unit recruitment. Where more motor units are re­
cruited depending on how much force needs to be ex­
erted by the muscle. So that if more force is required,
more motor neurons will fire activating more motor units and thereby the contraction of
more muscle fibres.
When a motor neuron fires it reaches its connective muscle fibres through something
called the motor end plates. This triggers action potentials that spreads longitudinally
along the muscle fibres from the originin of the motor end plate. As previously described
the action potential is a wave of a positive charge that travels along the sarcolemma of
the muscle fibres. By placing electrodes near the muscles, as is the case with surface­
EMG (s­EMG), or in the muscle (as with intramuscular EMG), it’s possible to detect the
electrical charge emitted by the action potential as it travels along the muscle fibers via
the sarcolemma.
2.3.2
Types of EMG
Overall, there exists two types of EMG – surface EMG (sEMG) and intramuscular EMG.
With sEMG, electrode pads are placed on the surface of the skin above the muscle where
it detects the EMG signal emitted by the muscle through the skin and subcutaneous tissue.
Intramuscular EMG, on the other hand, works by inserting thin needles directly into the
muscle and record the signal from there. With surface EMG, the EMG signal must go
through the skin and subcutaneous tissue before reaching the electrode pads, whereas
with intramuscular EMG signal it’s picked up directly from the muscle tissue.
The obvious advantage with intramuscular EMG is the signal quality, with the signal being
stronger when picked up directly from the muscle in question rather than on the surface
of the skin where the muscle where the signal has to travel through the skin and the
subcutaneous tissue before reaching the skin. The main disadvantage with intramuscular
EMG is that needles must be positioned or inserted through the skin which can be quite
inconvenient, especially if not in a clinical hygienic setting.
With sEMG the advantage is the ease of application of the electrode pads, that simply
adhere to the skin using various types of adhesives (often gels). There are, however, a
number of disadvantages to using sEMG when compared with intramuscular EMG. First,
there will be a significant degradation of the signal as the skin and the ssubcutaneous
tissue acts as a low­pass filter, filtering out some of the high­frequency components of the
signal. Second, there is a risk of “sEMG crosstalk” where the signal from other activated
10
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:19==
muscles reaches the electrodes, thereby adding noise to the signal of interest. Third, the
electrodes are attached to skin only and the skin may move relative to the muscles during
dynamic contractions (muscle migration [14]), which will likely change the characteristics
of the signal, as the signal varies depending on where on the muscle it is recorded [15].
With this thesis being a feasibility study examining the feasibility of using EMG to detect
muscle fatigue in patients wearing an exoskeleton, it’s of course important that we choose
a method that has the potential, with further development, to become a feasible solution
for incorporation in such an exoskeleton. Using penetrating needles, with the pain, dis­
comfort, hygienic requirements etc. that follows with such a solution, does not seem like a
promising path to follow, to find a feasible way of detecting the EMG signal. It’s therefore
more relevant to study the feasibility of sEMG despite its disadvantages with regards to
signal quality. Going forward sEMG will therefore be the focus of this thesis.
2.3.3
Surface EMG (sEMG)
As previously explained the exitation of a muscle fiber by a motor neuron causes an action
potential to travel along the muscle fiber membrane. When a muscle is contracted the
action potentials of many motor units reach the skin in what is called the superposed
surface signal.
(a) The superposed signal from several
motor units reaching the skin
(b) Bipolar electrodes recording the superposed action po­
tentials
Figure 2.9: The sEMG recording process, from [14]
sEMG, in its most common (bipolar) form, works by placing two electrodes on the surface
of the skin over the muscle in interest. They measure difference in charge between the
two electrodes using differential amplification. So, if there is a more positive charge on
one electrode compared with the other, it results in a differential signal. This way the
superposed surface signal is detected.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Signal Processing in sEMG Fatigue Detection
The field of signal processing is vast, and so is the range of signal processing techniques
that have historically been applied in the field of sEMG fatigue detection. The focus in
the following section will therefore be to give the reader an understanding of the signal
processing techniques applied in this project.
Signal processing is what allows us to extract parameters from the raw EMG data, useful
for detecting fatigue. The raw EMG data is the input to the signal process and the pa­
rameters are the output. Often, signal processing is not just a single transformation but
a series of transformations sequentially applied to the signal to get to a certain outcome.
The field of signal processing can be seen as a toolbox of possible transformations that
can be applied depending on the desired outcome. For this thesis a certain subset of
these transformations have been chosen based on previous work, and it is this subset
that will be explained below, but first to give the reader a better overview the processing
steps used in this project have been outlined in figure 2.10 below.
Raw EMG 
Signal
Bandpass 
Filter
Rectification
Rectified 
EMG
Moving 
Average
ARV
Bandpassed 
Signal
Zero Crossing
Counter
Differentiation
ZCR
Signal 
Derivative
Moving 
Average
Zero Crossing
Counter
DZCR
Fourier 
Transform
Power 
Spectrum
STFT
MDF
Integration
Spectrogram
MDF
Integration
Time Domain
Frequency Domain
Time-Frequency Domain
Figure 2.10: Pipeline of the EMG signal processing used in this project.
The steps all serve to transform the signal in such a way that allows for the extraction of
parameters that can be used to detect fatigue. In figure 2.10 above, the fatigue detecting
parameters are shown as the yellow boxes, the signal processing steps as blue boxes,
the raw and transformed signals as white boxes and in the background, the domain of all
steps are shown. In the below sections the steps will be described following the structure
of the figure.
2.4.1
Time Domain
When a signal has amplitudes measured over time, it’s known as the time domain of
the signal. For analog signals, the time axis is continous, meaning that there is a value
for every possible point in time. For a digital signal, on the other hand, the time axis is
discrete, meaning that the values are only known at certain timesteps. This is also known
as a timeseries. The signal emitted from the muscles is analog by nature, but when
it enters the EMG amplifier it is converted to a digital signal using an analog­to­digital
converter (ADC). The conversion from analog to digital is done by sampling the analog
signal at certain intervals (the sampling rate) and saving those values as a (discrete) time
series. In figure 2.11 below the time domain of a signal is shown. In the top figure, the
12
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:21==
continous analog signal is shown and below it, digital samples at different sampling rates
are shown.
Figure 2.11: ADC conversion
with different sampling rates,
from [14]
When we describe a signal in the time domain we may talk
about the frequency of the signal. The frequency of a signal
is defined as ”the number of occurrences of a repeating event
per unit of time” [12]. In signal processing the unit of time
is often seconds, in which case the frequency is measured
in Hz (occurences per second) which is also the SI­unit of
frequency. If something occurs 120 times per minute, the
frequency is said to be 2Hz.
If we have a simple wave with a constant frequency it’s pos­
sible to describe the frequency of the signal with a single
number. In figure 2.12(a) below, a sine wave signal with a
frequency of 1 Hz is shown and in figure 2.12(b) a sine wave
with a frequency of 10 Hz is shown.
When two waveform signals are mixed, their displacements
are added together as either constructive or destructive in­
terference. Constructive is when the wavetops are aligned
(the signals are in phase) and destructive is when the wave­
tops are offset. With constructive interference the resultant signal has a higher amplitude
than the input signal and with destructive the waves of the signal cancel each other out,
so that the amplitude of the resulting signal becomes lower than that of the inputs. The
result of multiple signals being mixed is called an interference pattern. In figure 2.12(c),
the interference pattern resulting from mixing together the signals of figure 2.12(a) and
2.12(b) is shown.
Figure 2.12: Top left: Sine wave of 1Hz, top middle: Sine wave of 10Hz, top right: Interference
pattern of 1Hz + 10Hz signals, bottom row: Power spectra of each of the signals.
By applying what is known as a Fourier transformation to the signal, it’s possible to cal­
culate and show the frequency components of a signal [16]. When doing so, the signal
is also transformed from the time domain to the frequency domain and the information is
no longer a function of time, but of frequency. When two waves with different frequencies
are combined in an interference pattern, the frequencies of the signals are also combined
to form a more complex frequency composition.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
13
==PAGE:22==
Using, the fourier transformation it’s possible to decompose this signal to see the con­
stituent frequency components that formed the more complex interference pattern. The
bottom row of figure 2.12, shows the corresponding power spectra of the signal directly
above them. It can be seen how the complex interference pattern shown in figure 2.12(c)
also has two frequency components 2.12(d). Notice that the size of the frequency com­
ponents in the power spectra is proportional to the amplitude of the frequency in the in­
terference pattern. It should be noted that the sEMG signal is also an interference pat­
tern ­ being a ”superposed” signal consisting of the combined motor unit action potentials
(MUAPs).
Having laid the foundation of what the time and frequency domain of a signal are, we may
now proceed to look at the signal processing techniques of the time­domain used in this
thesis.
2.4.1.1
Band­pass Filtering
As can be seen from figure 2.10, the raw sEMG signal starts in the time­domain. From
here we start by passing it through a bandpass filter. To understand the bandpass filter,
we may start by explaining its two siblings ­ the low­ and the high­pass filters.
The role of the low­pass filter is to ”get rid off” (filter out) all of the frequencies above a
certain treshold, thereby letting only the ”low” frequencies ”pass”. If we applied a low
pass filter of 5 Hz to the interference pattern of figure 2.12(c), we would filter out all of the
frequencies component of figure 2.12(b), that came from a frequency of 10Hz, leaving us
with only the frequency components from figure 2.12(a). The result of applying a 5 Hz
low­pass filter to figure 2.12(c) would therfore be similar to figure 2.12(a).
If we instead applied a high­pass filter, we filter out the frequencies lower than a specified
treshold, only letting the frequencies higher than the treshold pass i.e., the opposite effect
of the low­pass filter. Applying a 5hz high­pass filter to the interference pattern in figure
2.12(c) would result in a signal similar to figure 2.12(b), where only the high­frequency
components of the signal are kept.
The band­pass filter can be seen as a combination of the two previously mentioned filters.
With a bandpass filter, we specify the band or interval of frequencies we want to keep
(pass the filter). Applying a 5­500 Hz bandpass filter would filter out frequencies below 5
Hz and above 500 Hz. The same could be achieved by applying a 500 Hz low­pass filter
and a 5 Hz high­pass filter.
2.4.1.2
Rectification
Rectifying a signal, simply means to convert the negative values to positive values of same
amplitude, i.e. taking the absolute value of all samples. The raw EMG signal is centered
around zero with both positive and negative fluctuations. Rectification is part of the normal
EMG signal preprocessing pipeline. There are two main purposes with rectification: First,
it enhances the firing rate information [17] used here for frequency shift estimation and
second, it is used for calculating the amplitude using a moving average.
2.4.1.3
Zero­Crossing Rate (ZCR
The zero crossing rate is the number of times the signal crosses the zero line (x­axis) per
time unit. It gives an indication of the average frequency of a signal as more zero crossings
per time unit would indicate a signal with shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies.
14
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:23==
2.4.1.4
Signal Derivative
The signal derivative measures the change of the signal over time and is calculated as
shown in eq. 2.1 below.
x′
i = xi+1 −xi−1
2
(2.1)
2.4.2
Frequency Domain
As explained above in section 2.4.1, the frequency domain shows the frequency compo­
nents of a signal. This can be achieved by applying a Fourier Transform to the signal
in the time domain, the output is the power spectrum, that can be seen as a histogram
showing the amount of each frequency of a signal.
2.4.2.1
Power Spectrum and Median Frequency
Shown below in figure is an example of a power spectrum figure 2.13. Also shown on
the figure is the median frequency. The median frequency is defined as ” the frequency
at which the EMG power spectrum is divided into two regions with equal amplitude” [18].
The median frequency is therefore useful for tracking the left shift of the power spectrum
that’s often asociated with fatigue.
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency (Hz)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Power Spectral Density
1e6
Power Spectra of Fatigued EMG-Signal
Fatigued Power Spectrum
Fatigued MDF
Figure 2.13: A power spectrum of a fatigued EMG signal with its median frequency shown
2.4.3
Time­Frequency Domain
When the Fourier transformation is applied on a signal, the resulting power spectrum
shows the frequency components of that signal in the frequency domain. On the x­axis
are the frequencies and on the y­axis the power (a measure of how much of the amplitude
comes from a particular frequency component). There is no time axis, and as such, the
temporal information is lost and any changes in the composition of the frequency compo­
nents as they happen over time would simply be averaged out. The frequency domain
is therefore only suitable for stationary signals that does not elicit any changes in the fre­
quency composition over time. To show changes in the frequency composition over time,
the signal must be converted to the time­frequency domain instead [16].
The time­frequency domain, shows the changes to the frequency composition as they
happen over time. Whereas the power spectrum of the frequency domain only had the
frequencies and their powers as dimensions, the time­frequency domain adds a third
dimension of time. A simple way to view it, is as a lot of seqeuantial power spetrums,
each computed on their small segment of the signal.
There are several methods for converting a signal from the time domain to the time­
frequency domain.
The arguably simplest method is the short­time fourier transform
(STFT). It works by going over the signal, segment by segment, with a specified win­
dow length and hoplength, and computing the frequency transform for each segment.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
15
==PAGE:24==
The outputted power spectrums are stacked in a representation called a spectrogram.
The spectrogram is usually shown with frequency on the y­axis, time on the x­axis and
the power shown as a color intensity.
16
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:25==
2.5
Machine Learning
As with signal processing, machine learning too is a vast area of research and we will
therefore not make any attempt at covering the field in its entirety, but rather give a brief
introduction to the concepts necessary to understand the methods used in this thesis.
2.5.1
Main Concepts
Broadly speaking machine learning can be divided into two subfields: Supervised­ and
unsupervised learning (although hybrids between the two also exist).
Both methods are trained on observations. An observation is a piece of data, represented
by its features. If the dataset was about used cars for example, the observation could
be a used car listing from a website and its features could be its price, age, mileage,
horsepower, condition etc. In unsupervised learning the task would simply be to try to
find patterns in the observations based on these features as with clustering, where the
observations are grouped based on their similarity.
In supervised learning however, we would try to predict one of the features based on
the others. The predicted feature is called the target variable (aka output­ or predicted
variable), and the features used to predict this target variable are the input variables or
simply features. When the observations have a target variable that we try to predict, we
also say that the data is labeled, in contrast to the unlabeled data we use in unsupervised
learning.
In the used cars example the price could be the target variable, that we would try to pre­
dict, and the features would be the remaining variables i.e., age, milage, horsepower etc.
We would then train the model on observations of used cars and their price, where the
parameters of the model would be tuned in such a way as to minimize its error when
predicting on this training data, shown to it. After training the model, it’s possible to evalu­
ate its performance on so­called test data, for which we know the true values of the target
variable, but only give the model the input variables and ask it to come with its predictions,
that can then be compared with the true values for the evaluation of its performance.
Supervised learning can be further subdivided depending on the nature of the target vari­
able that is predicted. If the target variable is categorical, we say that it has classes, and
the problem is a classification problem. If the target variable is continuous, it’s a regres­
sion problem. In the used cars example an example of a discrete target variable, could
be the brand of the car. So, if we tried to predict the car brand from the other variables it
would be a classification task. Continuous target variables could be price, age, milage or
horsepower – predicting these from the other variables would be regression tasks.
2.5.2
Regression Models
Many previous papers on the subject of muscle fatigue detection model it as a binary
classification problem [19][20], where the subject can either be fatigued or not. Some
papers have introduced a third class transition­to­fatigue [9] to capture some level of the
progression. But only few papers model it as a regression problem [21]. That is, however,
what we will attempt to do in this project. To do so, we will make us of two regression
models ­ multiple linear regression and random forest regressor. It is assumed that the
reader knows how a linear regression model works. But the underlying principle of the
random forest regressor will be explained.
2.5.3
Random Forest Regressor
The random forest estimator is an example of what is known in machine learning as an
ensemble method. Ensemble methods use multiple models to obtain better predictive per­
formance than the models can by themselves. More specifically random forests belong
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
17
==PAGE:26==
to a subcategory of ensemble methods, known as bagging. The ”base” model of a ran­
dom forest regressor is regression trees (similar to a decision tree, but outputs continous
predictions).
The problem with regression/decision trees are that they are prone to overfitting. Bagging
is a way to overcome this. The overall idea behind bagging is to train many ”weak learners”
and combine their predictions to create a strong learner, the weak learners in this case
being the individual regression trees and the strong learner being the random forest (of
regression trees).
(a) Concept of bagging, shown for classifier, but
same principle applies to regressors, from [22]
(b) Individual and ensembled predictions of
regression trees and random forest respec­
tively, from [23]
Figure 2.14: Concepts of random forest regressor
The general idea behind bagging (bootstrapped aggregating) is to combine (aggregate)
the predictions of many weak learners. Each of the weak learners are overfit to the training
data, but each in their own way, thereby canceling out each others errors in the ensem­
bled/aggregated prediction. The crucial point here is that the each model have to be
overfit in a different way , to ensure that the errors cancel out each other.
This is what the bootstrapping part of bagging ensures. Bootstrapping means that each
of regression trees are trained on a randomly sampled (with replacement) subset of the
training dataset (see figure 2.14a). The sampled observations will influence the param­
eters of each tree. This means that if there is an outlier in an area of the data, many of
the models will not have included this outlier in their training dataset and would not fit to
it but simply interpolate a prediction over the area based on nearby observations. The
outlier will then only influence the combined prediction through the effect it had on the few
models, that did include it, thereby scaling its ”say” / influence by its probability.
To summarize; each regression tree (weak learner) is trained on its own randomly sampled
subset of the training data (bootstrapping). When the random forest model predicts, it’s
simply the aggregation (the mean) of all of the predictions of the regression trees (see
figure 2.14b). [24] [23]
2.5.4
Model Evaluation
In supervised machine learning, the overall idea is to train a model to predict a label,
based on a labelled dataset and then use the same model to predict unlabeled data. In
the case of this project, the label is the fatigue level, that we will obtain by measuring the
time from the specific observation (a time window of signals) until the person fatigues.
The labelling of the data can only be done retrospectively as we can only know how long
there is from an observation to a subject has fatigued, after the subject has fatigued. This
is, of course, also the motivation for creating such a model.
18
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:27==
Not only can we use the historic labelled data to train a model to predict, we can also use
the it to evaluate the performance of the model. This is done by inputting the features
of labelled observations and comparing the outputted predictions with the true labels of
those observations.
2.5.4.1
Cross­validation
When evaluating the performance of a model, we want to evaluate the model on ”unseen”
data ­ meaning data that has not been used to train the model. This is because, if we were
to evaluate the model on the same data on which it had been trained, the model could ­
given enough parameters ­ fit the training data perfectly and the evaluation would show a
perfect accuracy [25]. However, this would be misleading, the model would have simply
overfitted itself to model random fluctuations of the training data observations. But by
using the training dataset for evaluation we would not be aware of this.
Figure 2.15: Polynomial models with various orders showing underfitting at M=0,1 correct fitting
at M=3 and overfitting at M=9, from [25]
The concept of overfitting is visualized above, where the green line represents the un­
derlying true process from which the observations (blue dots) are generated. Ideally we
want a model as close as possible to this green line. However, we notice that the blue
dots, does not excactly follow the green line, this is because of they are generated from
the green line plus a noise factor. If we fit polynomial models of orders M = 0, 1, 3 and
9 to the observations we obtain the models shown in figure 2.15. Here, the model with
M = 9 is an example of overfitting that would not be detected if we were to evaluate on
the same subset of the data, that was used for training. While models M = 0 and M = 1
are examples of underfitting.
It should therefore be clear that training and evaluating a model on the same observa­
tions is not advisable, as it doesn’t detect overfitting and generally does not give a good
indication of the model’s true generalization error [25]. A way to mitigate this is by split­
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
19
==PAGE:28==
ting the dataset into two subsets ­ a train and a test set. When doing so, a portion of the
observations are held out from the training and only used for evaluating the model.
Figure 2.16: Varying validation error depending on choice of data points for set, from [24]
As it can be seen from figure 2.16 above, the measured test error largely depends on
which of the observations are chosen for the test and train set.
To mitigate this, we may use cross validation. A common method of cross validation is
using k­fold cross validation. When we do k­fold cross validation, we do k different splits,
such that if k = 4 we do four different test­train splits of the same dataset, where the test
size is equal to one third (1/k) of the dataset as shown in figure 2.17 below.
Figure 2.17: 4­fold cross validation from [26]
As can be seen from figure 2.17, when performing k­fold cross validation all observations
will be part of the test set in one fold. The test error obtained in each fold will likely
fluctuate depending the observations that are used for testing and training, but by taking
an avearage of each of the test errors, we obtain a test error, that is closer to the true
generalization error [24].
When we perform cross validation we assume the data to be independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.), i.e. the data points have the same probability distribution and are mu­
tually independant. This assumption does not hold true for our dataset however. In our
dataset, each observation is the data obtained from performing a single cycle of the dy­
namic movement i.e., a bicep curl. But our observations are not identically distributed as
each cycle belong to a specific trial of the experiment and the trial affects the probability
distribution from which the sample/observation is drawn i.e., a subject with a thin fat layer
may present vastly different EMG signals than a subject with a thick layer of fat and inter­
trial factors such as electrode placement will also affect the probability distribution of the
samples. We may say that the data is grouoped by trials, where each group comes from
it’s own generative process.
20
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:29==
We will therefore use a group­wise cross validation, where the splits of the folds will be
made according to the groups of the data, such that the test set will always be one of
the groups/trials AKA. a leave­one­group­out cross validation [26]. In other words, we
will train the model on all but one trial and then test the performance of the model on the
trial left out from the training set. This way, we avoid that the model have already seen
observations from the trial on which it is tested which could unfairly help the model in
predicting other observations from the same trial.
2.5.4.2
Evaluation Metrics
In the previous sections we mentioned the concept of errors, the error can be seen as a
form of distance between the predicted and the true values. To measure this distance, we
have different metrics available. Overall the metrics can be divided in two groups, those
for classification tasks and those for regression tasks, and within these two groups there
are also several different metrics, depending on task. In this project we will use regression
to predict fatigue as a continous variable and we will therefore focus on the metrics used
in regression.
To keep the evaluation simple we will use the mean absolute error (MAE) to evaluate the
predictions of our model. The MAE is computed as follows:
MAE =
∑n
i=1|yi −ˆyi|
n
(2.2)
Where yi is the real value and ˆyi is the predicted value. The MAE, measures, as the
name strongly suggests, the average absolute size of our prediction error. Sometimes,
it’s useful to use an error metric that measures the error on a relative scale rather than on
an absolute scale as the MAE does. For example, if the target variable varies greatly in
size between observations. An example of this could be when predicting prices of items.
If we had a dataset of property prices for example, we may have been better off measuring
the error in relative terms instead, as an error of 50,000 € on a property worth 10 million
€ would be very different than an error of 50,000 € on a property worth 100,000 €. With
such a target variable, a relative metric like the mean average percentage error (MAPE)
may be more suitable, perhaps in conjunction with an absolute error metric. But since
the target variable we will be predicting will be the normalized time until fatigue, all target
variables will be on the same scale and there is therefore no need to use a relative error
metric.
´´
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:31==
3
State of Research
3.1
EMG­based Fatigue Detection
Fatigue detection using EMG dates all the way back to 1912, when Piper first noticed a
change in the signal during fatiguing contractions [27]. In the section below we will go
through some of the most notable research since then, showing the development in the
area.
The discovery that muscles generate electricity dates all the way back to Francesco Redi’s
work in 1666. In 1890 the first actual recording of the generated electricity through muscu­
lar activity was done by Étienne­Jules Marey, who also introduced the term electromyog­
raphy. In 1912, the German professor H. Piper was the first to notice a certain “slowing” of
the signal during static contractions. This slowing was later found to be a compression of
the frequency spectrum towards lower frequencies by Cobb and Forbes in 1923 [28], who
also noted an increase in the signal amplitude during fatigue. More systematic research
on the influence of fatigue on the properties of the myoelectric signals began around the
1950’s, where numerous papers quantified the shift towards lower frequencies of the my­
oelectric signal power spectrum as well as the change in amplitude in various muscles of
the human body [8].
In the era before the early­ to mid­nineties of the 19th century, the field of EMG­based fa­
tigue detection was mostly concerned with being able to detect fatigue in isometric (static)
contractions i.e. contractions where the subject simply holds a weight until fatigue, as the
methods for detecting fatigue during dynamic contractions was still to be developed and
it’s far more complicated to detect fatigue in dynamic contractions as the movements
induce noise and the signal changes as a function of muscle extension and relative posi­
tion of the electrodes etc. So, in order to detect fatigue in isometric contractions various
parameters were extracted to detect and quantify the fatigue­induced changes already
discovered, namely the shift of the frequency spectrum towards lower frequencies as well
as the increase in amplitude. The parameters used were found in either the time­ or
frequency­domain of the signal.
In the frequency­domain, the mean frequency (MNF) of the power spectrum was intro­
duced in 1970 by Kwatny et al. [29] as a way to detect the previously observed fre­
quency and thereby determine between fatigue and non­fatigue. In 1981, this was further
improved by using the median frequency instead [30] which proved to be slightly more
accurate in detecting fatigue [citation].
In the time­domain, a number of other parameters was found to be useful in the detection
of fatigue. The amplitude increase that’s linked to fatigue, is found in the time­domain
through measures such as the mean absolute value (MAV) and the root mean square
(RMS) of the signal. But it’s also possible to detect the frequency shift in the time­domain
– at least indirectly. Either through the use of zero crossings as introduced by Hägg in
1981 [31] or spike analysis [8].
Around the mid 1990’s researchers began more intensely tackling the problem of dynamic
contractions, this was done through the transformation of the signal to the time­frequency­
domain in order to investigate the changes in the frequency content over time [8]. Vari­
ous methods were used for the transform, including short­time­Fourier­transform (STFT),
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
23
==PAGE:32==
Wigner­Ville distribution (WVD), Choi­Williams distribution and continuous wavelet trans­
form, all providing ways to see the development of the frequency distribution in a contin­
uous way, over time. This way it’s possible to extract the normal frequency parameters,
such as the MNF and MDF, at any instant. These parameters are referred to as the in­
stantaneous mean frequency (iMNF) and instantaneous median frequency (iMDF). The
various methods for the time­frequency transformation have been compared in several
papers [32]. For example, Ricamato et al. showed that the Wigner­Ville distribution was
useful for showing recruitment patterns of individual MUs [33], but it was later shown by
Davies and Reismann in 1994, that the WVD was not accurate in displaying the changes
of frequency components with muscle fatigue. Davies and Reismann also showed that
the STFT was the most accurate in representing the frequency compression. Karlsson et
al. found that the parameter estimations provided by the CWT were slightly more accurate
than those found by the other transformations [34]. In 2001, showed that the averaging
associated with the STFT, could be useful in controlling the non­stationarities exhibited
by the dynamic EMG signal [35].
Since then much of the work has been focused on using more advanced, often machine
learning based methods for predicting fatigue. In 2006, MacIsaac et al. [36] used a small
fully connected Multi­layer Perceptron to map traditional parameters to the fatigue level.
Another paper in 2009 [37] used a combination of time­frequency transforms, ICA and a
neural network.
Most recently, many papers have used deep learning based approaches [38], using pop­
ular architectures such as LSTM [19] and CNN [39] or a combination of the two [40].
24
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:33==
4
Method
4.1
Experiments
4.1.1
Experimental Procedures
4.1.1.1
Skin Preperation
The skin is prepared in accordance with the SENIAM guidelines [41]. The procedure for
cleaning the skin was as follows. This is done by first washing the skin with pure soap
(to avoid residues) and ragged cloth, the ragged cloth serves to mildly exfoliate the skin,
removing dead skin cells that have higher impedance. Next, clinical alcohol is sprayed
on the skin and wiped with a skin cleaning pad, to further remove any sebum that may
obstruct the signal. It’s important to use clinical alcohol without additives such as glycol
as this can leave a residue on the skin. The cleaning pads are chosen over paper towel,
as they do not deposit fibers when used.
4.1.1.2
Electrode Placement
The subject is asked to sit down and bend the elbow to an angle of 70 degrees holding
the wrist in a supinated position. Holding the arm in this position serves the purpose of
mimicking the top position of the elbow curl, where the opsition of the Biceps Brachii (BB)
relative to the skin is most proximal. To ensure that the electrodes are positioned above
the BB during the entire movement cycle, while also being as distal as possible to avoid
innervation zones (zones of many motor end plates), we therefore position the electrodes
in the most distal region of the biceps while the arm is held in this position, this position is
also as suggested by the SENIAM guidelines [41].
To locate the BB under the skin, the subject is asked to perform a volantary isometric
contraction while holding the 70 degree angle, after which the BB may be visually located
or felt through the skin depending on the physiology of the subject. If the subject is not
able to voluntarily contract the muscle the clinician may aid by applying a constant outward
force to the wrist of the subject while asking the subject to resist the force.
After having located the most distal region of the biceps at a 70 degree flexion, two gel­
pad electrodes are positioned along a line from the acromion to the distal insertion of
the biceps brachii tendon, with a 20 mm electrode distance. Furthermore, the reference
electrode is placed at the elbow to avoid muscles.
4.1.1.3
Movement Pattern
In Experiment II the goal is to predict fatigue during cyclic dynamic contractions. To en­
sure that the subjects perform these contractions in a similar way both in terms of speed
and range of motion, they are asked to follow an animated pattern shown on a screen,
programmed using Python by the author. The animation shown resembles the arm with
two lines representing the upper­ and the forearm. During the experiment the two lines
are animated, showing a biceps curl see figure 4.1 below, where half a cycle is shown.
Figure 4.1: Metronome with countdown timer
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
25
==PAGE:34==
The movement pattern shown is as follows: First, a 10 second section of isometric con­
traction followed by a 50 second section of cyclic dynamic contractions at 24Hz, these two
sections are then alternately repeated until fatigue. For future reference we will refer to a
segment of 10 seconds of isometric contraction and 50 seconds of dynamic contractions
as one period, within the 50 second dynamic contraction segment we have the biceps
curls, where one bicep curls will be refered to as ”a cycle”. The frequency of the cycles
were 24 Hz, such that the duration of each cycle was 2.5 seconds. The animated elbow
angle was based on sinusoidal function as this was found to closely resemble the velocity
and acceleration of a natural cyclic elbow flexion.
4.1.2
Experiment I, Fatigue under Isometric Contractions (Pilot)
In the first experiment, the subject is asked to hold a dumbbell of 30% of their maximum
capacity (1RM) in a 90­degree angle for as long as they can, while the EMG signal of the
Biceps Brachii is being recorded and the elbow angle is recorded using a video camera
with computer vision. In the section below, the individual steps of the experiment will be
more thoroughly explained.
Step 1: The subject’s skin on the overarm used for the experiment is cleaned.
Step 2: Gel­pad electrodes are placed on the subject as described in section 4.1.1.2.
Step 3: The subject is positioned 3 meters from the camera facing perpendicular to the
camera i.e., the arm holding the dumbbell faces the camera.
Step 4: The amplifier is turned on and connected to the OpenSignals application where
a recording is initiated, activating the LabStreamingLayer output.
Step 5: The Python script ”DataCapture.py” is run, starting the recording of the EMG
signal and videostream.
Step 6: The subject is given a dumbbell and are asked to keep it at a 90­degree flexion
of the elbow joint, such that the upper arm is vertical, and the forearm is horizontal. The
wrist is kept neutral i.e., neither supinated nor pronated.
Step 7: During the experiment the subject is encouraged to continue for as long as they
can
Step 8: Once the subject can no longer hold the dumbbell, the script ”DataCapture.py” is
terminated and the recordings are saved to disk.
4.1.3
Experiment II, Fatigue in Dynamic Cyclic Contractions (Main)
The second experiment is very similar to the first, with the main difference being that the
subject performs elbow curls instead of holding the arm in a static position. But for clarity’s
sake the steps will still be outlined below:
Step 1: The subject’s skin on the overarm used for the experiment is cleaned.
Step 2: Gel­pad electrodes are placed on the subject as described in section 4.1.1.2.
Step 3: The subject is positioned 3 meters from the camera facing perpendicular to the
camera i.e., the arm holding the dumbbell faces the camera.
Step 4: The amplifier is turned on and connected to the OpenSignals application where
a recording is initiated, activating the LabStreamingLayer output.
Step 5: The Python script ”Metronome.py” is run, showing an animated arm on the screen.
26
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:35==
Step 6: The Python script ”DataCapture.py” is run, starting the recording of the EMG
signal and videostream.
Step 7: The subject is given a dumbbell and are asked to follow the animation shown on
the screen. The wrist is kept neutral i.e., neither supinated nor pronated.
Step 8: During the experiment the subject is encouraged to continue for as long as they
can.
Step 9: Once the subject can no longer follow the animation, the scripts ”DataCapture.py”
and ”Metronome.py” are terminated and the recordings are saved to disk.
4.1.4
Motivation of Experimental Design
4.1.4.1
Experimental Architecture
Two experiments were performed. The first experiment would aim to detect fatigue under
isometric contractions (not moving the joint), and the second would aim to detect fatigue
under cyclic dynamic contractions (moving the joint).
The motivation for this is that it is simpler to detect fatigue in isometric contractions, than
in dynamic, and EMG, although deceivingly simple to apply, is known for having many
factors that can go wrong [42]. It was therefore most sensible to start with a simpler
experiment, use this to verify that the data acquisition method worked as intended and
perform any troubleshooting on this experiment if needed. If it could be shown that the
experimental setup was able to detect fatigue under the isometric contractions, the same
setup could then be used for the more complex task of dynamic fatigue detection. That
way there would be fewer uncertain variables if the second experiment failed to detect
fatigue.
4.1.4.2
Choice of Muscle
The Biceps Brachii was chosen for several reasons. First, the current prototype of the
ReHyb exoskeleton focuses on large movements of the arm, and is positioned on the
upper­ and the forearm – i.e. around the elbow joint [3]. The biceps brachii is the main
agonist muscle driving the flexion of the elbow joint, with the triceps being the antagonist
muscle of the flexion and vise versa for extensions. The triceps could therefore also
have been chosen, but it’s less convenient to perform elbow extensions, as it requires the
elbow to be in a position where the extension works against gravity if using dumbbells or
alternatively the use of cable machines.
Second, the biceps brachii is often studied in the literature of muscle fatigue research and
there is therefore more available literature on the subject that may help both in the design
of the experiment and to compare results. Furthermore, the short head of the biceps
was chosen as popular sports literature suggests that the short head is more active when
performing curls with a supinated or neutral grip [43].
4.1.4.3
Movement Pattern
The following only applies to Experiment II (Dynamic). The movement pattern is as de­
scribed in section 4.1.1.3 i.e., first a 10 second section of isometric contraction followed by
a 50 second section of cyclic dynamic contractions at 24Hz, these two sections are then
alternately repeated until fatigue. The design is based on a previous fatigue study [36],
where the motivation for including the sections of isometric contractions was that could
serve to verify the fatiguing process as these sections can be more easily analyzed.
As for the sections of cyclic dynamic contractions, they were performed at a rate of 24Hz
or 2.5 seconds per cycle. The motivation behind this somewhat slow rate was that slower
movements would allow for near stationarity at the required window lengths for the STFT,
which is usually around 500 milliseconds [44]. Slower movements would mean more
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
27
==PAGE:36==
stationary conditions within each time window. On the other hand, the movements could
not be too slow as it would be unnatural for the subject, so a tradeoff was chosen at 2.5
seconds per cycle.
4.1.4.4
Load
The number of observations gathered for the model was linearly proportional with the
amount of time subjects performed the exercise as one observation is one cycle of the
dynamic contraction. The load was therefore adjusted to a point where subjects would
be able to continue the exercise for around 5­10 minutes, which would allow for 100­200
observations to be gathered per trial, to ensure efficiency of the experiments in gather­
ing the data. Untrained subjects used a dumbbell of 1.6 kg and trained subject used a
dumbbell of 2.6 kg.
4.1.4.5
sEMG Recording Equipment
This study is different to many other muscle fatigue detection studies by being a feasibility
study, this also means that more factors than the quality of the equipment should be taken
into consideration.
Many muscle fatigue detection studies use very expensive clinical grade sEMG recording
equipment from manufacturers such as BioPac, Noraxon and Delsys [37]. Quotes were
obtained from these companies with prices of around 10,000 USD and upwards, which
would probably not be feasible to include in an exoskeleton as only one of several sensors.
On the other end of the spectrum, we tested a device called MyoWare™Muscle Sensor,
which is a 20 USD consumer grade EMG amplifier that is often used in conjunction with
an Arduino for ADC and to send the data to a computer. However, the system had a very
low SNR that did not meet the requirements put forward by the SENIAM guidelines.
Finally, we decided to use a sensor from BioSignalsPlux with a price of around 1000 euro
[45]. That had an SNR superior to that of the MyoWare™Muscle Sensor. Furthermore,
it featured wireless streaming of the data through Bluetooth, the option of adding other
modality sensors such as temperature or ECG to the same device and 4000 Hz sampling
rate. It thereby offered a good tradeoff between price and quality for this study.
28
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Overview of Data Processing and Structure
Figure 4.2: See appendix to see each script in detail
The section below serves to give the reader an overview of how the data was processed
and structured during and after the trials were conducted. Following this overview, the
next sections will provide more details on each of the steps.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
29
==PAGE:38==
4.2.1
Part 1: Data Acquisition
The first step is to aqcuire the data during as seen in ”Part 1: Data Acquisition” in figure
4.2. Here, the script ”DataCapture.py” is run during each of the trials of the experiment
to record the datastreams from the videocamera and the EMG sensor, as they are being
streamed ”live”. The data streams are saved as arrays representing the timeseries. There
are four different arrays: The videofile, which can be seen as an array of images, the video
timestamps, the EMG observations and the EMG timestamps. These four are saved in a
folder on the disk after the trial has commenced.
4.2.2
Part 2: Data Preprocessing
The second step (”Part 2: Data Preprocessing” in figure 4.2) uses the Python script ”Dy­
namicPrep.py” that takes as input the four files created by ”DataCapture.py” and performs
some initial preprocessing tasks on these, before storing the result in the sqlite database
”experiments.sqlite”. Examples of these preprocessing tasks are the extraction of the
elbow angle from the video, converting the angular observations to the same sampling
frequency as the EMG observations and trimming of the timeseries. The reason that this
is not done directly in the ”DataCapture.py” script and then saved to the database from
there, is a wish to maintain original version of the dataset, should anything happen to the
database i.e., to have redundancy and, so that several trials can be performed succe­
sively, without the need to process the data between each trial.
4.2.3
Part 3: Feature Engineering
In the third step, the script ”ComputeFeatures.py” iterates through each record of the ”ex­
periments.sqlite” database, where each record corresponds to a trial of the experiment
with the basic timeseries stored as arrays in each field. Iterating through the records it
uses these basic timeseries to compute derived timeseries containing parameters from
the time and time­frequency domains. The results are then stored in the sqlite database
”experimentWithParams.sqlite” where each record also corresponds to a trial of the exper­
iment, although with the added computed parameters as new fields. We could also simply
add these new computed parameters as extra fields to the existing ”experiments.sqlite”
database, but chose to do it this way again for redundancy, as storage space was not an
issue.
4.2.4
Part 4: Visual Analysis
In part 4, the result of the computed parameters from part 3 is analysed. Both in details
for a single trial in the file ”singleTrialAnalysis.py” and on a comparative level in the script
”InterTrialAnalysis.py”. The result of this, is shown in the Results chapter.
4.2.5
Part 5: Predictive Analysis
Part 5 is concerned with the predictive analysis. First, in the script ”MLfromDB.py”, the
dataset is converted from the previous format, where each record was a trial, to a new
format where each record is a cycle. At the same time the timeseries parameters seg­
ments of each cycle are aggregated and added as new fields, the result of this is stored in
the database ”ML_DB.sqlite”. Finally, in the script ”ML_model.py”, the resulting database
is used to create a dataset that is directly used for the predictive modelling. This dataset
is then visually analyzed, cleaned and finally predictive models are trained and evaluated
using the dataset.
30
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:39==
4.3
Part 1: Data Acquisition
As previously described, the data acquisition was acomplished by running the script ”Dat­
aCapture.py” while a subject performed the dynamic fatigueing contractions. Data was
streamed from two sources, the video camera and the EMG sensor, that were captured
by the script and temporarily recorded as arrays. After the experiment these variables
were saved to the disk. In the below section we will explain how this was accomplished
in more details.
4.3.1
Overview of the algorithm
Algorithm 1 Data Capturing Loop
1: emgConnection ←connectToEmgStream()
2: cameraConnection ←connectToCamera()
3:
4: INIT a_emg, t_emg, video, t_video
5:
6: while not terminated do
7:
frame ←cameraConnection.readCamera()
8:
timeOfFrame ←getCurrentTime()
9:
emg_amps, emg_timestamps ←emgConnection.readEMGChunk()
10:
11:
APPEND(video, angle)
12:
APPEND(t_video, timeOfFrame)
13:
APPEND(a_emg, emg_amps)
14:
APPEND(t_emg, emg_timeStamps)
15: end while
In listing 1 seen above, the data capturing algorithm has been written as pseudocode.
The algorithm begins by initializing connections with the two datastreams in line 1 and 2.
It then proceeds to initialize four arrays: a_emg, t_emg, video and t_video. These four
arrays will hold/record the emg amplitude values, the emg timestamps, the videoframes
and the timestamps of the videoframes, respectively. After the initialization of these four
arrays a while­loop that continues for the duration of the experiment is initiated. It is this
while­loop that is responsible for recording the input from the streams and saving it to the
respective arrays. This is done by reading from the two datastreams and saving the values
as variables. as can be seen from lines 7­9, and then saving the values in their respective
arrays as seen in line 11­14. Notice that the EMG stream comes with timestamps, but the
video does not, we therefore add the timestamp of the videoframe manually. The steps
outlined above will be more thorougly explained below.
4.3.2
Data Streaming
We receive two datastreams ­ the emg datastream and the video datastream. In the below
section we will describe how each of these are received.
4.3.2.1
Video Datastream
The video signal is streamed from a consumer grade Logitech C505 HD webcam, record­
ing at 30 fps and 720p, connected to the computer via USB. The Python library OpenCV is
used to establish the connection and read the images from the camera. The native fram­
erate of the camera also dictates the speed of the while­loop, although if the computer is
not able to keep up with this framerate the resulting framerate will be lower.
4.3.2.2
EMG Datastream
The EMG data is captured using the sensor described in section 4.1.4.5.
First, it is
streamed via Bluetooth to the application OpenSignals [], from here it is streamed as
an outlet using the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL), that streams the data over the network
[46]. Finally, it’s received by the DataCapture.py script as an inlet. The EMG signal has
a sample frequency of 4000 Hz, but the data capturing loop only runs at around 30 iter­
ations/second, so for every iteration of the loop there will have been appoximately 133
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
31
==PAGE:40==
recorded samples of the EMG signal. For this reason the data is read in chunks in every
iteration using a buffer provided by the LSL system.
4.3.3
Data Synchronization
A large obstacle to receiving the two datastreams was the synchronization. The solution
used was to record both streams in this single loop binding the observations together.
However it might be more optimal to run them in seperate threads as this may speed up
data reception.
4.3.4
Data Export
After the experiment has commenced the loop is ended and the 3 arrays a_emg, t_emg,
and t_video are stored as pickled numpy arrays on the disk, and the video file is stored in
the .avi format, also on disk. All files are prepended by the datetime of the record.
32
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:41==
4.4
Part 2: Data Preprocessing
As described in section 4.2.2, the purpose of ”Part 2: Data preprocessing” is to read
the timeseries arrays outputted from ”Part 1: DataCapture”, perform some preprocessing
tasks on them and finally add them to the database ”experiments.sqlite”.
Figure 4.3: Part 2: Data Preprocessing Structure
4.4.1
Extraction of Angle from Video
During the experiment the video and EMG sensor data was recorded using the loop de­
scribed in section 4.3.1. The motivation for collecting a video of the experiment, was to be
able to get the elbow angle from the video using computer vision. In theory this could be
done “online” i.e., during the experiment. That way, since we are after all only interested
in the angels derived from the video, we could avoid saving the large video files and only
save the angels. This could be done by changing the data capture loop given in algorithm
1 to:
Algorithm 2 An algorithm with caption 2
1: INIT a_emg, t_emg, angle_video, t_video
2: while not terminated do
3:
frame ←readCamera()
4:
angle ←getAngle(frame)
5:
timeOfFrame ←getCurrentTime()
6:
emg_amps, emg_timestamps ←readEMGChunk()
7:
8:
APPEND(angle_video, angle)
9:
APPEND(t_video, timeOfFrame)
10:
APPEND(a_emg, emg_amps)
11:
APPEND(t_emg, emg_timeStamps)
12: end while
This is almost identical to algorithm 1, but with the difference here being that instead of
simply saving the videoframes to an array as was done in algorithm 1, the approach here
is to read the frame and use the machine vision function within the loop (line 4, algorithm
2) to extract the angle and then save the angles (line 8, algorithm 2), thereby avoiding to
save the entire video.
The problem with the approach shown in algorithm 2 i.e., processing the images to extract
the angles during the capturing is that it increases the runtime of each iteration so much,
that it considerably lowers the recorded framerate. This was found experimentally, as this
method was the one initially used to capture the data. Having a lower framerate, means
having fewer observations of the elbow angle per second, whereas the sample frequency
of the EMG signal will remain unchanged as these are simply loaded in chunks waiting in
a buffer [47], with each iteration.
There are then at least two possible solutions:
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
33
==PAGE:42==
1: Do as in algorithm 2 i.e., use the computer vision algorithm to extract the angles in real
time. And then solve the subsequent decrease in sample rate of angle measurements
by interpolation. Where the interpolation could be done by fitting a sine function to the
observations that we do have.
2: Do as in algorithm 1 i.e., record and save the video frames, to get a higher framerate,
and then run the computer vision to extract the angles, as a post­process e.g. after the
video has been captured.
We chose to use the second solution, as it’s preferable to have a higher frequency of
real observations of the angles, rather than relying on interpolation. This is especially the
case becasue of the cyclic movements of experiment II, where having few observations
per cycle could result in the sine curve fitting poorly and thereby the interpolation becoming
unreliable.
To calculate the elbow angle in the post­processing, a library called MediaPipe Pose was
used. Mediapipe Pose provides a Python API, where its possible using a function provided
by the library to input an image and get back the coordinates (in real­world 3D coordinates
in meters with the origin at the center between hips) of certain landmarks as seen in figure
4.4 below. [48]
Figure 4.4: MediaPipe pose detection for two subjects during Experiment II
It was then possible to calculate the angle of the elbow joint using the 3D coordinates of the
landmarks. This was done by creating a function that takes as input the 3D coordinates
of the landmarks corresponding to the shoulder, elbow and wrist (either left or right), and
returns the angle of the elbow joint. This is done using trigonometry, as it reduces to
finding the angle between two vectors with the origin set to the elbow joint, and the two
vectors being the upper­ and forearm [49].
By combining the MediaPose pose detection with the function that calculates the angles
it’s thereby possible to create a program that loops over the videoframes, and for each
videoframe first applies the pose detection function to get out the 3d coordinates of the
three joints, which are then used as input to calculate the angles and appends these
angles to a new array of angles. This array then holds the calculated angle for each of
the video frames.
34
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:43==
4.4.2
Signal Synchronization
The output of the data capturing process and the angle detection post­processing is the
four arrays emg_a, emg_t and video_t and video_angles. emg_a and emg_t is the data
from the emg sensor readings, with emg_a being the amplitude measurements and emg_t
being the timestamps associated with each of these measurements. Just as, the video file
and the array video_angles belong together, where the video_angles are the measure­
ments as an array of angles and the array video_t consists of the timestamps for each of
these measurements.
Since the data streams are recorded in the same loop, we know that the first values of
the two arrays emg_t and video_t, were recorded in the same iteration of the loop and
thereby also at the same time. However, the two timestamps are in different formats, and
so the values of the timestamps are not equal, though both are in seconds.
To correct for this, we subtract the first value of the array from all of the values of the array,
so that the corrected value of emg_t[0] andvideo_t[0] is 0 and the subsequent timestamps
becomes measures of the difference in time from the first value. This way, the two arrays
are aligned.
4.4.3
Smoothing of EMG Timestamps
After the first trials, it was discovered that the timestamps of the EMG signal, found in
the emg_t array, were jagged. That is, where one would expect these timestamps to
increment by 1/4000th of a second for each element, they did not. Instead, batches of the
measurements would have the same timestamp which would then be incremented by a
lot for the next timestamp as can be seen in figure 4.5 below:
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Index
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Time (s)
Figure 4.5: Jagged Timesteps
In figure 4.5, we see the timestamps of the EMG data on y­axis and the index of the
timestamp on the x­axis. The plot shows a window of 2 seconds of an EMG recording with
8000 measurements at 4000 Hz. We would expect this to be a smooth line, incrementing
1/4000th of a second per increment in index value.
Instead, we see that the value remains the same for around 500 index values and then
increases about 1/8th of a second. The average increase is still 1/4000th of a second,
but the increments are jagged rather than smooth. By examining the array further it was
shown that this jaggedness is caused by the way the data is streamed in packages or
“chunks”, so that each group of timestamps with similar values arrived in one data chunk.
This is an artefact of how the data is transmitted via the Lab Streaming Layer [47], by
examining the corresponding EMG measurements it was confirmed that the datapoints
are in fact evenly spaced in time. It’s therefore necessary to correct the timestamps by
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
35
==PAGE:44==
smoothing them, so they are evenly spaced. This is done by setting the timestamps to
the following values:
Figure 4.6: Smoothing
It’s simply an array of time starting at the first timestamp, ending at the last and incre­
mented by the total time/total index. Doing so, we can now plot the new array of EMG
timestamps t_emg_smooth along with the old:
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Index
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Time (s)
Figure 4.7: Smooth Timesteps, red line shows the new timesteps and the blue line the old jagged
timesteps.
As can be seen t_emg_smooth shown above as the red line, exhibits the steady incre­
ments of 1/4000th of a second per index we would expect.
4.4.4
Mapping
With the timestamp arrays aligned and the emg timestamps smoothed, we now the correct
and aligned timestamps for both the EMG measurements and the angle measurements.
The problem is just that the two measurements have different sample frequencies. The
EMG measurements have a sample frequency of approximately 4000 Hz while the angles
are only sampled with a frequency of around 30 Hz.
Furthermore, while the sampling frequency of the of the angles remains close to 30 Hz,
it’s not constant as it depends on the processor speed when performing the data captur­
ing loop. This means, that for any given time window, we do not have as many angle
measurements as we EMG measurements.
As previously mentioned there are around 133 EMG measurements for ever measure­
ment of the elbow angles. For the sake of the further analysis, it’s easier to work with
the two timeseries if they have the same sample frequency. We will therefore create a
new array called angles_hf (high frequency angle array), that will have the same length
as emg_a and the same sampling frequency. The timestamps of every element in this
array will be the same as those found in emg_t belonging to emg_a. See figure 4.8 below
for a visual explanation of the mapping from angles to angles_hf.
36
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.8: Mapping of Angles
The idea here is that we only have around 30 elbow angle measurements per second from
the angles array, but ideally we want to have 4000 measurements per second, so we can
have an angle measurement associated with each EMG measurement. The way we get
this is by creating a new array with the 4000 measurements per second called angles_hf.
Since it’s also 4000 Hz this array is created to match the EMG observations, meaning
that we will have as many observations and with the same timestamps. We can therefore
use the array of timestamps emg_t_smooth as the timestamps for the “measurement” in
angles_hf. It’s now time to map the angles of the original 30Hz timeseries angles to the
new high frequency time series angles_hf. To do this, we simply take the element from
angles that are nearest in time for each element in angles_hf. This is also shown in figure
4.8 above. The resulting array angles_hf has a frequency of 4000 Hz and is populated
with the nearest available angle measurements.
4.4.5
Classifying Segments of the Dynamic Contractions
We want to classify segments such as the isometric parts of the experiment, the upstrokes
of the cycles and simply all the cycles. These classifications are dependent on the angle
as well as the angular velocity. For example, the isometric parts may be defined by having
an angle close to 90 degrees as well as a low angular velocity, whereas an upstroke
may be defined as an interval of the angle and a positive angular velocity of a certain
magnitude.
4.4.5.1
Extracting Angular Velocity
As previously mentioned, the angular velocity is of interest when classifying the segments.
It’s useful to distinguish between the up­ and downstrokes for example, as they both have
the same angular intervals, but opposite angular velocities. The angular velocity is mea­
sured in degrees per second and is derived from avgAngle_hf using the signal processing
method described in section 2.4.1.4. The angular velocity is then smoothed using a mov­
ing average function with a window length of 2000 timesteps. The resulting timeseries
are shown in figure 4.9 below.
110
112
114
116
118
120
122
Time (sec)
300
200
100
0
100
200
300
degrees/sec
Angle and Angle Velocity
Smoothed Angle Velocity
Angle Velocity
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
degrees
Smoothed Angle
Angle
Figure 4.9: Angle and angle velocity
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
37
==PAGE:46==
From the figure it can be seen how the angular velocity is the derivative of the angle signal,
describing its slope.
4.4.5.2
Segment Classification
Using the derived smoothed angle and angular velocity timeseries it’s possible to clas­
sify different segments of the timeseries as needed for the future analysis. To exemplify
the method, we will show how the isometric contractions, the cyclic contraction and the
upstrokes can be classified.
The classification can be done based on conditionals using the angle and the angular
velocity as input as shown below in algorithm 4.10:
Figure 4.10: Code snippet: Segment Classification
Using this algorithm we obtain a separate timeseries class, containing the class of every
timestep at 4000 Hz. We can use this timeseries to color the angular­ and EMG observa­
tions, to verify that the classification is correct, by plotting the angle_hf with each timestep
colored according to its classification as seen in figure 4.11 below:
Figure 4.11: Example of Segment Classification, with orange showing dynamic segments, turqoise
showing isometric segments and blue showing upstrokes. Top figure is elbow angle and bottom
is EMG signal, both colored by segment classification.
It’s evident that the method has successfully classified the segments of the angle signal,
finding the dynamic segments, the isometric segments, as well as the upstrokes.
38
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:47==
4.5
Part 3: Feature Engineering
As explained in the overview in section 4.2, the main purpose of ”Part 3: Feature engi­
neering is to iterate of the records of the ”experiments.sqlite” database, compute fatigue
parameters using the timeseries of each experiment and finally save the result in the new
database ”experimentsWithParams.sqlite”.
Figure 4.12: Part 3: Feature Engineering Structure
4.5.1
Iterative Script
Computing the different parameters described in the following sections is quite a time con­
suming task as the time series from which they are derived are recorded at 4000 Hz sam­
pling frequency, so an experiment lasting for 8 minutes for example results in 1,920,000
samples for each of the timeseries. The script ”computeParameters.py” is therefore con­
structed in such a way, that it only calculates the parameters for new experiments in
the ”experiments.sqlite” database that does not already exist in the ”experimentsWith­
Params.sqlite” database. This also explains the use of databases to store the data, as
there was a need for a persistant way to save the data, where new records could be added
without having to recompute entire tables.
The missing experiments are found by first finding the unique set of experiment names
in each of the two databases, and then subtracting the set of experiments from ”ex­
perimentsWithParams.sqlite” from the set of experiments from ”experiments.sqlite”. The
script then iterates over the resulting difference set and add the records along with their
computed parameters to the ”experimentsWithParams.sqlite”. This way, we avoid recom­
puting all of the parameters everytime there is a new experiment.
4.5.2
Calculate windowed parameters for each cycle vs for the entire
timeseries and then extracting
The main purpose of calculating the parameters is to use them to train and evaluate the
machine learning model. The ”experiments.sqlite” database is in a wide format, where
each record is an entire experiment and the fields of the records are the timeseries be­
longing to that experiment stored as arrays. For training and evaluating the machine
learning model, we will convert the dataset to a long format, where each record will be a
single cycle instead. So each record will be split into all of the cyclic dynamic contractions,
and each of these will be stored as a record for the machine learning dataset. How this
is done, is described in further details in section 4.6.
The parameters that we will use to detect fatigue, such as the ARV and MDF, are also
timeseries themselves, that exist parralel to the original EMG signal with the same number
of observations. The end goal is to have the corresponding segment of the timeseries of
the parameters for each of the cyclic segments, added as features to the machine learning
dataset. To obtain this, we can either calculate the parameters on the entire timeseries
in its wide format, and then use the same splitting points to transfer the segments of the
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
39
==PAGE:48==
emg data and the parameters, or we can extract only the EMG segments from the wide
to the long format and then calculate the parameters on each segment.
We choose the method of calculating the parameters first in the wide format as many
of the parameters are calculated using windows, which means that there are boundary
effects at the beginning and end of the signal. By calculating the parameters on the entire
signal, we only have boundary effects in the beginning and end of the trials, whereas if
we were to first split the EMG signal and then calculate the parameters on each cyclic
segment seperately, we would get boundary effects for each cycle. Furthermore some
parameters are calculated using window sizes that exceed the the length of a single cycle
and therefore would not be possible to calculate on the extracted segments.
4.5.3
Calculation of Windowed Parameters
All of the below fatigue parameters are calculated as windowed functions over the EMG
signal, the method for calculating them is therefore very similar, and will be explained here
in details using the amplitude parameter average rectified value (ARV) as an example.
4.5.3.1
Extracting the Dyanmic Segments
We start by extracting the dynamic segments of the EMG signal. This is done, as the
parameters are calculated using windows and later the parameters are also smoothed
out using very long windows of lengths of up to 30 seconds. Many parameters are sigi­
ficantly different during the isometric segments, so if we were to include the isometric
segments, the first cycles of every dynamic segment would be influenced by the values
of the isometric segment.
The dynamic segments can be extracted using the segmentation classification we created
in section 4.4.5.2, based on the observed angles and angular velocities. This is done by
using the class labels of each timestep as a binary mask of the emg array. Extracting the
dynamic segments of the EMG signal we create the new timeseries ”dyn_a” that holds
only the dynamic sections of the emg data.
4.5.3.2
Calculating the Windowed Functions
We will use the ARV of the signal as an example of how to calculate the windowed pa­
rameters, but it could be any of the parameters with only small changes.
1
def ARV(signal,w,hl):
2
#Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and
low hl
3
finalLength = len(signal)
4
5
ARV = []
6
7
for i in range(w,len(signal),hl):
8
ARV.append(np.mean(np.abs(signal[i-w:i])))
9
10
ARV = np.repeat(ARV,hl)
11
ARV = np.insert(ARV,0,np.full(w,np.mean(ARV[:w])))
12
ARV = ARV[:finalLength]
13
14
return ARV
Code Listing 4.1: Code snippet to compute the ARV of a EMG signal
The function takes as input the emg signal, the window/epoch length and a hop length.
The epoch/window length specifies how many timesteps we want to calculate the moving
average over, and the hop length specifies the distance between each calculation. In
theory we could use a hop length of 1 and calculate the ARV for every timestep in the
40
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:49==
timeseries. But as the data is recorded at 4000 Hz, it’s computationally expensive to do
so, and we therefore reduce the computational load by only computing the parameter for
values at the interval of the hop length, and then use interpolation by repition between
each calculated value.
First, the length of the input signal is saved in the variable finalLength in line 3, for later
use. We then, in line 5, initialize an empty array ARV, that will hold the calculated ARV
values. In line 7­8 we iterate over the signal starting at signalw until signalT at an interval
of hl (the hop length). For every iteration, we append the mean absolute value of the
signal in the interval from i −w to i. We can also write the ARV function as an equation
as seen in 4.1 below.
ARVi =
i
∑
j=i−w
|dynEMGj| 1
w
(4.1)
The function is undefined in the range [ARV0 : ARVw[, we therefore insert the mean
value of the first w timesteps of the signal in this interval. It can be discussed if this is the
best approach or not, and many alternative solutions exists, including simply leaving out
this interval. For now, however, we would like to keep the interval and have the option
of filtering observations belonging to the interval out, later when creating the machine
learning data set.
Initially the same method was used to calculate the other parameters (zero­crossing rates
and median frequencies) but in the end we used a library called Librosa [50] to calculate
these as it was faster than our own implementations. All parameters were added to the
database, using varying window lengths and in unnormalized and normalized version to
give the predictive models more features to choose from. Normalizing was done by di­
viding the entire timeseries of a parameter with the first 20 seconds of the parameter,
whereby all the parameter values were shown relative to the first values, giving an indi­
cation of the relative development of the parameter.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
41
==PAGE:50==
4.6
Part 5: Predictive Analysis
Figure 4.13: Structure of Predictive Analysis
As described in section 4.2, the purpose of the predictive analysis is to create a ma­
chine learning dataset from the dataset and the parameters calculated in section 4.5 and
stored in the ”experimentsWithParams.sqlite” database as is done in the Python script
”MlfromDB”, here the dataset is also converted from a wide format to a long format as pre­
viously mentioned. This resulting dataset is then used in the Python script ”ML_model.py”
to train and evaluate the fatigue predicting model.
4.6.1
Creating the long format Machine Learning Dataset
To train and evaluate the model we will have to divide the existing timeseries into segments
used as observations, each segment/observtion will consist of one cycle i.e., one bicep
curl, and the target variable will be the normalized time until fatigue. The input variables,
will be the mean values of the corresponding segments of the parameters calculated in
section 4.5.
4.6.1.1
Locating the Breakpoints
To create such a dataset, we must first find out where to split the existing timeseries, to
extract each cycle. The defining feature of a cycle is the elbow angle, i.e., a cycle is
defined as being a full movement of the forearm. The breakpoints of this motion could
in theory be placed anywhere along the range of motion, but we choose to place the
breakpoints when the forearm reaches its top position, closest to the shoulder joint. The
individual cycles are found using the angles, as we know that each cycle starts and stop
at the peaks of the angles. To find the points in time, marking a local maxima or “peak”,
and thereby the beginning or ending of a cycle, the function find_peaks() from the SciPy
library is used. In figure 4.14 below the peak angles are marked by vertical lines, showing
the breakpoints of each cycle.
Figure 4.14: Dynamic cycle breakdown
42
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:51==
It should be noted that the chosen breakpoints do not necessarily mark the minimum
amplitude of the signal as this is often found, when the hand is moving towards the ground,
as it requires more force to hold the dumbbell steady, compared with letting it accelerate
towards the ground.
4.6.1.2
Construcing the Dataset
Using the above mentioned method to locate the breakpoints seperating each cycle, it’s
now possible to use these breakpoints to iteratively extract the cycles from the existing ”ex­
perimentsWithParams.sqlite” database and save them to the new database ”mlDB.sqlite”.
This is done using the code shown below (the code has been simplified for the purpose
of clarity).
1
for experiment in experiments:
2
item = experimentsWithParams[experiment]
3
peaks = item['peaks']
4
5
for i in range(len(peaks)-1):
6
start = peaks[i]
7
end = peaks[i+1]
8
9
cycleDict = {}
10
11
for parameter in parameters:
12
cycleDict[parameter] = item[parameter][start:end]
13
14
mlDB[experiment + "_" + str(i+1)] = cycleDict
Code Listing 4.2: Iteratively constructing the machine learning data set
In the actual code used, that can be seen in appendix A.8, we also calculate the mean
value of every parameter over the segment and add along with the extracted segments to
each observation/record in the mlDB database, as we will later use the mean values as
input to ML models. The records that are saved to the database are first constructed as
Python dictionaries ”cycleDict”, such that the constructed dictionary represent one record
in the new database i.e., one cycle of the movement. The functionality of saving a dictio­
nary as a record in the database is enabled by the Python library SqliteDict.
The target variable nTuF (normalized time until fatigue) is also added in this step. It is
calculated using the following code, where maxTime is the total duration of the trial and
meantime is the average timepoint of the cycle:
1
2
cycleDict['maxTime'] = np.max(item['tSmooth'])
3
4
cycleDict['meanTime'] =
np.mean(cycleDict['Dyn_tSmooth'])
5
6
cycleDict['nTuF'] =
(cycleDict['maxTime'] - cycleDict['meanTime'])/cycleDict
['maxTime']
Code Listing 4.3: Calculation of the target variable
4.6.2
Machine Learning Data Preperation
With the process described above, the data has been wrangled to the correct format for
the supervised learning. Before commencing with the actual modelling, the data was
visualized and cleaned to remove outliers. In this process it was found that especially at
the beginning and end of the dynamic segments, there would be outlier cycles that differed
greatly from the other cycles, by for example being incomplete. This was discovered by
examining the cycle lengths in time as showm in figure 4.15 below.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
43
==PAGE:52==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Number of Cycle
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Duration of Cycle
Duration of each cycle of the dataset used to detect outliers
Figure 4.15: Cycle Durations
Furthermore the difference between the start and end angle of the cycles were examined
along with the durations showing clusters of cycles as shown below in figure 4.16. The
difference between the start and end angles were used as ideally a complete cycle would
have a difference between the two angles of zero.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Angular Difference between start and end angles of cycle
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Duration of Cycle
Time length and angle difference of each cycle of the dataset used to detect outliers
Figure 4.16: Cycle Duration and angular differences, showing clusters of cycles
Based on the visualizations above it was possible to create treshold values for the duration
and the angular difference that served to filter out the outlier cycles.
4.6.3
Modelling
We compared three different estimators:
A mean predictor (used as a baseline model to compare performance), a multiple linear
regression and a random forest regressor.
4.6.3.1
Cross validation
The processes described below, that requires evaluating the performance of the mod­
els, such as hyperparameter­tuning and feature selection will use the leaveOneGroupOut
cross validation split provided by the python library scikit­learn.
4.6.3.2
Feature Selection and hyperparameter­tuning
To compare the two estimators we will first optimize their performance using feature se­
lection and hyperparameter tuning.
4.6.3.3
Multiple Linear Regression Optimization
Since we are using multiple linear regression without regularization terms there are no
hyperparameters to tune, we will therefore only perform feature selection.
The feature selection was performed using recursive feature elimination with cross­validation,
implemented in the sckikit­learn function RFECV [ref], using the cross­validation method
specificied in section 4.6.3.1.
44
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:53==
4.6.3.4
Random Forest Regressor
The random forest regressor has tunable hyperparameters, many of which can help con­
trol the model’s tendency to over/under fit the training data. We will therefore perform
hyperparameter tuning using a cross­validated grid search, again using the cv­folds of
section 4.6.3.1.
As with the multiple linear regression estimator, feature selection will also be performed
using cross­validated recursive feature eliminiation on the same set of available features.
There is a two­way relationship between the feature selection and hyperparameter tuning
i.e., the chosen features, has an effect on which hyperparameters perform best and the
chosen hyperparameters affects which features will be chosen, so it becomes a sort of
chicken and egg problem. To alleviate the problem, at least to some extent, we first tune
the hyperparameters using all available input features, then using this tuned model, we
perform feature selection, and finally we do hyperparameter tuning once again on the se­
lected features. This process could of course be further iterated, and the only guaranteed
way of finding the best combination of features and hyperparameters would be to perform
feature selection on every combination of hyperparameters in the grid search, but this
would greatly increase the computation time, and was therefore deemed infeasible.
4.6.4
Alternative Models
The procedure described in the above sections was performed mainly to create a gen­
eral model that was trained on all subjects. But due to the large inter­subject variability
observed in section 5.2.2, we also created models specific to the subjects i.e., a model
dedicated to each subject. The procedure for doing so, was exactly the same, only the
dataset was limited to containing only observations of the subject for which the model
belonged to.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:55==
5
Results
5.1
Experiment I (Isometric Contractions)
The primary interest of this project is to explore the feasibility of including EMG­based fa­
tigue detection in the ReHyb exoskeleton. Presumably, most of the exercises performed
using the exoskeleton will be dynamic (moving). The isometric experiment is therefore,
not of key interest, given its dissimilarity from the real use case. The main purpose of
this experiment is to act as a pilot experiment, testing the experimental setup before com­
mencing with the more relevant Experiment II, that incorperates dynamic movements.
This also means that the focus of the following analysis of Experiment I is to explore if
the experimental setup is able to detect fatigue, in a setting slightly simpler than that of
Experiment II.
To verify whether the experimental setup can detect fatigue, we may look at the classically
used parameters for detecting the frequency shift and amplitude increase.
5.1.1
Time Domain
We will begin the analysis in the time domain, as this is the domain of the unaltered EMG
signal. In figure 5.1 below, the top shows the EMG­signal of the Biceps Brachii during a
fatiguing isometric contraction at 30% of 1RM, lasting for about 100 seconds. The bottom
shows a 1 second section of the signal in more detail.
Figure 5.1: Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
5.1.1.1
ARV
We will start by examining the effects of fatigue on the amplitude of the signal using the
average rectified value (ARV) of the signal.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.2: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
In figure 5.2 above, the ARV has been shown above along with the rectified EMG signal
from which it has been derived. The ARV is shown with two different window lengths ­
w = 2000 timestep (0.5 seconds at 4000Hz sampling rate), which will be referred to as
ARV2,000 and an ARV with w = 20,0000 timesteps (5 seconds) reffered to as ARV20,000.
Though both ARVs show a clear increase, it’s more evident with the longer window length
of ARV20,000 as there is still a lot of variance in the ARV2,000 signal. The downside is,
that the the ARV20,000 signal shows a considerable lag of 5 seconds due to the window
calculation.
5.1.1.2
ZCR
We’ll now proceed to the zero­crossings of the signal, that can give an indication of fre­
quency shifts.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
time (s)
100
120
140
160
180
ZCR (ZC/s)
ZCR of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction
ZCR, w = 2000
MA(ZCR(2000)), w = 15000
Figure 5.3: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
In the above figure, two zero­crossing parameters of the EMG signal are shown. The first
has been calculated using a sliding window of length w = 2000 timesteps. We will refer to
this as the ZCR2,000. The second, is a moving average of ZCR2,000 with a window length of
w = 15,000 timesteps (3.75 seconds). It can be seen, that as expected, the zero­crossing
rate does decrease over time. However, the rate remains relatively steady until around
50 seconds into the experiment, when there is a small burst of amplitude (see figure 5.2)
and the zero­crossing rate drops from around 155 to 135 mV. From there, there seems
to be a more linear decrease over the rest of the experiment. As with the amplitude, the
development of the parameter is more clearly seen with the longer window length, having
less variance.
48
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:57==
5.1.1.3
ZCR of Signal Derivative
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
time (s)
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
ZCR (ZC/s)
ZCR of Signal Derivative of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction
ZCRD, w = 2000
MA(ZCRD(2000)), w = 15000
Figure 5.4: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
If we instead look at the zero­crossing rate of the signal derivative, as seen above in figure
5.4, we can see a somewhat similar pattern, where the big drops in the rate happen with
the small burst in amplitude around the 50­, 65­, and 80­second marks. There also seems
to be a more linear decrease with time for the zero­crossings rate of the signal derivative,
than what was seen in the zero­crossing rate of the signal seen in figure 5.3.
5.1.2
Frequency Domain
The frequency domain does not capture the temporal development, but it’s possible to
transform shorter duration time windows separately, such that each window can be as­
sumed to satisfy the stationarity condition. By picking a window in the beginning and end
of the experiment (figure 5.5a), we can compare the power spectrum attained through a
Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) for each of the windows (figure 5.5b) to investigate if
there is any detectable frequency shift present.
(a) Time Windows of Power Spectra
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency (Hz)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Power Spectral Density
1e6
Power Spectra of Fatigued and Non-Fatigued Windows of EMG-Signal
Non-Fatigued Power Spectrum
Non-Fatigued MDF
Fatigued Power Spectrum
Fatigued MDF
(b) Power Spectra of Time Windows with MDF
Figure 5.5: Power Spectra of Non­Fatigued and Fatigued State
In figure 5.5a shown above, the two windows of the signal have been shown. The first
window, depicted in blue captures a segment of the signal, 7.5 seconds long, from the
beginning of the experiment when the subject is in an non­fatigued state. The second
window, shown in orange, also has a duration of 7.5 seconds, and captures a segment of
the signal closer to the end of the experiment, when the subject is fatigued.
Figure 5.5b shows the power spectra of the two windows after using Fourier transform
to convert the data from the windows from the time domain to the frequency domain.
Furthermore, the median frequency for each window is depicted as a vertical line in cor­
responding color. First of all, we see that there is more power across all of the spectral
components in the fatigued state, a result of the increase in amplitude. Second, the fre­
quency shift is also evident, as it can be seen that the power spectrum has been pushed
to the left. This is also in accordance with what has been described in the literature. The
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
49
==PAGE:58==
frequency shift is furthermore confirmed by the median frequency that is seen to be lower
in the fatigued state than in the non­fatigued state.
5.1.3
Time­Frequency Domain
The time­frequency domain shows the spectral density as it changes over time. As de­
scribed in section 2.4.3, there exists multiple time­frequency transforms, that can trans­
form a signal from the time domain to the time­frequency domain. In the following analysis
the STFT method has been used as the time­frequency transformer.
5.1.3.1
Spectrogram
In the time­frequency domain we should be able to observe the frequency shift over the
course of the experiment, not as momentary “snapshots” as was the case with the fre­
quency domain analysis in section 5.1.2, but rather continuously. Using a spectrogram the
spectral density and any possible changes over the length of the signal can be observed,
as shown below in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: STFT Spectrogram of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction
Going from left to right we see an increase in the intensity (shown as a lighter color), the
color intensity shows the spectral density and is proportional to the amplitude of different
frequencies at different times. We see that there is a general increase in this intensity
across the entire frequency spectrum but the biggest increase is in the lower frequencies,
as was also shown in figure 5.5b. It’s also possible to see the shift with more spectral
intensity towards the lower frequencies, although it’s more difficult to see on the spectro­
gram than it was on power spectras of figure 5.5b.
5.1.3.2
Median Frequency (MDF)
Using the power of the frequency components at each point in time, it’s possible to calcu­
late the parameter often used for fatigue detection – the median frequency which we will
do in the following section.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
time (s)
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
MDF (Hz)
MDF of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction
MDF, w = 2000
MA(MDF(2000)), w = 15000
Figure 5.7: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
50
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.7 shows the median frequency calculated from the STFT. The result is, as ex­
pected, quite similar to those of the zero­crossings. But whereas, the zero­crossing rate
is an indication of the frequency shift, the median frequency as calculated here, is a direct
measure of it. When comparing it to the zero­crossing rates, it seems to be more similar
to the ZCRD (the zero crossing rate of the signal derivative seen in figure 5.4), where
the decrease happens more gradually and over the course of the entire experiment, com­
pared with the ZCR where the decrease happened more in steps and mostly toward the
final half of the experiment.
5.1.4
Conclusion
From the parameters shown in the above section, we can see that they all show the
patterns we would expect from the litterature indicating an amplitude increase and a left
shift of frequencies. We therefore conclude that the experimental setup is adequeate for
detecting these parameters and can be used for Experiment II.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
51
==PAGE:60==
5.2
Experiment II (Dynamic Cyclic Contractions)
In the following analysis we will first, in section 5.2.1, analyze one trial of Experiment II
to show the details of the computed parameters and then, in section 5.2.2, go over the
same parameters across the trials, to see how these vary between diffent trials.
5.2.1
Single Trial Analysis
5.2.1.1
General Observations
Figure 5.8: EMG­signal and video­detected elbow angle, colored by automatically generated seg­
ment classification. Orange showing dynamic segments and turquoise showing isometric seg­
ments.
In figure 5.8 above, the complete signal for one trial of Experiment II is shown. In figure
the top diagram the EMG­signal is shown, in the middle diagram the same signal is shown
color coded by the segment classification obtained through the method explained in sec­
tion 4.4.5.2, such that the dynamic contraction segments are colored in orange and the
isometric in turquoise. Finally, in the bottom diagram the elbow angle obtained frm the
video feed using pose detection is shown, also colored by the segment classification.
It’s easy to see the repeated pattern of 50 seconds of cyclic dynamic contractions followed
by 10 seconds of isometric contractions described in section 4.1.1.3. It’s also evident that
there is clear correlation between the amplitude of the EMG signal and the elbow curls.
This correlation can be more clearly seen in figure 5.9 below, where a short section of the
dynamic contractions are shown.
Figure 5.9 below, shows the EMG signal and the angles for five dynamic contractions. The
top diagram shows the EMG­signal, the middle diagram shows the angular acceleration
of the elbow and the ARV calculated using w = 1000 and the bottom diagram shows the
elbow angle. Interestingly, but also logically, there is a very high correlation between the
angular acceleration and the amplitude of the EMG signal (given by the RMS). Which can
be explained by Newton’s second law stating that:
F = ma
(5.1)
52
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.9: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
And since research has shown a close relationship (linear in the case of isometric con­
tractions) between the force produced by a muscle and the amplitude of the emitted EMG
signal (given here by the ARV) [51] along with the mass being constant, we may therefore
write:
ARV ∝F = ca
⇕
ARV ∝a
(5.2)
Showing that the ARV should be proportional to the acceleration. This formula ignores
that the gravitational force exerted on the mass varies with the elbow angle, which may
explain why there is some misalignment between the RMS and the acceleration at angles.
For example, we see that the acceleration is larger at the bottom of the cycle (the lowest
angles), relative to the amplitude and thereby the force, which makes sense as the top
and bottom positions are where gravity exerts the least force in the direction of movement.
Other than the connection to the angular acceleration, it’s also evident that the amplitude
peaks just after the angle begins to increase i.e., the arm starts to move up. This makes
sense as the subject needs force both to accelerate the object and combat gravity, which
exerts the maximum force against the upward movement when the forearm is horizontal.
The amplitude then lowers and comes to a minima just after the forearm begins to lower
from it’s top position, to once again steadily increase until the maxima is reached again.
5.2.1.2
Time­Domain Parameters
To examine the development fatigue during the experiment we will use the parameters
previously presented, that previous research have found to be correlated with the onset
of fatigue. Once again, we will divide the analysis between the domains of the signal,
leaving out the frequency domain, however, as the time­frequency domain gives us the
same information, but continuously over time. We will start by examining the features
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
53
==PAGE:62==
of the time domain. Here, we will look at three different parameters: the ARV, the zero­
crossing­rate of the signal and zero­crossing rate of the signal derivative.
Amplitude As previously described, the literature has found a tendency for the amplitude
to increase with the onset of fatigue. In figure 5.10 below, the ARV is shown calculated
with a window length of 2000 timesteps (blue line) and shown in red is a moving average of
the ARV2,000 with a window length of 20,000 timesteps (ARV20,000). The ARV2,000 values
have been divided by two, so they can be shown on the same scale, as the peaks of this
shorter window length are considerably higher.
0
100
200
300
400
500
time (s)
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Amplitude (mV)
ARV of EMG-signal During Dynamic Fatiguing Contractions
(ARV, w=2000) / 2
MA(ARV(2000)), w=20,000
Figure 5.10: Amplitude indicated by the ARV for Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions.
From ARV2,000, the individual elbow curls can be clearly seen, as well as the larger pattern
of isometric and dynamic contraction segments. It’s also noticeable that the peaks for
each of the elbow curls become higher and higher as the experiment progresses and
that the peaks increase for each curl within a dynamic contraction segment, and then
decrease slightly after each of the isometric contraction segments. The same findings
can be seen from ARV20,000, where the overall development is clearer, smoothing out the
effect of the individual elbow curls, and it can be seen that there is an increase in the
average amplitude as the experiment progresses.
54
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:63==
5.2.1.3
Zero­Crossing­Rates
In figure 5.11 below, the ZCR with a window length of 2000 (ZCR2,000) is shown in the top
diagram. In the bottom diagram, a moving average of the ZCR with a window length of
20,000 timesteps (ZCR20,000) is shown. Also in the bottom diagram is a moving average
of ZCR calculated on the signal derivative with a window length of 20,0000 (ZCRD20,000).
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
ZCR
ZCR of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=2,000
0
100
200
300
400
500
0.0275
0.0300
0.0325
0.0350
0.0375
0.0400
0.0425
ZCR
Moving Average of ZCR of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=20,000
MA(ZCR(2000)), w = 20,000
MA(ZCRD(2000)), w = 20,000
Figure 5.11: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
As with the ARV2,000, the ZCR2,000 is sensitive to the variation of the individual elbow
curls, clearly showing the curls and the overall isometric – dynamic cycles. A decreasing
trend can also be seen, although the variation within each curl is greater than the overall
trend. The trend is more clearly observed with the larger time windows of ZCR20,000 and
ZCRD20,000, when the effect of each bicep curl is smoothed out. Overall, there is a clear
decrease of the ZCR, both for the signal and its derivative over the course of the experi­
ment, showing that a frequency shift takes place with the onset of fatigue. Furthermore,
the downward trend seems to be close to linear, although becoming a bit a steeper with
time.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
55
==PAGE:64==
5.2.1.4
Time­frequency Domain
In the time­frequency domain, the frequency shift can be examined using a spectrogram
derived from the STFT time­frequency transform. The spectrogram has the advantage
that it shows the entire power spectrum as it changes over time, but to summarize this
change the median frequency (MDF) will be used as it can provide a clearer view of the
frequency shift.
Figure 5.12: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
In figure 5.12 above, the spectrogram is shown, calculated with a STFT transform with a
window length of 2048 timesteps [44]. The pattern of the exercise is clearly evident, both
the overall periods of isometric­dynamic segments, and also the individual cycle of the
elbow curls. It’s possible to see a decreasing trend of the frequencies, with the level of
the lowest frequencies becomig lower over time. The increase in amplitude is also clearly
seen by the increased color intensity (lighter color is more intense). The frequency shift
is better seen in figure 5.13 below.
60
80
100
120
MDF(Hz)
MDF of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=2,000
0
100
200
300
400
500
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
MDF(Hz)
Moving Average of MDF of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=20,000
MA(ZCR(2000)), w = 20,000
Figure 5.13: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
In figure 5.13 above, the median frequency is shown using a window size of 2000 (MDF2,000)
along with a moving average of this parameter with a window length of 20,000 timesteps
56
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:65==
(MDF20,000). The result is very similar to that of the ZCR in the time domain. The MDF has
a noticeable decrease that happens over the course of the experiment as well as over the
course of each dynamic segment.
5.2.2
Intertrial Analysis
In section 5.2.1, we presented a detailed analysis of the parameters extracted from various
domains. However, sEMG studies are known to elicit a high variance, having both a
high intra­subject (difference between trials of same subject) and inter­subject (difference
between trials of different subjects) variability.
Although, we attempt to minimize the trial differences, for example by using consistent
methods for electrode placement, they are still inevitable. For these reasons, it’s relevant
not just to examine the parameters for a single trial, but between trials to further examine
the differences and similarities between subjects and trials. Once again, the analysis
will be divided among those parameters describing the amplitude increase and those
describing the frequency shift.
5.2.2.1
Amplitude
As seen in figure 5.10, it’s difficult to discern trends when looking at the short­windowed
parameters such as ARV2,000 as they are heavily influenced by the variance caused by
the individual cycles/bicep curls. As the focus of this analysis is to find differences and
similarities between the trials, we will instead focus on long­windowed moving averages
where the trends are more easily seen.
Earlier we presented the parameter ARV20,000 ­ a 20,000 timestep moving average of the
ARV2,000 (average rectified value, calculated over w = 2,000). In the following analysis we
will make the trends even clearer, by utilizing a window length of 120,000 timesteps (30
seconds). Whereas the earlier presented ARV parameters were calculated across the
entire signal, the following parameters are calculated across the signal with the isometric
segments removed as described in section 4.5.3.2. This is done as the signal is very
different in the isometric segments, and using a window length of this size, the isometric
parts would have a large and uneven impact on the first cycles of each dynamic segment.
(a) ARV of each trial
(b) Normalized ARV of each trial
Figure 5.14: Long­windowed ARV parameter showing amplitude changes of each trial
In figure 5.14a above, each line shows a trial of Experiment II colored by subject, with the
average rectified amplitude on the y­axis and the timestep on the x­axis. It’s immediately
clear that all trials show an overall upward trend, with varying linearity, however.
It’s evident that the initial level of amplitude of each trial varies a lot, but also that the intra­
subject variability of the initial amplitude is lower than the inter­subject variability. The
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
57
==PAGE:66==
source of the inter­subject variability is likely long­term physiological differences between
the subjects, such as the thickness of their fat layer and size of muscles. Whereas the
source of the intra­subject variability could be short­term physiological differences, such
as energy and fluid levels on the day of the trial as well as experimental differences such
as electrode placement, skin cleaning etc.
The large variance of the initial amplitude levels makes it difficult to compare the change
in amplitude over time between the trials, especially as a relative increase of 50% in am­
plitude for a trial with an initial amplitude of 0.05 would only result in an absolute increase
of 0.025, whereas the same relative increase for a trial with an initial value of 0.12 would
mean a 0.06 absolute increase. We can therefore normalize the initial levels by dividing
all measurements in a trial with the mean of the first w timesteps (30 seconds) of that trial.
In figure 5.14b above, the normalized moving average of the ARV is shown. It can be seen
that the relative increase of amplitude over time is more similar than it perhaps appeared
in figure 5.14a.
Looking at the slope of each trial, there is some variance and the inter­subject variability
seems to be more or less similar to the intra­subject variability although the trials of sub­
ject 1, seem to have a more consistent slope i.e. subject 1 has a smaller intra­subject
variability of the slope than subject 2.
Looking at the length of each trial, we also see a high variance. Here, the intra­subject
variability is quite low, but the inter­subject variability is high i.e. the endurance between
the subjects varies a lot, but for a single subject the endurance is relatively similar across
trials.
There does not seem to be a correlation between the duration of the trial and the slope
of the amplitude. This is interesting, as one could hypothesize that fatigue was reached
once a certain relative increase in amplitude was reached, and thus subjects who fatigued
faster therefore would have a steeper slope in order to reach the relative level of amplitude
increase faster. This is however not what we observe, instead, it seems that subjects that
fatigue faster have the same rate of increase of amplitude as those who fatigue slower,
they just fatigue at a lower level of relative increase in amplitude.
58
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:67==
5.2.2.2
Frequency Shift
We have previously calculated three parameters to examine the frequency shifts, the
ZCR, the ZCRD and the MDF. From the analysis of section 5.2.1, we saw that the three
parameters were very similar. We will therefore focus on the ZCRD parameter in the
following section, when examining how the frequency shifts varies between the trials and
subject.
(a) ARV of each trial
(b) Normalized ARV of each trial
Figure 5.15: Long­windowed ZCRD parameter showing frequency changes of each trial
In figure 5.15 shown above, the ZCRD (zero­crossing rate of signal derivative) has been
shown with a long­windowed moving average of w = 120,0000 timesteps applied to it
in an unnormalized and normalized version. If we start by looking at the unnormalized
version shown in figure 5.15a, we see many of the same patterns in terms of variability,
that we also saw with the ARV parameter shown in figure 5.14. Again, looking at both
the slope and the intercept, the inter­subject variability is higher than the intra­subject
variability. And again subject 1 has a lower intra­subject variability than subject 2 i.e.,
more stabile results. As can be seen the slope is also generally steeper for subject 1 than
subject 2 and the initial levels are slightly lower. In general, the observations show the
negative trend that we’d expect from looking at a fatiguing frequency parameter. There
is however, one notable outlier trial of subject 2, having a very low initial frequency and a
slight upward trend over the course of the experiment. It is unknown why this observations
is so different, but since it’s the same subject as many of the other trials, it could be due
to poor electrode placement.
If we instead look at the normalized version of the ZCRD shown in figure 5.15b, we see
many of the same patterns, the main difference being that the normalized version, further
enhances the difference in slope between subject 1 and 2.
5.3
Predictive Analysis
In the following section we will present the results of predicting fatigue using various mod­
els. Due to the large inter­subject variability it’s likely that models trained on each subject
may perform better than a general model for all subject, although a general model is more
practical as it can also predict for new patients without training. We will begin by present­
ing the results of a general model in section 5.3.1, and then compare the results with
individualized models in section 5.3.2.
5.3.1
Predicting for All Subjects
In this section we will compare the predictive performance three different models; a mean
predictor used for a baseline score, a multiple linear regression model, and a random for­
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
59
==PAGE:68==
est regressor. The models will all be trained on data from all subjects with all calculated
parameters available to them, predicting the target variable nTuF (normalized time until
fatigue). The multiple linear regression model and the random forest regressor are both
optimized in accordance with section 4.6.3, i.e. using recursive feature selection, hyper­
parameter tuning and grouped cross­validation. The errors of each model are shown in
the boxplot 5.16 below:
Figure 5.16: Distribution of cross validated scores for each model.
As can be seen from figure 5.16 and table 5.1, the mean predictor has MAE of 24.11
which makes sense as the target variable is almost perfectly uniformly distributed in the
interval between 0 and 100, so the average error when predicting 50 is 25, here the MAE
is slightly under 25, due the data not being perfectly uniformly distributed in the interval.
Table 5.1: MAE of all models, with mean and standard deviation calculated across CV­folds
Model
MAE mean
MAE SD
Mean Predictor
24.11
.74
Linear Regression
19.92
8.52
Random Forest
10.72
3.65
The linear regression model has an MAE of 19.92 and the random forest an MAE of 10.72.
So, whereas the linear regression model is only slightly better than a mean prediction, the
random forest is far better. This could be because of the random forest model’s ability to
model non­linear relationships and other more complex relationships of the data. It should
also be noted that the accuracy of the random forest is more stabile across the folds, than
it is for the linear regression as can be seen from the smaller standard deviation of the
scores.
As previously mentioned, many versions of the different parameters were made available
to the models, with varying window lengths and in normalized and unnormalized versions,
that the model could then ”choose” from using feature selection. The final random forest
selected a normalized version of MDF20,000, an unnormlized version of ZCRD20,000 and
a normalized version of ARV20,000.
5.3.2
Subject­Specific Models
While a single subject­agnostic (a model that is trained and predicts on all subjects) model
is the most practical as it doesn’t require previous examples to work on new subjects,
60
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:69==
there are reasons to believe that individualized models may be able to achieve a higher
accuracy, as the intra­subject variability in general was found to be lower than the inter­
subject variability in the analysis in section 5.2.2. We will therefore create a model for each
of the two most represented subjects – subject 1 and 2 and compare the performance,
with the performance of the subject­agnostic model found in section 5.3.1. The subject
specific­models will be based on the best performing subject­agnostic model ­ the random
forest and again hyperparameter tuning and feature selection will be performed as part of
the training process of each model.
Figure 5.17: Zoom in of Raw EMG signal in Time­domain
In figure 5.17, shown above a boxplot for each of the models is shown, showing the
distribution of the MAE over the folds of the grouped cross validation. Suprisingly the
subject­specific models, does not perform better than the subject­agnostic model. The
model trained on subject 1, has a slightly lower variability in it’s performance than the
subject­agnostic model, but it’s mean is slighly higher. The lower variability is likely to
stem from the lower intra­subject variability of subject 1 previously shown. The model
of subject 2, on the other hand, has larger errors than the two other models, again this
makes sense as the trials of subject 2 also exhibited larger intra­subject variability. One
could have expected the model specific to subject 1 to have a slightly lower error than
the subject specific model, but this is not the case. The reason behind this could be that
the subject­agnostic model has more training data available. Nevertheless the results
are positive as it shows that the subject­agnostic model is good at generalizing between
subjects, not being outperformed by the subject specific models.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:71==
6
Discussion
6.1
Results
In this project we succesfully predicted the fatigue level on a normalized continous scale
using multimodal data gathered from subjects performing fatigueing cyclic dynamic con­
tractions of their biceps. Doing so, we showed that it is possible to detect fatigue using
budget EMG sensors and furthermore, that a budget camera can be used as a digital
goniometer to aid in the predictive task, using novel pose detection methods.
The project was also created in the context of the ReHyb project, with the goal of evalu­
ating the feasibility of performing EMG based fatigue detection to include as a biomarker
for the digital twin, ultimately aiding in the control of the ReHyb exoskeleton.
6.1.1
Representativeness
The goal of this project was not to create a directly applicable method for fatigue detection
in the ReHyb project, but rather to serve as an initial exploration of the field providing a
holistic method for data gathering, storage and analysis, while also shedding light on
the possiblity of using budget equipment combined with advanced analytics for fatigue
detection.
Despite this, it’s reasonible to point out in which areas the project diverged from the ReHyb
application scenario, such that future work can be done to bring it closer to the actual use
case. We may start by looking at the representativeness of the results.
First of all, the model was trained and tested on healthy subjects, whereas the model of
the ReHyb project would be used on stroke patients suffering from partial to full paralysis.
It’s likely that these patients diverge physiologically from the group of subjects used in
this project and that the model therefore may not generalize well to this other group. One
specific issue that should be examined is whether stroke patients have the capacity to
volantarily contract muscles until peripheral fatigue is reached, as it could be hypothesized
that the bottleneck for them may be central fatigue.
Second, the model was trained and tested on subjects performing cyclic dynamic contrac­
tions. While some excercises of the ReHyb project may also exhibit cyclic movement pat­
terns, it’s likely that at least the gamified exercises may take on the form of more random
movements. Previous studies [36] have shown , that it’s possible to attain a comparable,
although slightly lower, accuricies when predicting fatigue in random movements as com­
pared with cyclic movements. So this may not be an issue, but it should be accounted for
when evaluating the results.
Third, we made normalized parameters available to the model, normalized by the initial 20
seconds of the parameter. The idea being, that this would remove some of the intersub­
ject variability, thereby creating a model better at generalizing between subjects. It also
seemed to work, as these features were selected in the feature selection. However, there
are two potential issues with the approach. First, it’s unclear how it may affect the results
if a person starts the experiment in fatigued state as the feature is calculated relative to
the initial state which is assumed to be unfatigued. Second, a model may benefit from
having access to the absolute values, it could for example be, that subject with low initial
amplitude levels, generally had a different development of the frequency shift. By knowing
the absolute values a model would be able to model such relationships. The models, did
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
63
==PAGE:72==
also have access to the versions of the features in absolute values, so it could be given
more data that they would choose to use them for such purposes, and it therefore may
not be an issue.
6.2
Experimental Design
We chose to have the subjects perform a movement pattern of alternating isometric and
dynamic segments. This choice significantly increased the complexity of the subsequent
analysis and the added benefit of including the isometric contraction segments was ques­
tionable, especially as only the dynamic segments was used for the predictive analysis.
The choice was made at an early stage, inspired by another study. It was only after a large
number of trials of Experiment II, that it became apparent that the isometric contraction
segments had a limited contribution. However, we decided to continue using the same
movement pattern for the sake of consistency of the acquired training data set. If someone
else was to continue the work of building this data set, it could be considered, if it is worth
the effort to include the isometric contraction segments.
6.3
Analysis
6.3.1
Feature Engineering
As previously mentioned the focus of this project was on creating a holistic solution to
fatigue prediction that may be applicable for the use in the ReHyb project, while also
focusing on the use of budget equipment. The focus was not on trying to increase the
prediction accuracy through the use of novel analysis methods or parameters. It was
therefore decided to use parameters that had proved themselves useful in predicting fa­
tigue in previous studies, rather than experimental parameters, in order to eliminate the
choice of parameters as a factor of uncertainty.
With that being said, it should also be noted that the use of very long epochs, the random
forest estimator and particularly the use of video based pose detection as an input signal
are all methods unbeknown to have been used in fatigue detection by the author.
However, since only the most proven fatigue parameters were used, it also means that
the accuracy of the model can likely be further improved by using other parameters and
more novel methods of analysis.
6.3.2
Evaluation
To evaluate the predictive performance of the models we used a leave­on­group­out cross
validation scheme. Normally, an entirely seperate test data set would be kept away from
the model, when using the cross­validation method for intermediate model evaluation dur­
ing the model selection phase, and used for a final test to estimate the true generalization
error. We chose not to follow that pattern and solely relied on the cross­validated score
for a number of reasons.
First and foremost, the splits had to be divided in a grouped manner following the trials,
if we decided to use the 10% (to allow for adequate size of training data) as the test set
that would equate to roughly 2 trials. Because of the large variability between each trial,
the test score would greatly depend on which of the two trials was chosen. This is why
cross­validation is used.
In theory, by performing more folds as we do here by conducting a fold per trial, we get
an estimate closer to the true generalization error. [24]
64
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:73==
6.4
Future Work
There are many possible future directions that could be taken. In the below section we
will attempt to categorize these to provide a roadmap of possible extensions.
6.4.1
Analytics
As previously mentioned, although this project used novel methods, the focus was not
on creating a novel predictive model. Prevous research have already shown that there
are improvements to be gathered using novel methods for signal processing, and future
work could use the framework developed here, to explore such methods. During the
development of this project, a few such ideas for methods came to mind, that could be
interesting to explore.
First of all it was clear that the trials had a lot in common, but also that the trials of each sub­
ject were more similar to each other than those of other subjects. It’s therefore likely that
a model could benefit from seeing all of the data, but specializing specifically in predicting
for a certain subject. A method that does this, is transfer learning, here we could train a
model on the large dataset of all subjects and then use fine­tuning to adapt it specifically
to an individual subject.
Another idea is to use a model to cluster together similar subjects based on the training
data and then train a model for each cluster of subjects that showed similar fatiguing
patterns. A third model could then be trained to classify subjects to these clusters, such
that new subject could be classified according to the cluster of subjects they were most
similar to, and the model specific to that cluster would then be used to predict their fatigue.
A third idea is to use self­supervised learning, to learn general patterns of the EMG sig­
nal and then transfer that knowledge to the task of predicting fatigue. Something that
seemingly has not been done before.
6.4.2
Signal Acquisition
In this project a basic bipolar sEMG sensor was used along with a digital goniometer in
the form of a camera. However, several additional sensors could be considered used
either instead of, or in conjunction with the ones used here. For the sake of the overview
divide these alternative signal sources into those concerning the sEMG signal and those
that provide entirely different biomarkers.
6.4.2.1
Alternative sEMG sources
Since the ReHyb exoskeleton envelops most of the arm, it could be interesting to see
how adding more sensors would affect the fatigue prediction capability. This could be
done in several different ways. We could add more bipolar sensors to additional muscles,
such as the brachialis or we could use 1­ or 2 dimensional arrays of electrodes (HD­EMG)
to detect muscle activity over a larger area with more fidelity while also helping to avoid
innervation zones.
6.4.2.2
Alternative Biomarkers
As mentioned in section 2.2, there are a number of different biomarkers other than sEMG
and the goniometer that can be used for fatigue detection. It could be interesting to look at
which of these may be the most to incorporate into an exoskeleton for the use. Something
like NIRS could be of particular interest in this regard, as it would be very practical to
include, since the sensor only needs to be in contact with the skin, but nothing is applied
to the skin. It would therefore be more practical than sEMG gel electrode pads.
6.4.3
Realism
Further work could also be done to make the study even more applicable to the real use
case of the ReHyb project. It can for example be discussed if applying gel­pad electrodes
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
65
==PAGE:74==
is a viable solution. Another idea is therefore to use something like emg sensors embed­
ded in fabric, that could be woven into the padding of the exoskeleton. Furthermore, there
is ample opportunity to extend the model such that it predicts the fatigue level in real time.
All of the parameters were computed in such a way that the models is able to predict with
a live feed. For example for the moving averages, we only used retrospective moving
average, that could also be obtained ”online”.
66
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Valery L. Feigin et al. “Global, regional, and national burden of stroke and its risk
factors, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2019”. English. In: The Lancet Neurology 20.10 (Oct. 2021). Publisher: Elsevier,
pp. 795–820. ISSN: 1474­4422, 1474­4465. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00252-0.
URL: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laneur/article/PIIS1474-4422(21)00252-
0/fulltext (visited on 08/23/2022).
[2]
Ying­Ye Yao et al. “Functional Disability After Ischemic Stroke: A Community­Based
Cross­Sectional Study in Shanghai, China”. In: Frontiers in Neurology 12 (2021).
ISSN: 1664­2295. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fneur.2021.
649088 (visited on 08/23/2022).
[3]
Carmen Krewer et al. “ReHyb: D2.1 Use case scenarios and stakeholder identifica­
tion”. eng. In: (Nov. 2021). Publisher: Zenodo. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5797827. URL:
https://zenodo.org/record/5797827 (visited on 09/25/2022).
[4]
Rehabilitation After Stroke. en. URL: https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/rehabilitation-
after-stroke (visited on 08/23/2022).
[5]
Hermano Igo Krebs. “Chapter 13 ­ Twenty + years of robotics for upper­extremity
rehabilitation following a stroke”. en. In: Rehabilitation Robotics. Ed. by Roberto
Colombo and Vittorio Sanguineti. Academic Press, Jan. 2018, pp. 175–192. ISBN:
978­0­12­811995­2. DOI: 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 811995 - 2 . 00013 - 8. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128119952000138 (visited on
08/26/2022).
[6]
Lindsay M. Biga et al. “10.2 Skeletal Muscle”. en. In: (Sept. 2019). Book Title:
Anatomy & Physiology Publisher: OpenStax/Oregon State University. URL: https:
//open.oregonstate.education/aandp/chapter/10- 2- skeletal- muscle/ (visited on
09/23/2022).
[7]
Boron & Boulpaep Concise Medical Physiology ­ 9780323655309 | Elsevier Health.
en. URL: https : / / www . eu . elsevierhealth . com / boron - boulpaep - concise - medical -
physiology-9780323655309.html (visited on 10/01/2022).
[8]
Surface EMG based muscle fatigue evaluation in biomechanics | Elsevier Enhanced
Reader. en. 2009. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2009.01.010. URL: https://reader.
elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0268003309000254?token=885CB8FFC005EA43680E8A5366F49A30611D
originRegion=eu-west-1&originCreation=20220411124507 (visited on 04/11/2022).
[9]
Mohamed R. Al­Mulla, Francisco Sepulveda, and Martin Colley. “A Review of Non­
Invasive Techniques to Detect and Predict Localised Muscle Fatigue”. en. In: Sen­
sors 11.4 (Mar. 2011), pp. 3545–3594. ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s110403545.
URL: http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/11/4/3545 (visited on 04/24/2022).
[10]
Clinical applications of mechanomyography: technical brief. ­ Free Online Library.
URL: https://www.thefreelibrary.com/Clinical+applications+of+mechanomyography%
3A+technical+brief%20-a0217771439 (visited on 09/17/2022).
[11]
Daniel T. Barry, Steven R. Geiringer, and Richard D. Ball. Acoustic myography: a
noninvasive monitor of motor unit fatigue. Muscle Nerve. 1985.
[12]
Definition of FREQUENCY. en. URL: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
frequency (visited on 10/01/2022).
[13]
Slobodan Jaric et al. “A comparison of the effects of agonist and antagonist muscle
fatigue on performance of rapid movements”. en. In: European Journal of Applied
Physiology 76.1 (June 1997), pp. 41–47. ISSN: 1439­6319, 1439­6327. DOI: 10.
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
67
==PAGE:76==
1007/s004210050210. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s004210050210 (visited
on 09/17/2022).
[14]
Peter Konrad. “A Practical Introduction to Kinesiological Electromyography”. en. In:
(), p. 61.
[15]
D. Farina et al. “Effect of joint angle on EMG variables in leg and thigh muscles”.
In: IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine 20.6 (Nov. 2001). Con­
ference Name: IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, pp. 62–71.
ISSN: 1937­4186. DOI: 10.1109/51.982277.
[16]
Sadasivan Puthusserypady. Applied Signal Processing. en. Now Publishers, 2021.
ISBN: 978­1­68083­978­4 978­1­68083­979­1. DOI: 10.1561/9781680839791. URL:
https://nowpublishers.com/article/BookDetails/9781680839784 (visited on 10/01/2022).
[17]
L. J Myers et al. “Rectification and non­linear pre­processing of EMG signals for
cortico­muscular analysis”. en. In: Journal of Neuroscience Methods 124.2 (Apr.
2003), pp. 157–165. ISSN: 0165­0270. DOI: 10.1016/S0165-0270(03)00004-9. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165027003000049 (visited on
09/18/2022).
[18]
Median Frequency ­ an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/topics/engineering/median-frequency (visited on 10/01/2022).
[19]
Junhong Wang, Shaoming Sun, and Yining Sun. “A Muscle Fatigue Classification
Model Based on LSTM and Improved Wavelet Packet Threshold”. en. In: Sensors
21.19 (Jan. 2021). Number: 19 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Insti­
tute, p. 6369. ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s21196369. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/21/19/6369 (visited on 07/24/2022).
[20]
Hayder A. Yousif et al. “Assessment of Muscles Fatigue Based on Surface EMG
Signals Using Machine Learning and Statistical Approaches: A Review”. en. In:
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 705.1 (Nov. 2019),
p. 012010. ISSN: 1757­8981, 1757­899X. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/705/1/012010.
URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1757-899X/705/1/012010 (visited
on 07/24/2022).
[21]
Chang­ok Cho et al. “Comparison of Endurance Time Prediction of Biceps Brachii
Using Logarithmic Parameters of a Surface Electromyogram during Low­Moderate
Level Isotonic Contractions”. In: Applied Sciences 11.6 (2021). MAG ID: 3136866901,
p. 2861. DOI: 10.3390/app11062861.
[22]
Bootstrap aggregating. en. Page Version ID: 1108900816. Sept. 2022. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bootstrap_aggregating&oldid=1108900816
(visited on 10/02/2022).
[23]
Bagging and Pasting. ­ Python implementation explained. en­US. Mar. 2020. URL:
https://machinelearningjourney.com/index.php/2020/03/24/bagging-and-pasting/
(visited on 10/02/2022).
[24]
Tue Herlau. Introduction to Machine Learning and Data Mining, Course Notes. (Vis­
ited on 10/01/2022).
[25]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. en. Information
science and statistics. New York: Springer, 2006. ISBN: 978­0­387­31073­2.
[26]
sklearn.model_selection.LeaveOneGroupOut. en. URL: https://scikit-learn/stable/
modules / generated / sklearn . model _ selection . LeaveOneGroupOut . html (visited on
10/01/2022).
[27]
Elektrophysiologie menschlicher Muskeln. en. 1912. URL: https://link.springer.
com/book/10.1007/978-3-642-50944-5 (visited on 06/26/2022).
68
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:77==
[28]
Stanley Cobb and Alexander Forbes. “Electromyographic Studies of Muscular Fa­
tigue in Man”. In: American Journal of Physiology 65.2 (July 1923). MAG ID: 2202778413,
pp. 234–251. DOI: 10.1152/ajplegacy.1923.65.2.234.
[29]
Eugene Kwatny, Donald H. Thomas, and Harry G. Kwatny. “An Application of Signal
Processing Techniques to the Study of Myoelectric Signals”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering BME­17.4 (Oct. 1970). Conference Name: IEEE Trans­
actions on Biomedical Engineering, pp. 303–313. ISSN: 1558­2531. DOI: 10.1109/
TBME.1970.4502758.
[30]
Foster B. Stulen, Carlo J. De Luca, and Carlo J. De Luca. “Frequency Parameters
of the Myoelectric Signal as a Measure of Muscle Conduction Velocity”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 28.7 (July 1981). MAG ID: 2124346728,
pp. 515–523. DOI: 10.1109/tbme.1981.324738.
[31]
Göran M Hägg. “Electromyographic fatigue analysis based on the number of zero
crossings.” In: Pflügers Archiv: European Journal of Physiology 391.1 (July 1981).
MAG ID: 2076597511, pp. 78–80. DOI: 10.1007/bf00580699.
[32]
Michelle Rene Davies. “Time frequency analysis of the electromyogram during fa­
tigue”. en. In: (), p. 68.
[33]
A.L. Ricamato et al. “A time­frequency approach to evaluate electromyographic
recordings”. In: [1992] Proceedings Fifth Annual IEEE Symposium on Computer­
Based Medical Systems. June 1992, pp. 520–527. DOI: 10 . 1109 / CBMS . 1992 .
245010.
[34]
S. Karlsson, Jun Yu, and M. Akay. “Time­frequency analysis of myoelectric sig­
nals during dynamic contractions: a comparative study”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering 47.2 (Feb. 2000). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, pp. 228–238. ISSN: 1558­2531. DOI: 10.1109/10.821766.
[35]
Dawn MacIsaac, Philip A Parker, and Robert N Scott. “The short­time Fourier trans­
form and muscle fatigue assessment in dynamic contractions”. en. In: Journal of
Electromyography and Kinesiology 11.6 (Dec. 2001), pp. 439–449. ISSN: 10506411.
DOI: 10.1016/S1050-6411(01)00021-9. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S1050641101000219 (visited on 07/11/2022).
[36]
D.T. MacIsaac et al. “Fatigue estimation with a multivariable myoelectric mapping
function”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 53.4 (Apr. 2006). Con­
ference Name: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, pp. 694–700. ISSN:
1558­2531. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2006.870220.
[37]
“Muscle fatigue detection in EMG using time­frequency methods, ICA and neural
networks”. In: (2009).
[38]
Dezhen Xiong et al. “Deep Learning for EMG­based Human­Machine Interaction: A
Review”. In: IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica 8.3 (Mar. 2021). Conference
Name: IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, pp. 512–533. ISSN: 2329­9274.
DOI: 10.1109/JAS.2021.1003865.
[39]
You­Lei Fu et al. “A hybrid approach to product prototype usability testing based on
surface EMG images and convolutional neural network classification”. en. In: Com­
puter Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 221 (June 2022), p. 106870. ISSN:
0169­2607. DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106870. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0169260722002528 (visited on 07/24/2022).
[40]
Ming­Zhou Liu et al. “Real time detection of driver fatigue based on CNN­LSTM”. en.
In: IET Image Processing 16.2 (2022). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/ipr2.1
pp. 576–595. ISSN: 1751­9667. DOI: 10.1049/ipr2.12373. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/ipr2.12373 (visited on 07/24/2022).
[41]
Welcome to SENIAM. URL: http://www.seniam.org/ (visited on 10/01/2022).
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
69
==PAGE:78==
[42]
Carlo J. De Luca. “Myoelectrical Manifestations of Localized Muscular Fatigue in
Humans”. en. In: (1984), p. 29.
[43]
Short Head Biceps Exercises. en­US. Section: Workouts. Jan. 2019. URL: https://
builtwithscience.com/workouts/short-head-biceps-exercises/ (visited on 10/01/2022).
[44]
E F Shair et al. “Selection of Spectrogram’s Best Window Size in EMG Signal During
Core Lifting Task”. en. In: 10.1 (), p. 5.
[45]
Explorer Kit. en. URL: https://www.pluxbiosignals.com/products/copy-of-explorer
(visited on 10/02/2022).
[46]
Introduction — Labstreaminglayer 1.13 documentation. URL: https://labstreaminglayer.
readthedocs.io/info/intro.html (visited on 09/25/2022).
[47]
Stream Inlets — liblsl 1.13.0­b13­27­g99cc03f8 documentation. URL: https://labstreaminglayer.
readthedocs.io/projects/liblsl/ref/inlet.html?highlight=smooth (visited on 09/01/2022).
[48]
Pose. en­US. URL: https://google.github.io/mediapipe/solutions/pose.html (visited
on 08/31/2022).
[49]
Angle Between Two Vectors Calculator. 2D and 3D Vectors. en. URL: https://www.
omnicalculator.com/math/angle-between-two-vectors (visited on 08/31/2022).
[50]
librosa — librosa 0.9.2 documentation. URL: https://librosa.org/doc/latest/index.
html (visited on 10/02/2022).
[51]
A. L. Hof. “The relationship between electromyogram and muscle force”. eng. In:
Sportverletzung Sportschaden: Organ Der Gesellschaft Fur Orthopadisch­Traumatologische
Sportmedizin 11.3 (Sept. 1997), pp. 79–86. ISSN: 0932­0555. DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-
993372.
70
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:79==
A
Code
A.1
Metronome
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
71
==PAGE:80==
In [ ]:
import tkinter
import time
import math

Window_Width=1000
Window_Height=800
Refresh_Sec = 0.0333

def create_animation_window():
    Window = tkinter.Tk()
    Window.title("Python Guides")

    Window.geometry(f'{Window_Width}x{Window_Height}')
    return Window
 
def create_animation_canvas(Window):
    canvas = tkinter.Canvas(Window)
    canvas.configure(bg="white")
    canvas.pack(fill="both", expand=True)
    return canvas
 
def animate_elbow(Window, canvas):
    
    center_x = 450
    center_y = 400
    
    i = 0
    line0 = canvas.create_line(center_x,center_y-250,center_x,center_y, width = 5, fill='black')
    line = canvas.create_line(10,10,250,500, width = 5, fill='black')
    countDown = canvas.create_text(800, 350, text=str(i), fill="black", font=('Helvetica 60 '))
    
    
    now = time.time()
    
    while True:
        
        #Move line 
        #
        
        
        currentTime  = time.time()
        
        
        
        #fps = 1/Refresh_Sec
        #period  =math.pi * 2 
        angle = 120
        #timePerRep = 2 
        
        #degrees = math.sin(i/((timePerRep*fps)/period)) * angle/2
        degrees = int(math.sin(i/9)*angle/2)+170
        
        
        angle_in_radians =  degrees * math.pi / 180
        line_length = 250

        end_x = center_x + line_length * math.cos(angle_in_radians)
        end_y = center_y + line_length * math.sin(angle_in_radians)
        
        
        canvas.coords(line, center_x,center_y,end_x, end_y)
        
        if int(currentTime-now) % 60 - 10 == 0:
            canvas.coords(line, center_x,center_y,center_x - line_length, center_y)
            Window.update()
            time.sleep(10)
            i = 22
            
        i += 1 
        
        
        
        canvas.itemconfig(countDown, text=str(60- int(currentTime-now-9) % 60  ))
        
        #canvas.create_line(10,10,250,500 + i, width = 5, fill='red')

        Window.update()
        time.sleep(Refresh_Sec)

            

Animation_Window = create_animation_window()
Animation_canvas = create_animation_canvas(Animation_Window)
animate_elbow(Animation_Window,Animation_canvas)
==PAGE:81==
==PAGE:82==
A.2
DataCapture.py
74
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:83==
Establish connections to datastreams and initialize arrays for datacapture
The data capturing loop
In [1]:
from pylsl import StreamInlet, resolve_stream
import cv2
import numpy as np 
import plotly.express as px
import time
import pickle
from datetime import datetime
import cv2
import mediapipe as mp
import math
In [2]:
video = cv2.VideoCapture(1)
video.set(cv2.CAP_PROP_FRAME_WIDTH, 1280)
video.set(cv2.CAP_PROP_FRAME_HEIGHT, 720)


if (video.isOpened() == False):
    print("Error reading video file")
    
    
frame_width = int(video.get(3))
frame_height = int(video.get(4))
size = (frame_width, frame_height)


# https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56274861/save-frames-of-live-video-with-timestamps
os_stream = resolve_stream("name", "OpenSignals")
inlet = StreamInlet(os_stream[0])



now = datetime.now()
# dd/mm/YY H:M:S
dt_string = now.strftime("_%d_%m_%H_%M_%S_%f")

result = cv2.VideoWriter(dt_string + '.avi', 
                         cv2.VideoWriter_fourcc(*'MJPG'),
                         30, size)

a = []
t = []
t_video = []

#t_end = time.time() + 60
In [3]:
while(True):
    
    sample, timestamp = inlet.pull_chunk()
    a.append(sample)
    t.append(timestamp)
    thisFrame = time.time()
    
    t_video.append(thisFrame)
    
    currentTimeStart = "0"
    currentTimeEnd = "0"
    
    try:
        currentTimeStart = str(timestamp[0])
        currentTimeEnd = str(timestamp[-1])
    except:
        pass
    
    ret, frame = video.read()
  
    if ret == True: 
  
        # Write the frame into the
        # file 'filename.avi'
        
        
        cv2.putText(frame, currentTimeStart , (10, 300),cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX, 0.6, (0, 255, 0), 1)
        cv2.putText(frame, currentTimeEnd , (10, 350),cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX, 0.6, (0, 255, 0), 1)
        cv2.putText(frame, str(thisFrame) , (10, 400),cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX, 0.6, (0, 255, 0), 1)
        
==PAGE:84==
The video was successfully saved
Save arrays to disk
        result.write(frame)
  
        # Display the frame
        # saved in the file
        cv2.imshow('Frame', frame)
  
        # Press S on keyboard 
        # to stop the process
        if cv2.waitKey(1) & 0xFF == ord('s'):
            break
  
    # Break the loop
    else:
        break
        
#video.release()
result.release()

# Closes all the frames
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
       
print("The video was successfully saved")
In [5]:
video.release()
In [4]:
# datetime object containing current date and time

with open('a' + dt_string + '.pkl', 'wb') as f:
    pickle.dump(a, f)

with open('t' + dt_string + '.pkl', 'wb') as f:
    pickle.dump(t, f)

with open('t_v' + dt_string + '.pkl', 'wb') as f:
    pickle.dump(t_video, f)
==PAGE:85==
A.3
DynamicPrep.py
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
77
==PAGE:86==
In [1]:
import cv2
import mediapipe as mp
import math
import plotly.express as px
import pickle
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import bisect
from scipy.fft import rfft, rfftfreq,irfft
from scipy import signal
import scipy
from tqdm import tqdm
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestRegressor
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression
from matplotlib.collections import LineCollection
from sqlitedict import SqliteDict

plt.style.use('default')
#plt.style.use('seaborn-whitegrid')
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 5]

mp_drawing = mp.solutions.drawing_utils
mp_drawing_styles = mp.solutions.drawing_styles
mp_pose = mp.solutions.pose
In [2]:
def calculateAngle(landmark1, landmark2, landmark3):
    '''
    This function calculates angle between three different landmarks.
    Args:
        landmark1: The first landmark containing the x,y and z coordinates.
        landmark2: The second landmark containing the x,y and z coordinates.
        landmark3: The third landmark containing the x,y and z coordinates.
    Returns:
        angle: The calculated angle between the three landmarks.
 
    '''
 
    # Get the required landmarks coordinates.
    x1, y1 = landmark1.x, landmark1.y 
    x2, y2 = landmark2.x, landmark2.y
    x3, y3 = landmark3.x, landmark3.y
 
    # Calculate the angle between the three points
    angle = math.degrees(math.atan2(y3 - y2, x3 - x2) - math.atan2(y1 - y2, x1 - x2))
    
    # Check if the angle is less than zero.
    if angle < 0:
 
        # Add 360 to the found angle.
        angle += 360
    
    # Return the calculated angle.

    angle = min(angle, 360-angle)

    return angle

def flatten(xss):
    return [x for xs in xss for x in xs]


def find_nearest(array, value):
    array = np.asarray(array)
    idx = (np.abs(array - value)).argmin()
    return array[idx], idx


def getSpectrum(signal,fs):
    yf = rfft(signal)
    xf = rfftfreq(len(signal), 1 / fs)
    
    return xf, yf 

def plotSpectrum(xf,yf):
    
    plt.close()
    plt.plot(xf, np.abs(yf))
    plt.show()
    
def normalize(signal):
==PAGE:87==
    signal -= np.mean(signal) 
    
    return signal

def getSpectrumOfWindow(signal,freq,bp=False,):
    
    signal = normalize(signal)
    
    if bp:
        signal = bandPassFilter(signal,5,300,freq)
    
    xf,yf = getSpectrum(signal, freq)

    #plotSpectrum(xf,yf)
    return xf,yf

def getMedianFreq(xf,yf):
    
    location = bisect.bisect_left(np.cumsum(np.abs(yf)), np.sum(np.abs(yf))/2)

    result = xf[location - 1]

    return result

def moving_average(x, w):
    return np.convolve(x, np.ones(w), 'valid') / w

def moving_average2(x, w):
    return np.convolve(x, np.ones(w), 'same') / w

def bandPassFilter(signal,lowcut,highcut,fs):

    nyq = 0.5 * fs 
    low = lowcut/nyq
    high = highcut/nyq
    
    order = 2
    
    b,a = scipy.signal.butter(order,[low,high],'bandpass',analog = False)
    y = scipy.signal.filtfilt(b, a, signal, axis=0)
    
    return y

def getZC(signal):
    signal = np.array(signal)
    
    pos = (signal>0)*1
    
    change = []

    for i in range(len(pos)-1):
        if pos[i]!=pos[i+1]:
            change.append(1)
        else:
            change.append(0)
            
    return sum(change)

def getDerrivative(signal):
    der = []

    for i in range(len(signal)-1):
        der.append(signal[i+1]-signal[i])

    der = np.array(np.append(der,np.mean(der)))
    
    return der
    
In [3]:
#Folder of files of data
folder = 'EMG_recordings/Dynamic/'

#insert name prepending of file to be processed 
name = '_23_09_16_45_31_460213'

with open(folder + 'a' + name + '.pkl', 'rb') as f:
    a = pickle.load(f)
    
with open(folder + 't' + name + '.pkl', 'rb') as f:
    t = pickle.load(f)

with open(folder + 't_v' + name + '.pkl', 'rb') as f:
    tv = pickle.load(f)
    
==PAGE:88==
a = flatten(a)
t = flatten(t)

a = np.array(a)
t = np.array(t)
tv = np.array(tv)

a = [x[1] for x in a]
In [4]:
#Start by checking whether the angles have already been calculated for this particular video. 
try: 
    with open(folder + name + '_angles.pkl', 'rb') as f:
        angles = pickle.load(f)
        print("Angles Loaded")
except:
    #print("Angles not calculated yet")
    
    cap = cv2.VideoCapture(folder + name + '.avi')
    
    frame_width = int(cap.get(3))
    frame_height = int(cap.get(4))
    size = (frame_width, frame_height)


    result = cv2.VideoWriter(folder + name + '_analyzed.avi', 
                             cv2.VideoWriter_fourcc(*'MJPG'),
                             10, size)

    angles = []

    i = 0

    with mp_pose.Pose(
        min_detection_confidence=0.5,
        min_tracking_confidence=0.5) as pose:
        while cap.isOpened():

            success, image = cap.read()
            if not success:
                print("Ignoring empty camera frame.")
                # If loading a video, use 'break' instead of 'continue'.
                break
            image.flags.writeable = False
            image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
            #image = cv2.flip(image, 1) # comment for right-arm video
            results = pose.process(image)


            try:
                right_elbow = results.pose_landmarks.landmark[14]
                right_shoulder = results.pose_landmarks.landmark[12]
                right_wrist = results.pose_landmarks.landmark[16]

                angle = round(calculateAngle(right_shoulder,right_elbow, right_wrist),0)
                #print(angle)
            except Exception as e:
                #print(e)
                angle = -10

            angles.append(angle)

            cv2.putText(image, str(angle) , (10, 450),cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX, 0.6, (0, 255, 0), 1)
            cv2.putText(image, str(i) , (10, 480),cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX, 0.6, (0, 255, 0), 1)
            i+=1

            image.flags.writeable = True
            image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_RGB2BGR)
            mp_drawing.draw_landmarks(
              image,
              results.pose_landmarks,
              mp_pose.POSE_CONNECTIONS,
              landmark_drawing_spec=mp_drawing_styles.get_default_pose_landmarks_style())

            cv2.imshow("analysis",image)
            result.write(image)

            if cv2.waitKey(5) & 0xFF == 27:
                break

    cv2.destroyAllWindows()
    result.release()
    cap.release()
    
    with open(folder + name + '_angles.pkl', 'wb') as f:
==PAGE:89==
Angles Loaded
Data Prep
556.0892371000082 556.2506337165833
Interpolate Angles timeseries to match frequency
100%|██████████| 16480/16480 [02:17<00:00, 119.57it/s]
Apply Bandpass Filter
Create Data Set
Divide into sections based on angles
Sections are found based on the angles and their derivatives
        pickle.dump(angles, f)
    
In [5]:
#Sync timeseries
t = t - t[0]
tv = tv - tv[0]

#Smooth out t (because of chunk timestamps)
tSmooth = np.linspace(t[0],t[-1],len(t)) # np.arange(t[0],t[-1],(t[-1]-t[0])/len(t))

print(t[-1],tv[-1])
In [6]:
#Make a new array with length = len(t) to tell which video frame belongs to which index value in the array t
frameMap = np.zeros(len(tSmooth),int)

# find out which index in t array belongs to which video frame using the frameMap array
reached = 0

for i in tqdm(range(len(tv))):
    
    nearest = find_nearest(tSmooth,tv[i])[1]
    frameMap[reached:nearest] = i
    #print(i,reached, nearest)
    reached = nearest 

#Using frameMap array to translate frames to angles 
anglesInterpolated = [180- angles[x] for x in frameMap]
In [7]:
plt.plot(tSmooth,anglesInterpolated)
plt.plot(tSmooth, np.array(a)*20)
#plt.xlim([100,140])
plt.show()
In [8]:
a = bandPassFilter(a,5,500,4000)
==PAGE:90==
Calculate moving average
Angle measurement have artefacts, that can affect subsequent division. We therefore smooth them out using a moving average
Get derivative of moving average and moving average of derivative
In [9]:
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (6,3)
start = 130
windowLength = 12
plt.plot(tSmooth, anglesInterpolated,color='orange',linewidth=0.8)
plt.axis(xmin=start,xmax=start+windowLength)
plt.show()
In [10]:
angleAvg = moving_average2(anglesInterpolated,2000)
In [11]:
plt.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg,color='green',linewidth=0.8)
plt.plot(tSmooth, anglesInterpolated,color='orange',linewidth=0.8)
plt.axis(xmin=start,xmax=start+windowLength)
plt.show()
In [12]:
angleVel = getDerrivative(angleAvg)*4000
avgVel = moving_average2(angleVel,2000)

angleAcc = getDerrivative(avgVel)*4000
avgAcc = moving_average2(angleAcc,1000)
In [26]:
start = 110
windowLength = 12
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12,5))
ax2 = ax.twinx()
ax.set_title('Angle and Angle Velocity')
ax.set_xlabel('Time (sec)')
ax2.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg,color='red',linewidth=1,label='Smoothed Angle')
ax2.plot(tSmooth,anglesInterpolated, color='orange',linewidth=1,label='Angle')
ax.plot(tSmooth,angleVel,color='blue',linewidth=1,label='Smoothed Angle Velocity')
ax.plot(tSmooth,avgVel,color='green',linewidth=1,label='Angle Velocity')
ax.set_ylim([-300, 300])
ax.set_ylabel('degrees/sec')
ax2.set_ylabel('degrees')

plt.axis(xmin=start,xmax=start+windowLength)
ax2.legend(loc="upper right")
ax.legend(loc="lower right")
==PAGE:91==
Trim Signal to cut off parts from before and after experiment
We do this now as it's fine to have padding in the ends when calculating moving averages etc
Find beginning
plt.savefig('images/angleAndAngleVel.pdf')  
plt.show()
In [27]:
start = 103
windowLength = 20
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12,5))
ax2 = ax.twinx()
ax.set_title('Angle Velocity and Acceleration')
ax.set_xlabel('Time (sec)')
ax2.plot(tSmooth, avgVel,color='red',linewidth=1)
#.plot(tSmooth,anglesInterpolated, color='orange',linewidth=1)
#ax.plot(tSmooth,angleVel,color='blue',linewidth=1)
ax.plot(tSmooth,avgAcc,color='green',linewidth=1)
ax2.set_ylim([-250, 250])
ax.set_ylim([-700, 700])
ax.set_ylabel('EMG in mv')
ax2.set_ylabel('Degrees')

plt.axis(xmin=start,xmax=start+windowLength)
plt.show()
In [28]:
start = 150000
length = 200000

major_ticks = np.arange(0, length, 10000)
minor_ticks = np.arange(0, length, 5000)

plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (13,3)
plt.plot(angleAvg[start:start+length],linewidth=1)
plt.plot(anglesInterpolated[start:start+length],linewidth=1)
==PAGE:92==
Find Ending
-30000
Trim all arrays
plt.gca().set_xticks(major_ticks)
plt.gca().set_xticks(minor_ticks, minor=True)
plt.grid(axis='x')
plt.gca().grid(which='minor', alpha=0.3)
plt.xticks(rotation = 45)
plt.show()
In [29]:
signalStart = 90000 + start
In [30]:
#major_ticks = np.arange(0, until-start, 10000)
#minor_ticks = np.arange(0, until-start, 5000)
start = -150000
stepsize = 10000
plt.plot(angleAvg[start:],linewidth=1)
plt.plot(anglesInterpolated[start:],linewidth=1)
#plt.gca().set_xticks(major_ticks)
#plt.gca().set_xticks(minor_ticks, minor=True)
plt.grid(axis='x')
plt.gca().grid(which='minor', alpha=0.3)

#start, end = plt.gca().get_xlim()
#plt.gca().xaxis.set_ticks(np.arange(start, end, stepsize))

plt.xticks(rotation = 45)
plt.show()
In [31]:
signalEnd = start+120000
In [32]:
signalEnd
Out[32]:
In [33]:
angleAvg = angleAvg[signalStart:signalEnd]
anglesInterpolated = anglesInterpolated[signalStart:signalEnd]
tSmooth = tSmooth[signalStart:signalEnd]
a = a[signalStart:signalEnd]
angleVel =angleVel[signalStart:signalEnd]
avgVel = avgVel[signalStart:signalEnd]
angleAcc = angleAcc[signalStart:signalEnd]
avgAcc = avgAcc[signalStart:signalEnd]
In [34]:
tSmooth = tSmooth - tSmooth[0]
==PAGE:93==
Locate Sections
Plot to find characteristics of each part
Find sections based on conditions
In [35]:
plt.plot(tSmooth,anglesInterpolated)
plt.plot(tSmooth, np.array(a)*20)
#plt.xlim([100,140])
plt.show()
In [37]:
start = 90
windowLength = 50
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12,5))
ax2 = ax.twinx()
ax.set_title('Angle and Angle Derivative')
ax.set_xlabel('Time (sec)')
ax2.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg,color='orange',linewidth=1)
ax.plot(tSmooth,avgVel,color='green',linewidth=1,linestyle='dashed')
ax.set_ylim([-300, 300])
ax.set_ylabel('EMG in mv')
ax2.set_ylabel('Degrees')
#plt.grid(axis='y')

plt.axis(xmin=start,xmax=start+windowLength)
plt.show()
In [38]:
colors = np.zeros(len(angleAvg),dtype=int)

#1 = isometric
#2 = upstroke
#3 = other

for i in tqdm(range(len(angleAvg)-1)):
    #Breaks
    if angleAvg[i] <120 and angleAvg[i] >50 and avgVel[i] > -40 and avgVel[i] < 40:
        colors[i] = 1 
    #Upstroke
    elif angleAvg[i] >70 and angleAvg[i] <110 and avgVel[i] >= 0:
        colors[i] = 2
    #All others    
    else:
        colors[i] = 0
        
==PAGE:94==
100%|██████████| 1955375/1955375 [00:02<00:00, 939209.03it/s]
Plot result
Save to Database
In [52]:
start = 210000
#start = 0
length = 130000

lines = []
for i in range(start,start+length):
    line = [(tSmooth[i],angleAvg[i]),(tSmooth[i+1],angleAvg[i+1])]
    lines.append(line)
    
linesEMG = []
for i in range(start,start+length):
    line = [(tSmooth[i],a[i]),(tSmooth[i+1],a[i+1])]
    linesEMG.append(line)

colorNames = ['orange', 'mediumaquamarine', 'b']
colorsMap = [colorNames[x] for x in colors]
lc = LineCollection(lines, colors=colorsMap[start:start+length], linewidths = 1.2)
lcEMG = LineCollection(linesEMG, colors=colorsMap[start:start+length], linewidths = 0.3)

fig, [ax1, ax2] = plt.subplots(2, 1, sharex=True)
ax1.add_collection(lc)
ax1.autoscale()
ax2.add_collection(lcEMG)
ax2.autoscale()
ax2.set_ylabel('Amplitude (mV)')
ax1.set_ylabel('Angle (degrees)')
ax2.set_xlabel('time (sec)')
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (12,5)
plt.savefig('images/segClassExample.png', dpi=300) #Issues with pdf  
plt.show()
In [ ]:
db = SqliteDict("experiments.sqlite")
list(db.keys())
In [ ]:
db.close()
==PAGE:95==
A.4
computeFeatures.py
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
87
==PAGE:96==
Function definitions
In [1]:
from sqlitedict import SqliteDict
import numpy as np
import re
from tqdm import  tqdm 
import librosa
import scipy
from scipy import signal
In [2]:
# subject dict, showing which subject performed which trial
subjects  = {
    "_05_08_19_22_54_429927" : "1",
    "_12_09_18_42_40_361378" : "1",
    "_14_09_23_06_53_406823" : "2",
    "_14_09_23_25_35_213589" : "2",
    "_15_09_23_03_20_913667" : "2",
    "_17_09_01_00_01_166338" : "2",
    "_17_09_15_50_47_514843" : "1",
    "_17_09_18_43_25_136387" : "1",
    "_19_07_21_44_26_034076" : "1",
    "_24_07_22_08_54_742068" : "3",
    "_24_07_22_26_09_758960" : "2",
    "_20_09_20_27_22_066721" : "1",
    "_20_09_20_43_26_732398" : "4",
    "_22_09_23_17_30_192688" : "2",
    "_22_09_23_33_21_211735" : "2",
    "_23_09_16_45_31_460213" : "1",
}
In [3]:
def fast_moving_average(signal,w,hl):
    #Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and low hl
    finalLength = len(signal)
    
    ma = []
    padLength = int(w/2-hl/2)
    
    signal = np.pad(signal,(padLength,padLength),'linear_ramp')
    for item in range(0,len(signal),hl):
        ma.append(np.mean(signal[item:item+w]))
    
    ma = np.repeat(ma,hl)    
    ma = ma[:finalLength]

    return ma

def fast_moving_average_retro(signal,w,hl):
    #Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and low hl
    finalLength = len(signal)
    
    ma = []

    for item in range(w,len(signal),hl):
        ma.append(np.mean(signal[item-w:item]))
    
    ma = np.repeat(ma,hl)
    ma = np.insert(ma,0,np.full(w,np.mean(ma[:50000])))
    ma = ma[:finalLength]

    return ma

def librosaZCR(signal,w,hl):
    #Computed as a moving average with window size w over the rectified signal
    endLength = len(signal)
    
    padLength = int(w/2-hl/2)
    signal = np.pad(signal,(padLength,padLength),'linear_ramp')
    
    signal = librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signal.astype(float),frame_length=w,hop_length=hl)[0]
    signal = np.repeat(signal,hl)[padLength+int(hl/2):endLength+padLength+int(hl/2)]
    
    return signal

def getDerrivative(signal):
    der = []
    for i in range(len(signal)-1):
        der.append(signal[i+1]-signal[i])

==PAGE:97==
Find unprocessed experiments
[]
Compute Parameters for unprocessed experiments
    der = np.array(der)
    return der
In [4]:
db = SqliteDict("experiments.sqlite")
savedExperiments = list(db.keys())
db.close()
In [5]:
db2 = SqliteDict("experimentsWithParams.sqlite")
computedExperiments = list(db2.keys())
db2.close()
In [6]:
experimentsToCompute = list(set(savedExperiments) - set(computedExperiments))
experimentsToCompute
Out[6]:
In [8]:
db2 = SqliteDict("experimentsWithParams.sqlite")

hl = 256



for experiment in tqdm(experimentsToCompute):
    #print(experiment)
    
    # Load data of experiment from experiments 
    db = SqliteDict("experiments.sqlite")
    experimentData = db[experiment]
    db.close()
    
    item = {"tSmooth": experimentData[0],
                            "a": experimentData[1],
                           "angleAvg": experimentData[2],
                           "avgVel": experimentData[3],
                           "colors": experimentData[4],
                           "anglesInterpolated": experimentData[5],
                           "angleVel": experimentData[6],
                           "angleAcc": experimentData[7],
                           "avgAcc": experimentData[8]}
    
    
    item['aRect'] = np.abs(item['a'])
    msk = item['colors'] != 1
    item['Dyn_tSmooth']              =        item['tSmooth'][msk]      
    item['Dyn_a']                    =        item['a'][msk]
    item['Dyn_angleAvg']             =        item['angleAvg'][msk]       
    item['Dyn_avgVel']               =        item['avgVel'][msk]            
    item['Dyn_colors']               =        item['colors'][msk]           
    item['Dyn_anglesInterpolated']   =        item['anglesInterpolated'][msk]         
    item['Dyn_angleVel']             =        item['angleVel'][msk]           
    item['Dyn_angleAcc']             =        item['angleAcc'][msk]            
    item['Dyn_avgAcc']               =        item['avgAcc'][msk]            
    item['Dyn_aRect']                =        item['aRect'][msk] 
    
    
    #own code, w = 4000, hl = 32, DynSignal
    item['DRMS1'] = fast_moving_average(item['Dyn_aRect'].astype(float),4000,32) 

    #own code, w = 32000, hl = 32, DynSignal
    item['DRMS2'] = fast_moving_average(item['Dyn_aRect'].astype(float),32000,32) 

    #own code, w = 200000, hl = 256, DynSignal
    item['DRMS3'] = fast_moving_average_retro(item['Dyn_aRect'].astype(float),200000,256) 

    #own code, w = 200000, hl = 256, DynSignal, standardized
    item['DRMS3_s'] = item['DRMS3']/np.mean(item['DRMS3'][:80000]) 


    ####### ZCR #########

    #ZCR, w = 4000
    item['DZCR1'] = librosaZCR(item['Dyn_a'], 4000,hl) 
    #ZCR, w = 4000, mov_avg = 200000
==PAGE:98==
100%|██████████| 3/3 [01:07<00:00, 22.45s/it]
    item['DZCR1_long'] = fast_moving_average_retro(item['DZCR1'].astype(float),200000,256) 

    #ZCR, w = 32000
    item['DZCR2'] = librosaZCR(item['Dyn_a'], 32000,hl)
    #ZCR, w = 4000, signal derivative
    item['DZCR3'] = librosaZCR(getDerrivative(item['Dyn_a']),4000,hl) 
    #ZCR, w = 4000, mov_avg = 200000
    item['DZCR3_long'] = fast_moving_average_retro(item['DZCR3'].astype(float),200000,256)
    #ZCR, w = 4000, mov_avg = 200000, standardized,signal derivative
    item['DZCR3_long_s'] = item['DZCR3_long']/np.mean(item['DZCR3_long'][:80000]) 
    #ZCR, w = 32000, signal derivative
    item['DZCR4'] = librosaZCR(getDerrivative(item['Dyn_a']),32000,hl) 


    ####### MDF #########

    #MDF, w = 4096
    item['DMDF1'] = np.repeat(librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=item['Dyn_a'].astype(float), sr=4000, roll_percent=0.

    #MDF, w = 4000, mov_avg = 200000
    item['DMDF1_long'] = fast_moving_average_retro(item['DMDF1'].astype(float),200000,256) 

    #MDF, w = 4000, mov_avg = 200000, standardized
    item['DMDF1_long_s'] = item['DMDF1_long']/np.mean(item['DMDF1_long'][:80000]) 

    #MDF, w = 32768
    item['DMDF2'] = np.repeat(librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=item['Dyn_a'].astype(float), sr=4000, roll_percent=0.

    
    item['peaks'] =  scipy.signal.find_peaks(item['Dyn_angleAvg'])[0]
    item['subject'] = subjects[experiment]
    
    

    db2[experiment] = item
    
    
db2.commit()
In [7]:
db2.close()
==PAGE:99==
A.5
Isometric Analysis
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
91
==PAGE:100==
In [1]:
import pandas as pd 
import numpy as np
import h5py
import plotly.express as px
from scipy.fft import rfft, rfftfreq,irfft
from scipy import signal
import bisect
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import scipy
import librosa

from numpy import linspace, where
from scipy.signal import periodogram
from scipy.integrate import cumtrapz


plt.style.use('default')
#plt.style.use('seaborn-whitegrid')
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 5]
In [69]:
def calculateAngle(landmark1, landmark2, landmark3):
    '''
    This function calculates angle between three different landmarks.
    Args:
        landmark1: The first landmark containing the x,y and z coordinates.
        landmark2: The second landmark containing the x,y and z coordinates.
        landmark3: The third landmark containing the x,y and z coordinates.
    Returns:
        angle: The calculated angle between the three landmarks.
 
    '''
 
    # Get the required landmarks coordinates.
    x1, y1 = landmark1.x, landmark1.y 
    x2, y2 = landmark2.x, landmark2.y
    x3, y3 = landmark3.x, landmark3.y
 
    # Calculate the angle between the three points
    angle = math.degrees(math.atan2(y3 - y2, x3 - x2) - math.atan2(y1 - y2, x1 - x2))
    
    # Check if the angle is less than zero.
    if angle < 0:
 
        # Add 360 to the found angle.
        angle += 360
    
    # Return the calculated angle.

    angle = min(angle, 360-angle)

    return angle

def flatten(xss):
    return [x for xs in xss for x in xs]


def find_nearest(array, value):
    array = np.asarray(array)
    idx = (np.abs(array - value)).argmin()
    return array[idx], idx


def getSpectrum(signal,fs):
    yf = rfft(signal)
    xf = rfftfreq(len(signal), 1 / fs)
    
    return xf, yf 

def plotSpectrum(xf,yf):
    
    plt.close()
    plt.plot(xf, np.abs(yf))
    plt.show()
    
def normalize(signal):
    signal -= np.mean(signal) 
    
    return signal

def getSpectrumOfWindow(signal,freq,bp=False,):
    
    signal = normalize(signal)
==PAGE:101==
Load Data
    
    if bp:
        signal = bandPassFilter(signal,5,300,freq)
    
    xf,yf = getSpectrum(signal, freq)

    #plotSpectrum(xf,yf)
    return xf,yf

def getMedianFreq(xf,yf):
    
    location = bisect.bisect_left(np.cumsum(np.abs(yf)), np.sum(np.abs(yf))/2)

    result = xf[location - 1]

    return result

def moving_average(x, w):
    return np.convolve(x, np.ones(w), 'valid') / w


def fast_moving_average_retro(signal,w,hl):
    #Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and low hl
    finalLength = len(signal)
    
    ma = []

    for item in range(w,len(signal),hl):
        ma.append(np.mean(signal[item-w:item]))
    
    ma = np.repeat(ma,hl)
    ma = np.insert(ma,0,np.full(w,np.mean(ma[:w])))
    ma = ma[:finalLength]

    return ma





def bandPassFilter(signal,lowcut,highcut,fs):

    nyq = 0.5 * fs 
    low = lowcut/nyq
    high = highcut/nyq
    
    order = 2
    
    b,a = scipy.signal.butter(order,[low,high],'bandpass',analog = False)
    y = scipy.signal.filtfilt(b, a, signal, axis=0)
    
    return y

def getZC(signal):
    signal = np.array(signal)
    
    pos = (signal>0)*1
    
    change = []

    for i in range(len(pos)-1):
        if pos[i]!=pos[i+1]:
            change.append(1)
        else:
            change.append(0)
            
    return sum(change)

def getDerrivative(signal):
    der = []

    for i in range(len(signal)-1):
        der.append(signal[i+1]-signal[i])

    der = np.array(der)
    
    return der
In [28]:
filename = "EMG_recordings/Isometric/opensignals_0007800f30f0_2022-07-07_12-17-41.h5"

==PAGE:102==
Preprocess
Time Domain
Amplitude
f = h5py.File(filename,'r')
a = f['00:07:80:0F:30:F0']['raw']['channel_1'][:]
f.close()
a = a.flatten()
In [199…
signal2 = a.copy().astype('float32')
signal2= normalize(signal2)
signal2 = bandPassFilter(signal2,5,500,4000)
signal2 = signal2[26000:-30000]
emg_t = np.arange(0,len(signal2)/4000,1/4000)
In [21]:
 
In [65]:
#plt.plot(emg_t, signal2,color='b',linewidth=0.08)
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 3]


plt.plot(emg_t,signal2/10000,color='b',linewidth=0.05)
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 100, 10))
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.savefig('images/isoAll.png',dpi=300)  
plt.show()
In [68]:
start = 188000
stop = 192000

plt.plot(emg_t[start:stop],signal2[start:stop]/10000,color='b',linewidth=0.8)
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.savefig('images/isoZoom.png',dpi=300)  
plt.show()
In [100…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 7]

fig, [ax0 ,ax1, ax2] = plt.subplots(3, 1, sharex=True)
ax0.plot(emg_t, np.abs(signal2)/10000,color='b',linewidth=0.08)
==PAGE:103==
Zero Crossing Rate
ax1.plot(emg_t[2000:],fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(signal2),2000,100)[2000:]/10000,c='r',linewidth=0.5)
ax2.plot(emg_t[20000:],fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(signal2),20000,100)[20000:]/10000,c='orange',linewidth=0.5)

plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (12,5)
plt.show()
In [211…
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (12,5)
plt.plot(emg_t, np.abs(signal2)/80000,color='green',linewidth=0.08,alpha=0.5,label='Rectified EMG signal/4')
plt.plot(emg_t[2000:],fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(signal2),2000,100)[2000:]/10000,c='r',linewidth=0.3,label='ARV,
plt.plot(emg_t[20000:],fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(signal2),20000,100)[20000:]/10000,c='b',linewidth=0.7,label='A
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 100, 10))
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.legend(loc="upper left")
plt.title('ARV of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction')
plt.savefig('images/isoAmplitude.png',dpi=500)
plt.show()
In [305…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 4]

norm  = 4000
zcr = librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signal2,frame_length=2000)[0]
plt.plot(emg_t[0::512],zcr*norm,c='b',linewidth=0.4,label = 'ZCR, w = 2000')
==PAGE:104==
Zero Crossing Rate of Signal Derivative
plt.plot(emg_t[::512][30:],fast_moving_average_retro(zcr,30,1)[30:]*norm,c='red',linewidth=1,label = 'MA(ZCR(2000)), w
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 100, 10))
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("ZCR (ZC/s)")
plt.legend(loc="upper right")
plt.title('ZCR of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction')
plt.savefig('images/isoZCR.pdf')
plt.show()
In [145…
plt.plot(emg_t, signal2/4000000+0.0367,color='g',linewidth=0.08,alpha=0.35)

plt.plot(emg_t[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signal2,frame_length=10000)[0],c='b')
#plt.axis(xmin=1,xmax=89,ymin=0.028,ymax=0.045)
plt.show()
In [190…
 
In [221…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 4]
signalDer = getDerrivative(signal2)
norm  = 4000
zcr = librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signalDer,frame_length=2000)[0]
plt.plot(emg_t[0::512][5:],zcr[5:]*norm,c='b',linewidth=0.4,label = 'ZCRD, w = 2000')
plt.plot(emg_t[::512][30:],fast_moving_average_retro(zcr,30,1)[30:]*norm,c='red',linewidth=1,label = 'MA(ZCRD(2000)), 
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 100, 10))
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("ZCR (ZC/s)")
plt.legend(loc="upper right")
plt.title('ZCR of Signal Derivative of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction')
plt.savefig('images/isoZCRD.pdf')
plt.show()
==PAGE:105==
In [161…
plt.plot(emg_t, signal2/3000000+0.067,color='g',linewidth=0.08,alpha=0.35)

plt.plot(emg_t[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signalDer,frame_length=8000)[0],c='b')
plt.axis(xmin=0.7, xmax=89,ymin=0.055,ymax=0.09)
plt.show()
In [20]:
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
ax2 = ax.twinx()
#ax.set_title('EMG and angles')
ax.set_xlabel('Time')
#ax.plot(emg_t*4000/512, signal2/3000000+0.065,color='g',linewidth=0.08,alpha=0.3)
ax2.plot(librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signal2,frame_length=8000)[0],c='orange')
ax.plot(librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signalDer,frame_length=8000)[0],c='g')
ax2.set_ylim([0.03, 0.045])
ax.set_ylim([0.05, 0.08])
#ax.set_ylabel('EMG in mv')
#ax2.set_ylabel('Degrees')

plt.axis(xmin=20, xmax=680)
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
==PAGE:106==
Frequency Domain
In [ ]:
 
In [41]:
xf, yf = getSpectrum(windowStart,4000)
plt.plot(xf, np.abs(yf))
plt.axis(xmin=0,xmax=270)
plt.show()
In [241…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [9, 4]


windowLength = 30000

start = 35000
end = 330000

windowStart = signal2[start:start+windowLength]
windowEnd = signal2[end:end+windowLength]

ma = 50

xf, yf = getSpectrum(windowStart,4000)
plt.plot(xf[ma-1:], moving_average(np.abs(yf),ma),color='b',label="Non-Fatigued Power Spectrum")
plt.axvline(x=getMedianFreq(xf,yf),color='b',linestyle='--',label="Non-Fatigued MDF")

xf, yf = getSpectrum(windowEnd,4000)
plt.plot(xf[ma-1:], moving_average(np.abs(yf),ma),color='orange',label="Fatigued Power Spectrum")
plt.axvline(x=getMedianFreq(xf,yf),color='orange',linestyle='--',label="Fatigued MDF")
plt.axis(xmin=0,xmax=240)
plt.axis(ymin=0,ymax=9000000)
plt.legend(loc="upper right")
plt.title('Power Spectra of Fatigued and Non-Fatigued Windows of EMG-Signal')
==PAGE:107==

plt.xlabel("Frequency (Hz)")
plt.ylabel("Power Spectral Density")

plt.savefig('images/powerSpectra.pdf')


plt.show()
In [249…
from matplotlib.patches import Rectangle

boxHeight = 7
opacity = 0.5

plt.plot(signal2/10000, c='black', linewidth=0.3, alpha=0.4)
plt.gca().add_patch(Rectangle((start,-boxHeight/2),windowLength,boxHeight,linewidth=1,edgecolor='none',facecolor='blue
plt.gca().add_patch(Rectangle((end,-boxHeight/2),windowLength,boxHeight,linewidth=1,edgecolor='none',facecolor='orange


#plt.legend(loc="upper right")
plt.title('EMG-signal and with Boxes Marking Fatigued and Non-Fatigued Segments')

plt.xlabel("Timestep")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")

plt.savefig('images/powerSpectraWindows.png',dpi=500)


plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
==PAGE:108==
Spectrogram
Using this
In [298…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 5]
f, t, Zxx = signal.stft(signal2, 4000, nperseg=2000,padded=False, return_onesided=True)
plt.pcolormesh(t, f, np.abs(Zxx), vmin=0, vmax=1200, shading='gouraud')#,cmap='gnuplot2')
plt.title('STFT Spectrogram')
plt.ylabel('Frequency [Hz]')
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 100, 10))
plt.axis(ymin=0, ymax=250)
plt.savefig('images/isoSpectrogram.jpg',dpi=300)
plt.show()
In [90]:
#med_filter = signal.medfilt(np.abs(Zxx), 9)
In [306…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 4]

norm  = 4000

#median = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=signal2, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5,n_fft=6000,hop_length=512)[0]

mdf = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=signal2, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5,n_fft=6000,hop_length=512)[0]
plt.plot(emg_t[0::512],mdf,c='b',linewidth=0.4,label = 'MDF, w = 2000')
plt.plot(emg_t[::512][30:],fast_moving_average_retro(mdf,30,1)[30:],c='red',linewidth=1,label = 'MA(MDF(2000)), w = 15
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 100, 10))
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("MDF (Hz)")
plt.legend(loc="upper right")
plt.title('MDF of Isometric Fatiguing Contraction')
plt.savefig('images/isoMDF.pdf')
plt.show()
==PAGE:109==
https://kevinsprojects.wordpress.com/2014/12/13/short-time-fourier-transform-using-python-and-numpy/
Using Librosa
In [77]:
# data = a numpy array containing the signal to be processed
# fs = a scalar which is the sampling frequency of the data

data = a 
fs = 4000
overlap_fac = 0.5
fft_size = 2000

hop_size = np.int32(np.floor(fft_size * (1-overlap_fac)))
pad_end_size = fft_size          # the last segment can overlap the end of the data array by no more than one window s
total_segments = np.int32(np.ceil(len(data) / np.float32(hop_size)))
t_max = len(data) / np.float32(fs)
 
window = np.hanning(fft_size)  # our half cosine window
inner_pad = np.zeros(fft_size) # the zeros which will be used to double each segment size
 
proc = np.concatenate((data, np.zeros(pad_end_size)))              # the data to process
result = np.empty((total_segments, fft_size), dtype=np.float32)    # space to hold the result
 
for i in range(total_segments):                      # for each segment
    current_hop = hop_size * i                        # figure out the current segment offset
    segment = proc[current_hop:current_hop+fft_size]  # get the current segment
    windowed = segment * window                       # multiply by the half cosine function
    padded = np.append(windowed, inner_pad)           # add 0s to double the length of the data
    spectrum = np.fft.fft(padded) / fft_size          # take the Fourier Transform and scale by the number of samples
    autopower = np.abs(spectrum * np.conj(spectrum))  # find the autopower spectrum
    result[i, :] = autopower[:fft_size]               # append to the results array
 
result = 20*np.log10(result)          # scale to db
result = np.clip(result, -40, 200)    # clip values
In [78]:
img = plt.imshow(result.T, origin='lower', cmap='jet', interpolation='nearest', aspect='auto')
plt.axis(ymin=10, ymax=250)
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [93]:
 
In [113…
signal = a.copy().astype('float32')
#signal = [x[0] for x in signal]
==PAGE:110==
C:\Users\ander\anaconda3\lib\site-packages\librosa\util\decorators.py:88: UserWarning: amplitude_to_db was called on c
omplex input so phase information will be discarded. To suppress this warning, call amplitude_to_db(np.abs(S)) instea
d.
  return f(*args, **kwargs)
C:\Users\ander\anaconda3\lib\site-packages\librosa\util\decorators.py:88: UserWarning: Trying to display complex-value
d input. Showing magnitude instead.
  return f(*args, **kwargs)
(-0.064, 94.4, 0.0, 300.0)
signal= normalize(signal)
signal2 = bandPassFilter(signal,10,500,4000)
In [189…
median = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=signal2, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5,n_fft=6000,hop_length=512)[0]
In [190…
plt.plot(emg_t, signal2/3000+80,color='green',linewidth=0.08,alpha=0.35)
#plt.plot(emg_t[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=signal2,frame_length=8000)[0]*2100,c='orange',linewidth=0

plt.plot(emg_t[0::512],median,c='b',linewidth=0.8)
plt.axis(ymin=60,ymax=100)
plt.show()
In [283…
import librosa.display

S = librosa.stft(signal2)


fig, ax = plt.subplots()
img = librosa.display.specshow(librosa.amplitude_to_db(S,
                                                       ref=np.max), x_axis='time', y_axis='log', sr=4000, ax=ax,vmax=2

img = librosa.display.specshow(S, x_axis='time', y_axis='log', sr=4000, ax=ax,vmax=1100000)
ax.set_title('Power spectrogram')
plt.axis(ymin=0, ymax=300)
#fig.colorbar(img, ax=ax, format="%+2.0f dB")
Out[283…
==PAGE:111==
C:\Users\ander\anaconda3\lib\site-packages\librosa\util\decorators.py:88: UserWarning: amplitude_to_db was called on c
omplex input so phase information will be discarded. To suppress this warning, call amplitude_to_db(np.abs(S)) instea
d.
  return f(*args, **kwargs)
[Text(0.5, 1.0, 'log Power spectrogram')]
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [291…
S = librosa.stft(signal2)

rolloffmax = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=signal2, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.99)
rolloffmin = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=signal2, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.05)
rolloff = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=signal2, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5)

fig, ax = plt.subplots()
librosa.display.specshow(librosa.amplitude_to_db(S,ref=np.max), x_axis='time', y_axis='log', sr=4000, ax=ax)
ax.plot(librosa.times_like(rolloff)*5.515805, rolloff[0], label='Roll-off frequency (0.5)',c='b',linewidth=.8)
ax.plot(librosa.times_like(rolloff)*5.515805, rolloffmax[0], label='Roll-off frequency (0.95)')
ax.plot(librosa.times_like(rolloff)*5.515805, rolloffmin[0], label='Roll-off frequency (0.05)')

ax.legend(loc='upper right')
ax.set(title='log Power spectrogram')
Out[291…
In [ ]:
 
==PAGE:112==
A.6
InterTrialAnalysis.py
104
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:113==
Load Data from Database
Single Experiment Analysis
Entire Signal
1953599
In [1]:
from sqlitedict import SqliteDict
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from scipy import signal
import numpy as np
import librosa
import librosa.display
from matplotlib.collections import LineCollection

plt.style.use('default')
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 7]
In [2]:
def moving_average(x, w):
    return np.convolve(x, np.ones(w), 'valid') / w

def getDerrivative(signal):
    der = []
    for i in range(len(signal)-1):
        der.append(signal[i+1]-signal[i])

    der = np.array(der)
    return der

def fast_moving_average_retro(signal,w,hl):
    #Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and low hl
    finalLength = len(signal)
    
    ma = []

    for item in range(w,len(signal),hl):
        ma.append(np.mean(signal[item-w:item]))
    
    ma = np.repeat(ma,hl)
    ma = np.insert(ma,0,np.full(w,np.mean(ma[:w])))
    ma = ma[:finalLength]

    return ma
In [3]:
db = SqliteDict("experiments.sqlite")

tSmooth, a, angleAvg, avgVel, colors, anglesInterpolated,angleVel,angleAcc, avgAcc = db[list(db.keys())[2]]
db.close()
In [37]:
length
Out[37]:
In [58]:
start = 220000
start = 400000
length = 990000 #len(tSmooth)-1 #1200000

lines = []
for i in range(start,start+length):
    line = [(tSmooth[i],angleAvg[i]),(tSmooth[i+1],angleAvg[i+1])]
    lines.append(line)
    
linesEMG = []
for i in range(start,start+length):
    line = [(tSmooth[i],a[i]),(tSmooth[i+1],a[i+1])]
    linesEMG.append(line)

colorNames = ['orange', 'mediumaquamarine', 'orange']
colorsMap = [colorNames[x] for x in colors]
In [59]:
lc = LineCollection(lines, colors=colorsMap[start:start+length], linewidths = 0.7)
lcEMG = LineCollection(linesEMG, colors=colorsMap[start:start+length], linewidths = 0.3)
==PAGE:114==
In [60]:
fig, [ax0 ,ax1, ax2] = plt.subplots(3, 1, sharex=True)

ax0.plot(tSmooth[start:start+length],a[start:start+length], color='blue',linewidth=0.3)
ax0.set_title('Raw EMG')
ax0.set_ylabel('Amp (mV)')

ax1.add_collection(lcEMG)
ax1.autoscale()
ax1.set_title('Raw EMG Colored by Segment Classification')
ax1.set_ylabel('Amp (mV)')

ax2.add_collection(lc)
ax2.autoscale()
ax2.set_title('Elbow Angle Colored by Segment Classification')
ax2.set_ylabel('Elbow Angle')

ax2.set_xlabel('Time (s)')

plt.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.4)
plt.savefig('images/dynamicOverview.png',dpi=500)
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [15]:
plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.rms(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=32000)[0])
plt.show()
==PAGE:115==
Angle and Amplitude
In [63]:
#w = 100
#angleAcc = getDerrivative(derAvg,w)
#derAvg = np.insert(derAvg,0,np.zeros(int(w/2)))
#derAvg = np.append(derAvg,np.zeros(int(w/2)-1))

#len(getDerrivative(derAvg))
#len(tSmooth)
In [5]:
fig, [ax0 ,ax1, ax2] = plt.subplots(3, 1, sharex=True)

ax0.plot(tSmooth,a,linewidth=0.4)

ax0.set_xlim([100, 112])

ax1.plot(tSmooth,fast_moving_average_retro(np.append(fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(a),1000,10)[1000:],np.zeros(1000

#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.rms(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=700)[0])
ax1.set_ylim([0,0.4])
ax3 = ax1.twinx()
ax3.plot(tSmooth,np.append(avgAcc[:-1],0),c='orange')
ax2.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg)

plt.savefig('images/AccAndAmplitude.png',dpi=500)
#movAvg()

plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [100…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 5]

fig, [ax0 ,ax1] = plt.subplots(2, 1, sharex=True)

ax0.plot(tSmooth,a,linewidth=0.4)

ax2 = ax0.twinx()

ax2.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg,c='r',linewidth=1)

ax0.set_xlim([100, 112])

ax1.plot(tSmooth,fast_moving_average_retro(np.append(fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(a),1000,10)[1000:],np.zeros(1000

#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.rms(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=700)[0])
ax1.set_ylim([0,0.4])
ax3 = ax1.twinx()
ax3.plot(tSmooth,np.append(avgAcc[:-1],0),c='orange')
==PAGE:116==
Amplitude


plt.savefig('images/AccAndAmplitude.png',dpi=500)
#movAvg()

plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [115…
fig, [ax0 ,ax1, ax2] = plt.subplots(3, 1, sharex=True)

ax0.plot(tSmooth,a,linewidth=0.4)
ax0.set_xlim([100, 112])

ax1.plot(tSmooth,fast_moving_average_retro(np.append(fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(a),1000,10)[1000:],np.zeros(1000

#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.rms(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=700)[0])
ax1.set_ylim([0,0.4])
ax3 = ax1.twinx()
ax3.plot(tSmooth,np.append(avgAcc[:-1],0),c='orange')
ax2.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg)

plt.savefig('images/AccAndAmplitude.png',dpi=500)
#movAvg()
plt.show()
In [131…
plt.plot(tSmooth,fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(a),2000,500)*.5+0.03,linewidth=.6,label='(ARV, w=2000) / 2')
plt.plot(tSmooth,fast_moving_average_retro(fast_moving_average_retro(np.abs(a),20000,500),20000,10),linewidth=1,c='r',
plt.legend(loc='upper left')
plt.title('ARV of EMG-signal During Dynamic Fatiguing Contractions')
==PAGE:117==
Frequency Shift
ZCR
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.savefig('images/dynSingleAmp.pdf')
plt.show()
#plt.ylim([0.05,.3])
In [ ]:
 
In [143…
fig, ax1 = plt.subplots()

color = 'tab:blue'
ax1.set_ylabel('sin', color=color)  # we already handled the x-label with ax1
#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=1000)[0]*0.25,c=color,line
ax1.tick_params(axis='y', labelcolor=color)

ax2 = ax1.twinx()  # instantiate a second axes that shares the same x-axis

color = 'tab:red'
ax2.set_xlabel('time (s)')
ax2.set_ylabel('exp', color=color)
ax2.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=32000)[0],c=color,linewidth
ax2.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=getDerrivative(a.astype(float)),frame_length=32000)[0]*0
ax2.tick_params(axis='y', labelcolor=color)
ax2.set_ylim([0.025,0.045])


#plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=32000)[0],c='red',linewidt
#plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=getDerrivative(a.astype(float)),frame_length=32000)[0]*
#plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=1000)[0]*0.25,c='darkorang
#plt.ylim(0.025, 0.05)
plt.show()
==PAGE:118==
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [176…
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 7]

fig, [ax0 ,ax1] = plt.subplots(2, 1, sharex=True)

ax0.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=2000)[0],c='tab:blue',linew


zcr = librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=2000)[0]

ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],fast_moving_average_retro(zcr,40,2),c='tab:red',linewidth=0.7,label='MA(ZCR(2000)), w = 20,00

#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.rms(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=700)[0])
ax1.set_ylim([0.026,0.0445])

zcrd = librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=getDerrivative(a.astype(float)),frame_length=2000)[0]*0.5

ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],fast_moving_average_retro(zcrd,40,2),c='blue',linewidth=1,label='MA(ZCRD(2000)), w = 20,000')
#ax2.plot(tSmooth, angleAvg)

ax0.set_title('ZCR of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=2,000')
ax0.set_ylabel('ZCR')
ax1.set_title('Moving Average of ZCR of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=20,000')
ax1.set_ylabel('ZCR')
ax1.legend(loc='upper right')

plt.savefig('images/dynSingleZCR.pdf')
#movAvg()
plt.show()
==PAGE:119==
(0.025, 0.05)
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [146…
plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=32000)[0],c='tab:red',linew
plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=getDerrivative(a.astype(float)),frame_length=32000)[0]*0
plt.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.zero_crossing_rate(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=1000)[0]*0.25+0.03,c='darko
plt.ylim(0.025, 0.05)
Out[146…
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
    
==PAGE:120==
Spectrogram
1953600
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [159…
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12,3))
ax2 = ax.twinx()
ax.set_title('EMG and angles')
ax.set_xlabel('Time')
#ax2.plot(tSmooth,angleAvg, color='red',linewidth=0.9)
ax.plot(tSmooth,a, color='blue',linewidth=0.3)
ax2.set_ylim([0, 180])
ax.set_ylabel('EMG in mv')
ax2.set_ylabel('Degrees')
#ax.set_xlim([50, 150])

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
In [92]:
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12,3))
ax2 = ax.twinx()
ax.set_title('EMG and angles')
ax.set_xlabel('Time')
ax2.plot(tSmooth,angleAvg, color='red',linewidth=0.9)
ax.plot(tSmooth,a, color='blue',linewidth=0.3)
ax2.set_ylim([0, 180])
ax.set_ylabel('EMG in mv')
ax2.set_ylabel('Degrees')
ax.set_xlim([60, 90])

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [10]:
len(a)
Out[10]:
In [57]:
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 5]
f, t, Zxx = signal.stft(np.array(a).astype('float64'), 4000, nperseg=2000,padded=False, return_onesided=True)
plt.pcolormesh(t, f, np.abs(Zxx), vmin=0, vmax=0.06, shading='gouraud')#,cmap='gnuplot2')


==PAGE:121==
MDF
#rolloff = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=a.astype(float), sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5)
#plt.plot(librosa.times_like(rolloff)*5.5, rolloff[0], label='Median Frequency',c='magenta',linewidth=.6)


plt.title('STFT Spectrogram of Fatiguing Dynamic Cyclic Contractions')
plt.ylabel('Frequency [Hz]')
plt.xlabel('Time (s)')
plt.xticks(np.arange(0, 500, 50))
plt.axis(ymin=0, ymax=200)
plt.savefig('images/dynSpectrogram.jpg',dpi=300)
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [71]:
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 7]
a = np.array(a).astype('float64')

#
fig, [ax0 ,ax1] = plt.subplots(2, 1, sharex=True)


mdf  = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=a, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5,n_fft=2048,hop_length=128)[0]

ax0.plot(tSmooth[0::128],mdf,c='tab:blue',linewidth=0.5)

ma1 = fast_moving_average_retro(mdf,156,1)
ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::128],ma1,c='tab:red',linewidth=0.7,label='MA(ZCR(2000)), w = 20,000')
#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::128],fast_moving_average_retro(ma1,200,1),c='tab:blue',linewidth=1.5,label='MA(ZCR(2000)), w = 20

#ax1.plot(tSmooth[0::512],librosa.feature.rms(y=a.astype(float),frame_length=700)[0])
#ax1.set_ylim([0.026,0.0445])


ax0.set_title('MDF of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=2,000')
ax0.set_ylabel('MDF(Hz)')
ax1.set_title('Moving Average of MDF of Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions, w=20,000')
ax1.set_ylabel('MDF(Hz)')
ax1.legend(loc='upper right')

plt.savefig('images/dynSingleMDF.pdf')
#movAvg()
plt.show()
==PAGE:122==
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [58]:
#plt.plot(emg_t, signal2/3000000+0.067,color='g',linewidth=0.08,alpha=0.35)


mdf = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=a, sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5,n_fft=2048,hop_length=128)[0]




mdfLong = librosa.feature.spectral_rolloff(y=a.astype(float), sr=4000, roll_percent=0.5,n_fft=int(16384*2),hop_length=
movAvg = moving_average(np.pad(mdf,(124,125),'linear_ramp'),250)

plt.plot(tSmooth[0::128],mdf,c='b',linewidth=0.4)
plt.plot(tSmooth[0::128],mdfLong,c='red',linewidth=1)
plt.plot(tSmooth[0::128],movAvg[:],c='orange')
#plt.axis(xmin=0.7, xmax=89,ymin=0.055,ymax=0.09)
plt.show()
==PAGE:123==
A.7
SingleTrialAnalysis.py
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
115
==PAGE:124==
Build dataframe
16it [01:45,  6.59s/it]
In [1]:
import pandas as pd
import sqlite3
import numpy as np
from sqlitedict import SqliteDict
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from tqdm import tqdm
from operator import itemgetter
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = [12, 8]
# Read sqlite query results into a pandas DataFrame
#con = sqlite3.connect("experimentsWithParams.sqlite")
#df = pd.read_sql_query("SELECT * from unnamed", con)

# Verify that result of SQL query is stored in the dataframe
#print(df.head())

#con.close()
In [16]:
def fast_moving_average(signal,w,hl):
    #Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and low hl
    finalLength = len(signal)
    
    ma = []
    padLength = int(w/2-hl/2)
    
    #signal = np.pad(signal,(padLength,padLength),'linear_ramp')
    for item in range(w,len(signal),hl):
        ma.append(np.mean(signal[item-w:item]))
    
    ma = np.repeat(ma,hl)    
    #ma = ma[:finalLength]

    return ma


def fast_moving_average_retro(signal,w,hl):
    #Possible to smooth it out by calling it again on result with low w and low hl
    finalLength = len(signal)
    
    ma = []

    for item in range(w,len(signal),hl):
        ma.append(np.mean(signal[item-w:item]))
    
    ma = np.repeat(ma,hl)
    ma = np.insert(ma,0,np.full(w,np.mean(ma[:w])))
    ma = ma[:finalLength]

    return ma
In [3]:
db = SqliteDict("experimentsWithParams.sqlite")
#db.close()
In [4]:
columns = list(db[list(db.keys())[0]].keys())
In [34]:
#Columns to include in dataframe
columns = [ 'DRMS1',
            'DRMS3',
            'DZCR3_long_s',
            'DZCR3_long',
            'DZCR3',
            'DRMS3_s',
            'subject']
In [35]:
#columns = list(db[list(db.keys())[0]].keys())
df = pd.DataFrame(columns=columns)

for key, item in tqdm(db.items()):
    thisRow = pd.Series([item.get(column) for column in columns],index=columns)
    df.loc[key] = thisRow  #original version just used "item"
In [9]:
==PAGE:125==
Index(['_24_07_22_08_54_742068', '_24_07_22_26_09_758960',
       '_05_08_19_22_54_429927', '_19_07_21_44_26_034076',
       '_12_09_18_42_40_361378', '_14_09_23_06_53_406823',
       '_14_09_23_25_35_213589', '_15_09_23_03_20_913667',
       '_17_09_01_00_01_166338', '_17_09_15_50_47_514843',
       '_17_09_18_43_25_136387', '_20_09_20_27_22_066721',
       '_20_09_20_43_26_732398', '_22_09_23_17_30_192688',
       '_22_09_23_33_21_211735', '_23_09_16_45_31_460213'],
      dtype='object')
Visual Analysis
General Observations
Amplitude
df.index
Out[9]:
In [7]:
df.drop(index = ['_15_09_23_03_20_913667','_20_09_20_43_26_732398'],inplace=True)
In [10]:
cmap = plt.get_cmap('jet')
names = df.subject.unique().tolist()
colors = cmap(np.linspace(0, 1, len(names)))
In [29]:
for index,item in df.drop(index = ['_15_09_23_03_20_913667'])[['DRMS1','subject']].iterrows():
    values = fast_moving_average_retro(fast_moving_average_retro(item['DRMS1'][:],120000,2000),10000,1000)[120000:]
    time = np.arange(0,len(values)/4000,1/4000)
    #mean = np.mean(values)
    plt.plot(time,values,label=item['subject'],color=colors[int(item['subject'])-1])
    #plt.axhline(y=mean, xmin=0, xmax= 1,color =colors[int(item['subject'])-1], linestyle='dotted', linewidth=2)
    
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.title('ARV, w = 120000 during Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions')
plt.savefig('images/intertrialAmp.png',dpi=500)
#plt.legend(loc="upper left")
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [32]:
for index,item in df.drop(index = ['_15_09_23_03_20_913667'])[['DRMS1','subject']].iterrows():
    values = fast_moving_average_retro(fast_moving_average_retro(item['DRMS1'][:],120000,2000),10000,1000)
    values = values / np.mean(values[:120000])
    values = values[120000:]
    time = np.arange(0,len(values)/4000,1/4000)
==PAGE:126==
Frequency
    #mean = np.mean(values)
    plt.plot(time,values,label=item['subject'],color=colors[int(item['subject'])-1])
    #plt.axhline(y=mean, xmin=0, xmax= 1,color =colors[int(item['subject'])-1], linestyle='dotted', linewidth=2)
    
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.title('Normalized ARV, w = 120000 during Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions')
plt.savefig('images/intertrialAmpNorm.png',dpi=500)
#plt.legend(loc="upper left")
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [41]:
for index,item in df.drop(index = ['_15_09_23_03_20_913667','_20_09_20_43_26_732398'])[['DZCR3','subject']].iterrows()
    values = fast_moving_average_retro(fast_moving_average_retro(item['DZCR3'][:],120000,2000),10000,1000)
    #values = values / np.mean(values[:120000])
    values = values[120000:]
    
    time = np.arange(0,len(values)/4000,1/4000)
    #mean = np.mean(values)
    plt.plot(time,values,label=item['subject'],color=colors[int(item['subject'])-1])
    #plt.axhline(y=mean, xmin=0, xmax= 1,color =colors[int(item['subject'])-1], linestyle='dotted', linewidth=2)
    
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.title('ZCRD, w = 120000 during Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions')
plt.savefig('images/intertrialZCRD.png',dpi=500)
#plt.legend(loc="upper left")
plt.show()
==PAGE:127==
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [43]:
for index,item in df.drop(index = ['_15_09_23_03_20_913667','_20_09_20_43_26_732398'])[['DZCR3','subject']].iterrows()
    values = fast_moving_average_retro(fast_moving_average_retro(item['DZCR3'][:],120000,2000),10000,1000)
    values = values / np.mean(values[:120000])
    values = values[120000:]
    
    time = np.arange(0,len(values)/4000,1/4000)
    #mean = np.mean(values)
    plt.plot(time,values,label=item['subject'],color=colors[int(item['subject'])-1])
    #plt.axhline(y=mean, xmin=0, xmax= 1,color =colors[int(item['subject'])-1], linestyle='dotted', linewidth=2)
    
plt.xlabel("time (s)")
plt.ylabel("Amplitude (mV)")
plt.title('Normalized ZCRD, w = 120000 during Fatiguing Cyclic Dynamic Contractions')
plt.savefig('images/intertrialZCRDN.png',dpi=500)
#plt.legend(loc="upper left")
plt.show()
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
A.8
MLfromDB.py
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
121
==PAGE:130==
dict_keys(['tSmooth', 'a', 'angleAvg', 'avgVel', 'colors', 'anglesInterpolated', 'angleVel', 'angleAcc', 'avgAcc', 'aR
ect', 'Dyn_tSmooth', 'Dyn_a', 'Dyn_angleAvg', 'Dyn_avgVel', 'Dyn_colors', 'Dyn_anglesInterpolated', 'Dyn_angleVel', 'D
yn_angleAcc', 'Dyn_avgAcc', 'Dyn_aRect', 'DRMS1', 'DRMS2', 'DRMS3', 'DRMS3_s', 'DZCR1', 'DZCR1_long', 'DZCR2', 'DZCR
3', 'DZCR3_long', 'DZCR3_long_s', 'DZCR4', 'DMDF1', 'DMDF1_long', 'DMDF1_long_s', 'DMDF2', 'peaks', 'subject'])
100%|██████████| 16/16 [06:38<00:00, 24.90s/it]
In [1]:
from sqlitedict import SqliteDict
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from tqdm import  tqdm 
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (15,5)
In [2]:
db2 = SqliteDict("experimentsWithParams.sqlite")
mlDB = SqliteDict("mlDB.sqlite")
experiments = list(db2.keys())
In [3]:
db2[experiments[0]].keys()
Out[3]:
In [4]:
parameters = ['Dyn_tSmooth', 'Dyn_a', 'Dyn_angleAvg', 'Dyn_avgVel', \
              'Dyn_colors', 'Dyn_anglesInterpolated', 'Dyn_angleVel', 'Dyn_angleAcc', 'Dyn_avgAcc', \
              'Dyn_aRect', 'DRMS1', 'DRMS2', 'DRMS3', 'DRMS3_s', 'DZCR1', 'DZCR1_long', 'DZCR2', \
              'DZCR3', 'DZCR3_long', 'DZCR3_long_s', 'DZCR4', 'DMDF1', 'DMDF1_long', 'DMDF1_long_s',\
              'DMDF2']
In [5]:
for experiment in tqdm(experiments):
    item = db2[experiment]
    peaks = item['peaks']
    

    for i in range(len(peaks)-1):
        start = peaks[i]
        end = peaks[i+1]

        cycleDict = {}

        for parameter in parameters:
            cycleDict[parameter] = item[parameter][start:end]
        
        cycleDict['maxTime'] = np.max(item['tSmooth'])
        cycleDict['subject'] = item['subject']
        cycleDict['name'] =   experiment
        cycleDict['cycleNumber'] = i+1
        
        
        cycleDict['duration'] =   cycleDict['Dyn_tSmooth'][-1] -cycleDict['Dyn_tSmooth'][0]
        cycleDict['angleDiff'] = cycleDict['Dyn_angleAvg'][-1] - cycleDict['Dyn_angleAvg'][0]
        cycleDict['meanTime'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['Dyn_tSmooth'])
        cycleDict['TUF'] =   (cycleDict['maxTime'] - cycleDict['meanTime'])/cycleDict['maxTime']
        
        #Could perhaps just add these in the parameters loop. 
        cycleDict['MDRMS1'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DRMS1'])
        cycleDict['MDRMS2'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DRMS2'])
        cycleDict['MDRMS3'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DRMS3'])
        cycleDict['MDRMS3_s'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DRMS3_s'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR1'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR1'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR1_long'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR1_long'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR2'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR2'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR3'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR3'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR3_long'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR3_long'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR3_long_s'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR3_long_s'])
        cycleDict['MDZCR4'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DZCR4'])
        cycleDict['MDMDF1'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DMDF1'])
        cycleDict['MDMDF1_long'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DMDF1_long'])
        cycleDict['MDMDF1_long_s'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DMDF1_long_s'])
        cycleDict['MDMDF2'] =   np.mean(cycleDict['DMDF2'])
        
        
        

        mlDB[experiment + "_" + str(i+1)] = cycleDict

mlDB.commit()
In [6]:
mlDB.close()
==PAGE:131==
1500it [00:15, 94.57it/s]
Dyn_tSmooth
Dyn_a
Dyn_angleAvg
Dyn_avgVel
Dyn_colors
Dyn_anglesInterp
_14_09_23_06_53_406823_1
[12.089418362207098,
12.089668226177878,
12.08...
[0.11695907316680333,
0.11366724184842404,
0.1...
[133.711,
133.711,
133.711,
133.711,
133.711, ...
[-7.025000000000295,
-7.118000000000281,
-7.21...
[0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, ...
[136.0, 136.0
136.0, 136.0, 136
_14_09_23_06_53_406823_2
[14.782702103241952,
14.782951967212732,
14.78...
[-0.026286051814203997,
-0.02254735308425542, ...
[133.567,
133.565,
133.563,
133.561,
133.559, ...
[-8.261000000000028,
-8.360000000000039,
-8.45...
[0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, ...
[138.0, 138.0
138.0, 138.0, 138
_14_09_23_06_53_406823_3
[17.450999447198832,
17.45124931116961,
17.451...
[0.0239288602532336,
0.021723901836466497,
0.0...
[138.4205,
138.4205,
138.4205,
138.4205,
138.4...
[-5.8210000000002164,
-5.919000000000169,
-6.0...
[0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, ...
[142.0, 142.0
142.0, 142.0, 142
_14_09_23_06_53_406823_4
[20.198253805922107,
20.198503669892887,
20.19...
[0.01618909884004157,
0.01144898584217199,
0.0...
[138.4765,
138.475,
138.4735,
138.472,
138.470...
[-4.7789999999999635,
-4.851999999999914,
-4.9...
[0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, ...
[141.0, 141.0
141.0, 141.0, 141
_14_09_23_06_53_406823_5
[22.723878822563755,
22.724128686534534,
22.72...
[-0.005727672712212205,
-0.012199634570148856,...
[136.0385,
136.038,
136.0375,
136.037,
136.036...
[-5.648999999999871,
-5.743999999999872,
-5.83...
[0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, ...
[138.0, 138.0
138.0, 138.0, 138
5 rows × 45 columns
In [27]:
#Build Dataframe
columns = list(mlDB[list(mlDB.keys())[0]].keys())
df = pd.DataFrame(columns=columns)

for key, item in tqdm(mlDB.items()):
    
    df.loc[key] = pd.Series(item)
In [28]:
df.head()
Out[28]:
==PAGE:132==
A.9
MLmodel.py
124
Fatigue Prediction in Robotic Rehabilitation
==PAGE:133==
Construct DataFrame from DB
2337it [00:58, 40.25it/s]
Clean Dataframe
In [1]:
import pandas as pd
from scipy import signal
from sqlitedict import SqliteDict
from tqdm import  tqdm 
import scipy
import numpy as np
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestRegressor
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.model_selection import LeaveOneGroupOut
from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
from sklearn.model_selection import GridSearchCV
from sklearn.feature_selection import RFECV
from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_predict


import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (15,5)
import plotly.express as px
In [2]:
mlDB = SqliteDict("mlDB.sqlite")

#Build Dataframe
columns = list(mlDB[list(mlDB.keys())[0]].keys())
df = pd.DataFrame(columns=columns)

for key, item in tqdm(mlDB.items()):
    
    df.loc[key] = pd.Series(item)
    
mlDB.close()
In [9]:
plt.plot(df.duration.values)
plt.xlabel("Number of Cycle")
plt.ylabel("Duration of Cycle")
plt.title('Duration of each cycle of the dataset used to detect outliers')
plt.savefig('images/outliersTimelength.pdf')
In [6]:
df = df[df.duration < 3.1]
In [7]:
plt.plot(df.duration.values)
plt.xlabel("Number of Cycle")
plt.ylabel("Duration of Cycle")
plt.title('Time length of each cycle of the dataset used to detect outliers')
plt.savefig('images/outliersTimelength2.pdf')
==PAGE:134==
In [10]:
plt.scatter(df.angleDiff,df.duration, s = 3, c=df.cycleNumber)
plt.xticks(range(-100, 120,10))
plt.xlabel("Angular Difference between start and end angles of cycle")
plt.ylabel("Duration of Cycle")
plt.title('Time length and angle difference of each cycle of the dataset used to detect outliers')
plt.savefig('images/outliersTimelength3.pdf')
plt.show()
In [7]:
df = df[(df['angleDiff']> -10) & (df['angleDiff'] < 10 ) & (df.duration > 2.3)]
In [8]:
plt.scatter(df.angleDiff,df.duration, s = 3)
#plt.xticks(range(-100, 120,10))
plt.show()
In [9]:
for i in range(1,5):
    plt.scatter(df[df.subject==str(i)].MDZCR2,df[df.subject==str(i)].MDRMS2, s = 4)

plt.show()
==PAGE:135==
Visualize
Amplitude
In [ ]:
 
In [10]:
cmap = plt.get_cmap('jet')
names = df.subject.unique().tolist()
colors = cmap(np.linspace(0, 1, len(names)))
In [11]:
df = df[~df.name.isin(['_15_09_23_03_20_913667','_20_09_20_43_26_732398'])].copy()
In [12]:
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (15,9)
In [13]:
for i in range(1,5):
    plt.scatter((1-df[df.subject==str(i)].TUF)*100, df[df.subject==str(i)].MDRMS3_s,s = 4,color=colors[i-1])

plt.xlabel("Normalized Time until Fatigue")
plt.ylabel("Normalized Amplitude")
plt.title('Mean of Extraction of ARV(20,0000) per Dynamic Cycle')
plt.savefig('images/ML_Amp.pdf')


plt.show()
==PAGE:136==
array(['_24_07_22_08_54_742068', '_24_07_22_26_09_758960',
       '_05_08_19_22_54_429927', '_19_07_21_44_26_034076',
       '_12_09_18_42_40_361378', '_14_09_23_06_53_406823',
       '_14_09_23_25_35_213589', '_17_09_01_00_01_166338',
       '_17_09_15_50_47_514843', '_17_09_18_43_25_136387',
       '_20_09_20_27_22_066721', '_22_09_23_17_30_192688',
       '_22_09_23_33_21_211735', '_23_09_16_45_31_460213'], dtype=object)
All subjects
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [14]:
for i in range(1,5):
    plt.scatter((1-df[df.subject==str(i)].TUF)*100, df[df.subject==str(i)].MDZCR3_long_s,s = 4,color=colors[i-1])

    
plt.xlabel("Normalized Time until Fatigue")
plt.ylabel("Normalized ZCR")
plt.title('Mean of Extraction of ZCR(20,0000) per Dynamic Cycle')
plt.savefig('images/ML_Freq.pdf')

plt.show()
In [15]:
df.name.unique()
Out[15]:
In [16]:
dfWaypoint = df.copy()
#df = dfWaypoint
In [17]:
#df = df[df.name != "_20_09_20_27_22_066721"].copy()
#df = df[df.subject == "1"].copy()
#df = df[df.name.isin(['_24_07_22_26_09_758960','_14_09_23_06_53_406823','_14_09_23_25_35_213589'])].copy()

dfAll = df.copy()

dfAll['group'] = pd.Categorical(dfAll['name'])
dfAll['group_code'] = dfAll['group'].cat.codes


input_columns = ['MDRMS1','MDRMS2', 'MDZCR1', 'MDZCR2', 'MDZCR3', 'MDZCR4', 'MDMDF1', 'MDMDF2',\
                 'MDMDF1_long','MDMDF1_long_s','MDZCR3_long','MDZCR3_long_s','MDRMS3','MDRMS3_s','MDZCR1_long']

#input_columns = ['MDRMS3_s','MDZCR3_long_s']
==PAGE:137==
Mean Predictor
array([0.24088325, 0.24398124, 0.24370091, 0.23501301, 0.24142797,
       0.24311558, 0.24140155, 0.24079321, 0.2399846 , 0.2454795 ,
       0.2475348 , 0.24555942, 0.21731584, 0.2488371 ])
array([0.49689314, 0.49689314, 0.49689314, ..., 0.49470883, 0.49470883,
       0.49470883])
Linear Regression
1 variable
0.205241423611282
RFECV(cv=[(array([   0,    1,    2, ..., 1778, 1779, 1780]),
           array([253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265,
       266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278,
       279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291,
       292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304,
       305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317,
       318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 32...
       179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191,
       192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204,
       205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,
       218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230,
       231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243,
       244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252]))],
      estimator=LinearRegression(), scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')

target_column = ['TUF']

X=dfAll[input_columns]
y = dfAll[target_column].values.ravel()
groups = dfAll.group_code.values.ravel()

logo = LeaveOneGroupOut()
cv = list(logo.split(X, y, groups))
In [18]:
from sklearn.dummy import DummyRegressor
dummy_regr = DummyRegressor(strategy="mean")
In [19]:
meanScores = cross_val_score(dummy_regr, X, y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)
meanScores
Out[19]:
In [20]:
cross_val_predict(dummy_regr, X, y, cv=cv)
Out[20]:
In [21]:
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression

input_columns = ['MDRMS1','MDRMS2', 'MDZCR1', 'MDZCR2', 'MDZCR3', 'MDZCR4', 'MDMDF1', 'MDMDF2',\
                 'MDMDF1_long','MDMDF1_long_s','MDZCR3_long','MDZCR3_long_s','MDRMS3','MDRMS3_s','MDZCR1_long']

X = X=dfAll[input_columns]

reg = LinearRegression()
In [22]:
LinRegScores = cross_val_score(reg, X, y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)
In [23]:
np.mean(LinRegScores)
Out[23]:
In [24]:
min_features_to_select = 1  # Minimum number of features to consider
rfecv = RFECV(
    estimator=reg,
    step=1,
    cv=cv,
    scoring="neg_mean_absolute_error",
    min_features_to_select=min_features_to_select,
)
rfecv.fit(X, y)
Out[24]:
In [25]:
plt.figure()
plt.xlabel("Number of features selected")
plt.ylabel("Cross validation score (MAE)")
plt.plot(
==PAGE:138==
Weirdly low scores for low number of features compared to manually selecting and running 1 or 2 features
0.19921958457313396
Random Forrest
Hyperparameter tuning 1
    range(min_features_to_select, len(rfecv.grid_scores_) + min_features_to_select),
    rfecv.grid_scores_,
)
plt.show()
In [26]:
input_columns2 = np.array(input_columns)[rfecv.support_]
In [27]:
X = X=dfAll[input_columns2]
In [28]:
LinRegScores2 = cross_val_score(reg, X, y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)
In [29]:
np.mean(LinRegScores2)
Out[29]:
In [30]:
X=dfAll[input_columns]
In [31]:
param_grid = {
    'bootstrap': [True],
    'max_depth': [40, 50, 100],
    'max_features': [2, 3],
    'min_samples_leaf': [3, 4, 5],
    'min_samples_split': [5, 10],
    'n_estimators': [100, 200, 1000]
}


param_grid = {
    'max_depth': [1,2,3,5,10],
    'min_samples_split': [2,3,4,5,6],
    'n_estimators': [4,5,7,10,20]
}

# Create a based model
rf = RandomForestRegressor()
# Instantiate the grid search model
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator = rf, param_grid = param_grid, 
                          cv = cv, n_jobs = -1, verbose = 3, scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')
==PAGE:139==
Fitting 14 folds for each of 125 candidates, totalling 1750 fits
GridSearchCV(cv=[(array([   0,    1,    2, ..., 1778, 1779, 1780]),
                  array([253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265,
       266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278,
       279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291,
       292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304,
       305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317,
       318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325...
       205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,
       218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230,
       231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243,
       244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252]))],
             estimator=RandomForestRegressor(), n_jobs=-1,
             param_grid={'max_depth': [1, 2, 3, 5, 10],
                         'min_samples_split': [2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
                         'n_estimators': [4, 5, 7, 10, 20]},
             scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error', verbose=3)
-0.12338430547533318
Feature selection 1
RFECV(cv=[(array([   0,    1,    2, ..., 1778, 1779, 1780]),
           array([253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265,
       266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278,
       279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291,
       292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304,
       305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317,
       318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 32...
       192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204,
       205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,
       218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230,
       231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243,
       244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252]))],
      estimator=RandomForestRegressor(max_depth=5, min_samples_split=4,
                                      n_estimators=7),
      scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')
In [32]:
grid_search.fit(X,y)
Out[32]:
In [33]:
grid_search.best_score_
Out[33]:
In [34]:
rf = grid_search.best_estimator_
In [35]:
min_features_to_select = 1  # Minimum number of features to consider
rfecv = RFECV(
    estimator=rf,
    step=1,
    cv=cv,
    scoring="neg_mean_absolute_error",
    min_features_to_select=min_features_to_select,
)
rfecv.fit(X, y)
Out[35]:
In [36]:
plt.figure()
plt.xlabel("Number of features selected")
plt.ylabel("Cross validation score (MAE)")
plt.plot(
    range(min_features_to_select, len(rfecv.grid_scores_) + min_features_to_select),
    rfecv.grid_scores_,
)
plt.show()
==PAGE:140==
Fitting 14 folds for each of 125 candidates, totalling 1750 fits
-0.1039210671877666
0.10724633960507123
In [37]:
input_columns2 = np.array(input_columns)[rfecv.support_]
X=dfAll[input_columns2]
In [38]:
param_grid = {
    'max_depth': [1,2,3,5,10],
    'min_samples_split': [2,3,4,5,6],
    'n_estimators': [4,5,7,10,20]
}

# Create a base model
rf = RandomForestRegressor()
# Instantiate the grid search model
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator = rf, param_grid = param_grid, 
                          cv = cv, n_jobs = -1, verbose = 3, scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')

grid_search.fit(X,y)

rf = grid_search.best_estimator_
grid_search.best_score_
Out[38]:
In [ ]:
 
In [39]:
rfScores  = cross_val_score(rf, X, y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)
np.mean(rfScores)
Out[39]:
In [40]:
y_pred = cross_val_predict(rf, X, y, cv=cv)
error = y-y_pred
In [41]:
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (10,8)

sc =  plt.scatter(y,y_pred,c=error,cmap='coolwarm', s=6)
plt.xlim([0,1])
plt.ylim([0,1])
plt.colorbar(sc)
plt.show()
==PAGE:141==
XGBoost
0.11705335651235578
In [42]:
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (10,8)

sc =  plt.scatter(y,y_pred,c=groups,cmap='Set2', s=6)
plt.xlim([0,1])
plt.ylim([0,1])
plt.colorbar(sc)
plt.show()
In [55]:
from xgboost import XGBRegressor


X=dfAll[input_columns2]

xgbScores = cross_val_score(XGBRegressor(), X.astype(float), y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)

xgbScores.mean()
Out[55]:
==PAGE:142==
Compare Models
3.653721008033125
10.724633960507125
0.10830855489824266
(0.0845361712036319, 0.13208093859285341)
In [47]:
np.std(rfScores*100)
Out[47]:
In [48]:
np.mean(rfScores*100)
Out[48]:
In [102…
data_1 = meanScores*100
data_2 = LinRegScores2*100
data_3 = rfScores*100
data = [data_1, data_2, data_3]
 
fig = plt.figure(figsize =(5, 5))
 
# Creating axes instance
ax = fig.add_axes([0, 0, 1, 1])
 
# Creating plot
bp = ax.boxplot(data,labels=['Mean','Linear Regression','Random Forest'],vert=True)


ax.set_ylabel("MAE (% of TuF)")
ax.set_ylim([0,45])
ax.set_title('Distribution of Prediction Errors of each CV-fold')
fig.savefig('images/allSubjectBoxplot.png',dpi=400)
# show plot
plt.show()
In [ ]:
 
In [104…
np.mean(rfScores)
Out[104…
In [105…
import numpy as np
import scipy.stats as st

#define sample data
data = rfScores

#create 95% confidence interval for population mean weight
st.t.interval(alpha=0.95, df=len(data)-1, loc=np.mean(data), scale=st.sem(data)) 
Out[105…
In [ ]:
 
==PAGE:143==
Subject-Specific Models
Subject 1
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
In [89]:
dfsub1 = dfAll[dfAll.subject == "1"].copy()
X=dfsub1[input_columns]
y = dfsub1[target_column].values.ravel()
groups = dfsub1.group_code.values.ravel()

logo = LeaveOneGroupOut()
cv = list(logo.split(X, y, groups))


param_grid = {
    'bootstrap': [True],
    'max_depth': [40, 50, 100],
    'max_features': [2, 3],
    'min_samples_leaf': [3, 4, 5],
    'min_samples_split': [5, 10],
    'n_estimators': [100, 200, 1000]
}


param_grid = {
    'max_depth': [1,2,3,5,10],
    'min_samples_split': [2,3,4,5,6],
    'n_estimators': [4,5,7,10,20]
}

# Create a based model
rf = RandomForestRegressor()
# Instantiate the grid search model
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator = rf, param_grid = param_grid, 
                          cv = cv, n_jobs = -1, verbose = 3, scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')

grid_search.fit(X,y)

print("grid search 1 best score: ", grid_search.best_score_)

#Update Hyperparameters 
rf = grid_search.best_estimator_


#Use updated hyperparameters to perform feature selection

min_features_to_select = 1  # Minimum number of features to consider
rfecv = RFECV(
    estimator=rf,
    step=1,
    cv=cv,
    scoring="neg_mean_absolute_error",
    min_features_to_select=min_features_to_select,
)
rfecv.fit(X, y)

print("feature selection 1 best score: ", rfecv.grid_scores_)

#Update features 
input_columns2 = np.array(input_columns)[rfecv.support_]
X=dfsub1[input_columns2]


# Hyperparameter tuning 2 
param_grid = {
    'max_depth': [1,2,3,5,10],
    'min_samples_split': [2,3,4,5,6],
    'n_estimators': [4,5,7,10,20]
}

# Create a base model
rf = RandomForestRegressor()
# Instantiate the grid search model
==PAGE:144==
Fitting 7 folds for each of 125 candidates, totalling 875 fits
grid search 1 best score:  -0.10683500145438173
feature selection 1 best score:  [-0.11056537 -0.11243129 -0.10785027 -0.11069676 -0.10909902 -0.10940769
 -0.11394245 -0.11424076 -0.11131762 -0.11731689 -0.11425881 -0.11838631
 -0.1154904  -0.10919862 -0.11116441]
Fitting 7 folds for each of 125 candidates, totalling 875 fits
grid search 2 best score:  -0.09353241947924482
0.09498879497308056
Subject 2
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator = rf, param_grid = param_grid, 
                          cv = cv, n_jobs = -1, verbose = 3, scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')

#her
grid_search.fit(X,y)

rf = grid_search.best_estimator_
print("grid search 2 best score: ", grid_search.best_score_)
In [90]:
rfScores1  = cross_val_score(rf, X, y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)
np.mean(rfScores1)
Out[90]:
In [92]:
dfsub1 = dfAll[dfAll.subject == "2"].copy()
X=dfsub1[input_columns]
y = dfsub1[target_column].values.ravel()
groups = dfsub1.group_code.values.ravel()

logo = LeaveOneGroupOut()
cv = list(logo.split(X, y, groups))


param_grid = {
    'bootstrap': [True],
    'max_depth': [40, 50, 100],
    'max_features': [2, 3],
    'min_samples_leaf': [3, 4, 5],
    'min_samples_split': [5, 10],
    'n_estimators': [100, 200, 1000]
}


param_grid = {
    'max_depth': [1,2,3,5,10],
    'min_samples_split': [2,3,4,5,6],
    'n_estimators': [4,5,7,10,20]
}

# Create a based model
rf = RandomForestRegressor()
# Instantiate the grid search model
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator = rf, param_grid = param_grid, 
                          cv = cv, n_jobs = -1, verbose = 3, scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')

grid_search.fit(X,y)

print("grid search 1 best score: ", grid_search.best_score_)

#Update Hyperparameters 
rf = grid_search.best_estimator_


#Use updated hyperparameters to perform feature selection

min_features_to_select = 1  # Minimum number of features to consider
rfecv = RFECV(
    estimator=rf,
    step=1,
    cv=cv,
    scoring="neg_mean_absolute_error",
    min_features_to_select=min_features_to_select,
)
rfecv.fit(X, y)

print("feature selection 1 best score: ", rfecv.grid_scores_)

#Update features 
input_columns2 = np.array(input_columns)[rfecv.support_]
X=dfsub1[input_columns2]


# Hyperparameter tuning 2 
==PAGE:145==
Fitting 6 folds for each of 125 candidates, totalling 750 fits
grid search 1 best score:  -0.12242803168867807
feature selection 1 best score:  [-0.19247283 -0.13428591 -0.12159668 -0.12365447 -0.12332179 -0.127786
 -0.13628417 -0.13175097 -0.13485117 -0.140696   -0.11667606 -0.13213848
 -0.12611218 -0.13928757 -0.1416345 ]
Fitting 6 folds for each of 125 candidates, totalling 750 fits
grid search 2 best score:  -0.11827605895062693
0.14382424585971038
Comparison
param_grid = {
    'max_depth': [1,2,3,5,10],
    'min_samples_split': [2,3,4,5,6],
    'n_estimators': [4,5,7,10,20]
}

# Create a base model
rf = RandomForestRegressor()
# Instantiate the grid search model
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator = rf, param_grid = param_grid, 
                          cv = cv, n_jobs = -1, verbose = 3, scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error')

#her
grid_search.fit(X,y)

rf = grid_search.best_estimator_
print("grid search 2 best score: ", grid_search.best_score_)
In [93]:
rfScores2  = cross_val_score(rf, X, y,scoring='neg_mean_absolute_error',cv=cv) * (-1)
np.mean(rfScores2)
Out[93]:
In [103…
data_1 = rfScores *100
data_2 = rfScores1 * 100
data_3 = rfScores2 * 100
data = [data_1, data_2, data_3]
 
fig = plt.figure(figsize =(5, 5))
 
# Creating axes instance
ax = fig.add_axes([0, 0, 1, 1])
 
# Creating plot
bp = ax.boxplot(data,labels=['All Subjects','Subject 1','Subject 2'])

ax.set_ylabel("MAE (% of TuF)")
ax.set_ylim([0,23])
ax.set_title('Distribution of Prediction Errors of each CV-fold')

# show plot
plt.show()
==PAGE:146==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
