==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
The impact of wave fields on the marine 
atmospheric boundary layer
Mao Watanabe
DTU Wind and Energy Systems-M-0572 
September 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems M-0572 
September 2022
Project period: 
April - September 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Alfredo Peña
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Mao Watanabe
Title:
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric 
boundary layer
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
Master Thesis
September, 2022
By
Mao Watanabe
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK­4000
Roskilde Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for the Meteorology and Remote Sens­
ing Section, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Mao Watanabe ­ s221482
Signature
Date
ii
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
I will investigate the effects of ocean waves, especially swells, on the marine atmospheric boundary
layer (ABL) using large­eddy simulation.
Swells are long and remotely generated waves, that can propagate for long distances without dis­
sipation. It has been known that swells cannot be parameterized simply and severely impacts the
marine atmospheric boundary layer (MABL).
Thus, a better understanding of the swells’ impact on the MABL is a significant key to reducing
uncertainty in the prediction of offshore wind energy.
In the present study, simulations of the ABL flows are performed under neutral conditions by Sim­
ulator fOr Wind Farm Applications (SOWFA). First, simulations over flat terrains are analyzed
with the observations measured in Denmark, and sensitivity studies of turbulent models are con­
ducted. Then, simulations over stationary wavy boundaries are examined. I perform 7 cases under
different conditions: size of domains and wave heights.
I find that physical quantities such as momentum fluxes and mean velocity are well reproduced
by SOWFA. In particular, the Smagorinsky model with its coefficient equals 0.168 showed good
agreement between simulations and measurements. Next, the effect of stationary waves on the
ABL was analyzed. A total of seven different analyses were performed to confirm that wave height
affects the wind profile and momentum flux distribution. The results led to an increase in wind
speed near the wave front than on the plane in the presence of waves. Furthermore, the momentum
flux was found to be smaller than on a flat surface. These results are at odds with the results of
other studies and require further improvement. However, it was shown in this study that waves
affect the characteristics of the ABL.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
The present work was carried out at the Meteorology and Remote Sensing Section, the Department
of Wind and Energy Systems, the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and co­supervised by
the Professorship of Hydromechanics at the Technical University of Munich (TUM). Without the
support of many people, this project would not have been realized. The work is also partly funded
by Independent Research Fund Denmark through the ‘Multi­scale At­mospheric Modeling Above
the Seas’ (MAMAS) project (nr. 0217­00055B)
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Alfredo Peña, for his constant and excellent
guidance throughout the project with a perfect blend of insight and humor. He assisted me in
solving problems that I did not figure out, and gave me a deeper understanding of meteorological
phenomena. I would also like to express my gratitude to Dalibor Cavar, a senior scientist in the
Resource Assessment and Meteorology Section, for his kind support in handling the SOWFA.
I would like to thank all the Ph.D. candidates whom I met through the project as well. They helped
me to figure out problems and encouraged me to go through them. Finally, I am very grateful for
the warm welcome I received from all the people in the section. It was my pleasure to have met
smart and warmhearted people who are leading the field of wind energy.
Aside from DTU, I would also like to thank all the people at TUM. In particular, I would like
to thank Professor Michael Manhart for helping me realize my master’s thesis project at another
university abroad, and Yoshiyuki Sakai, a postdoctoral researcher at the Professorship of Hydrome­
chanics, for his always considerable support in solving software and administrative problems.
At last, many thanks to my family who listened to me patiently and cheered me up.
iv
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Total installed capacity of renewable energy in the world, taken from [2]. Marine,
geothermal, biofuels, biogas, biomass, solar, wind, hydro, and mixed power plants
are shown in the figure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
Structure of the Earth’s atmosphere. The Earth’s surface influences on the atmo­
sphere and forms the boundary layer. Capping inversion lies between the boundary
layer and the free troposphere. Figure taken from [21]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Diurnal change of the ABL. In a day, turbulent convection forms the convective
ABL but gradually stops until sunset and starts forming the residual layer. At night,
the stable layer develops near the surface. Figure taken from [22]
. . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Vertical structure of the MABL. Structures are similar to the land­based ABL, how­
ever, the surface layer can be further divided into two layers: the inertial layer and
the wave boundary layer. Figure taken from [24]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Waves characteristics. Crest and trough are the highest and lowest points of curves.
The width between two troughs or crests is wavelength. The height of curves is
amplitude. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
The lapse rate and air parcels’ movement under the stable (a) and unstable condi­
tions (b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Schematic of the energy cascade. k is the wave number and E is the kinetic energy.
The kinetic energy enters the turbulence at the largest scale and dissipates as heat
at the smallest scale.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
The relationship between scales of eddies and CFD methods. DNS resolves all the
scales of eddies but RANS is based on the time­averaged flow fields. LES lies
between DNS and RANS because LES resolves eddies up to certain scales and
models the rest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Flow chart from pre­proess to post­process by OpenFOAM.
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Structures for a case directory. Before starting simulations, there are three direc­
tories included: 0, constant and system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
PIMPLE algorithm flow chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Directory structure for a custom application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Schematic of the computational domain. The domain with the size of (Lx, Ly, Lz) =
(7500, 3750, 2000) m discretized by (nx, ny, nz) = (500, 250, 120) grid points. .
18
3.6
The bottom of the domains. Idealized wave surfaces are described by amplitude
a = 1.6 m, wavelength λ = 100 m and phase speed c = 12.5 ms−1. . . . . . . .
19
4.1
Time series of UMag and its moving average
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Time Series of velocity components in each direction. u, v and w denotes the
velocity in the x, y and z direction respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Instantaneous velocity fluctuations in the horizontal plane at z = 100 and the
vertical plane at y = 0 (Second row). (a), (c) Cs = 0.135 (b), (d) Cs = 0.165 . .
22
4.4
velocity and temperature profile in the vertical direction. The black dots are the
observations and the error bars denote their ±1 standard deviation. . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Velocity variances normalized by u∗2 in the vertical direction. Blue line is the
simulation from Cs = 0.135 and green is the one from Cs = 0.168. The solid
line represents the total fluxes and the dashed line describes the resolved one. The
black dots are the observations with the error bars of their ±1 standard deviation.
23
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
v
==PAGE:8==
4.6
The ratio of the sub­grid scale (SGS) turbulent kinetic energy to the total one (left)
and the total turbulent kinetic energy in the vertical directions (righb). . . . . . .
24
4.7
The eu′ ­component of wind fields in the horizontal direction. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.8
The eu′ ­component of wind fields in the vertical direction.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.9
The ew′ ­component of wind fields in the vertical direction. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.10 The horizontal mean velocity <UMag> in the vertical direction.
. . . . . . . . .
26
4.11 The horizontal mean velocity <UMag> in the vertical directionfor zooming below
z/zi = 0.10.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.12 Normalized velocity variances in the vertical direction. u∗is the friction velocity
calculated from a cell at the lowest vertical level. Dashed lines express resolved
variances and solid lines describe total (resolved + sgs) variances.
. . . . . . . .
27
4.13 Normalized velocity covariances in the vertical direction. Normalized velocity
covariances in the vertical direction. u∗is the friction velocity calculated from a
cell at the lowest vertical level. Dashed lines express resolved variances and solid
lines describe total (resolved + sgs) covariances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
B.1
Sub­class structure for dynamic meshes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
vi
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
Simulation properties. FF, FW, NF and NW stands for full flat, full wave, narrow
flat and narrow wave respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
vii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective and Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Meteorological Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Numerical simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Method
14
3.1
CFD software: OpenFOAM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
CFD software for the ABL flows: SOWFA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Simulation setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
21
4.1
Simulation over the flat terrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Simulation over stationary wavy surfaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Future work
29
6
Conclusion
30
Bibliography
31
A Stationary wave fields generator
33
B
Dynamic Mesh solver
37
C Dynamic Mesh
41
viii
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Today, around 50 billion tonnes of greenhouse gasses (GHG) have been emitted around the world
and accelerate global warming every year [1]. This situation has urged many countries to set
targets for cutting their GHG emissions. For example, the European Union committed to reduce
GHG emissions by 40 % from 1990 to 2030. This global movement pushes renewable energy
into the spotlight as a solution to global warming since it produces energy with less or almost no
GHG emissions. Figure 1.1 shows the total capacity of renewable energy around the world for ten
years. It expresses that renewable energy increased every year, and the installed capacity in 2017
has doubled since 2007.
Figure 1.1: Total installed capacity of renewable energy in the world, taken from [2]. Marine,
geothermal, biofuels, biogas, biomass, solar, wind, hydro, and mixed power plants are shown in
the figure.
Among renewable energy sources, wind power has experienced remarkable growth in the last
decade. The scale of wind turbine rotors expands every year and enables us to produce more
energy at the same wind speed. In 2020, wind energy produced almost 743 GW and avoided over
1.1 billion tonnes of GHG in the world [3]. Wind energy is expected to have a continuous growth
and reach 5.9 GW of the total capacity, including 1.7 GW of offshore wind energy by 2050 [4].
Offshore wind power is predicted to develop at an unexpectedly rapid pace. This is because wind
speeds above oceans tend to be higher than on land and offshore wind turbines can avoid issues
that onshore wind turbines face such as noise and land use. However, offshore wind energy have
complexities. In particular, the effect of waves has drawn attention since ocean waves interact with
the atmosphere, and exchange mass, momentum, and heat.
Waves can be split into two types: wind waves and swells. They are generated by blowing winds
but their characteristics are different. Wind waves are short­wavelength waves generated locally
by winds and use the momentum from winds to develop themselves. On the other hand, swells are
long­wavelength waves and propagate long distances from generation areas without dissipation.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
1
==PAGE:12==
According to the probability study of swell occurrence, the probability is more than 80 % in oceans
around the world and it reaches over 95 % in the tropical and subtropical regions [5]. Especially
swells under light­winds frequently appear in the tropical eastern ocean basins [6]. Besides, field
observations find that logarithmic wind profiles and the Monin­Obukhov similarity theory [7] are
not valid under swells [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] because they induce misalignments between surface
winds and turbulent stress. In contrast, they are valid under wind waves [15]. So far some studies
investigate the impact of swells on the characteristics of the atmosphere above oceans using large­
eddy simulations by varying parameters such as specific traveling velocity, traveling direction,
wave ages and slope steepness [16, 17, 18, 14, 19]. However, more studies can be done with
different parameters because swells characteristics cannot be parameterized simply.
1.2
Objective and Outline
The objective of this study is to investigate how wave fields influence the flow characteristics of
the atmosphere above oceans by using large­eddy simulations.
The project consists of three steps:
1. Simulations over flat terrains.
2. Simulations over stationary wave surfaces.
3. Simulations over moving wave fields.
Firstly, I carry out simulations over flat terrains under neutral conditions and compare with field
observations done in Denmark [20]. Next, I perform simulation over stationary wave fields with
different size of domains and compare with another study done in the United States [14]. Finally,
I implemented simulations over moving wave fields.
The present study is organized as follows. First, chapter 2 presents theoretical background regard­
ing meteorology and numerical simulations. Chapter 3 explains simulation tools and setups for
each case. Chapter 4 analyzes simulation results and discusses them. Chapter 5 and chapter 6
provide conclusions and recommendations for future works.
2
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Meteorological Background
2.1.1
The Atmospheric Boundary Layer
The lowest portion of the Earth atmosphere, the troposphere, is where most weather phenomena
occurs. The troposphere expands from the surface of the Earth up to a height of 6–20 km depend­
ing on the latitude. The troposphere is further split into two layers: the free atmosphere and the
atmospheric boundary layer (ABL), shown in fig. 2.1. The ABL grows hundreds of meters to 3 km
from the ground. The ABL is strongly influenced by the Earth’s surface because it causes frictional
drag and heat transfer, which modify the atmospheric flow fields. This interaction with surfaces
provides the ABL with temporal and spatial variability, the so­called diurnal variation shown in
fig. 2.2.
During the day, the sun’s radiation heats the ground and warm air rises. Simultaneously, air is
cooled down due to the radiation from the top of the cloud layer. This situation drives turbulent
convection and forms the layer, known as the convective or the mixed layer. Convection is caused
by either wind shears across the top of the mixed layer or buoyant turbulence. Buoyant turbulence
is triggered by heat transfer from the Earth’s surface or radiative cooling from the top of the clouds
or fog layers. Due to intermittent turbulence and overshooting thermals at the top of the mixed
layer, the free atmosphere tends to be entrained into the top of the ABL. A layer that generated
between the free atmosphere and the mixed layer is the entrainment zone.
Before sunset, the advection of cool air gradually stops and prevents thermals from forming. Then,
it forms the neutrally stratified layer, the residual layer. Between the residual layer and the free
atmosphere, there is a layer with a temperature inversion, the capping inversion. After sunset, the
Earth’s surface gradually influences the atmosphere above and starts to form the sable layer.
The layer at the bottom of ABL is the surface layer which expands between 1 to 100 m where
turbulent fluxes and stress tend to vary by less than 10 % of their magnitude [23]. Lastly, the thin
layer, which is the so­called viscous sublayer, lies up to a few centimeters above the surface where
molecular viscosity dominates.
Figure 2.1: Structure of the Earth’s atmosphere. The Earth’s surface influences on the atmosphere
and forms the boundary layer. Capping inversion lies between the boundary layer and the free
troposphere. Figure taken from [21]
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Diurnal change of the ABL. In a day, turbulent convection forms the convective ABL
but gradually stops until sunset and starts forming the residual layer. At night, the stable layer
develops near the surface. Figure taken from [22]
Figure 2.3: Vertical structure of the MABL. Structures are similar to the land­based ABL, however,
the surface layer can be further divided into two layers: the inertial layer and the wave boundary
layer. Figure taken from [24]
2.1.2
The Marine Atmospheric Boundary Layer
The ABL appear over the sea is marine atmospheric boundary layer (MABL), which is a special
type of ABL developing over oceans and large lakes. While it holds many features in common
with the land­based ABL such as a vertical structure, the physical process of the MABL brings
more complexities due to the interaction with ocean waves. In terms of the diurnal variation, the
depth of the MABL changes less than the land­based ABL in time and space. It is because water
has a larger heat capacity than air, which means water absorbs more heat with less temperature
change than air does.
Figure 2.3 describes the vertical structure of the MABL. Like the land­based ABL, the MABL can
be split into several layers: the mixed layer, the surface layer, and the viscous sublayer. Typically,
the MABL grows from 200 to 700 m from the ocean surface, and the surface layer lies its bottom
part from 1 to 100 m [24]. The surface layer can be further split into two layers: the inertial sublayer
and the wave boundary layer. The inertial sublayer appears at the highest part of the surface layer,
where momentum and heat are exchanged between waves and the atmosphere. Below that, the
4
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Waves characteristics. Crest and trough are the highest and lowest points of curves.
The width between two troughs or crests is wavelength. The height of curves is amplitude.
wave boundary layer develops from a few meters to higher altitudes depending on ocean wave
conditions.
Two types of waves exist: wind waves and swells. Both of them are generated by winds but their
characteristics are different. Wind waves are short­wavelength waves generated locally by winds
and use the momentum from winds to develop themselves, while swells are long­wavelength waves
and propagate long distances from generation areas without dissipation. Some field measurements
find that swells appear most of oceans in the world, especially in the tropical and subtropical regions
[5, 6].
Figure 2.4 illustrates characteristics of waves. The highest and lowest curves of waves are crest
and trough, respectively. The length between two crests or troughs is wavelength, and the height
of waves is amplitude. Some large­eddy simulation (LES) simulations of the MABL above swell­
dominant oceans have been performed by using Airy (linear) waves [14, 25, 16] as
z(x, t) = Acos (k(x −ct)) ,
(2.1)
where z is an elevation of waves, x is a propagating direction, A is amplitude, k is wave number
which is computed by 2π/λ where λ is wavelength, and c is phase speed of waves. Therefore, in
the present study, wave fields are idealized by eq. (2.1).
2.1.3
Atmospheric stability
In atmospheric sciences, typically, an air parcel is assumed to be stretched and contracted, and not
to be merged with others under the process that can reversibly exchange heat, termed an adiabatic
process.
The concept of atmospheric stability can be expressed as a condition of equilibrium. If initial
movement results in no movement, it is a neutral condition. If initial motion is amplified, it is
an unstable, and vise versa in a stable condition. In other words, if an air parcel is in a stable
condition, it will eventually return to its initial position after rising or sinking, and if it is in an
unstable condition, it is kept pushed away from its original position.
To discuss the evaluation of the atmospheric stability, the lapse rate will be explained first. When
an air parcel is unsaturated, its temperature decrease with the altitude, which is so­called the lapse
rate. For the dry air, the dry adiabatic lapse rate is 9.8 K km−1. By using the lapse rate and
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: The lapse rate and air parcels’ movement under the stable (a) and unstable conditions
(b)
comparing the temperature between the rising air and the air around it, atmospheric stability can
be determined.
Figure 2.5 shows the dry adiabatic lapse rate and the environmental lapse rate over the height under
stable (a) and unstable conditions (b). The air parcel rises to a certain height by following the dry
adiabatic lapse rate. Then, if the rising air parcel is cooler than the surrounding air, it tends to sink
and move to the original height because the cooler air has a larger density. This process results in a
restricted vertical motion and produces less turbulence, which means a stable condition. Typically,
it happens during the night due to the cooling of the ground. On the contrary, if the rising air is
warmer, in other words, lighter than the surrounding air, it will continuously rise until a certain
height where its temperature is in balance with the environmental temperature. As a result, this
process generates more turbulence and is treated as unstable. This case often appears in the daytime
due to the warming of the ground.
Atmospheric stability can be easily determined by using the potential temperature. The potential
temperature θ is the temperature that an unsaturated dry air parcel at the absolute temperature T
and pressure P is adiabatically transported to the standard reference pressure P0 (typically 100
kPa). It is defined as
θ = T
P0
P
 R
Cp ,
(2.2)
where R is the gas constant of air and Cp is the specific heat capacity at a constant pressure. In
the meteorology, the non­dimensional parameter R/Cp often set 0.286. If it is in stable conditions,
a gradient of potential temperature with height becomes positive, and its negative values express
unstable conditions. To simplify the problem, the present study considers neutral conditions only:
∂θ
∂z





= 0
K m−1 neutral,
> 0
K m−1 stable,
< 0
K m−1 unstable.
(2.3)
2.1.4
Governing equations
Compared with the mean density profile, the variations in density are negligible. Thus, the air
density is assumed to be constant on the flow field except in the case considering the buoyancy
6
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:17==
effect. This approximation is termed Boussinesq approximation. This allows us to simplify gov­
erning equations of the ABL to the incompressible Navier­Stokes equations (NSE). Additionally,
a transportation equation of potential temperature governs the ABL physical phenomena.
∂Uj
∂xj
= 0,
(2.4)
∂Ui
∂t
|{z}
I
+ Uj
∂Ui
∂xj
| {z }
II
= −1
ρ0
∂p
∂xi
| {z }
III
−δi3
gθ
θ0
| {z }
IV
−2ϵijkΩjUj
|
{z
}
V
+ ν ∂2Ui
∂x2
j
| {z }
VI
,
(2.5)
∂θ
∂t = −∂
∂xi
(Ujθ) + kt
∂2θ
∂x2
j
+ S,
(2.6)
where the indexing i, j, k expressing the component in the direction x, y, z respectively, U is the
velocity, p is the deviation of the pressure from the hydrostatic pressure, ρ0 is the reference air
density, θ is the potential temperature, kt is the molecular diffusivity for heat, S is the heating or
cooling flux, Ωis the angular velocity of the Earth’s rotation, δij is the kronecker delta, ϵijk is the
permutation tensor.
Each terms in eq. (2.5) are described as follows:
• Term I represents local acceleration.
• Term II describes advection.
• Term III expresses pressure­gradient forces.
• Term IIV represents buoyancy.
• Term V is a Coriolis effect.
• Term VI expresses viscous stress.
In term V, the component of Ωis defined as [0, ωcos(ϕ), ωsin(ϕ)] where ω is the angular velocity
of the Earth and ϕ is the latitude.
2.2
Numerical simulation
2.2.1
Characteristics of turbulent flows
The ABL flow consists of different scales of eddies ranging from centimeters to several kilometers
[23]. They are generated either thermally or mechanically, or by both factors. Thermally generated
eddies are thermals of either warm air that tends to rise or cold air that tends to sink. On the other
hand, mechanically generated eddies are induced by either obstacle like buildings, or a shear caused
by the frictional drag that exists near the ground or between air layers of different velocities.
Figure 2.6 illustrates the physical process on different scales of eddies, termed the energy cascade,
proposed by Richardson [26]. The kinetic energy is fed to the turbulence at the largest eddies.
Then, the kinetic energy is transferred to smaller and smaller eddies. To this end, the transferred
energy is dissipated as heat by viscous action.
Kolmogorov stated that eddies are statistically isotropic and their characteristics can only rely
on the dissipation rate of the kinetic energy in the intermediate range of length scales, the so­
called inertial subrange. This relationship is expressed as E = k−5/3ϵ2/3 where E is the energy
spectral, k is the wave number and ϵ is the dissipation rate. According to his study, the scale of the
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: Schematic of the energy cascade. k is the wave number and E is the kinetic energy.
The kinetic energy enters the turbulence at the largest scale and dissipates as heat at the smallest
scale.
smallest eddies can be described by η = µ3/ϵ1/4 where µ is the kinematic viscosity. For the ABL
simulations, η is approximately 1 mm (µ is 1.6×10−5 m2s−3 for the air at 20 ° and ϵ is around 10−3
m2s−3). By using η, the required number of grid points can be estimated as L/η where L is the
largest scale of eddies [27]. It leads to almost 1020 gird points, which is beyond the capability of
modern computers.
2.2.2
Classification of numerical simulations
To model the ABL flows, atmospheric dynamics must be parameterized and transformed into
model equations that can be solved numerically. Modeling methods can be divided into two cate­
gories: microscale and mesoscale models.
Mesoscale modeling, known as numerical weather prediction (NWP) or weather modeling, is a
technique for forecasting meteorological variables such as wind, pressure, temperature, humid­
ity, and precipitation. Typically with mesoscale modeling, we simulate a region from the Earth’s
surface to a depth of 20 km in the atmosphere.
On the contrary, microscale modeling deals with small scales of meteorological phenomena, down
to about 2 km. This is mainly categorized into two: linearised models and computational fluid
dynamics (CFD). The former is based on the linearised NSE and uses wind statistics to parametrize
the effect of the physical characteristics on the flow field [28]. It saves computational cost, but it
does not ensure accurate results.
Another microscale model, CFD, provides more reliable analysis by solving more complete NSE.
The details of CFD are explained in the next section.
2.2.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)
CFD is a technique that models a physical phenomenon of fluid flow mathematically, solves it
numerically, and analyzes results. A common procedure of CFD is:
1. Formulate a fluid flow problem.
2. Define a geometry.
3. Set boundary and initial conditions.
8
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:19==
4. Generate a mesh.
5. Select numerical methods.
6. Perform a simulation.
7. Analyze results.
First, governing equations for a physical phenomenon are formulated. In this study, three partial
differential equations (PDEs) represents the phenomena: the mass and the momentum conservation
equations, and the transport equation of potential temperature.
Afterwards, a geometry that represents objects inside fluid flows and a domain of a simulation is
defined. For complex structures, CAD software is often utilized to model complex geometries.
For accurate simulations, it is important to set appropriate boundary and initial conditions. This
is because the real space in which physical phenomena take place has no boundaries, while the
computational domain is enclosed by walls. Three main types of conditions are commonly used
in CFD: Dirichlet, Neumann, and periodic. The Dirichlet boundary conditions (BCs) force the
solution of PDEs at the boundary to a specified value. For example, a specific value is set for
the velocity at the inlet of the domain. The Neumann BCs specify the value of the derivative at
the boundary. One of the Neumann conditions is the free­slip condition. This indicates that no
friction occurs at the boundary by setting a derivative of velocity of zero. The periodic BCs define
values on two or more boundaries as equal. Typically, this condition is applied when an object or
domain has a symmetrical shape or periodicity. As an initial condition, the solution is given at the
beginning of the simulation.
Once the conditions are established, the computational domain is discretized into a finite number of
elements and a mesh is generated. The quality and number of meshes are essential to obtain precise
results and to reduce computational costs. If the mesh is too coarse, physical phenomena cannot
be captured, leading to unphysical results. Conversely, if the mesh is too fine, physical phenomena
can be well represented, but the simulation requires significant computational power. To estimate
the minimum number of elements to obtain accurate results, a mesh sensitivity analysis is often
performed by comparing the results of simulations with different numbers of elements. Mesh
quality is also evaluated using criteria such as mesh skewness and orthogonality.
The governing equations for fluid flow are represented by PDEs. They depend on both time and
space, and cannot be solved as simply as ordinary differential equations. Therefore, discretization
methods have to be applied in order to transform PDEs into algebraic equations. The widely used
discretization method for CFD is finite volume method (FVM). This method integrates PDEs over
elements of the mesh known as control volumes (CVs). As a simple example, we will introduce
the general conservation equation for a quantity ϕ [29]:
∂(ρϕ)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρϕU) = ∇· (Γ∇ϕ) + qϕ
(2.7)
where Γ is the diffusivity for ϕ and qϕ is the source or sink of ϕ. Then, FVM integrates eq. (2.7)
over a CV, which derives
Z
V
∂(ρϕ)
∂t
dV +
Z
V
∇· (ρϕU) dV =
Z
V
∇· (Γ∇ϕ) dV +
Z
V
qϕ dV.
(2.8)
This equation can be reformulate as follows:
∂(ρϕ)
∂t
VCV +
Z
V
∇· (ρϕU) dV =
Z
V
∇· (Γ∇ϕ) dV + qϕVCV ,
(2.9)
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
9
==PAGE:20==
where VCV expresses a volume of a CV. Volume integrals of spacial derivative in eq. (2.9) can be
converted into surface integrals using divergence theorem:
Z
V
∇· (ϕU) dV =
Z
S
(ϕU) · n dS
(2.10)
where textbfn is the normal vector to the plane of the CV. Other volume integrals are reformulated
in the same way. The net flux through the surface of the CV can be described as the sum of integrals
over the surrounding surfaces of the CV.
Z
S
f dS =
X
k
Z
Sk
f dS,
(2.11)
where f represents fluxes of either (ρϕU)·n or (Γ∇ϕ)·n in the normal direction of CV’s surfaces.
Since ϕ at the center of a CV is only calculated and f on CV’s faces is not directly computed, f
have to be approximated using interpolation schemes. Linear interpolation is a widely used scheme
that computes ϕ on a face derived from the cell center ϕ of CVs that share the same face:
ϕface = wϕp + (1 −w)ϕn,
(2.12)
where ϕp and ϕn are ϕ at two neighbouring CVs, and w is the linear interpolation factor defined
as:
w = |xf −xn|
|xn −xp|
(2.13)
Since this is a non­stationary problem in which physical phenomena vary with time, time must also
be discretized. To illustrate this, I introduce the first­order ordinary differential equation:
dϕ(t)
dt
= f(t, ϕ(t))
(2.14)
If this is integrated from time tn to tn+1 = tn + ∆t, it derives:
Z tn
tn+1
dϕ(t)
dt
dt = ϕn+1 −ϕn
=
Z tn
tn+1
dϕ(t)
dt f(t, ϕ(t)) dt,
(2.15)
where ϕn+1 expresses ϕ at time tn+1. Since the integral of f(t, ϕ(t)) in eq. (2.15) cannot be
computed, approximations are necessary. Three common methods are introduced:
ϕn+1 −ϕn = f(tn, ϕn+1)∆t
explicit Euler,
(2.16)
ϕn+1 −ϕn = f(tn+1, ϕn+1)∆t
implicit Euler,
(2.17)
ϕn+1 −ϕn = 1
2

f(tn, ϕn) + f(tn+1, ϕn+1)

∆t
Crank­Nicolson.
(2.18)
10
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: The relationship between scales of eddies and CFD methods. DNS resolves all the
scales of eddies but RANS is based on the time­averaged flow fields. LES lies between DNS and
RANS because LES resolves eddies up to certain scales and models the rest.
The implicit Euler method estimates the integral of f(t, ϕ(t)) with the value of the first time step.
The explicit method, on the other hand, uses the value of the next time step. Finally, the Crank­
Nicolson method estimates the integral of f(t, ϕ(t)) by taking the average of the initial and next
time step values.
After selecting an appropriate numerical method, simulations are conducted using CFD software
or similar means, and the results are analyzed.
In general, CFD techniques are classified into three categories: Reynolds­averaged Navier–Stokes
equations (RANS), large­eddy simulation (LES), and direct numerical simulation (DNS). Fig­
ure 2.7 illustrates how each method deals with various scales of eddies. RANS solves time­
averaged flow fields and does not compute all scales of eddies. Therefore, it saves computational
cost but loses accuracy. In contrast, DNS resolves eddies at all scales without modeling. It causes
high computational cost but provides accurate results. However, simulations of the ABL using
DNS is beyond the capability of modern computers due to the high Reynolds number (Re) flows.
Finally, LES is a method that is between the two, which means LES resolves eddies up to certain
scales of eddies and models the rest of them. To distinguish different scales of eddies, filter func­
tions are applied to velocity fields. This system of LES allows us to save more computational cost
than DNS and ensure more accuracy than RANS. To capture the interaction between waves and
the atmosphere, I chose LES simulations for the present study.
2.2.4
Large­eddy simulation
In LES, filtering methods apply to the velocity fields and distinguish flows. The filtered velocity
is defined as
eU(x, t) =
Z
G(r, x)U(x −r, t)dr,
(2.19)
where G represents the filter function, which satisfies the condition
R
G(r, x)dr = 1. The resid­
uals of original and filtered velocity fields of velocity fields are defined by
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
11
==PAGE:22==
u
′(x, t) = U(x, t) −eU(x, t).
(2.20)
It is termed the sub­grid scale (SGS) or residual velocity fields.
After a filter operation applies to eq. (2.4), eq. (2.5) and eq. (2.6), the governing equations of the
ABL are reformulated in the following equations [27, 30, 17]:
∂eUi
∂xi
= 0,
(2.21)
∂eUi
∂t + f
Uj
∂eUi
∂xj
= −1
ρ0
∂ep
∂xi
−δi3
geθ
θ0
−2ϵijkΩjf
Uj −
∂τ D
ij
∂xj
,
(2.22)
∂eθ
∂t = −∂(f
Ujeθ)
∂xj
+ kt
∂2θ
∂x2
j
−∂qi
∂xi
+ eS,
(2.23)
where τ D
ij is the deviatoric part of the SGS stress tensor and qi is the SGS temperature flux. They
are defined by
τ D
ij = g
UiUj −eUi f
Uj,
(2.24)
qi = g
Ujθ −f
Ujeθ.
(2.25)
Note that τ D
ij and qi are unknown and must be modeled to close governing equations.
Sub­grid scale models
To model the unknown terms, τ D
ij and qi, the linear eddy viscosity assumption is normally applied.
The residual stress can be described as a linearly dependent term on the filtered rate of strain f
Sij
by using the eddy viscosity νsgs:
τ D
ij = −2νsgs f
Sij,
(2.26)
f
Sij = 1
2
 
∂eUi
∂xj
+ ∂f
Uj
∂xi
!
.
(2.27)
In a similar manner, the SGS temperature flux can also be modeled as
qi = −νsgs
Prt
∂eθ
∂xi
,
(2.28)
where Prt is the turbulent Prandtl number that is a non­dimensional ratio between the momentum
and heat diffusivity. Prt can be prescribed depending on the status of the flows however νsgs
remains unknown.
In 1963, Smagorinsky proposed a solution for modeling the unknown νsgs, the so­called Smagorin­
sky model [31]. This model represents the eddy viscosity by the smagorinsky coefficient Cs, the
filter width ∆= (∆x∆y∆z)1/3 and the characteristic filtered rate of strain eS:
12
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:23==
νsgs = (CS∆)2 eS,
(2.29)
eS = (2f
Sij f
Sij)1/2.
(2.30)
The Smagorinsky model has some disadvantages. Firstly, the model assumes an equilibrium in
which the production and dissipation of kinetic energy are balanced, however, it is not always
satisfied in real flows. Secondly, this model cannot account for the kinetic energy backscatter,
which is the situation when the energy is transferred from small scales to large ones. However, even
though the Smagorinsky model has some disadvantages, it is still widely used in the meteorology
field due to its robustness.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
13
==PAGE:24==
3
Method
3.1
CFD software: OpenFOAM
3.1.1
Structure of OpenFOAM
CFD simulations for the present study are performed by the open­source CFD software SOWFA
(The Simulator fOr Wind Farm Applications). This software is widely used in the meteorology
field, and based on the open­source CFD toolbox, OpenFOAM (Open Field Operation and Ma­
nipulation).
OpenFOAM has been developed by OpenCFD Ltd since 2004. OpenFOAM enables us to deal
with a CFD analysis from beginning to end, which is decsribed in fig. 3.1. First, users setup
initial conditions of physical quantities and simulation configurations. Then, meshes are generated
in order to discretize geometry into finite grids. For simulations with large number of meshes
(more than 1 million grids), information that is created before such as initial conditions of physical
quantities and meshes should be decomposed into small pieces of data so that simulations can be run
in parallel with many processors. After running simulations, users analyze results (post­process).
Figure 3.2 illustrates structures of a case directory. The directory holds three folders: 0, constant
and system. 0 is the initial time step directory that have configuration files for physical quantities
such as velocity, temperature, kinetic energy and pressure. Each file includes conditions of bound­
aries and internal flow fields. During simulations, output files about fields of computed variables
are generated in each output time directories.
In the constant directory, at least following folders and files are required. polyMesh is the di­
rectory generated after mesh creation. It stores information of mesh such as faces, boundaries,
points. The file, so­called transportProperties, includes properties of fluids like type of flu­
ids and molecular viscosity. Another file, turbulenceProperties describes configurations of
turbulence models such as types of models, each values for model coefficients and types of filters.
The last directory, system includes files to define other parameters for running and post­processing
simulations: blockMeshDict, controlDict, decomposeParDict, fvSchemes and fvSolution.
BlockMeshDict is an utility to generate meshes. All the vertices inside a computational domain,
a mesh growth rate, numbers of grid points in each direction and types of cells (hexahedral or
prism) are specified. Types of boundaries can be defined as well. Curved lines can be described
by specifying interpolation points and methods. For the present study, a spline curve is used to
Figure 3.1: Flow chart from pre­proess to post­process by OpenFOAM.
14
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:25==
Case
0
U
T
constant
polyMesh
transportProperties
turbulenceProperties
system
blockMeshDict
controlDict
decomposePar
fvSchemes
fvSolution
Figure 3.2: Structures for a case directory. Before starting simulations, there are three directories
included: 0, constant and system.
generate sinusoidal wave fields. The python program to generate stationary wave fields is attached
in appendix A.
In controlDict, control parameters are specified. The simulations can be controled by start and
end time, the size of time steps and maximum CFL number, which is a common criterion for
simulation stability in CFD.
FvSchemes specifies numerical schemes for descritization of finite volume methods: time deriva­
tive ∂/∂t and ∂/∂2t, gradient ∇, divergence ∇· and laplacian ∇2. Available discretization schemes
for time derivatives in OpenFOAM are:
yn+1 −yn = ∆tϕn+1
Euler,
(3.1)
yn+1 −yn = γ∆tϕn+1 + (1 −γ) ∆tϕn
Crank Nicholson,
(3.2)
yn+1 −yn = 3ϕn+1 −4ϕn + ϕn−1
2∆t
downward,
(3.3)
where ϕ is fluxes, n is the present, n −1 is the previous, and n + 1 is the next time step. Euler
(implicit Euler) is a first order scheme ,which is stable. Crank Nicholson and downward methods
are second order schemes. In the Crank Nicholson, γ defines the ratio of blending between the
Euler scheme. γ = 1 corresponds to pure Crank Nicholson.
For discretizations of other terms, Gauss therem is often applied. This allows us to convert volume
integrals to surface integrals as:
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: PIMPLE algorithm flow chart
Z
V
(∇· U) dV =
I
S
(n · U) dS,
(3.4)
where V is a control volume, n is a normal and S is a surface of a control volume. FvSchemes
enables us to determine spatial discretization and time integration schemes.
In fvSolution, linear solvers for each discretized equation can be specified with solution toler­
ances, and different kinds of conjugate gradient methods, multi­grid methods, and smoothing are
available. In addition, the detailed settings for the algorithms to solve pressure and velocity can be
defined.
For the present study, one of the well­known algorithms called PIMPLE is chosen. It is an algorithm
merged with two algorithms: SIMPLE (Semi­Implicit Method for Pressure­Linked Equations)
and PISO (pressure­implicit split­operator). They are iterative algorithms to solve equations for
velocity and pressure based on evaluating initial solutions and correcting them. The SIMPLE
algorithm is used for steady state and the PISO is for transient flows. Figure 3.3 is a flow chart
of the PIMPLE algorithm. After the simulation starts, PIMPLE begins the iteration loop which
is an inherited feature from SIMPLE, then it solves velocity. Afterward, it enters the pressure
correction loop to solve pressure and compensate for velocity from derived pressure. If the mesh
is not orthogonal, meaning the normal vector of each face is not parallel to the vector among the
centers of the cells to which that face connects, additional corrections are employed.
3.1.2
Customizing OpenFOAM tools
OpenFOAM allows users to develop their own applications and utilities by following the standard
convention of placing the source code for each application in a directory with the application’s
name. For example, if an user develop an application called Custom App,the directory for this
application should look like fig. 3.4.
Then, the compilation script based on make, called wmake, compiles the application by taking a
look at options to detect the compiling location and files to include necessary libraries and
headers.
16
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:27==
Custom App
Custom App.H
Custom App.C
Make
files
options
Figure 3.4: Directory structure for a custom application
3.2
CFD software for the ABL flows: SOWFA
SOWFA(The Simulator fOr Wind Farm Applications) is the OpenFOAM based CFD toolbox de­
veloped by the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). It
comprises atmospheric or wind farm LES solvers, boundary conditions, and a tool for initializing
fields. OpenFOAM 2.4.x is used as a basis in this study. As it specializes in simulations in the
field of wind energy, SOWFA is widely known among the wind energy community.
The SOWFA solvers are developed on the basis of buoyantBoussinesqPimpleFoam. It is a tran­
sient OpenFOAM solver for buoyant, turbulent, and incompressible flows. Additionally, Coriolis
force is taken into account in the solvers’ momentum equation.
In the real world, many obstacles such as waves, rocks, forests, buildings, and mountains on the
earth’s surface influence the wind flow profile. It was caused by friction between wind flows
and the ground. However, for the simulation, it is not feasible to resolve their detailed structures.
Therefore, the constant value is used as the representative roughness of the surface.
In order to account for the shear stress in the equations, a model proposed by Schumann [32] is
implemented in SOWFA [33]. It assumes that the first cell away from the ground lies within the
surface layer of the ABL, which results in zero components except τxz and τyz.
τxz = −u2
∗
˜
Ux(z1)

D
˜U(z1)
E
(3.5)
τyz = −u2
∗
˜
Uy(z1)

D
˜U(z1)
E
(3.6)
where u∗is the friction velocity and ˜Uz1 is the velocity at the first cell from the surface.
In addition to dedicated ABL solvers, SOWFA provides a utility that generates divergence­free
velocity perturbations near the surface [34]. It is useful for LES because it develops turbulence
quickly and shortens the simulation time.
3.3
Simulation setup
The present study consists of three steps:
1. Simulation over flat terrains,
2. Simulation over stationary wave fields,
3. Simulation over moving wave fields.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.5: Schematic of the computational domain. The domain with the size of (Lx, Ly, Lz) =
(7500, 3750, 2000) m discretized by (nx, ny, nz) = (500, 250, 120) grid points.
3.3.1
Simulation over the flat terrain
Firstly, LES simulations over flat terrains are performed and compared with observations measured
by sonic anemometers on a 250 m mast at Østerild in Denmark [35]. In [20], the vertical profiles
of horizontal velocity and momentum fluxes computed by LES simulations with the WRF model
shows good agreement with observations. Therefore, simulation setup follows the similar manner
as [20].
Figure 3.5 is a computational domain with the size of (Lx, Ly, Lz) = (7500, 3750, 2000) m,
where x, y, z is the streamwise, spanwise and horizontal direction. The domain is discretized
by (nx, ny, nz) = (500, 250, 120) grid points with (∆x, ∆y) = 15 m. The vertical spacing is
not constant in order to capture different scales of motions in the ABL; ∆z from the surface to
z = 250 m is kept at 5 m, and the spacing expands up to 900 m with ∆z = 35 m and set constant
above 900 m.
At the flat bottom of the domain, I set the roughness length to 0.2492 m, which is estimated from
observations at Østerild. The Coriolis force is calculated by the latitude 57.0489 ◦. As initial
conditions, a constant wind Ug = (14, 0, 0) ms−1 blows in the domain, and the temperature is
kept from 289.5 K up to 700 m with a capping inversion of 10 Km −1 above 700 m. Von Kármán
constant κ sets 0.4.
For sensitivity analysis of turbulent models, two Smagorinsky models with different coefficients
Cs = 0.165 and 0.135 are used. Such numbers are chosen based on [33].
The simulations are performed with periodic boundary conditions on lateral walls. On the top of
the domain, a slip condition is applied for the velocity field, the pressure gradient is adjusted so
that fluxes on boundaries are specified by the velocity boundary condition (fixedFluxPressure
in OpenFOAM), and the temperature gradient is set to the strength of the capping inversion. On
the bottom of the domain, the surface shear stress model, a zero gradient temperature, a zero tem­
perature flux, and the same pressure condition as the top are applied.
The size of time steps is adjusted to satisfy the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) number, which is
a non­dimensional number of the ratio between traveling length for one time step U∆t and a cell
width ∆x, lower than 0.7. The simulation is performed for 14 hours. The backward second­order
method and Gauss theorem with linear interpolations are used for temporal and spatial discretiza­
tion respectively.
3.3.2
Simulation over stationary wave fields
To analyze the impact of stationary wave fields, seven simulations are performed over flat and
stationary wave surfaces with different size of domains and height of waves.
18
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:29==
Table 3.1: Simulation properties. FF, FW, NF and NW stands for full flat, full wave, narrow flat
and narrow wave respectively.
name
λ
A
Ak
Ug
Lx
Ly
Lz
nx
ny
nz
FF
­
­
­
5
1200
1200
1100
250
250
120
FW
100
1.6
0.1
5
1200
1200
1100
250
250
120
NF
­
­
­
5
400
400
1100
100
100
120
NW
100
0.8
0.05
5
400
400
1100
100
100
120
100
1.6
0.10
5
400
400
1100
100
100
120
100
2.4
0.15
5
400
400
1100
100
100
120
100
3.2
0.20
5
400
400
1100
100
100
120
Figure 3.6: The bottom of the domains. Idealized wave surfaces are described by amplitude a =
1.6 m, wavelength λ = 100 m and phase speed c = 12.5 ms−1.
Table 3.1 shows simulation configurations for all cases. Each simulation is named according to
its domain size and type of bottom surface: Full flat (FF), full wave (FW), narrow flat (NF) and
narrow wave (NW). First two cases indicate simulations with the large domain (Lx, Ly, Lz) =
(1200, 1200, 1100) with the horizontal spacing ∆x = ∆y = 4.8 m. This configuration is chosen
by following the study by Sullivan[14]. Last two simulations are performed under narrow domains
of (Lx, Ly, Lz) = (400, 400, 1100) with grid spacing in x and y directions ∆x = ∆y = 4 m.
Since multiple simulations with large domains are computationally expensive and it is not feasible
to perform all of them under the limited time schedule, narrow domains are used for the study
regarding the effect of wave height. The vertical spacing are set equal between large and narrow
domains. It grows from ∆z = 1 m at the bottom of domains to ∆z = 28.8 m at the top with 120
grid points.
Under narrow domains, five different simulations are performed to study the effect of wave height.
Stationary wave fields are modeled based on eq. (2.1). Wave amplitude a sets 1.6 m, wavelength λ
is 100 m, and phase speed c = 0 ms−1. To create wavy surfaces, curves are interpolated by finite
points on cosine curves. This is done by the python program that generates blockMesh for this
geometry. It is attached appendix A. According to Sullivan’s study [14], it is known that surface
pressure on wave fields matches analytical solutions derived [36] very well in case multiplication
of wave height and wave number Ak is lower than 0.1. Therefore, in this study, four different wave
height that varies from lower than 0.1 to larger than 0.1 is chosen.
The surface roughness z0 sets to 0.0002 m. The Coriolis force is calculated by the latitude 41.3 ◦.
An initial wind speed in the domain is Ug = (5, 0, 0) ms −1. The temperature is initialized with
300 K from the wavy surface to 400 m and the inversion of 0.01 Km −1 above 400 m.
Schemes for temporal and spatial discretization are the same as the simulations in the previous
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
19
==PAGE:30==
section. Since size of domains influence on convergence time of flows, narrow and large cases
are performed for 23 h and 18 h respectively, with constant time steps of 0.2 seconds. Simulations
results are averaged for one hour between 19 h to 20 h for narrow cases and 12 h to 13 h for large
cases.
20
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
4.1
Simulation over the flat terrain
The simulations were performed with the standard Smagorisky models with different coefficients;
Cs = 0.135 and Cs = 0.168, to identify the appropriate model for later use. These values are
chosen from [33].
4.1.1
Time series
In fig. 4.1 and fig. 4.2, blue lines describes time series of the horizontal velocity UMag =
q
U2x + U2y
at Cs = 0.135. The velocity is taken from the 84th level of the mesh where a jet exists. Orange
lines are moving on average over 600 windows. From these figures, it can be shown that it takes
one hour to trigger the turbulence in the internal field. Then, velocities in the x and y directions
were dropped down and recovered to the fully developed condition after 7 h. Since moving av­
erages showed stability, further analysis was done by time and spacial averaged values from the
hour between 11 h and 12 h.
Figure 4.1: Time series of UMag and its moving average
Figure 4.2: Time Series of velocity components in each direction. u, v and w denotes the velocity
in the x, y and z direction respectively.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
21
==PAGE:32==
4.1.2
Flow visualization
Figure 4.3 illustrates the instantaneous velocity fluctuations in the horizontal plane at z = 100 m
and the vertical plane at y = 0. On the horizontal plane, narrow regions of low and high wind
speed alternate along the flow direction. The vertical planes show that the wind speed grows along
the height and reaches the maximum speed at 700 to 800 m height, where the capping inversion
applies. Then it decreases to the geostrophic wind speed of 14 ms−1. Below the capping inversion,
it is seen that the velocity fluctuates a lot due to the shear stress from the ground. The maximum
velocity of Cs = 0.135 is 1 ms−1 faster than Cs = 0.168.
(a) Cs = 0.135
(b) Cs = 0.165
(c) Cs = 0.135
(d) Cs = 0.165
Figure 4.3: Instantaneous velocity fluctuations in the horizontal plane at z = 100 and the vertical
plane at y = 0 (Second row). (a), (c) Cs = 0.135 (b), (d) Cs = 0.165
Figure 4.4: velocity and temperature profile in the vertical direction. The black dots are the obser­
vations and the error bars denote their ±1 standard deviation.
22
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.5: Velocity variances normalized by u∗2 in the vertical direction. Blue line is the simu­
lation from Cs = 0.135 and green is the one from Cs = 0.168. The solid line represents the total
fluxes and the dashed line describes the resolved one. The black dots are the observations with the
error bars of their ±1 standard deviation.
4.1.3
Vertical profiles
fig. 4.4 describes the comparison of the spacial averaged velocity normalized by u∗and temperature
along the height. The friction velocity u∗is derived from the logarithmic wind profile U0 =
u∗
κ log( z
z0 ) where U0 is the velocity at the first cell from the ground. It is seen that the velocities
profiles of both cases are in good agreement with the measurements. Especially, Cs = 0.168
matches the measurements quite well. In terms of a jet, Cs = 0.135 shows larger speed at 750[m]
where the capping inversion exists. On the other hand, temperature profiles for both cases are not
so different compared to the velocity profile.
fig. 4.5 shows the spacial averaged momentum fluxes normalized by u∗2 from the simulations and
observations below 250 m. SOWFA generates the resolved fluxes < g
u′
iu′
j > and the SGS stress
τ sgs as an output. Thus, the SGS fluxes are obtained by being divided by density and the total
fluxes are computed by adding up the resolved and SGS fluxes. Overall, both models reproduce
fluxes well above 100 m. Even below 100 m, the fluxes < g
u′u′ >, < g
v′v′ > and < g
w′w′ >
near the ground are in the good agreement with the measurements. In particular, at the lowest
measurement level, the resolved < g
u′u′ > already reproduces the whole fluxes well enough while
< g
v′v′ > and < g
w′w′ > are made up for the measurement amount by the SGS fluxes. However,
for < g
v′w′ >, the SGS fluxes compensate too much, which results in the gap between the total
fluxes and the measurements.
The resolved turbulent kinetic energy kres is computed by kres = 0.5( g
u′
iu′
i) Figure 4.6 illustrates
the ratio of the SGS turbulent kinetic energy to the total one. AS Pope proposed 80% of the total
kinetic energy should be resolved for the LES [27], both cases resolved the turbulent kinetic energy
well. However, even though the amount of the total turbulent kinetic energy is almost the same
between the two cases, Cs = 0.135 shows the larger ratio of ksgs which means it models more
eddies than Cs = 168. Therefore, Cs = 0.168 is decided to be used for further study.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: The ratio of the SGS turbulent kinetic energy to the total one (left) and the total turbulent
kinetic energy in the vertical directions (righb).
4.2
Simulation over stationary wavy surfaces
Seven simulations are conducted in order to investigate the effect of wave fields on the atmosphere.
Since SOWFA has separate solvers for flat and complex terrains with the same functionalities to
simulate the atmosphere, both solvers are utilized. Besides that, a solver for complex terrains does
not derive spatial averages as output, so it is necessary to calculate them. In OpenFOAM, a mesh
is created by specifying the number of vertical cells. Therefore, when a group of cells on the same
x­coordinate is considered a single group, between the group with cells at the lowest height located
on the bottom of waves, and the ones with these cells at the top of waves, the distance from the
bottom of the groups to their top become different. It implies that the height of cells varies even at
the same vertical level, which results in the fact that the spacial average computed by values at the
same vertical level is not simply applicable. To solve the above problem, the following approach is
applied. First, take the average over the same vertical level of each group. Then, those values are
used to interpolate values up to 450 m for every 1 m of relative distance from the lowest coordinate
of each group. This results in a value at each point from 1 to 450 m in all groups. Finally, a spatial
average is taken by averaging the values located at the same height from all cell groups.
fig. 4.7 shows the eu′ ­component of wind fields at the horizontal plane of 15 m. It is seen that
regions of high velocity are visible in the flow direction in the form of long bands. Furthermore,
it can be seen that in the direction perpendicular to the flow, there are alternating fast and slow
velocity regions. The vertical plane of the component eu′ reveals areas of high wind speed near
the height where the strong capping inversion applies in fig. 4.9. Another vertical slice of the
component ew′ indicates areas of high speed are present in bundles from near the surface just before
the crest of waves and extend upward.
24
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.7: The eu′ ­component of wind fields in the horizontal direction.
Figure 4.8: The eu′ ­component of wind fields in the vertical direction.
Figure 4.9: The ew′ ­component of wind fields in the vertical direction.
Figure 4.10 shows the horizontal mean velocity profile in the vertical direction. It is seen that
velocity from all wave cases is higher than flat cases near bottom surfaces. However, above z/zi =
0.25, wind speed from wave cases becomes lower than in flat cases, and the difference between
the velocity of the wave and flat cases tends to decrease along the height over z/zi = 0.8. Finally,
near z/zi = 1, velocity for both cases reaches almost the same values.
The influence of domain size is evident from this result. In the case of smaller domains, the bound­
ary layer velocities tend to be lower overall. In particular, the maximum wind speed in the presence
of waves is 3.2% and 5.4% more phenomenal in the case of a flat surface.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
25
==PAGE:36==
Comparing narrow cases indicates different wave height brings slight differences near z/zi = 1 but
velocity tends to be higher if ak is less than 0.1. Figure 4.11 brings more clear results. This figure
presents the distribution of horizontally averaged velocities focusing on the near­bottom surface.
As can be seen from this, comparing the Narrow case, for wave heights above z/zi = 0.01, the
wind speeds are faster for wave heights of 2.4, 0.8, 2.4, and 3.2 min in that order. Conversely,
below that, the velocities increase in the order 3.2, 2.4, or 1.6, and 0.8 m.
Figure 4.10: The horizontal mean velocity <UMag> in the vertical direction.
Figure 4.11: The horizontal mean velocity <UMag> in the vertical directionfor zooming below
z/zi = 0.10.
Figure 4.12 describes vertical profiles of the total and resolved variances normalized by friction
velocities. As the height approaches 400 m, the amount of u, v, and w variances tends to de­
crease due to less wind shear. Near the bottom of domains, waves cause wind fluctuations, which
26
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:37==
brings a large gap between flat and terrain cases. This results in a larger dispersion of the u and w
components compared to the simulation for the flat case.
Especially, SGS variances for u variances are not so compensated to the total variances even near
the bottom surfaces. On the other hand, v variances are not resolved well near the surface. In
particular, just above the surface, SGS terms play an important role to make up for the total amount
of variances. w variances reach maximum values near the ground where variances of u and v show
local minimum values. Besides, profiles of v variances are different between the two types of
surfaces. Simulations over flat terrains have a large gap between total and resolved variances near
the bottom surface, while the total amount of variances for simulations over wave fields decreases.
In common with all of them, the total amount of variances differs significantly for flat cases and a
case with a wave height of 1.6 m, and for other cases.
Figure 4.13 shows the vertical profile of covariances for both flat and wave cases. It is seen that
all the covariances uw are negative. This tendency is similar to the profile over flat terrains with
roughness height. When vertical momentum flux is increased, momentum flux of Ux becomes
negative, which derives negative covariances of uw. Compared with flat cases, covariances of uw
from wave cases show lower values except for a wave height of 2.4 m. This is because velocity
profiles for these wave cases are steeper than flat cases. When wave height gets low, the vertical
momentum fluxes become lower.
Figure 4.12: Normalized velocity variances in the vertical direction. u∗is the friction velocity
calculated from a cell at the lowest vertical level. Dashed lines express resolved variances and
solid lines describe total (resolved + sgs) variances.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.13: Normalized velocity covariances in the vertical direction. Normalized velocity co­
variances in the vertical direction. u∗is the friction velocity calculated from a cell at the lowest
vertical level. Dashed lines express resolved variances and solid lines describe total (resolved +
sgs) covariances.
28
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:39==
5
Future work
The analysis of atmospheric boundary layer and the effect of wave fronts using numerical analysis
is very complex. This is because it is greatly influenced by assumptions such as whether the
interaction between waves and the atmosphere is taken into account and how waves are modeled.
In this study, the effect on the atmosphere by a fixed wave idealized by a linear equation was treated
under the condition that only the effect from the wave to the atmosphere was taken into account.
Therefore, at the same time, the effect of the atmosphere on waves could not be reflected in the
wave behavior, the complex shape of waves could not be reproduced, or the effect of the wave
motion on the atmosphere could not be analyzed. Based on this, more complex wave reproduction
methods can be adopted and the use of a two phase flow solver that simultaneously calculates air
and water. In recent years, studies have been conducted in LES to reproduce waves using model
equations based on the wave spectral method [19] and in DNS using one of the two phase flow
solver, the Volume Of Fluid (VoF) method [37].
If the wave front is idealized by some model equation and the atmosphere flowing over it is an­
alyzed, a dynamic mesh mechanism to move the wave front must be incorporated in SOWFA. in
OpenFOAM, the mesh movement must be calculated at the same time as the flow is solved, but
SOWFA does not have the mechanism does not exist in SOWFA. Furthermore, it is necessary to
process large scale calculations in parallel when dealing with the atmospheric boundary layer. In
this study, we succeeded in analyzing the effect of moving waves under a small domain, but were
unable to parallelize the computations. The reason is that SOWFA is based on an older version of
OpenFOAM, which makes it complex to incorporate the ability to process certain dynamic meshes
in parallel. (This is possible with newer versions of OF.) Incorporating dynamic mesh computation
and parallelization would allow for a more realistic analysis.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
29
==PAGE:40==
6
Conclusion
This study investigates the effect of wave fields on characteristics of the ABL. CFD simulations
are performed by SOWFA, which is based on an old version of OpenFOAM. This is specialized
for the ABL analysis and enables us to perform LES analysis. At the beginning of the study, we
planned to tackle this research by using OpenFOAM, but I find that OpenFOAM by itself is difficult
to provide eddies as an significant initial condition for LES analysis. Therefore, the tool for this
study is changed to SOWFA. I would like to say at the outset that I were not able to reach the process
we had envisioned because a lot of time is spent on trial and error with the open­form, preparing
the SOWFA environment, and preparing for the analysis.
First, to confirm that SOWFA could accurately capture the ABL, an analysis of the ABL on flat
ground under neutral conditions is performed and compared with observations in Denmark [20].
Since the previous study [20] shows good agreement between observations and simulations con­
ducted by the WRF model, the analysis is performed based on the setup of that study. The results
show that vertical wind speeds are in very good agreement with observations. Momentum flux
also shows good agreement with measurements at most observation points. These results indicate
that SOWFA can ensure sufficient accuracy in the analysis of the ABL. Since the results of the
LES analysis vary greatly depending on the choice of the SGS model used, we also analyzed the
standard Smagorinsky model with different constants among the available models and used the
derived model for subsequent studies.
Next, I attempt to analyze the ABL on a stationary idealized wave height. The wave height is mod­
eled with a cosine curve and four wave heights are prepared to analyze the effect of wave height.
The domain size and waveform conditions are taken from Sullivan [14]. Sullivan performed the
analysis in a domain of 1200 m horizontally and 1000 m high, but the usage limitations of the
clusters used in this study made it difficult to perform multiple analyses in the same domain size.
In addition, the SOWFA analysis system required a minimum height of 1000 m. Therefore, in this
study, a domain with a reduced horizontal length is used for comparative analysis of wave heights.
However, I struggled to prepare a program to create a domain with wave fronts in an OpenFOAM
generator, and the time step width of the analysis had to be smaller than it is, or the analysis crashed
in the middle, which took a lot of time. Fortunately, the analysis is able to turn with a time step
width of 0.2, and the results obtained are used for analysis. The results of the analysis show that
the wind speed near the wave front decreases as the wave height increases. However, at a height
of 400 meters above the wave surface, no significant velocity difference occurred, suggesting that
the effect of wave height is minimal. In addition, a comparison of momentum fluxes is made. In
all variances, the wave values are found to be reduced compared to the flat case. The reason is
that, as mentioned above, wind speed decreases under waves, so variances also decrease. Next,
the effect of vertical momentum flux is analyzed. The analysis shows that for vertical momentum
flux in the x direction, the larger the wave, the larger the friction and the larger the flux. However,
although the assumption is that the flux on a flat plane should be less, the results of this analysis
are the opposite. One reason for this is that the gradient of velocity change is steeper on the wavy
surface. However, similar studies conducted in the past [14, 25] have confirmed that in the pres­
ence of stationary wave heights, the velocity is reduced compared to the velocity on a flat surface.
The decrease in velocity is due to friction caused by the surface roughness on the surface. Unfortu­
nately, due to the limited time available and the many unexpected challenges I faced, I am unable
to pursue the analysis further. However, I confirm that wave height effects can have a significant
impact on the velocity distribution and momentum flux in the ABL.
30
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
Global greenhouse gas emissions. URL: https://ourworldindata.org/greenhouse-gas-
emissions#.
[2]
Ahmed Amine Ramdani and Sebastian Rudnik. Design and Construction of High Current
Winding for a Transverse Flux Linear Generator Intended for Wave Power Generation.
2018.
[3]
Global wind report 2021. 2021. URL: https://gwec.net/global-wind-report-2021/.
[4]
Craig Richard. Global wind fleet set to reach 5.9TW by 2050 – DNV. 2021.
[5]
Ge Chen et al. A Global View of Swell and Wind Sea Climate in the Ocean by Satellite
Altimeter and Scatterometer. 2002.
[6]
Kirsty E Hanley, Stephen E Belcher, and Peter P Sullivan. “A global climatology of wind–
wave interaction”. In: Journal of physical oceanography 40.6 (2010), pp. 1263–1282.
[7]
A.S. Monin and A.M. Obukhov. Basic laws of turbulent mixing in the surface layer of the
atmosphere. 1954.
[8]
Ann­Sofi Smedman et al. Effect of sea state on the momentum exchange over the sea during
neutral conditions. 2003.
[9]
Ann­Sofi Smedman and Ulf Högström. Observational study of marine atmospheric bound­
ary layer characteristics during swell. 2009.
[10]
Qingfang Jiang, Peter P. Sullivan, and Shouping Wang. Impact of Swell on Air–Sea Momen­
tum Flux and Marine Boundary Layer under Low­Wind Conditions. 2016.
[11]
Ulf Högström and Ann­Sofi Smedman. The atmospheric boundary layer during swell: A
field study and interpretation of the turbulent kinetic energy budget for high wave ages.
2009.
[12]
Ulf Högström, Anna Rutgersson, and Erik Sahlée. Air–Sea Interaction Features in the Baltic
Sea and at a Pacific Trade­Wind Site: An Inter­comparison Study. 2012.
[13]
James B. Edson, Venkata Jampana, and Robert A. Weller. On the Exchange of Momentum
over the Open Ocean. 2003.
[14]
Peter P. Sullivan, James B. Edson, and Tihomir Hristov. Large­Eddy Simulations and Ob­
servations of Atmospheric Marine Boundary Layers above Nonequilibrium Surface Waves.
2008.
[15]
Peter P. Sullivan and James C. McWilliams. Dynamics of Winds and Currents Coupled to
Surface Waves. 2009.
[16]
Ali Al Sam, Robert Szasz, and Johan Revstedt. The effect of moving waves on neutral marine
atmospheric boundary layer. 2014.
[17]
Ali Al Sam. Wind­wave interaction effects on offshore wind energy. 2016.
[18]
Haoze Yang et al. The effect of swell on marine atmospheric boundary layer and the oper­
ation of an offshore wind turbine. 2022.
[19]
Peter P Sullivan, James C McWilliams, and Edward G Patton. “Large­eddy simulation of
marine atmospheric boundary layers above a spectrum of moving waves”. In: Journal of the
Atmospheric Sciences 71.11 (2014), pp. 4001–4027.
[20]
Alfredo Peña, Branko Kosović, and Jeffrey D. Mirocha. Evaluation of idealized large­eddy
simulations performed with the Weather Research and Forecasting model using turbulence
measurements from a 250 m meteorological mast. 2021.
[21]
Tilman Koblitz. CFD Modeling of Non­Neutral Atmospheric Boundary Layer Conditions.
2013.
[22]
Manuel Helbig et al. Understanding land­atmosphere interactions through tower­based flux
and continuous atmospheric boundary layer measurements. 2021.
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
31
==PAGE:42==
[23]
Roland B. Stull. An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology. 1988.
[24]
Georgios Deskos et al. Review of Wind–Wave Coupling Models for Large­Eddy Simulation
of the Marine Atmospheric Boundary Layer. 2021.
[25]
Erik Olof Nilsson et al. “Convective boundary­layer structure in the presence of wind­
following swell”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 138.667 (2012),
pp. 1476–1489.
[26]
Lewis Fry Richardson. Weather prediction by numerical process. 1922.
[27]
Stephen B. Pope. Ten questions concerning the large­eddy simulation of turbulent flows.
2003.
[28]
P. S. Jackson and J. C. R. Hunt. Turbulent wind flow over a low hill. 1975.
[29]
Joel H. Ferziger and Milovan Perić. Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics. 2002.
[30]
Zbigniew Sorbjan. The Large­Eddy Simulations of the Atmospheric Boundary Layer. 2004.
[31]
Joseph Smagorinsky. General circulation experiments with the primitive equations. I. The
basic experiment. 1963.
[32]
U. Schumann. Subgrid scale model for finite difference simulations of turbulent flows in
plane channels and annuli. 1975.
[33]
Matthew J. Churchfield. Adding complex terrain and stable atmospheric condition capabil­
ity to the OpenFOAM­based flow solver of the simulator for on/offshore wind farm appli­
cations (SOWFA). 2004.
[34]
Eugene de Villiers. The Potential of Large Eddy Simulation for the Modeling of Wall Bounded
Flows. 2006.
[35]
Alfredo Peña. Østerild: A natural laboratory for atmospheric turbulence. 2019.
[36]
Benjamin T. Brooke. Shearing flow over a wavy boundary. 1959.
[37]
Zixuan Yang, Bing­Qing Deng, and Lian Shen. Direct numerical simulation of wind turbu­
lence over breaking waves. 2018.
32
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:43==
A
Stationary wave fields generator
1
2
from cmath import cos
3
import os
4
from math import sqrt
5
from pyexpat.model import XML_CTYPE_MIXED
6
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
7
import numpy as np
8
9
def write( xMin, xMax, yMin, yMax, zMin, zMax, nScaleX , nScaleY , nScaleZ , nX,
nY, nZ, nBx, nBy, nBz, nPoints , a, k):
10
filename = 'blockMeshDict'
11
f = open(filename , 'w')
12
f.write("FoamFile \n")
13
f.write("{ \n")
14
f.write("
version
2.0; \n")
15
f.write("
format
ascii; \n")
16
f.write("
class
dictionary; \n")
17
f.write("
object
blockMeshDict; \n")
18
f.write("} \n")
19
f.write("// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * // \n\n")
20
f.write("convertToMeters 1.0; \n\n")
21
22
f.write("vertices \n")
23
f.write("( \n")
24
# I did not expext to divide in y direction. only x and z direction.
25
26
vertexNum = 0
27
x = [xMin, xMax, xMax, xMin] # x coordinate of vertices on the bottom face
28
zpeak
= []
29
for i in range(4):
30
zpeak.append(a * np.cos(k*x[i]))
31
print("zpeak[",i, "] = ", zpeak[i])
32
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 0 \n" %(xMin, yMin, zpeak[0]) )
33
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 1 \n" %(xMax, yMin, zpeak[1]) )
34
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 2 \n" %(xMax, yMax, zpeak[2]) )
35
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 3 \n" %(xMin, yMax, zpeak[3]) )
36
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 4 \n" %(xMin, yMin, zMax ) )
37
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 5 \n" %(xMax, yMin, zMax ) )
38
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 6 \n" %(xMax, yMax, zMax ) )
39
f.write("
( %g %g %g ) // 7 \n" %(xMin, yMax, zMax ) )
40
41
f.write("); \n\n")
42
43
f.write("blocks \n")
44
f.write("( \n")
45
f.write("
hex (0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7) (%g %g %g) simpleGrading (%g %g %g)\n" %
(nX, nY, nZ, nScaleX , nScaleY , nScaleZ)) # number of vertices at the
bottom of the block
46
f.write("); \n\n")
47
48
dx = (xMax - xMin)/nPoints
49
x = np.linspace(xMin, xMax, num = (nPoints +1 ))
50
print("x", x)
51
print("len(x)", len(x))
52
z = a * np.cos(k * x)
53
print("z", z)
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
33
==PAGE:44==
54
z_round = [float("{0:.2f}".format(element)) for element in z]
55
print("z_round", z_round)
56
57
print("spline: size of x =", len(x), ", nPoints = ", nPoints)
58
59
f.write('edges ( \n')
60
f.write('
spline 0 1 \n
( \n')
61
for i in range(len(x)):
62
f.write('
(%g %g %g) \n' %(x[i],yMin, z_round[i]))
63
f.write('
) \n')
64
65
f.write('
spline 3 2 \n
( \n')
66
for i in range(len(x)):
67
f.write('
(%g %g %g) \n' %(x[i],yMax, z_round[i]))
68
f.write('
) \n')
69
70
f.write('); \n') #close edges
71
72
f.write("boundary \n")
73
f.write("( \n")
74
#lower
75
f.write("
lower\n")
76
f.write("
{ \n")
77
f.write("
type
wall; \n")
78
f.write("
faces \n")
79
f.write("
( \n")
80
f.write("
(0 3 2 1)\n"
)
81
f.write("
); \n")
82
f.write("
} \n")
83
#upper
84
f.write("
upper \n")
85
f.write("
{ \n")
86
f.write("
type
patch; \n")
87
f.write("
faces \n")
88
f.write("
( \n")
89
f.write("
(4 5 6 7)\n")
90
f.write("
); \n")
91
f.write("
} \n")
92
#west
93
f.write("
west \n")
94
f.write("
{ \n")
95
f.write("
type
cyclic; \n")
96
f.write("
neighbourPatch
east; \n")
97
# f.write("
matchTolerance
0.001;
\n")
98
f.write("
faces \n")
99
f.write("
( \n")
100
f.write("
(0 4 7 3)\n")
101
f.write("
); \n")
102
f.write("
} \n")
103
#east
104
f.write("
east \n")
105
f.write("
{ \n")
106
f.write("
type
cyclic; \n")
107
f.write("
neighbourPatch
west; \n")
108
# f.write("
matchTolerance
0.001;
\n")
109
f.write("
faces \n")
110
f.write("
( \n")
111
f.write("
(1 2 6 5)\n")
112
f.write("
); \n")
113
f.write("
} \n")
114
#north
115
f.write("
north \n")
34
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:45==
116
f.write("
{ \n")
117
f.write("
type
cyclic; \n")
118
f.write("
neighbourPatch
south; \n")
119
f.write("
faces \n")
120
f.write("
( \n")
121
f.write("
(3 7 6 2)\n")
122
f.write("
); \n")
123
f.write("
} \n")
124
#south
125
f.write("
south \n")
126
f.write("
{ \n")
127
f.write("
type
cyclic; \n")
128
f.write("
neighbourPatch
north; \n")
129
f.write("
faces \n")
130
f.write("
( \n")
131
f.write("
(0 1 5 4)\n" )
132
f.write("
); \n")
133
f.write("
} \n")
134
f.write("); \n")
135
136
f.write("mergePatchPairs \n")
137
f.write("(); \n")
138
139
140
141
142
###############################################
143
144
# the growth rate of mesh in each direction
145
nScaleX = 1
146
nScaleY = 1
147
nScaleZ = 28.82
148
149
# settings for splines , a: amplitude of a wave, k: wave number
150
lamda = 100
151
a = 1.6
152
k = 2* np.pi/lamda
153
154
print("lamda = ", lamda, "k = ", k)
155
156
# the size of computational domain
157
xMin = 0
158
xMax = 400
159
yMin = 0
160
yMax = 400
161
zMin = 0
162
zMax = 1100
163
164
# the number of blocks in each direction
165
nBx = 1
166
nBy = 1 # * only 1 is considered
167
nBz = 1
168
169
# the number of mesh in each direction
170
nPoints = 100
171
nX = nPoints
172
nY = nPoints
173
nZ = 120
174
175
###############################################
176
print("start writing a file")
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
35
==PAGE:46==
177
write( xMin, xMax, yMin, yMax, zMin, zMax, nScaleX , nScaleY , nScaleZ , nX, nY,
nZ, nBx, nBy, nBz, nPoints , a, k)
178
print("Finish writing a blockMeshDict")
Listing A.1: genWave
36
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:47==
B
Dynamic Mesh solver
B.0.1
Dynamic Mesh libraries
To generate the propagating wave fields, the functionality for dynamic mesh is required.
In OpenFOAM, two libraries for dynamic meshes are available: dynamicFvMesh and topoChangeFvMesh
in fig. B.1 The dynamicFvMesh does not consider the topology change, which means the number of
nodes and mesh connectivity during the motion are preserved. There are five sub­classes available:
staticFvMesh, dynamicMotionSolverFvMesh, dynamiclnkJetFvMesh, dynamicRefineFvMesh
and solidBodyMotionFvMesh.
1. staticFvMesh : fixed meshes which mainly for testing dynamic mesh solvers
2. dynamicMotionSolverFvMesh : moving meshes computed by the motion displacement or
motion velocity.
3. dynamiclnkJetFvMesh : moving meshes sinusoidally in the x direction by explicitly com­
puting new nodes locations.
4. dynamicRefineFvMesh : refined or unrefined meshes depending on directions.
5. solidBodyMotionFvMesh : meshes for the rigid­body motions in multiple regions of meshes.
On the other hand, the other library, topoChangeFvMesh handles topological change. It also
have four sub­classes: linearValveFvMesh, linearValveLayersFvMesh, mixerFvMesh and
movingConeTopoFvMesh.
1. linearValveFvMesh : sliding meshes at the interface of two meshes in relative liinear
motion.
2. linearValveLayersFvMesh : sliding meshes with adding or removing layers.
3. mixerFvMesh : rotating meshes where a moving part and a fixed one exist.
4. movingConeTopoFvMesh : squeezing or stretching meshes with adding or removing meshes
To include the dynamic mesh libraries in simulations, dynamicMeshDict should be included in
the directory constant with user defined values appendix C.
B.0.2
Propagating wave fields
In the present study, a new library for propagating wave fields is developed based on dynamiclnkJetFvMesh.
First, we created the directory MoveWave and copied necessary files from the directory of dynamic
mesh in OpenFOAM.
1
mkdir MoveWave
2
cd MoveWave
3
cp -r $WM_PROJECT_DIR/src/dynamicFvMesh/dynamicInkJetFvMesh/
dynamicInkJetFvMesh.C
4
MoveWave.C
5
cp $WM_PROJECT_DIR/src/dynamicFvMesh/dynamicInkJetFvMesh/
dynamicInkJetFvMesh.H
6
MoveWave.H
7
cp -r $WM_PROJECT_DIR/src/dynamicFvMesh/Make/ ./
Listing B.1: make and copy necessary files
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
37
==PAGE:48==
Dynamic Mesh
dynamicFvMesh
staticFvMesh
dynamicMotionSolverFvMesh
dynamiclnkJetFvMesh
dynamicRefineFvMesh
solidBodyMotionFvMesh
topoChangeFvMesh
linearValveFvMesh
linearValveLayersFvMesh
mixerFvMesh
movingConeTopoFvMesh
Figure B.1: Sub­class structure for dynamic meshes
Then, names of the class and inputs are changed to MoveMesh in MoveWave.C and MoveWave.H.
(sed -i s/dynamicInkJetFvMesh/MoveWave/g MoveWave.C is useful to perform all the changes.)
To include necessary libraries and compile the custom library, files and options need to be
modified as follows
1
MoveWave.C
2
LIB=$(FOAM_USER_LIBBIN)/libMoveWave
Listing B.2: files
1
EXE_INC = \
2
-I$(LIB_SRC)/triSurface/lnInclude \
3
-I$(LIB_SRC)/meshTools/lnInclude \
4
-I$(LIB_SRC)/dynamicMesh/lnInclude \
5
-I$(LIB_SRC)/dynamicFvMesh/lnInclude \
6
-I$(LIB_SRC)/finiteVolume/lnInclude
7
8
LIB_LIBS = \
9
-ltriSurface \
10
-lmeshTools \
11
-ldynamicMesh \
12
-lfiniteVolume
Listing B.3: options
Afterwards, some modification were done in the source and header files. The dynamic mesh equa­
tion is changed to the wave equations in eq. (B.1) with some input variables: an amplitude a, a
length λ and a propagating speed c of waves. In eq. (B.1), a Wave number k is calculated from 2π
divided by λ. Modified codes are explained in appendix C.
z(x, t) = acos (k(x −ct))
(B.1)
At the end, they were compiled by wmake libso.
Aside from preparing a dynamic meshes libraries for propagating wave fields, the solver must
include the computation of the mesh motion as well as solving for the physical fields. In Open­
FOAM, solvers with dynamic mesh capabilities have name with ”DyM” such as pimpleDyMFoam
38
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:49==
or interDyMFoam. However, the solver for the current study is designed only for the stationary
mesh, so the dynamic mesh capability is added to the solver. The detailed description is explained
in appendix B.
1
2
3
#include "fvCFD.H"
4
#include "dynamicFvMesh.H" //for dynamic mesh
5
#include "singlePhaseTransportModel.H"
6
#include "turbulenceModel.H"
7
#include "pimpleControl.H"
8
#include "fixedFluxPressureFvPatchScalarField.H"
9
#include "IFstream.H"
10
#include "OFstream.H"
11
#include "wallDist.H"
12
#include "interpolateXY.H"
13
#include "interpolateSplineXY.H"
14
15
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
//
16
17
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
18
{
19
#include "setRootCase.H"
20
#include "createTime.H"
21
#include "createDynamicFvMesh.H" //for dynamic mesh
22
#include "initContinuityErrs.H" //for dynamic mesh
23
24
pimpleControl pimple(mesh);
25
26
Info << nl << "pimpleControl pimple(mesh);
done" << endl;
27
#include "readGravitationalAcceleration.H"
28
#include "createFields.H"
29
#include "createGradP.H"
30
#include "createDivSchemeBlendingField.H"
31
#include "createUf.H" //for dynamic mesh
32
#include "readTimeControls.H"
33
#include "createPcorrTypes.H" // for dynamic mesh
34
#include "CourantNo.H"
35
#include "setInitialDeltaT.H"
36
#include "createAverageFields.H"
37
#include "createVorticityQFields.H"
38
#include "computeDivergence.H"
39
40
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
//
41
42
Info << nl << "Starting time loop\n" << endl;
43
44
while (runTime.loop())
45
{
46
Info << "Time = " << runTime.timeName() << tab;
47
Info << "Time Step = " << runTime.timeIndex() << endl;
48
49
#include "readControls.H" //for dynamic mesh
50
#include "CourantNo.H"
51
#include "setDeltaT.H"
52
#include "updateDivSchemeBlendingField.H"
53
54
mesh.update(); //for dynamic mesh
55
Info << "DyM: mesh is updated! " << endl;
56
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
39
==PAGE:50==
57
// Calculate absolute flux from the mapped surface velocity
58
phi = mesh.Sf() & Uf;
59
60
if (mesh.changing() && correctPhi)
61
{
62
#include "correctPhi.H"
63
Info << "DyM: phi is updated! " << endl;
64
}
65
66
// Make the flux relative to the mesh motion
67
fvc::makeRelative(phi, U);
68
69
if (mesh.changing() && checkMeshCourantNo)
70
{
71
#include "meshCourantNo.H"
72
Info << "DyM: phi is updated! " << endl;
73
}
74
75
// --- Pressure -velocity PIMPLE corrector loop
76
while (pimple.loop())
77
{
78
Info << "
Predictor..." << endl;
79
#include "UEqn.H"
80
#include "turbulenceCorrect.H"
81
#include "TEqn.H"
82
83
// --- Pressure corrector loop
84
int corr = 0;
85
while (pimple.correct())
86
{
87
Info << "
Corrector Step " << corr << "..." << endl;
88
#include "pEqn.H"
89
#include "turbulenceCorrect.H"
90
#include "TEqn.H"
91
corr++;
92
}
93
94
// --- Compute the velocity flux divergence
95
#include "computeDivergence.H"
96
97
// --- Update the driving pressure gradient
98
#include "correctGradP.H"
99
}
100
101
102
#include "computeAverageFields.H"
103
#include "computeVorticityQ.H"
104
105
runTime.write();
106
#include "writeGradP.H"
107
108
Info << "ExecutionTime = " << runTime.elapsedCpuTime() << " s"
109
<< "
ClockTime = " << runTime.elapsedClockTime() << " s"
110
<< nl << endl;
111
}
112
113
Info << "End" << endl;
114
115
return 0;
116
}
Listing B.4: DyMSolver.C
40
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:51==
C
Dynamic Mesh
1
2
#ifndef MoveWave_H
3
#define MoveWave_H
4
5
#include "dynamicFvMesh.H"
6
#include "dictionary.H"
7
#include "pointIOField.H"
8
9
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * * //
10
11
namespace Foam
12
{
13
class MoveWave
14
:
15
public dynamicFvMesh
16
{
17
// Private data
18
dictionary dynamicMeshCoeffs_;
19
scalar amplitude_;
20
scalar waveLength_;
21
scalar waveSpeed_;
22
pointIOField stationaryPoints_;
23
24
// Private Member Functions
25
//- Disallow default bitwise copy construct
26
MoveWave(const MoveWave&);
27
28
//- Disallow default bitwise assignment
29
void operator=(const MoveWave&);
30
31
public:
32
33
//- Runtime type information
34
TypeName("MoveWave");
35
36
// Constructors
37
//- Construct from IOobject
38
MoveWave(const IOobject& io);
39
40
//- Destructor
41
~MoveWave();
42
43
// Member Functions
44
//- Update the mesh for both mesh motion and topology change
45
virtual bool update();
46
};
47
// * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * //
48
} // End namespace Foam
49
#endif
Listing C.1: MoveWave.H
1
\*-------------------------------------------------------------------*/
2
#include "MoveWave.H"
3
#include "addToRunTimeSelectionTable.H"
4
#include "volFields.H"
5
#include "mathematicalConstants.H"
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
41
==PAGE:52==
6
7
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * Static Data Members * * * * * * * * * * * * * //
8
namespace Foam
9
{
10
defineTypeNameAndDebug(MoveWave , 0);
11
addToRunTimeSelectionTable(dynamicFvMesh , MoveWave , IOobject);
12
}
13
14
15
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Constructors
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * //
16
17
Foam::MoveWave::MoveWave(const IOobject& io)
18
:
19
dynamicFvMesh(io),
20
dynamicMeshCoeffs_
21
(
22
IOdictionary
23
(
24
IOobject
25
(
26
"dynamicMeshDict",
27
io.time().constant(),
28
*this,
29
IOobject::MUST_READ_IF_MODIFIED ,
30
IOobject::NO_WRITE ,
31
false
32
)
33
).subDict(typeName + "Coeffs")
34
),
35
amplitude_(readScalar(dynamicMeshCoeffs_.lookup("amplitude"))),
36
waveLength_(readScalar(dynamicMeshCoeffs_.lookup("waveLength"))),
37
waveSpeed_(readScalar(dynamicMeshCoeffs_.lookup("waveSpeed"))),
38
stationaryPoints_
39
(
40
IOobject
41
(
42
"points",
43
io.time().constant(),
44
meshSubDir ,
45
*this,
46
IOobject::MUST_READ ,
47
IOobject::NO_WRITE
48
)
49
)
50
{
51
Info<< "Performing a dynamic mesh calculation: " << endl;
52
Info<< "Amplitude of waves: " << amplitude_ <<endl;
53
Info<< " WaveLength: " << waveLength_ <<endl;
54
Info<< " waveSpeed: " << waveSpeed_ <<endl;
55
}
56
57
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Destructor
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * //
58
Foam::MoveWave::~MoveWave()
59
{}
60
bool Foam::MoveWave::update()
61
{
62
pointField newPoints = stationaryPoints_;
63
newPoints.replace
64
(vector::Z,
65
stationaryPoints_.component(vector::Z) + amplitude_*
66
// Foam::exp(-mag(stationaryPoints_.component(vector::Z)))*
67
cos( (constant::mathematical::twoPi)/waveLength_ *
(stationaryPoints_
42
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
==PAGE:53==
.component(vector::X) - waveSpeed_ * time().value() ) )
68
);
69
fvMesh::movePoints(newPoints);
70
volVectorField& U =
71
const_cast <volVectorField&>(lookupObject <volVectorField >("U"));
72
U.correctBoundaryConditions();
73
74
return true;
75
}
Listing C.2: MoveWave.C
1
2
FoamFile
3
{
4
version
2.0;
5
format
ascii;
6
class
dictionary;
7
location
"constant";
8
object
dynamicMeshDict;
9
}
10
// * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * //
11
12
dynamicFvMeshLibs ("libdynamicMyFvMesh.so");
13
dynamicFvMesh dynamicMyFvMesh;
14
motionSolverLibs ("libfvMotionSolvers.so");
15
dynamicMyFvMeshCoeffs
16
{
17
a 1.60;
18
waveNumber 0.06;
19
waveSpeed 12.5;
20
}
21
// ******************************************************************* //
Listing C.3: dynamicMeshDict
The impact of wave fields on the marine atmospheric boundary layer
43
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK­4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
