==PAGE:1==
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to mul­
timeric
single
domain
antibodies
against
Clostridium difficile in various host species
Master Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against
Clostridium difficile in various host species
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
September, 2022
By
Ilenuta Simina Cuciurean
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Søltofts Plads,
Building 223, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Ilenuta Simina Cuciurean ­ s202237
Signature
Date
ii Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
During the 21st century, the incidence and severity of Clostridium difficile Infection (CDI)
exponentially increased, due to the rapid spread of new antibiotic resistant strains of C.
difficile. CDI can manifest its symptoms in many ways, from asymtomatic or mild to life­
threatening diarrhea, and it affects especially hospitalized patients under antibiotic treat­
ment. In fact, the disruption of the gut microflora induced by a prolonged usage of antibi­
otics facilitates the gut colonization by Clostridium difficile. Therefore, alternative solutions
are needed to combat the pathogen and alleviate the symptoms of the disease. Currently,
immunotherapy seems the alternative method preferred. However, IgG anitbodies due to
their big size are difficult to engineer and their production is costly. More recently, the
discovery of small antibody fragments, called single domain antibodies (VHHs), paved
the way towards a more sustainable production. In fact, nanobodies are potent neuntral­
izing proteins, that are easy to engineer and their production can be adapted to different
expression systems. This work aims to evaluate the expression of mono­ to multimeric
single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB in Prokaryotic
(Escherichia coli) and Eukaryotic (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Saccharomyces boulardii,
Pichia pastoris, CHO, expiCHO, HEK293) cell factories. Additionally, it gives an overview
of the advantages and disadvantages of expressing therapeutic proteins of increasing
size and complexity in bacterial, fungal and mammalian expression hosts. The cloning,
expression and characterization of therapeutic nanobodies was successful in both lower
and higher organisms. However, generally lower organisms are particularly suited for the
production of smaller size (around 15.48 KDa) and lower complexity proteins, while higher
organisms allow high expression levels of larger and structurally complex peptides (from
30.48 KDa to 57.38 KDa).
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Clostridium difficile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Nanobodies as therapeutics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Aim of the research project
9
3
The protein characteristics affect the choice of the expression system
11
4
The choice of suitable expression vectors
14
5
Different cell factories
19
5.1
Bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Fungi: Yeasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.3
Mammalian cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Material and methods
25
6.1
Cloning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.2
Bacterial transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.3
Yeast transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.4
Mammalian cells transfection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.5
Nanobodies expression in different cell factories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.6
Characterization of the nanobodies production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7
Results
33
7.1
Cloning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7.2
Qualitative analysis by SDS­PAGE and Western blot . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.3
Quantitative analysis by ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
8
Discussion
57
9
Conclusion and future perspectives
61
10 Appendix A
62
11 Appendix B
72
Bibliography
73
iv Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Nowadays antibiotic resistance is one of world’s biggest challenges. Inappropriate pre­
scription and administration of antibiotics have led to the development of antibiotic resis­
tant bacteria. As a consequence, treating common infectious diseases is becoming more
and more difficult [1]. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention has reported that
every year in the US occur 2.8 million bacterial infections, and more than 35,000 deaths
are caused by antibiotic resistant bacteria [2].The economical impact of the multi­drug
resistant infections is huge, and the US health system invests 20 billion USD per year.
Worldwide 700,000 people a year die due to drug­resistant infections. Estimations pre­
dict that by 2050 the number of deaths will rise to 10 million, making antibiotic resistance
even deadlier than cancer [3]. For this reason, researches and the healthcare industry
are focused on discovering new antibiotics and developing vaccines, diagnostics and al­
ternative tools to fight against antibiotic resistant bacteria.
1.1
Clostridium difficile
An example of antibiotic resistant bacteria that threatens public health is Clostridium dif­
ficile (C.difficile), recently classified as Clostridioides difficile. It has been isolated for the
first time in 1935 by Hall and O’Toole and it was considered part of the infants normal
gut microbiota until 1970 [4]. However, in 1974 Tedesco and al. discovered that with the
introduction of antibiotics, also the pathogenicity of C.difficile increased. Currently, the in­
cidence of Clostridium difficle infection (CDI) is considerably increasing and this disease
is becoming one of the most common nosocomial infections among hospitals around the
world [5]. Particularly, certain ribotypes of C.difficile such as BI/NAP1/027, 106 and 018
are connected with increased antibiotic resistance, higher mortality rate and pathogenicity
[6].
1.1.1
Ribotyping
PCR­ribotyping is the preferred method used to distinguish between different strains of
Clostridium difficile. It is based on a polymorphism in the 16S­23S intergenic spacer re­
gion in the bacterial genome. The length of this region varies between ribotypes (RTs) and
allows identification and classification of new strains by only using a pair of primers target­
ing sequences on the 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA genes. The method produces patterns of
bands unique for each ribotype, that are easy to reproduce and to separate on agarose
gel [7]. It has been demonstrated that some strains of C.difficile, such as BI/NAP1/027,
014, 001/072, and 078, are prevalent in European stool samples. However, C.difficile
ribotypes are geographically distributed in different nations and regions. Specifically,the
epidemic RT 027 moslty affected United States, Canada, Mexico, England, Denmark,
Hungary, Italy, Germany, Serbia, Romania, and Poland. 027 results to be resistant to
multiple antibiotics and it is associated with increased toxin A, B, and binary toxin produc­
tion. RT 356 was mostly isolated in Italy, while RT 018 was found in Italy, Japan, and
Korea. RT 018 is characterized by the mutation gyrA C245T, which confers resistance
to fuoroquinolones. RTs 591, 106, and 002 are the most common RTs in Colombia. RT
016 presents resistance to at least three antibiotics and increased spore production [8]
[6]. While CDI is a toxin­mediated disease, transmission and pathogenesis of the different
strains are related to their capability to produce viable spores [9].
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1.2
Clostridium difficile pathogenesis
Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, Gram­positive and spore forming pathogenic bacteria
and it is the main cause of healthcare­associated (HA) infectious diarrhea. The infection
occurs through spore transmission, and the pathogen is usually transmitted via fecal­oral
route. It mostly affects elderly people, hospitalized patients, and nursing home residents.
C.difficile spores are very resistant to drug treatment, such as antibiotics, to heat and
to acidic conditions. Moreover, they are able to persist on surfaces for several months.
For this reason, medical devices, toilets, phones and clinic equipment seem to be the
most common reservoirs for this pathogen [10]. Additional risks include prolonged an­
tibiotic use and multimorbidity. Particularly, the extended usage of fluoroquinolones, clin­
damycins, cephalosporins or a combination of these antibiotics is associated with high
occurrence of Clostridium difficile infection (figure 1.1 A) [6]. It was demonstrated that
the broad­spectrum antibiotic clindamycin severely affects the gut microbiota by reducing
the amount of intestinal anaerobic bacteria and consequently the resistance to pathogens
colonization. In fact, the gut microflora pays a fundamental role as natural protective bar­
rier against C.difficile and its disruption leads to symptoms such as diarrhea, gastritis and
intestinal pain [11].
Figure 1.1: Clostridium difficile germination and proliferation in the gut. A. C.difficile
spores are resistant to antibiotics. Alteration of the gut microflora occurs in case of mul­
timorbidity and persistent use of fluoroquinolones, clindamycins and cephalosporins. B.
Facilitated colonization of the gut when naturally occurring anaerobic bacteria are not
present, with consequent disruption of the intestinal epithelial cells by the action of TdcA
and TdcB. The picture was adapted from Csaba Fehér et al 2016 [12].
When the balance of the gut microflora is altered, Clostridium difficile proliferates in the
2 Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:9==
large intestine (figure 1.1 B). The pathogenicity of the organism is related to the ability
to produce enzymes such as collagenase, chondroitin­sulfatase, hyaluronidase, and two
toxins, called toxin A and toxin B. The molecular weight of TdcA and TdcB is 308 and 270
kDa respectively, and they are composed by two subunits. Subunit A inactivates host GT­
Pases by glucosylation, and subunit B delivers the subunit A into the target cell. Subunit
A, located at the N­terminus, carries only the glucosyltransferase domain (GTD), while
subunit B, located at the C­terminus, consists of three domains: the receptor­binding do­
main (RBD), the pore­forming domain and autoprotease domain. The receptor­binding
domain contains the combined repetitive oligopeptides (CROPs). CROPs are formed of
19­24 short repeats (SR) and 31 long repeats (LR) of aminoacids involved in the adhesion
to the host cells, and indeed these aminoacids seem to act as cell binding motif on the en­
terocytes. CROPs sequence results to be shorter in TdcB, when compared to TdcA. The
CROPs domain of TdcA contains 32 SRs and 7 interspersed LRs, while TdcB has only 19
SRs and 4 LRs [13]. The two toxins enter the target cells through clathrin­mediated endo­
cytosis. Acidification of the endosomal environment allows a conformational change of the
pore forming domain, with consequent exposure of the hydrophobic segment. This apolar
fragment functions as a pore through the endosomal membrane, transporting the gluco­
syltransferase into the host cytoplasm [13]. Only the subunit A (GTD) is transferred to
the cytosol, and a proteolytic reaction that occurs between Leu543 and Gly544 separates
the two subunits. The cleavage is initiated by inositol­phosphate (InsP6) and mediated by
cysteine protease domain (CPD) adjacent to the GTD [14]. The glucosyltransferase acts
on GDP­bound Rho proteins located on the cell membrane and involved in regulation and
rearrangement of the cytoskeleton. The inactivation of GTPases occurs by monoglucosy­
lation of Thr37 (Thr35 of Rac and Cdc42), using UDP­glucose as a co­substrate [15]. After
inactivation the glucosylated Rho proteins are not able to interact with effector molecules
and other regulatory proteins [16].TdcA and TdcB drastically affect the gut barrier integrity
by damaging the epithelial cell cytoskeleton and by inducing cell rounding (figure 1.1), with
subsequent fluid secretion, local inflammation and neutrophil adhesion. As a result, the
inflammatory response intensifies and in more extreme cases, the intestinal mucosal sur­
face can be damaged by microulcerations. In fact, TdcA and TdcB can also induce p53
dependent and independent apoptosis, caspase dependent and independent apoptosis
and nectosis[5]. Some epidemic ribotypes 027 produce also a third toxin called Clostrid­
ium difficile transferase (CDT). However, the role of CDT in the pathogenesis is not fully
understood [13]. All these mechanisms of parthogenesis lead to the appearance of mild
or more severe disease symptoms, that usually affect the gastrointestinal tract.
1.1.3
The symptoms of the disease
Clostridium difficle is able to colonize every part of the colon, but the most infiltrated re­
gion is the distal segment [5]. Infection of extracolonic regions are rare, but the bacteria
can also expand in the small intestine, causing reactive arthritis and bacteremia [17]. The
symptoms manifestation of CDI differs between patients: in some cases Clostridium diffi­
cile carriers can be asymptomatic, or they can present mild or moderate watery diarrhea.
Additional symptoms include abdominal pain, fever, weakness, loss of appetite, nausea
and vomiting. In extreme cases patients can develop life­threatening fulminant colitis
combined with significant dehydration, abdominal distension, hypoalbuminemia with pe­
ripheral edema, and subsequent circulatory shock. Other complications of Clostridium
difficile infection such as colon perforation, kidney failure, intestinal paralysis, toxic mega­
colon, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, septicemia and death might also oc­
cur. The incubation period is individual­dependent and usually is longer than three days
[18].Genrally, patients who are affected by CDI and manifest mild diarrhea spontaneously
recover after 5­10 days of antibiotic therapy withdrawing. However, it is really common
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
3
==PAGE:10==
that a relapse of the symptoms might occur during the first week after the treatment is
completed. Different treatments are currently available for CDI.
1.1.4
The available treatments for CDI
Antibiotic treatment
In case of an early stage non­severe infection the antibiotic metronidazole is commonly
administated, whereas more severe infections are treated with vancomycin since its phar­
macokinetic properties are superior to metronidazole [19]. The efficacy of fidaxomicin
seems to be comparable to vancomycin in early stages, but there are no data regarding
its effects in severe life­threatening disease. Oral metronizadol seems to be preferred due
to its low cost and lower risk of vancomycin­resistant enterococci (VRE) selection [20][21].
In fact, there is a concern that the use of vancomycin might induce a facilitated coloniza­
tion of VRE by selection pressure. However, both antibiotics are related to vancomycin­
resistant enterococci persistent overgrowth and transmission in stool samples of infected
patients during antibiotic treatment [22]. Moreover, since both drugs are broad spectrum
antibiotics, they might negatively affect the commensal colonic microbiota. In fact, a con­
sequence of the microbiota disruption may be the reoccurence of CDI and predisposition
to intestinal colonization of pathogens, such as VRE and Candida species [19].
Non­antibiotic treatment
For this reason, non­antibiotic treatments are currently investigated. In a publication of
the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases called Update of
the treatment guidance document for Clostridium difficile infection from 2014, the different
non­antibiotic alternatives are described [19]. However most of them are administrated
in combination with antibiotics. Passive immunizations with human intravenous gamma­
globulins (IVIG) have been demonstrated to be successful in a small group of people, pro­
biotics seem to attenuate the symptoms of antibiotic­associated diarrhoea, while Thomas
J. Louie et al. reports that Tolevamer, a novel polymer binder of C. difficile toxins A and
B, resolved diarrhoea in 48 (67%) of 72 patients receiving 3g of Tolevamer per day and in
58 (83%) of 70 patients receiving 6g of Tolevamer per day [19] [23]. Even though these
alternatives merit further medical development, there was not enough evidence to recom­
mend this method as a cure for CDI [19]. In a more recent work by Eric Wombwell et al.
2021 it was denomstrated that a single formulation of the probiotic yeast Saccharomyces
boulardii (20 billion CFUs per day) lowers the risk of developing Hospital­onset­CDI (HO­
CDI) in a large cohort of hospitalized patients receiving antibiotics associated with HO­CDI
[24]. In case of reoccurence of CDI that is not responsive to antibiotic treatment, fecal
transplantation in combination with oral antibiotics is usually preferred [19].
Immunotherapy
Active immunization can be achieved though vaccination and it should provide protection
against CDI relapse and primary disease. Vaccine therapy against Clostridium difficile
seems to be suitable especially for the the 65­and­older age group and the those who
are hospitalized or already under antibiotic treatment. Currently two vaccines against
Clostridium difficile are in clinical trial[25]. VLA84 vaccine has been developed by Valneva,
and contains a recombinant fusion protein composed by the tuncated version of TdcA
and TdcB [26]. CLOVER, produced by Pfizer, is a toxin­based vaccine expressed in a
recombinant non­sporulating and non pathogenic C.difficile. In fact, the C.difficle strain
lacks the genes tdcA and tdcB, and instead secrete recombinant TdcA and TdcB that
lack glucosyltransferase and autoproteolytic processing activities [27]. However, there is
not enough evidence that vaccination against C.difficile toxins are efficacious, despite the
4 Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:11==
positive results achieved until now. In fact, vaccination prevents the symptoms connected
with the two toxins, but does not prevent colonization and transmission of the bacteria [25].
An alternative to vaccination that prevents asymptomatic carriage and spread of spores
is passive immunization with neutralizing antibodies. In fact, the effect of the immune
therapy is limited to the time of administration. For this purpose, intravenous polyclonal
antibodies against Toxin A and Toxin B have been developed, with successful results in
mice and hamster models [28] [29]. Moreover, two human monoclonal antibodies targent­
ing the two toxins TdcA and TdcB have been discovered: Actoxumab and Bezlotoxumab
respectively. It has been demonstrated that intravenous administration of Actoxumab and
Bezlotoxumab can protect against epithelial damage and lower the frequency of CDI re­
currence by 40% [30]. Another option currently investigated is the immunotherapy against
surface cellular components and spores of Clostrudium difficile. Particularly, orally admin­
istrated IgY anti­C.difficile spore antibody in combination with vancomycin resolves CDI
in infected mice and prevented its recurrence [30].
Nanobodies against Toxin A and Toxin B
Since IgG and IgY antibodies are large molecules (150 kDa) ( figure 1.2 A), they present
limited tissue penetration and biodistribution. Additionally, monoclonal antibodies are nar­
row spectrum and not optimized against the intestinal disease, their engineering results
difficult and their production is costly. However, it has been discovered that antibody frag­
ments, called single­domain antibodies or VHH (antigen­binding variable domain of the
H chain of heavy­chain antibodies), still conserve their ability to bind a specific antigen,
despite their small size (figure 1.2 B). In fact, their dimension varies between 12 and 15
kDa. A single­domain antibody is composed by a single monomeric variable antibody do­
main missing either the light chain and the CH1 domain of the heavy chain (called VH) or
the light chain (called VL) [30]. They are obtained through engineering of unconventional
antibodies, called IgG2 and IgG3. Unconventional antibodies are produced in Camelidae
species and they consist only of the heavy chain, as described by Serge Muyldermans
[31]. The structural and functional equivalent of the Fab region of conventional antibod­
Figure 1.2: Visual representation of the structure of a conventional antibody, an un­
conventional and a VHH. A. IgG1 is a conventional antiboby consisting of an Fc region
and a Fab region. Differently from unconventional antibodies (IgG3), that are composed
only by two heavy chains (VHs), conventional antibodies have also two light chains (VLs).
B. Nanobodies (VHH) are antibodies fragments, obtained from IgG3 by proteolytic cleav­
age.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
5
==PAGE:12==
ies is the VHH, also known as nanobodies, of unconventional antibodies. These protein
compounds not only are easy to clone, but also they present a stable behaviour under
stringent conditions, such as the acidic pH of the stomach. Therefore they have potential
to be used as neutralizing components against C.difficile toxins.
The fist attempt to produce neutralizing VHHs against TdcA and TdcB in Escherichia coli
was made by Hussack et al. in 2011 [32]. Four VHHs A4.2, A5.1, A20.1, and A26.8 target­
ing the C­terminal receptor­binding domain of TdcA were found to have strong neutralizing
properties after cytotoxicity assay. Additionally, a combination of the above mentioned
VHHs increased the neutralization activity, meaning that they were binding to different,
non­overlapping epitopes. Only later was demonstrated that this was valid only for A20.1,
a VHH that is able to bind a repetitive and highly conserved sequence on the toxin A. In
fact, seven molecules of A20.1 were could neutralize the toxin by sterically interacting
to an extended array of receptor oligosaccharides. Any neutralizing agent against TdCB
was found [30].
In 2014 Yang et al. generated a potent neutralizing, bispecific, and tetravalent antibody
called ABA or VNA, targeting simultaneously both Toxin A and ToxinB (figure 1.3) [33].
Specifically, AH3 and AA6 were binding to the GTD and the transmembrane domain
(TMD) of toxin A. Two copies of E3 targeting the GTD region of toxin B were also in­
cluded. The VHHs were connected by a glycine/serine linker. The nanobodies showed
stronger neutralizing properties when they were not recognizing overlapping targets. ABA
was cloned initially in the bacterial pET32b expression vector for cytosolic expression in
Escherichia coli. Afterwords it was cloned in the plasmid pSEC91, under the control of
the cytomegalovirus promoter and transfected in HEK293 cells [33].
Figure 1.3: Overview of the different neutralizing tetra­specific constructs against
TcdA and TcdB produced until now.
Different combinations of neutralizing VHHs
against both toxin A and B were tested. AH3 and AA6 were the most potent neutraliz­
ing agents against toxin A, while 5D and E3 against toxin B. Their organization in tandem
seems to increase even more their potency, when compared with the mixture of the dif­
ferent VHHs.
It was demonstrated that ABA was able to bind both toxins at the same time, as shown
by ELISA. Moreover, this construct could neutralize 11 genetically and geographically
diverse clinical isolates of C.difficile. In vivo in mice experiments suggested that ABA
was 300­fold more potent than a mixture of the different VHHs [33]. Later on the ABA
construction was modified in order to obtain a new single heteromultimeric tetravalent
VHH­based neutralizing agent called VNA2­Tcd (figure 1.3). In VNA2­Tcd a copy of E3
was substituted with 5D, targeting a different region on the GTD domain of TdcB.The
VNA2­Tcd was expressed in Rosetta­gami (DE3) E. coli and the production was induced
6 Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:13==
with IPTG. The new construct was tested by cell toxicity assay and in three animal models
of CDI, resulting in reduced morbidity and mortality [30] [34].
In 2020 Chen et al. designed another tetra­specific construct called ABAB, based on
Yang’s work (figure 1.3). The ABAB expression was confirmed by Western blot (figure
1.4 A). The neutralizing activity of ABAB was compared with Actoxumab and Bezlotox­
umab. For this purpose, ABAB was fused with a human IgG1 Fc fragment. The new
ABAB constuct was 1000­fold more potent than a mixture of Merck anti­TdcA and anti­
TdcB to neutralize the toxins [35]. ABAB was then delivered directly to the site of infection
by using the yeast Saccharomyces boulardii (orally administrated), as an alternative to
the parenteral injection. In fact, many are the advantages of employing this organism for
the Gastro­Intestinal (GI) delivery of therapeutic antibodies, such as safety in humans,
the ability to be used in combination with antibiotics and the baseline probiotic efficacy
against CDI.The therapeutic efficacy of ABAB was tested, and ABAB­treated mice exhib­
ited a lower mortality and a faster recovery when compared to the control, while histolog­
ical examination revealed less tissue damage and inflammation. Lower toxin titers were
detected in feces of ABAB­treated mice, although the number of C.difficile fecal counts
were similar between treated­control groups [35]. Additionally, Saccaromyces boulardii
collected from from feces of treated mice was able to stably secrete ABAB in a similar
amount to the stock culture, as shown in figure 1.4 B.
Figure 1.4: ABAB production in Saccharomyces boulardii. A. ABAB construct in Sb­
ABAB culture supernatant detected by Western blot. B. ABAB expression in Sb­ABAB
culture supernatants over multiple passages in vitro for yeast recovered from fecal (f)
samples in (F) versus nonpassaged strains from frozen master stocks. [35]
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
7
==PAGE:14==
1.2
Nanobodies as therapeutics
In the past years, polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies were successful due to their speci­
ficity for particular targets. Although they still have a very important role in diagnosis, their
engineering is pretty challenging and their production is costly and technically demanding
[36]. Moreover, their big size (150 kDa) and relative instability restrict them to injectable
routes of administration. Additionally, immunotherapy usually requires high doses of puri­
fied antibodies over a long period of time due to poor tissue penetration presented by this
large molecules. For these reasons, there is the need to identify smaller but still functional
therapeutics, that can be easily engineered and sustainably produced [37].
Nanobod­
ies or VHHs are the variable antigen­binding domains of the heavy chain­only antibodies
(HcAbs) produced in Camelidae species, such as camels and llamas. VHHs are the
smallest, fully capable of antigen binding fragments derived from naturally occurring im­
munoglobulins, such as IgG2 and IgG3 [37]. Even though VHHs do not originate from
humans, they do not initiate an immune response due to similarities with the human VH
gene family III. They are composed by three hypervariable complementarity­determining
regions (CDRs), involved in the antigen recognition and biding, and four conserved se­
quences called the framework regions. Due to their small size (15 kDa), they are able
to access hidden, cryptic, and concave epitopes, that usually are not reachable by larger
molecules, such as conventional antibodies. Moreover, they can be stored for several
months at 4°C and even longer at ­20°C, therefore resulting in an excellent shelf life. Dif­
ferently from conventional IgG antibodies, nanobodies are stable under harsh conditions,
such as the presence of proteases, low pH and extreme temperatures. Additionally their
stability can be increased by adding the amino acid Cystein at position 54 and 78. This
results in the formation of an additional disulfide bound, that enhances the resistance
to pepsin and chymotrypsin. This characteristic makes these neutralizing proteins to be
suitable for oral administration. Additionally, the small size and configuration of nanobod­
ies allow their multimerization in bigger constructs through genetic fusion. The multimers
can be mono­ or multi­specific, therefore binding to one or multiple targets. In this way,
the therapeutic potency and specificity can be enhanced, due to improved avidity for the
target [37].
8 Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:15==
2
Aim of the research project
Nanobodies can be potentially used as targeted therapeutics against antigens, such as
Clostridium difficile pathogenic toxins TdcA and TdcB. In order to meet the regulatory re­
quirements and for commercial feasibility, nanobody­based therapeutics need to be pro­
duced in high yields and have full reproducibility. For this reason, different cell factories
are tested to investigate which one is the most suitable for the production of nanobody­
based mono­to multimeric constructs. Moreover, protein complexity and post­translational
modifications need to be taken into consideration when choosing the host organism.
This work is based on the construct VNA2­Tcd, obtained by Schmidt et al., 2016 and
shown in figure 1.3 [34]. The aim of the research project is to evaluate the expression
of four VHHs against Clostridium difficile toxins and the secretion ability of different cell
factories. For this purpose, mammalian, yeast and bacterial hosts systems are being
employed for the production of single and multi­domain nanobodies targeting TdcA and
TdcB. In fact, in this work, in addition to the full length VNA2­Tcd, different fragments of
one, two, and three VHHs will be tested. The increasing size of the new constructs allows
to compare the secretion efficiency of Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic cell factories when
the product complexity increases.
The constructs, codon optimized for high yield production and secretion, will be cloned in
the respective backbones. The plasmids will be amplified in competent Escherichia coli
and subsequently transformed in the respective hosts. Bacteria, yeasts and mammalian
cells will be cultured and the VHHs expression will be analyzed. Protein expression is
induced with methanol and IPTG (or α­lactose) in Pichia pastoris and Escherichia coli
respectively, while it is constitutive in mammalian cells (HEK293, CHO and expiCHO),
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii. Products will be purified and
characterized in a set of biophysical test systems. SDS­PAGE and Western blot will be
performed in order to conduct a qualitative analysis of the protein production, while ELISA
to quantify the expression in each host. Together these analytical methods will help to
estimate the production ability of the different cell factories. Figure 2.1 summarizes the
different steps involved in the protein production and characterization. Moreover, it gives
an idea of the workflow carried out during this project.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: The main steps required for the production of single and multi­domain
nanobodies targeting TdcA and TdcB. The green box includes the initial steps of
the workflow, from the cloning of the four different codon optimized constructs in the
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic expression vectors to the plasmids amplification and extrac­
tion. The extracted plasmids are then transformed in Escherichia coli BL21, Saccha­
romyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae and transfected the mammalian cells
HEK293, CHO and expiCHO (orange box). After the cells are cultured, the expression is
characterized by SDS­PAGE, Western Blot and ELISA, as seen in the blue box.
10Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:17==
3
The protein characteristics affect the
choice of the expression system
In this work the sequence of VNA2­Tdc costruct was used (figure 1.3). In order to test
the secretion ability and efficacy of the different cell factories, the VNA2­Tdc was split
in four constructs of increasing length. The first construct contains only the VHH AH3.
The second one contains AH3 and 5D, connected by a G4S linker. The third construct
includes E3, linked to 5D by a G3S linker. The fourth construct consists of the full VNA2­
Tdc (figure 1.3), containing also AA6, as presented by Schmidt et al. 2016 [34]. Figure 3.1
provides an overview of the four inserts cloned and expressed in the different Prokaryotic
and Eukaryotic expression systems.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the four constructs expressed in the different cell factories,
and their increasing length. The VHHs AH3 and AA6, binding to the toxin A are repre­
sented in green. The ones binding to toxin B (5D and E3) are coloured in orange. The
yellow squares and the blue squares indicate the 6x­His tag and the c­Myc tag, respec­
tively.
Before starting a protein expression study, it is necessary to determine the definitive use
of the produced protein. Moreover, it is important to answer several questions regarding
the protein itself. Does the product need to be soluble and active? Is the native protein
conformation crucial for its functionality? [38]. As mentioned above, also other character­
istics of the product need to be taken into consideration when choosing the host organism
for the production. In fact, the size of the protein expressed, its solubility and the protein
structure and folding are important parameters during protein expression, that can affect
the yield of production. For this reason, the solubility of the four different construct was
analysed by using the online tool Protein­sol. The output of this tool is the scaled solu­
bility value (QuerySol), which corresponds to the predicted solubility of the target protein.
The QuerySol value is based on the analysis of 35 features of the protein itself, includ­
ing composition of the standard 20 amino acids and protein length. The tool compares
the obtained value to an average value (PopAvrSol) obtained for the solubility of the Es­
cherichia coli proteins, that corresponds to 0.45. If the obtained value is higher than 0.45,
the protein of interest has a higher solubility than the average soluble E.coli protein [39].
The QuerySol values for the four constructs are 0.469, 0.428, 0.353, 0.426 respectively
for the first. second, third and fourth construct, as shown in figure 3.2. This means that the
proteins expressed in this study present similar solubility to the native proteins expressed
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
11
==PAGE:18==
by Escherichia coli. Only the third construct presents a lower QuerySol value, meaning
that it might be less soluble than the three other constructs, that might result in a lower
yield or functionality.
Figure 3.2: Protein­sol analysis. The solubility of the four constructs (QuerySol) was
analysed and compared to an average value (PopAvrSol) obtained for the solubility of the
Escherichia coli proteins.
Additionally, other parameters such as overall protein charge (z) and hydrophobicity need
to be considered when choosing the expression conditions. In fact, the extracellular pH is
one of the main factors that might affect both cell growth and production. Variation of the
pH during recombinant protein expression can improve production levels, and it generally
affects secretion and proteolytic activity [40]. Another important parameter is the size of
the protein of interest. The evolution of higher organisms have led to a increase in the size
and complexity of proteins. In fact, most of the proteins expressed in bacteria have an av­
erage length of 317 aminoacids (aa), while in humans it is 510 [38]. The size of the proteins
expressed in this study (together with the tags 6xHis and c­Myc) is 142 aa, 284 aa, 421 aa
and 548 aa, respectively for the first, second, third and fourth construct and their molecu­
lar weight is 15.48 KDa, 30.48 KDa, 44.43 KDa and 57.38 KDa, respectively. Additionally,
the glycosylation pattern of the protein of interest need to be considered before choosing
the host of production. In fact, glycosylation is crucial for the correct folding and protein
function [38]. As mentioned in section 1.2, VHHs from Camelidae species present simi­
larities with the human VH gene family III. Therefore, the protein sequence of the fourth
construct (1.3), was screened for N­glycosylation sites by using the tool NetNGlyc­1.0
from DTU Health Tech. The sequence contains the four VHHs AH3, 5D, E3, AA6, the two
tags 6xHis and c­Myc, and the secretion signal for extracellular expression in mammalian
cells. The figure 3.3 reveals that there are not N­glycosylation sites (Asn­X­Ser/Thr) within
the protein sequences expressed in this study. Another factor that can negatively affect
heterologous protein production is the presence of rare codons in the mRNA sequence
of the expressed protein. In fact, proteins derived from mammalian cells often present
codons that are not frequently used by lower organisms, such as bacteria and yeasts.
Particularly, the rare codons for Escherichia coli are those ones for arginine (AGA, AGG),
12Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:19==
isoleucine (AUA), leucine (CUA), and proline (CCC). Another example is GCA, being a
rare codon in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. As a result, the expression of a target protein
might experience translational stalling, where very low production level is obtained, or the
expression completely fails [38]. To overcome this problem, codon optimization tools are
used to substitute rare codons with frequent codons, allowing a successful protein ex­
pression in most cases [41]. In this work the protein sequences corresponding to the four
constructs were codon optimized for the different organisms involved in the study. The
codon optimized sequences were then cloned in host specific expression vectors.
Figure 3.3: NetNGlyc­1.0 Server Output. The analysis reveals that there are not poten­
tial N­glycosylation sites (Asn­X­Ser/Thr) in the proteins expressed in this study, since
any red or blue sequence is highlighted.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
13
==PAGE:20==
4
The choice of suitable expression
vectors
When starting heterologous expression experiments, the first step is to clone the protein­
coding sequence in a suitable expression vector. By expression vector is meant a DNA
carrier (plasmid) specific for the expression system selected, that uses the cell’s protein
synthesis machinery to synthesize the recombinant protein [42]. In order to allow an effi­
cient expression, the plasmid needs to contain a strong promoter, a ribosomal binding site
(RBS), the start and stop codons, a transcription termination sequence and protein expres­
sion regulatory elements [42]. Another crucial element is the selection marker, used for
identification and screening of positive transformants. Moreover, in order to allow quan­
tification and purification of the target protein, plasmids usually contain purification tags.
The tags are usually located at the C­terminal or N­terminal, based on the experimental
requirements. Last but not least, the size of the DNA fragments might affect the choice of
the expression vector. Usually plasmids can contain inserts of 5­25 kb [43].
The plasmids involved in this work are pET­22b(+) for heterologous expression in Es­
cherichia coli, DD224_pTDH3α for the yeast strains Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Sac­
charomyces boulardii, pPICZα for Pichia pastoris and CON009 for mammalian cells (CHO,
expiCHO, HEK293). The four constructs (figure 3.1) were cloned in each expression plas­
mid.
4.0.1
The Prokaryotic expression vector pET­22b(+) for E. coli
pET­22b(+) is a Prokaryotic vector for expression of recombinant proteins in Escherichia
coli. Its size is 5431 bp. Figure 4.1 A shows a visual representation of the backbone
pET­22b(+) and the insert corresponding to the first construct, which contains the AH3
gene, the c­Myc and the 6­His tags for protein purification and quantification. Additionally,
in order to allow homologous recombination, regions homologous to the backbone have
been added at the 3’ and 5’ of the insert. This procedure was applied to all the four con­
structs expressed in E.coli, as shown in figure 4.1 B, C and D. The four inserts have been
ordered as different gene blocks. The DNA sequences of the different VHHs, tags and ho­
mologous regions (HR 3’ and HR 5’) can be found in Appendix A table 10.1. The plasmid
pET­22b(+) carries the Origin of replication in E.coli and the AmpR gene as a selection
marker, that confers resistance to the antibiotic Ampicillin. It also contains elements of the
Lac operon, the operator LacO and the repressor LacI. The genes of interest are placed
under the control of the T7 Lac promoter. Expression is induced by lactose or IPTG and
it is regulated by the T7 RNA polymerase. The proteins are directed to the periplasm by
the pelB signal sequence.
14Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.1: Representation of the bacterial expression vector pET22b(+).
A. The
red arrow indicates the region where the cassette containing the AH3 gene, flanked by
the 6­His, c­Myc tags will be inserted through homologous recombination. Homologous
regions (light blue) were added to facilitate the recombination. B. C. D. The second, third
and fourth constructs flanked by homologous regions and linked by GS4 and GS3 linkers.
4.0.2
Eukaryotic expression vectors DD224_pTDH3α for S. boulardii and
S. cerevisiae
For the nanobody expression in S. boulardii and S. cerevisiae the backbone DD224_pTDH3α
was used. The size of this vector is 5534 bp. The plasmid contains the Origin of replica­
tion for plasmid amplification Escherichia coli and the gene AmpR that confers resistance
to the antibiotic Ampicillin for bacterial selection. Moreover, it contains the main com­
ponents for yeast expression, such as the constitutive ScTDH3 Promoter, the α­factor
secretion signal for extracellular expression, the ScTDH1 Terminator and the selection
marker URA3 (figure 4.2). The addition of this gene on the plasmid reverts the uracil aux­
otrophy, allowing the cells to grow on a media lacking uracil only in case of successful
tranformation. The target protein is directed to the extracellular space by the the α­factor
secretion signal.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: Representation of the yeast expression vector DD224_pTDH3α. A. The
red arrow indicates the insert containing the gene AH3 and the two tags 6­His (yellow box)
and c­Myc (blue box). B.C.D The second, third and fourth constructs linked by GS4 and
GS3 linkers.
4.0.3
Eukaryotic expression vectors pPICZα for Pichia pastoris
For the expression in Pichia pastoris the plasmid pPICZα was employed. Its size is 3435
bp. The plasmid carries elements needed for plasmid amplification and selection in Es­
cherichia coli. However, in this case the selection marker is Zeocin, both in bacteria and
in yeast. Resistance to this antibiotic is provided by the gene BleoR. The transcription
is regulated by the methanol inducible promoter AOX1 and it is terminated by the AOX1
terminator. The target protein is directed to the extracellular space by the the α­factor
secretion signal (figure 4.3). Differently from the other plasmids involved in this study,
pPICZα does not transiently express the recombinant protein, but it actually integrate into
the genome. Pichia pastoris contains a native AOX1 gene, that is the locus where the in­
tegration of the plasmid occurs. In fact, in order to promote integration by gene insertion,
pPICZα needs to be linearized within the 5′ AOX1 region. However, the expression might
be limited by the presence of just one copy of the gene of interest. The literature reports
different studies where, when using the gene conferring antibiotic resistance to Zeocin,
16Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:23==
the selection of the transformants can be done on different concentrations of the antibi­
otic. The higher the concentration, the higher the copy number of integrated in the yeast
genome. As a consequence, an increased gene dosage leads to an increased protein
expression [44]. Studies have demonstrated that clones selected on 100 μg/mL Zeocin
can contain 1­5 copies of the plasmid integrated, selection on 500 μg/mL 4­15 copies,
while selection on 1000 μg/mL can contain up to 17 copies [44].
Figure 4.3: Representation of the yeast expression vector pPICZα. A. The green
arrow indicates the insert containing the gene AH3. In this case , the two tags 6­His
(yellow box) and c­Myc (blue box) were firstly cloned on the backbone by using the primers
His_myc_FW and His_myc_REV (Appendix A table 10.2). B.C.D The second, third and
fourth constructs linked by GS4 and GS3 linkers.
4.0.4
The Eukaryotic expression vector CON009 for mammalian cells
For the nanobody expression in mammalian cells (CHO, expiCHO and HEK293) the back­
bone CON009 was employed. The plasmid has a size of 4960 bp. CON009 contains
elements for amplification and selection in bacteria, such as the Origin of replication
and the Ampicillin resistance gene AmpR. Transctiption is regulated by the CMV (Cy­
tomegalovirus) promorer and enhanced by the CMV Enhancer. The target protein is di­
rected to the extracellular space by the HSA signal peptide. bGH poly(A) signal and the
CAP binding site are added in order to allow the correct processing of the mRNA after tran­
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
17
==PAGE:24==
scription and facilitates the recognition of the transcript by the ribosoms. A representation
of the CON009 plasmid can be seen below in figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Representation of the mammalian expression vector CON009. A. The
green arrow indicates the insert containing the gene AH3 flanked by the tags 6­His (yellow
box) and c­Myc (blue box). Genetic element typical of higher Eukaryots, such as the CAP
binding site and the bGH polyA signal are present. B.C.D The second, third and fourth
constructs linked by GS4 and GS3 linkers.
18Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:25==
5
Different cell factories
Collectively mammalian cells, Escherichia coli and yeasts account for the production of
89% of biopharmaceuticals that have been approved by the FDA. However, the choice
of the cell factory for the production of heterologous proteins for medical use is based on
the characteristics of the protein itself [45].
5.1
Bacteria
Until now the expression and production of nanobodies have been challenging in Prokary­
otic cells, such as Escherichia coli due to the possibility of non­specific interactions and
protein aggregation [46]. Additionally, some VHHs might contain additional disulfide bonds
linking CDR3 to CDR1 or CDR2, that increase the possibility of misfolding, as described
by Wesolowski et al. 2009 [47]. For this reason, periplasmic expression is preferred to
cytoplasmic expression for VHHs production in Escherichia coli. In fact, the periplasm
is an oxidizing environment, and it is rich in chaperones and isomerases that facilitate
the correct folding of disulfide bonds and avoid non functional aggregation of nanobod­
ies. Other prokaryotic cell factories engineered for nanobody production are Lactobacilli.
However, studies demonstrated that only 1–3 μg/mL of VHHs were produced by these
bacteria, that is way lower than the average yield of E. coli [46] [48]. Therefore, there are
still limitations to the high production of VHHs in lower organisms.
5.1.1
Escherichia coli
The simplest and cheapest Prokaryotic host organism is Escherichia coli. This organism is
the most important expression system for heterologous proteins. Many are the benefits of
this bacterium, such as simple structure and genetic engineering, and a variety of genetic
tools have already been developed. However, it presents some limitations, such as lack of
post­translational modifications and protein misfolding. Additionally, due to production of
endotoxins, Escherichia coli is non beneficial for human beings. In fact, the rapid bacterial
growth and expression can often lead to unfolded or misfolded proteins. This mostly
affects heterologous proteins, that have a big size and require molecular chaperones to be
correctly folded [38]. As mentioned above, the complexity and the size of the heterologous
proteins are important factors during expression. Comparative studies confirmed that
the probability of soluble expression in Escherichia coli diminishes with the increasing
molecular weight. This occurs especially for proteins that have a molecular weight >60
KDa [49]. Another study by Dyson et al. 2004 demonstrated that small proteins (22.8
KDa) were expressed solubly alone in Escherichia coli, while proteins having a molecular
weight of 40.4 KDa were solubly expressed only when solubility­enhancing tags were
attached [50]. Therefore, Escherichia coli seems to be advantageous as an expression
system for small individual protein domains rather than full lenght proteins [38].
For VHHs expression, Escherichia coli is preferably employed, since in cases post­ trans­
lational are not needed due to the absence of the Fc domain. Until now, the periplasmic
nanobody expression is commonly performed. Firstly they are synthesized in the cyto­
plasm and subsequently secreted in the periplasm through the Sec pathway. VHHs re­
quire a N­terminal leader sequence for the secretion in the periplasmic environment. Two
others secretion pathways are also involved: the signal recognition particle (SRP) path­
way and twin­arginine translocation (Tat) pathway. The Tat system translocates folded
proteins through the cytoplasmic membrane, while Sec and SRP transport unfolded pep­
tides. In the periplasm, the chaperone Dsb helps the disulfide bond formation, while the
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
19
==PAGE:26==
chaperones SurA and FkpA enable the correct protein folding. After expression, nanobod­
ies are extracted by osmotic shock. This method enables the permeability of the outer
membrane, with consequent release of the VHHs without lysing the cells. VHHs have
been successfully produced in the periplasm, with yields around 10 mg/L. However, the
VHH production is still limited due to insufficient amount of chaperons in the periplasm.
However, it was demonstrated that co­expressing VHHs with the four chaperons DsbA,
DsbC, FkpA, and SurA increases the yield by 2­10 times [51].
5.2
Fungi: Yeasts
On the other hand, in eukaryotic cells VHHs are mostly affected by protease degradation
and inefficient secretion that lower the production yield. Nanobodies were produced in
yeasts, such as the well known Sacchatomyces cerevisiae and Pichia pastoris. These uni­
cellular fungi allow the production of correctly folded and functional heterologous proteins.
VHHs are usually not affected by post translational modifications, such as N­glycosylation.
In fact, due to the absence of the Fc region, they do not contain Asn­X­Ser/Thr sites.
However, about 10% of the VHHs still contain potential N­glycosylation sites, leading to
peptides that are larger than 12–15 kDa when expressed in yeast [52]. This needs fur­
ther reasearch, since N­glycosylation can either enhance the toxin­neutralizing capacity
of nanobodies, but at the same time can also decrease their antigen­binding capacity [53]
[54]. Furthermore, O­glycosylation can also occur in yeast, even if VHHs are not naturally
glycosylated in the native hosts [46].
Yeasts are well known cell factories for industrial production of therapeutic proteins, es­
pecially due to the similarity between their secretion pathways and the ones of higher Eu­
karyotic organisms [55]. Additionally, high homologous recombination (HR) is particularly
efficient in yeast, reason why gene recombination and gene knock­in are easy to perform
and they are attractive features of yeast [56]. These unicellular Eukaryotic microorgan­
isms are also able to consistently grow on cheap and simple media in large­scale bioreac­
tors, and have the ability to include Eukaryotic post­translational modifications, although
sometimes a non­optimal glycosylation pattern might occur. Over all, these characteris­
tics make yeasts practical production hosts [55].
5.2.1
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a GRAS organism (Generally Recognized As Safe), it is
a facultative anaerobe, and it has 16 chromosomes, when haploid. It is employed as a
model organism, since its cell structure and function is similar to the one of higher eukary­
otes [56]. In fact, this yeast has complete intracellular organelles, therefore it is able to
process the signal peptide by proteolytic cut and allow the formation of disulfide bonds
[56]. S.cerevisiae is a Crabtree­positive organism. In presence of high concentration of
glucose in aerobic conditions, respiration is repressed. This results in a limitation for het­
erologous production, since the high yield of ethanol produced might decrease the yield of
the target molecule. In fact, in these conditions, the yeast cells are engaged in producing
ethanol, rather that producing biomass [57]. Until now, 71 different VHHs have been pro­
duced in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, with yields that go from <1 to >100 mg/L. However,
almost half of the VHHs involved in the study had a secretion level <10 mg/l [58].
5.2.2
Saccharomyces boulardii
Saccharomyces boulardii is a probiotic yeast, that was employed as live vector for the de­
livery of antitoxin or therapeutic proteins [35]. In fact, it is FDA approved and designated
as safe. Differently from S. cerevisiae, Saccharomyces boulardii grows at 37°C and it
is more resistant to acidic conditions, making this yest strain particularly suitable for colo­
nization and persistence in the intestinal tract. Additionally, genetic tools of S. cerevisiae
20Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:27==
can be used in S. boulardii, however transformation seems to be 100 times less efficient
in S. boulardii [35]. Another advantage of this yeast strain is that, unlike probiotic bacteria,
it can be orally administrated together with antibiotics [35].
5.2.3
Pichia pastoris
Pichia pastoris, now reclassified as Komagataella pastoris, is a well known cell factory
for both intracellular and extracellular expression of recombinant proteins [59]. Moreover,
it is a FDA approved and recognized as safe (GRAS) organism, reason why it was ap­
proved as an expression system for the production of the kallikrein inhibitor Kalbitor® and
the protein phospholipase C, used in animal feed [59]. Pichia pastoris is a methylotrophic
organism and it is able to grow to very hight cell density (130 g/L). Heterologous protein
expression works under the strong and tightly regulated AOX1 promoter, leading to high
yields [60]. In fact, one of the advantages of the AOX1 promoter is that the transcription
is repressed by most carbon sources, while it is induced by simply adding methanol to the
growth medium. However, methanol is highly inflammable and therefore large­scale stor­
age of this alcohol is not recommended. Additionally, the usage of two carbon sources,
such as glucose or glycerol for the growth, and methanol for induction makes the process
more difficult [60]. Often, the GAP promoter is preferred to AOX1, since it is methanol­
free, it allows constitutive protein expression and any switch of carbon source is required.
However, the some proteins might be toxic for the yeast cells during production, leading
them to death [60]. Regarding VHHs production, different studies confirmed the success­
ful application of Pichia pastoris for nanobodies expression. In fact, yields of 10­15 mg/L
have been obtained for two anti­MUC1 VHHs, after a series of optimization steps. An­
other study by Ezzine et al. demonstrated that P. pastoris can produce up to 17 mg/L
of anti­AahI VHH. In this case, the production is six time greater, when compared with
the periplasmic expression in Escherichia coli. [54]. In another study, the expression of
anti­growth factor receptor (EGFR) nanobodies 7D12 and 7D12­9G8 led to a yield of 9.6
and 40.8 mg/L, respectively. The production was tested also in Escherichia coli, where
yields of 1.5 mg/L and 3 mg/L were obtained after periplasmic expression [61]. Together
this results suggest that Pichia pastoris has a better expression capacity that the bacteria
Escherichia coli.
5.3
Mammalian cells
Mammalian cells are employed as cell factories when the function of the protein produced
depends on post­translational modifications, such as glycosylation, or when it depends on
its three­dimensional structure. [62]. In fact, one of the biggest limitations of bacteria and
lower Eukaryots is the protein folding, especially of large polypeptides [63]. This obstacle
is overcome by the heterologous protein expression in mammalian cells. To date, mam­
malian cells represent one of the best expression systems for VHHs fused to non­camelid
Fc regions. VHHs can be grafted on to the Fc domain of IgG or IgA antibodies, resulting
in a bivalent monomeric VHH­Fc fusion. In this way, the nanobodies present increased
half­life and effector functions. Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably transformed
can produce up to 100 mg/L of VHH+Fc in shake flasks, as demonstrated by Agrawal et
al. However, generation of VHHs­only proteins in mammalian cells have not been fully
evaluated yet [64]. Moreover, since their production has been successful in lower or­
ganisms, the VHHs expression in demanding and expensive expression systems, such
as CHO and HEK293, needs to be justified. In fact, mammalian cells would be the first
choice when VHHs have therapeutic purpose, but their cost, long time requirements, and
complex handling push to look towards more sustainable alternatives [64].
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
21
==PAGE:28==
5.3.1
HEK293
HEK293 (Human Embryonic Kidney 293) cells are well known production platforms, not
only for their ability to produce proteins most similar to the ones naturally synthesized in
humans, but also due to their human­like post­translational modifications [65]. Addition­
ally HEK293 cells are characterized by high transient and stable transfection efficiency,
leading to high yields of the desired recombinant protein. HEK293 are also able to grow in
in shake flask in serum­free medium at high density, and they have a flexible metabolism
and efficient genetic manipulation. Drotrecogin alfa (Xigris®), the first therapeutic protein
produced in human cell lines, was produced in HEK293 and it was approved firstly by
the FDA and then by the EMA (European Medicines Agency). Later on, four more thera­
peutic compouds derived from HEK293 such as efmoroctocog alfa (Eloctate®), human­cl
rhFVIII (Nuwiq®), eftrnonacog alfa (Alprolix®), and dulaglutide (Trulicity®) were approved
[66]. However, HEK293 are not only employed as cell factories for therapeutic proteins,
but they find application also for adenovirus vaccine manufacturing for gene therapy and
cancer treatment [65].
5.3.2
CHO
Chinese Hamster Ovary are safe and robust expression systems which allow heterolo­
gous production via transient and stable expression [62]. Moreover, these cell types can
be easily adapted to serum­free suspension culture and high cell density. However, CHO
cells present also some negative traits such as genome instability, gene silencing due
to epigenetic regulation. These disadvantages can affect productivity and often optimiza­
tion steps are required. In most of the cases, epigentic regulators and inducible promoters
are used to prolong expression. Another approach is cell engineering in order to improve
stress resistance and cell viability, or to adjust the glycosylation profile [62].
5.3.3
expiCHO
The Gibco ExpiCHO Expression System are cells derived from ExpiCHO­S(TM) cells that
have been optimized and adapted to high cell density and suspension growth in Expi­
CHO(TM) Expression Medium. This system is designed to provide superior protein yields
compared to others mammalian transient expression systems. In fact, due to a high­
efficiency transfection reagent, the Gibco OptiPRO Serum­Free Medium, the protein yield
is three times higher than the Gibco Expi293 Expression System and 160 times higher
than the Gibco FreeStyle CHO Expression System. The literature reports expression
of the Fc­fused nanobodies R1a­B6 against against influenza, as mentioned by Joanne
Marie M. Del Rosario et al [67].
22Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:29==
H
Figure 5.1: Overview of the main advantages, disadvantages of the different cell
factories. The table gathers the advantages and disadvantages of the Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic expression systems. Moreover, it reports the yield of nanobody production in
each organism found in the literature.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
23
==PAGE:30==
24Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:31==
6
Material and methods
6.1
Cloning
The sequences were codon optimized for expression in Escherichia coli, Pichia pastoris,
Saccharomyces boulardii, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, CHO and HEK293 with GeneArt™
GeneOptimizer™software by Thermo Fisher Scientific. The DNA sequences of the four
constructs codon optimized for the different organisms, tags and homologous regions
can be found in Appendix A table 10.1. The DNA fragments corresponding to the four
constructs and the respective vectors were amplified via PCR, when needed. The primers
used for the amplification of the Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic vectors and the respective
inserts are listed in Appendix A table 10.2. The PCR protocol for Q5® High­Fidelity 2X
Master Mix was performed. Table 6.1 shows the volumes used in the PCR reaction.
50 µl Reaction
Final Concentration
Q5 High­Fidelity 2X Master Mix
25 µl
1X
10 µM Forward Primer
2.5 µl
0.5 µM
10 µM Reverse Primer
2.5 µl
0.5 µM
Template DNA
1 µl
<1,000 ng
Nuclease­Free Water
to 50 µl
Table 6.1: Volumes used to prepare the PCR reactions.
The PCR mix contains the
forward and reverse primers, the DNA template, the Q5 polymerase and nuclease­free
water.
The table 6.2 displays the PCR program used for the amplification of the different DNA
sequences, including both vectors and inserts. The annealing temperature (X) for each
couple of primers was calculated via the NEB Tm calculator from BioLabs.
PCR STEPS
TEMPERATURE
TIME
NUMBER OF CYCLES
1. INITIAL DENATURATION
98°C
30 sec
1
2.A DENATURATION
98°C
10 sec
2.B ANNEALING
X°C
20 sec
35
2.C EXTENTION
72°C
Y
3. FINAL EXTENTION
72°C
2 min
1
4. STORAGE
12°C
∞
1
Table 6.2: PCR program used for the amplification of both vectors and inserts.
The variable X refers to the different annealing temperatures, specific for each couple
of primers. The variable Y represents instead the extension time needed, based on the
lenght of the amplified sequence.
The extension time (Y) was obtained based of the length of the amplified region, estimating
that 30 seconds are required for the amplification of 1000 bp. Overhangs for homology
recombination between vectors and inserts were introduced by generating primers with
the Wizard Assembly tool on Benchling.
Escherichia coli The primers Hip059 and Hip060 were used to amplify the expression
vector pET­22b(+). In this case, the primers were manually designed and their sequence
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
25
==PAGE:32==
can be found in Appendix A Table 10.2. The four inserts have been ordered as different
gene blocks, already containing the homologous regions with the backbone.
Yeasts: S. boulardii, S. cerevisiae, P. pastoris The sequences for S. boulardii and S.
cerevisiae were ordered as one geneblock, since the two yeast present similar codon
usage. However, for Pichia pastoris a different codon optimization was needed in order
to maximise protein expression. Therefore, the genes were ordered on a separate gene
block. The primers used for the amplification of the inserts and backbones of the three
yeast strains are listed in Appendix A table 10.2.
Mammalian cells: CHO and HEK293 The sequences for CHO, expiCHO and HEK293
were ordered as two different gene block. In fact, CHO cells and HEK293 require different
codon optimization in order to maximise the protein expression. The primers required for
the amplification of the inserts and the backbone are listed in table in in Appendix A table
10.2.
After PCR amplification correct size of the vectors and the fragments were verified via Gel
Electrophoresis. The amplified DNA fragments of the expected size were subsequently
gel extracted by using the Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit. The plasmids were assem­
bled by using NEBuilder® HiFi DNA Assembly Kit. Table 6.3 shows the reagents needed
for the HiFi reaction and their ratio.
2­3 Fragments Assembly
Recommended DNA Molar Ratio
1:2 – 1:5 ratio vector:insert
Total amount of fragments
0.03­0.2 pmols
X µl
NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix
10 µl
Deionized water
10­X
Total volume
20 µl
Table 6.3: HiFi reaction mix. The table shows the volumes needed for the HiFi reaction
in order to assemble the Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic plasmids. It also indicates the ratio
vector:insert used to obtain the assembled plasmids.
In this work the total amount of DNA was 0.15 pmol, with a ratio vector:insert 0.05 pmol:0.1
pmol (1:2). However, when needed the ratio was changed up to 1:5 insert:vector in order
to optimize the assembly reaction. The variable X indicates in this case the volume in µl
required for each fragment involved in the reaction, and it was calculated by the online
tool NEBioCalculator, based on the DNA concentration and fragment length. The length
of each vector and insert is reported in table 10.2.
6.2
Bacterial transformation
6.2.1
Transformation in DH5α (C2987)
After HiFi assembly, the plasmids were transformed in in DH5α (C2987) competent cells.
The competent cells were thawed on ice for 20 minutes. 2 µl of the HiFi product was
added to the DH5α and the cells were incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Subsequently,
the cells undergone to heat shock for 30 seconds at 42°C and they were incubated again
on ice for 5 minutes. 200 µl of SOC medium were added to the cells and the mixture
was incubated at 37°C, 220 rpm for 30 minutes. This incubation step allows the cells to
express their antibiotic resistance. The transformed cells were then plated on LB medium
containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin and placed overnight at 37°C.
26Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:33==
The transformation in DH5α competent cells was performed after HiFi assembly of the
plasmids for all the organisms involved in this work. This step was required in order to
increase the DNA stability and to amplify the plasmids. The amplified plasmids were then
extracted (Miniprep) and sequenced by Sanger Sequencing. The sequencing primers
needed to verify the correct insertion of the constructs in the Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic
vectors can be found in Appendix A table 10.3.
6.2.2
Mini prep
After transformation in DH5α competent cells, the plasmids were extraced by using the
Zyppy™Plasmid Miniprep Kit.
One colony per construct of DH5α was picked and inoculated in 10 ml of LB medium con­
taining 100 μg/mL ampicillin and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C 220 rpm. The culture was
centrifuged at 10000g for 5 minutes and the pellet resuspended in 600 μl of LB and trans­
ferred to a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. 100 μl of Lysis Buffer were added and the tube
was inverted 4­6 times to mix the reagents. After the colour of the mixture changed from
opaque blue to clear blue, meaning that the cell lysis was complete, 350 μl of Neutraliza­
tion Buffer was added. In order to ensure a complete neutralization, the tube was inverted
2­3 times, until a precipitate was formed. The tube was then centrifuged at 13000g for
4 minutes. The supernatant was then transferred to a Zymo­Spin™IIN column placed
in a Collection Tube. The column was centrifuged again for 15 seconds at 13000g. The
flow­through was discarded and 200 μl of Endo­Wash Buffer were added to the column.
The tube was centrifuged for 30 seconds. 400 µl of Zyppy™Wash Buffer were added to
the column followed by centrifugation for 1 minute. The column was finally transferred in
a new microcentrifuge tube and the plasmids eluted in 30­50 μl of DNAse free water. A
last centrifugation step was performed for 30 seconds in order to elute the DNA from the
column.
The extracted plasmids were sent for sequencing in order to verify the correct assembly of
the constructs in the respective backbones. The correct plasmids were then transformed
or transfected in the respective expression hosts.
6.2.3
Transformation in BL21(DE3)
For the expression of the four nanobodies in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells were em­
ployed. These cells are suited for high­level expression of recombinant proteins. The pro­
tein expression is induced by IPTG, a structural analogue of allolactose. When present,
similarly to lactose, it binds to the lac repressor on the lac Operon and it induces a con­
formational change that reduced the repressor affinity for the DNA. Once the repressor is
removed, the T7 RNA polymerase is able to bind the promoter and start the expression
of the downstream genes. IPTG can be used as a substrate by the cells, but it cannot be
metabolized. Therefore, it is particularly suitable to induce bacterial expression systems
and it has been extensively used in Escherichia coli.
After Sanger sequencing, the correct plasmids containing the four nanobodies optimized
Escheriachia coli for were transformed in BL21(DE3) following the protocol above men­
tioned.
6.3
Yeast transformation
6.3.1
Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
One colony of wt Saccharomyces boulardii 277 and wt Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4741
were inoculated overnight in 2 ml of YPD at 37°C and 30°C respectively. The Optical Den­
sity (OD) of the cultures was checked at a wave length of 600 nm. Inoculate 10 ml of YPD
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
27
==PAGE:34==
after calculating the volume required to have an initial OD of 0.25. 10 ml of culture pro­
vides enough cells for 2 transformation. Incubate at the optimal growth temperature until
the OD reaches 0.8­1. The cells were then centrifuged at 5000g for 5 minutes (accelera­
tion 9, deceleration 9). The supernatant was discarded and the cells were washed in 25
ml of MQ water. The cells were centrifuged again at 5000g for 5 minutes. Meanwhile, the
Salmon Sperm DNA was heated at 42°C. After the wash, the supernatant was discarded,
and the pellet resuspended in 1 ml of 100 mM Lithium Acetate. The cells were then trans­
ferred to a 1.5 ml mictrocentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 10000g for 30 seconds. The
supernatant was discarded and the pellet resuspended again in 100 μl of 100 mM Lithium
Acetate. The culture was then split in two (50 μl) and each tube centrifuged at 10000g
for 30 seconds. Then 260 μl of 50% PEG, 36 μl of 1M Lithium Acetate, 50 μl of Salmon
Sperm DNA and the needed amount of extracted plasmid (500­1000 ng) were added. The
mixture was vortexed. The cells undergone to heat shock at 42°C for 40 minutes. After
the heat shock, the mixture was spun down for 1 minute at 8000g, the supernatant dis­
carded and the pellet resuspended in 1 ml of YPD medium. The cells were then incubated
at 37°C (S.boulardii) or 30°C 250 rpm shaking (S.cerevisiae) for 40 minutes. The cells
were spun down again at 8000g for 1 minute, the supernatant discarded, and the cells
resuspended in 50 μl of MQ water. Te cells were plated on selective medium (CSM­ura)
and grown at optimal growth temperature for 3­4 days.
6.3.2
Pichia pastoris
Differently from S.boulardii and S.cerevisiae, Pichia pastoris was transformed by electro­
poration. 50 μl of Pichia pastoris X­33 competent cells was used for each transformation.
The Pichia pastoris strain was kindly provided by Driss Elhanafi (North Carolina State
Uiniversity). The extracted plasmids were firstly linearized by the enzyme SacI. 4 μl of lin­
earized DNA were then added to the competent cells. After mixing gently by pipetting up
and down, the cells were transferred to the electroporation cuvette. The electroporation
conditions were set as follows: Voltage 2000, Capacitance (μF) 25, Resistance (Ω) 200,
Cuvette (mm) 2. The transformed cells were then resuspended in 1 ml of 1M Sorbitol,
incubated at 30°C for 2 hours. Subsequently 250 μl of the culture were plated on YPD
plates containing 200 mg/ml Zeocin. The plates were incubated at 30°C for 3 days.
6.4
Mammalian cells transfection
6.4.1
Maxi prep
The mini prep provides enough DNA for the transformation of lower organisms, such as
bacteria and yeasts. However, for transfection of mammalian cells a bigger amount of
DNA is needed. In fact, in this case a Midi prep extraction was performed. The plasmid
extraction was performed according to the protocol NucleoBond® Xtra plasmid purifica­
tion.
6.4.2
HEK293
The cells were seeded at the Viable Cell Density (VCD) of 0.5x106 cells/ml in 50 ml the
day before the transfection. After growing for 24h at 37°C, 130 rpm, the cell density was
measured again on the day of transfection. An optimal VCD for a successful transient
transfection is 1x106 cells/ml. In a total volume of 50 ml, around 50x106 cells should be
present. The DNA required for the transformation of 1x106 cells is 1 μg. The plasmids
containing the four constructs, after being extracted and purified by Midi prep, were then
diluted to a concentration of 1 μg/μl (1000 ng/μl). Therefore, 50 μl of plasmid DNA con­
taining each construct is required for the transformation of 50x106 HEK293 cells. The
ratio DNA:PEIpro® used is 1:1 and the complaxation volume (DNA+PEIpro®) is the 10%
of the total culture volume, which corresponds in this case to 5 ml. Therefore, 50 μl
28Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:35==
of each plasmid containing the four different constructs AH3, AH3­5D, AH3­5D­E3 and
AH3­5D­E3­AA6 were diluted in 2.5 ml of serum free medium (FreeStyle™293 Expres­
sion Medium). For each construct, 50 μl of PEIpro® were diluted in 2.5 ml of serum free
medium. The diluted PEIpro® was then added to the diluted DNA all at once. The solution
was briefly mixed and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. The complaxation
mix was then added to the cells and incubated at 37°C, 130 rpm, CO2 8% for 5 days.
6.4.3
CHO and expiCHO
For CHO and expiCHO cells the transfection protocol corresponds to the one described
above. However, there are some differences such as the initial cell density. In fact, the
cells were seeded the day before transfection at 1x106 cells/ml, in order to obtain a VCD
of 2x106 cells/ml on the day of transfection. Moreover, instead of serum free medium
(CHO™Expression Medium, ExpiCHO™Expression Medium) OptiPRO™was used for
the DNA and PEIpro® dilution. Another difference is the ration DNA:PEIpro® used. In the
case of CHO cells a ratio 1:2 DNA:PEIpro® was necessary to increase the transfection
efficiency.
6.5
Nanobodies expression in different cell factories
After transformation of the four constructs in Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces boulardii,
Saccharomyces cerecisiae and Pichia pastoris and after the tranfection of the mammalian
cells HEK293, CHO and expiCHO, the cells were grown at their optimal conditions for the
protein expression. The growth conditions achieved in these experiments were the best
conditions that could be simulated for a small scale production of proteins in a laboratory
environment, given the limited time and the available materials.
6.5.1
Nanobodies expression in bacteria
Preliminary experiments were performed in order to establish the optimal growth and ex­
pression conditions for Escherichia coli. Three conditions were tested. In the first one
the cells were grown on LB and induced with IPTG when the OD600 of the culture was
0.8, while in the second case the OD600 was 2 at the moment of induction. The third
condition involved the testing of a different growth medium called Autoinduction medium.
For the three different conditions only the expression of the first construct containing AH3
was tested.
Expression induced by IPTG A starter culture of Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) trans­
formed with pET22b(+)AH3 was inoculated in 20 ml of LB medium containing 100 μg/mL
ampicillin. The cells were grown for 16 hours at 37°C 220 rpm shaking. The OD of the
culture was checked. The OD600 of the starter culture should be >2. The cells were then
spun down at 6000g for 10 minutes and the pellet resuspended in LB+ampicillin. The
appropriate volume of the starter culture was then transferred into a shaking flask con­
taining 400 ml medium in order to have a initial OD600 of 0.05. The cells were incubated
at 37°C, 220 rpm shaking. The OD600 of the culture was regularly monitored, until the
OD600 reached 0.8. At this point, the culture was split in two flasks, each containing 200
ml of culture. One flask was induced with 200 μl IPTG and subsequently split into four
smaller flasks containing 50 ml of culture each. The four flasks were placed at different
temperatures, such as 20°C, 25°C, 30°C and 37°C. The other flask containing 200 ml of
culture was placed back in the incubator at 37°C, 220 rpm until the OD600 reached 2. The
expression was induced with 200 μl IPTG and the culture split again in four and placed
at different temperatures, as previously explained. The cells were incubated for 24 hours,
220 rpm shaking.
Autoinduction with α­lactose A starter culture of Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) tranformed
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
29
==PAGE:36==
with pET22b(+)AH3 was inoculated in 20 ml of LB medium containing 100 μg/mL ampi­
cillin and 2% Glucose. The cells were grown for 16 hours at 37°C 220 rpm shaking.
The culture was then spun down at 6000g for 10 minutes and the pellet resuspended in
LB+ampicillin+2%Glucose. 2 μl of the starter culture were then inoculated in four flasks
containing 50 ml of Autoinduction media each. Also in this case, the four flasks were incu­
bated at different temperatures, such as 20°C, 25°C, 30°C and 37°C, at 220 prm shaking
for 24 hours. 1 ml of the cultures were then collected and centrifuged at 5.000g for 3
min, the supernatant discarded, and the pellet resuspended in 200 μl of PBS. The cells
were centrifuged again at 10.000g for 5 min and the supernatant (periplasma fraction)
transferred into a new tube.
Autoinduction media The Autoinduction media contains 1L of ZY media, 2 ml of 1M
MgSO4, 20 ml of 50x5052, 20 ml of 50xM, 200 μl of 1000x Metal Mix and 1 ml of Ampi­
cillin 100 μg/mL. The composition of each solution needed for the media preparation is
described in Appendix B section 11.
6.5.2
Nanobodies expression in yeasts
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii Pre­cultures of S.cerevisiae
and S.boulardii were inoculated in 1 ml of CSM­ura medium. The cells were incubated
for 24 hours at 30°C and 37°C respectively, 220 rpm shaking. The next day, the OD600
of the pre­culture was measured in order to verify that the cells were growing well. The
culture was then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes and the cells were washed with 5
ml of sterile DI water. The cells were then spun down again 5000 rpm for 10 minutes and
resuspended in 0.5 ml of DI water. The OD600 was measured again. A proper dilution
was then calculated in order to have an OD600 of 5 in a 0.5 ml suspension. 30 μl of the
cell suspension was added to 1470 μl of CSM­ura medium, containing a double amount
of CSM­ura (1.54g), in order to have an initial OD600 of 0.1. The cells were incubated at
their optimal temperature for 72 hours, 220 rpm shaking. The cells were then harvested
by centrifuging 1 ml of culture at 10.000g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was transferred
into a new 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube.
CSM­ura medium The CSM­ura medium contains 0.77g (or 1.54g) of CSM­ura, 20g of
Glucose, 15g of Agar, 900 ml of DI water. After autoclave the media was cooled down
at room temperature. 100 ml of DI water containing 6.71g of YNB+Nitrogen were then
added, after being filter sterilized.
Pichia pastoris A pre­culture of Pichia pastoris was inoculated in 1 ml of BMGY (Buffered
Glycerol­complex medium). The cells were incubated for 24 hours at 30°C, 350 rpm
shaking. The next day, the OD600 of the pre­culture was measured in order to verify that
the cells were growing well. The culture was then centrifuged at 5.000 rpm for 10 minutes
and the cells were washed with 5 ml of sterile PBS. The OD600 was measured again. A
proper dilution was then calculated in order to have an OD600 of 5 in a 0.5 ml suspension.
30 μl of the cell suspension was added to 1470 μl of BMMY (Buffered Methanol­complex
medium) in order to have an initial OD600 of 0.1. The cells were incubated at 30°C for 72
hours, 350 rpm shaking. The expression of the nanobodies was induced every 24 hours
by adding 150 μl of 5% Methanol. The cells were then harvested by centrifuging 1 ml
of culture at 10.000g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was transferred into a new 1.5 ml
microcentrifuge tube.
BMGY and BMMY media For the preparation of the two media 10g of Yeast Extract, 10g
of Tryptone, 20g of Peptone were dissolved in 700 ml of DI water for the BMGY medium
and in 795 ml of DI water for the BMMY medium. The two bottles were autoclaved for 20
minutes on liquid cycle and cooled down at room temperature. Once they were cold, 100
30Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:37==
ml of 1M Potassium Phosphate Buffer, 100 ml of 10x YNB, 2ml of 500x Biotin and 100
ml of 10x Glycerol (BMGY) or 50 ml 100% Methanol (BMMY). The final concentration of
Glycerol and Methanol in 1L is 1% and 0.5% respectively.
6.5.3
Nanobodies expression in mammalian cells
Mammalian cells such as FreeStyle™293­F Cells, CHO­S and expiCHO require complex
and chemically defined media for the expression of recombinant proteins. Particularly, the
FreeStyle™293 Expression Medium and the CD CHO Medium Gibco™are animal­origin
free, protein­free and serum­free media, adapted to be easily used with the FreeStyle™
293 and CHO­S Expression systems. In fact, they present the ability to support the cell
growth in suspension and facilitate transient transfection of this cell types. Similarly, Expi­
CHO™Stable Production Medium used for the growth and expression in expiCHO cells,
is particularly suited for cell line development and protein production. This medium does
not need further optimization, since it has been designed for stable production and high
titers. All the media were provided by Thermo Fisher ­ Gibco™. After transient trans­
fection, the mammalian cells are incubated for 5­6 days at 37°C, 130 rpm, CO2 8%, in
order to allow the protein expression. The cells were then harvested by centrifuging 1 ml
of culture at 1.000g for 15 minutes. The supernatant was transferred into a new 1.5 ml
microcentrifuge tube.
6.6
Characterization of the nanobodies production
6.6.1
Qualitative studies­SDS page and Western Blot
SDS page For the preparation of the sample buffer, 900 μl of Laemmi w/BME were mixed
with 100 μl of β­Mercaptoethanol or DTT. The volume of sample required to have a ratio
3:1 sample:buffer was calculated based on the maximum wells volume of the gel (20 μl
in the case of yeast experiments, 50 μl in the case of E.coli and mammalian cells). The
sample buffer and the protein samples were then mixed in PCR tubes. The tubes were
heated at 95°C for 5 minutes in a thermocycler. Meanwhile, the 1x Tris/Glycine/SDS
(TGS) buffer was prepared by adding 100 ml of 10x TGS solution to 900 ml of DI water.
After loading the samples, the gels were run at 200 V for 30 minutes. The gels were then
removed from the gel­holding base, placed in a plastic boxes and rinsed with water. 80­
100 μl of 40%Methanol/10%Acetic Acid solution were added to the gels. The boxes were
then placed for 30 minutes on the horizontal mixer. After removing the Methanol/Acetic
Acid solution, 50 ml of Biosafe Commassie Blue were added. The gels were incubated
for 1 hour on the horizontal mixer. 100 ml of DI water were then added to the box, after
removing the staining colour, to induce destaining of the gels and to enable the bands
visualization. The gels were left overnight in DI water.
6.6.2
Protein precipitation with Acetone
In some cases it was needed to concentrate the protein samples before running them on
the SDS­PAGE gel. Acetone precipitation of proteins was performed as follows. Cool
down the required volume of Acetone on ice (4°C). Add four times the sample volume of
ice­cold acetone to the tube and mix with the pipette. Incubate overnight at ­20°C. The
following day, spin down the samples at 14000xg for 10 minutes, remove the supernatant
and let the protein pellet dry at room temperature for 60 minutes. Resuspend the pellet
in the preferred volume of PBS.
6.6.3
Quantitative studies­ELISA assay
Seven dilutions of the standard protein were prepared. In the yeast experiments the Multi
Tag Protein (1 mg/μl) was used as a standard. 2 μl of the standard protein were added
to 1998 μl of dilution buffer (1x TBS containing 0.05% Tween­20 detergent). The serial
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
31
==PAGE:38==
dilutions were prepared by taking 300 μl of the first tube and transfer them to a second tube
containing 300 μl of fresh dilution buffer, and so on. The same procedure was followed in
the bacterial and mammalian cells experiments. However, in this case the protein called
1Cys5’ was used as a standard. This protein, has the same amino acid sequence of the
first construct AH3, but it presents an extra Cysteine at the 5’. It has a concentration of
5.174 μg/μl. 10 μl of the protein was added to 990 μl of PBS to make the serial dilutions of
the standard. At the same time four different dilutions were of the samples were prepared
(1:1, 1:10, 1:100, 1:1000) by using TBS or PBS. After preparing the dilutions, 100 μl of
the standards and the sample solutions were added to the ELISA plate. Pierce™Nickel
Coated Plates, Clear, 8­Well Strip from Thermo Scientific™were used for the ELISA
assay. The plate was then incubated for 1 hour with shaking at room temperature. The
plate was covered with aluminium foil to prevent any environmental contamination. The
wells were then washed three times with 200 μl of 1x TBS containing 0.05% Tween­20
detergent or PBS. The HRP antibody binding to the myc tag was diluted in 10.000 ml of 1x
TBS containing 0.05% Tween­20 detergent or PBS after the second wash. 100 μl of the
antibody solution was then added to the wells and the plate incubated again for 40 minutes
at room temperature. The plate was covered with aluminium foil to prevent the antibody
denaturation or damage, since the HRP anti myc is sensitive to light. Meanwhile, the TMB
solution was equilibrated at room temperature. After another cycle of three washes with
200 μl of 1x TBS containing 0.05% Tween­20 detergent or PBS, 100 μl of TMB solution
were added to to each well. The plate was incubated for 2 minutes. 100 μl of the stop
solution (2M Sulfuric Acid) were added to each well to stop the reaction. The absorbance
of the standards and samples was measured at 450 nm wave length.
32Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:39==
7
Results
7.1
Cloning
The first step of the workflow is the cloning of the four different codon optimized inserts
AH3, AH3­5D, AH3­5D­E3, AH3­5D­E3­AA6 in the respective backbones. In order to
introduce overhangs between inserts and backbones and get enough DNA for the HiFi
assembly, PCR amplification was performed.
7.1.1
Escherichia coli
Since the four constructs codon optimized for Escherichia coli were ordered as separate
gene blocks and they were containing homology regions with the backbone (HR 3’ and
HR 5’), there was not need for their amplification. Only the backbone pET22b(+) was
amplified. Figure 7.1 shows clear bands for the correct amplification of the plasmid, that
has a size of 5352 bp. The PCR reaction was run on 1% Agarose gel and the 1kb ladder
was used.
Figure 7.1: Agarose gel picture of the bacterial backbone pET22b(+) (5352 bp).
7.1.2
Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
The genes codon optimized for Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
were ordered as a gene block containing the four VHH genes, as shown in figure 4.2
D. Figure 7.2 A.1 shows the correct bands for the amplification of the DD224_pTDH3α
for the first and second constructs, that have a size of 5534 bp. Figure 7.2 A.2 shows
the correct bands for the amplification of the first and second constructs. The first insert
contains only AH3 gene that is 378 bp long, and the band can be clearly seen on the 2%
gel. The ladder used in this case was 100 bp, in order to be able to better separate small
bands. The second construct contains the AH3 gene and the G4S linker, having a size
of 423 bp. A band of a size of 1000 bp can be seen, probably due to primer mismatch to
another region of the plasmid. The gene 5D (426 bp) is part of the second construct. A
smear can be seen when the 5D gene was amplified. This might have occurred due to
the presence of a too high template concentration, or too many PCR cycles.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7.2: A.1 Agarose gel picture showing the bands for the correct amplification of the
DD224_pTDH3α backbones for the first and second construct (5534 bp). A.2 Agarose
gel picture showing the correct bands for the first (AH3 378 bp) and second constructs
(AH3+linker 423 bp, 5D 426 bp).
Figure 7.3 B and C illustrate the bands obtained for the amplification of the backbones
DD224_pTDH3α and inserts for the third and fourth construct. The first plasmid to be
assembled was the one containing the fourth construct. Subsequently, the insert corre­
sponding to the third construct was amplified by using the plasmid containing the fourth
construct as a template. In figure 7.3 B, clear bands corresponding to the backbone for
the third construct and the insert are visible, with a size of 5574 bp and 1255 bp, respec­
tively. An extra band, that has a size of around 8000 bp, is present and it might be the
super­coiled plasmid used as a template. In figure 7.3 C the bands corresponding to the
backbone and the four DNA fragments forming the fourth construct are shown. The first
fragment is composed by the gene AH3+G4S linker (463 bp), the second fragment con­
tains 5D+G3S linker+E3+G4S linker (877 bp), and the third fragment contains only the
sequence of the AA6 gene (373 bp).
34Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:41==
Figure 7.3: B. Agarose gel picture showing the correct bands for the amplification of
the backbone (5574 bp) and insert corresponding to the third construct (1255 bp). C.
Agarose gel picture illustrating the three fragments forming the fourth construct (AH3 463
bp, 5D+E3 877 bp, AA6 373 bp) and the respective backbone (5577 bp).
7.1.3
Pichia pastoris
The genes codon optimized for Pichia pastoris were ordered as a gene block. The first
step required was the cloning of the 6xHis tag at the N­terminal and of the c­Myc at the
C­terminal of the site of insertion on the pPICZα. Figure 7.4 A shows the band for the
correct amplification of the plasmid containing the two tags within the plasmid, verified
also by Sanger sequencing. The size of the backbone is 3435 bp. Figure 7.4 B shows
the plasmid pPICZα after adding the overhangs with the four inserts via PCR. The size
of the backbones increases of 40 bp (3475 bp), 20 bp for each overhang. Figure 7.4 C
shows the correcly amplified fragments composing the four different constructs. The first
construct carries AH3, having a size of 418 bp. The second construct is composed by
AH3+G4S linker (443 bp) and 5D (421 bp). The third construct contains AH3+G4S linker
and 5D+E3 (832 bp). The fourth construct contains AH3+G4S linker, 5D+E3+G4S linker
(877 bp) and AA6 (373 bp).
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 7.4: A. Agarose gel picture showing the correct band for the amplification of
pPICZα after the insertion of the two tags (3435 bp). B. Agarose gel picture illustrat­
ing the backbones for the four constructs, after adding the overhangs with the four inserts
(3475 bp). C. DNA fragments forming the four different constructs and their sizes.
36Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:43==
7.1.4
Mammalian cells
The genes codon optimized for Cricetus griseus and for Homo sapiens were ordered
as eight different gene blocks. The sequences of the two tags 6­His and c­Myc were
included at the N­terminal and C­terminal of the inserts. The plasmid CON009 works in
both expression systems. Therefore it could be employed for the expression of the four
constructs in both CHO (and expiCHO) and HEK293.
Figure 7.5: Agarose gel picture showing the bands for the correct amplification of CON009
(4960 bp), used as a backbone for the different inserts optimized for expression in both
HEK293 and CHO cells.
Figure 7.5 shows the bands corresponding to the correct amplification of the plasmid
CON009, that has a size of 4960 bp. The bands representing the four constructs for
HEK293 and CHO/expiCHO are shown in figures 7.6 and 7.7. The first construct (AH3)
has a size of 429 bp, the second one (AH3+5D) is 855 bp. The third (AH3+5D+E3) and
fourth constructs (AH3+5D+E3+AA6) are 1266 bp and 1644 bp long, respectively. Addi­
tional bands appear on the gels, having a length of 500 bp or 1000 bp. These bands are
generated by improper primer binding to other regions of the template. Smaller bands
(>500 bp) are probably generated by primer dimers.
After the cloning of the four different constructs in the respective backbones for expres­
sion in bacteria, yeast and mammalian cells, the plasmids were transformed into DH5α.
Following plasmid extraction and verification by Sanger Sequencing, the plasmids were
transformed or transfected into the respective cell factories, as summarized in figure 2.1.
After the cells were cultured and the four different constructs expressed, the proteins were
characterized by SDS­PAGE and Western Blot.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 7.6: Agarose gel picture displaying bands corresponding to the four different con­
structs codon optimized for expression in HEK293 and cloned into CON009. The first,
second, third and fourth constructs have a size of 429 bp, 855 bp, 1266 bp and 1644 bp,
respectively.
Figure 7.7: A. Agarose gel picture showing the first construct, codon optimized for CHO/­
expiCHO cells, that has a size of 429 bp. B. Second, third and fourth constructs, having
a size of 855 bp, 1266 bp and 1644 bp, respectively.
38Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:45==
7.2
Qualitative analysis by SDS­PAGE and Western blot
The expression of the four constructs (AH3, AH3­5D, AH3­5D­E3, AH3­5D­E3­AA6) was
performed in Escherichia coli BL21, Saccharomyces boulardii, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Pichia pastoris, HEK293, CHO and expiCHO cells. A first approach to the characteriza­
tion of the proteins produced was to separate them by molecular weight via SDS­PAGE.
This would give an idea of the production of the different nanobodies by the cell factories,
and it would help to decide how to proceed further with the experiments. A second ap­
proach consists in a more specific analytical method, the Western blot, that specifically
detects a protein within a mixture of proteins.
7.2.1
Escherichia coli
Since environmental condition and the choice of the growth media usually affect heterol­
ogous production of proteins, preliminary studies were performed to understand which
conditions work best for the expression of the four constructs in Escherichia coli. There­
fore, the nanobody expression was tested in two different media (LB and Autoinduction
medium) at four different temperatures (20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 37°C). When culturing the cells
in LB medium, the induction was induced with 1 mM IPTG. Additionally, in LB medium two
initial Optical Densities (OD) were tested, OD 0.8 and OD 2, in order to understand if the
production was depending of the initial amount of cells in the culture. When growing the
cells in Autoinduction medium, the expression was induced with lactose instead. Fig­
ure 7.8 shows the expression of the first construct AH3 in LB medium and Autoinduction
medium at different temperatures, as well as the production in LB medium, OD 0.8, in the
same range of temperatures. The white arrows show the bands corresponding to the first
construct at different conditions. A negative control includes the cells at OD 0.8, where
IPTG was not added. The band is absent in the negative control. However, the bands
have a bigger size than expected (15.48 KDa). In fact, the bands observed on the gel
seem to be around 18 KDa instead.
Figure 7.8: SDS­PAGE showing the bands corresponding to the first construct AH3
(molecular weight around 18 KDa) at different conditions: Autoindiction medium (con­
taining lactose) at 20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 37°C, LB+IPTG at 20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 37°C. In the
last well a negative control (no IPTG) was included.
Subsequently, the Western Blot was performed for the same samples, as shown in figure
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
39
==PAGE:46==
7.9. A more intense band (indicating higher expression) appeared when the cells were cul­
tured in Autoinduction medium at 30°C temperature. Surprisingly, the optimal conditions
for the production were not achieved at the optimal growth temperature for Escherichia
coli (37°C). On the contrary, the band is barely visible on the SDS­PAGE at 37°C, LB
medium, OD 0.8 (figure 7.8), and it is completely absent on the Western Blot at the same
conditions (figure 7.9). Also in this case, the bands seem to be bigger than expected,
with a size around 18 KDa. This result arose doubts about the accuracy of the plasmid
design. Therefore, by checking the sequence again, it was discovered that the plasmid
was correctly designed and cloned, as verified by sequencing.
Figure 7.9: Western Blot showing the bands obtained for the first construct AH3 at dif­
ferent conditions: Autoindiction medium (containing lactose) at 20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 37°C,
LB+IPTG at 20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 37°C. In the last well a negative control (no IPTG) was
included.
Figure 7.10: AH3 protein sequence containing the secretion signal pelB (in green), 6xHis
tag (in yellow) and c­Myc tag (in light blue).
40Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:47==
However, it seems that for unknown reasons, the secretion signal was not removed from
the N­terminal of the protein, leading to a product that has a bigger size. Figure 7.10 dis­
plays the AH3 protein sequence containing the additional sectretion signal pelB, normally
removed during protein processing and translocation to the periplasm. Figure 7.11 shows
the biochemical properties (extracted from Benchling) of the sequence introduced before,
which molecular weight is 17.82 KDa. This result confirms that the secretion signal was
not correctly removed during the process.
Figure 7.11: Biochemical properties of the AH3 protein sequence containing the addi­
tional secretion signal pelB. The molecular weigh of the AH3 protein and secretion signal
corresponds to the one obtained in this work (around 18 KDa).
Another condition tested was cell growth on LB medium, expression induced with 1 mM
IPTG, initial OD 2. Figure 7.12 A and B display the SDS­PAGE and the Western Blot
of the samples in this conditions. From the SDS­PAGE gel, bands of the size of 18 KDa
appear at 20°C, 25°C and 30°C (figure 7.12 A). However, the same bands are not detected
by Western blot (figure 7.12 B). This might be due to secretion of a native protein of
Escherichia coli, that has similar size to the one produced in this work. Again, the protein
production seems generally lower at 37°C, even for native proteins.
Figure 7.12: A.SDS­PAGE gel showing the proteins secreted by Escherichia coli BL21 at
following conditions: initial OD 2, LB+IPTG, at 20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 37°C. B. Western blot
of the samples under the same conditions.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
41
==PAGE:48==
These preliminary studies helped to determine where the nanobody expression was more
efficient. In fact, the condition Autoinduction medium, 30°C was used for the production
of the three other constructs as well. The expression experiment in Escherichia coli BL21
was therefore repeated. Experimental replicates (triplicates) were performed for each
construct in order to validate the work.Figure 7.13 displays the bands corresponding to
the first construct and second construct (in triplicates).
Figure 7.13: SDS­PAGE displaying the bands obtained for the expression of the first and
second construct in Autoinduction medium at 30°C.
Figure 7.14: Western Blot showing the bands obtained for the expression of the first and
second construct in Autoinduction medium at 30°C.
The bands can be better observed on the Western Blot picture in figure 7.14. The size of
42Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:49==
the first construct is 17.82 KDa, as explained before, while the size of the second construct
is 30.48 KDa. The same procedure was applied to the third and fourth construct. In figure
7.15 the bands corresponding to the third and fourth constructs can be seen. The size of
the third construct should be around 44.43 KDa, while the fourth one has a size of 57.38
KDa.
Figure 7.15: SDS­PAGE showing the bands for the third (44.43 KDa) and fourth (57.38
KDa) constructs when expressed in Autoinduction medium at 30°C.
Figure 7.16: Western blot illustrating the bands for the third (44.43 KDa) and fourth (57.38
KDa) constructs when expressed in Autoinduction medium at 30°C.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
43
==PAGE:50==
7.2.2
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii.
The expression of the four constructs in the yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Sac­
charomyces boulardii was performed at their optimal growth temperatures, 30°C and 37°C
respectively. However, other expression conditions needed to be defined before perform­
ing the experiments, such as pH. As mentioned in section 3, the pH can affect both cell
growth and protein production, and it was a cruciual factor that could affect the expression
of the four proteins of interest. The literature reports that the optimal pH for heterologous
expression in S. cerevisiae is 6.5 [68] [69]. Therefore, in this work pH 6.5 was tested for
the production of the four constructs in this organism. Regarding S. boulardii, different
pHs were tested in order to establish which one suits best for nanobody production. An
attempt to express the first construct AH3 at different pHs was conducted. Five colonies,
transformed with the plasmid containing AH3, were picked for further analysis. Experi­
mental replicates were made in order to validate the results. The conditions tested were
pH 5, pH 7 and pH 8. The incubation time was 48h. The experiment was performed in the
BioLector XT Microbioreactor. However, for unknown reasons (probably lack of Oxygen),
the cells were not growing well. In fact, the OD obtained at the end of the experiment (after
72h) was lower that the initial OD 0.1, meaning that the cells were dying. The expression
in the same conditions was performed in the shaking incubator in 15 ml culture tubes. In
this case, higher ODs were generally obtained for all the conditions tested. However, the
Saccharomyces boulardii cells were growing considerably better at pH 5. The OD600
values obtained for S. boulardii cells cultured at the pH 5, ph 6 and ph 7 are reported in
table 7.1. Therefore, the pH 5 was selected as condition for growth of Saccharomyces
boulardii for the expression of the four constructs.
Table 7.1: OD600 values obtained for S. boulardii cells expressing the first construct AH3
at pH 5, pH 6 and pH 7 in the shaking incubator for 48h.
Saccharomyces boulardii
pH
Colony
OD600
7
1.1
0.246
1.2
0.260
1.3
0.210
1.4
0.248
1.5
0.239
6
1.2
0.143
1.2
0.113
1.3
0.247
1.4
0.216
1.5
0.054
5
1.4
1.106
1.2
0.511
1.3
0.412
1.4
1.253
1.5
1.142
It is important to mention that the cloning for Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae was particularly challenging, especially for the third construct. In fact, due to
the presence of repeated sequences, such as linkers, different mutations, repetitions and
deletions occurred while performing HiFi assembly. This inconvenience created delay in
the workflow and, even though the plasmid was successfully assembled and sequence
44Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:51==
verified, it could not be transformed in time. This explains why the expression experiments
were not executed for the third construct in these two organisms.
The expression of the first, second and fourth constructs in Saccharomyces boulardii was
performed at 37°C, ph 5, incubation time 72h. The supernatants were then run on SDS­
PAGE gels. After running the first and second constructs (shown in figure 7.17 A), it was
observed that something might have went wrong during the procedure. Two can be the
reasons for what happened: first, a problem with the voltage might have occurred, leading
to the improper separation of the bands. A second explanation might be that the proteins
have aggregated at the pH chosen for the experiment.
Figure 7.17: A. SDS­PAGE gel showing the first and second construct in Saccharomyces
boulardii. The bands were not properly separated and the correct bands corresponding
to the size of the two constructs (15.48 KDa and 30.48 KDa) are not visible. B. The same
samples run after protein concentration with acetone.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
45
==PAGE:52==
Additionally, in order to exclude the possibility that the protein of interest were not ex­
pressed enough to detect a band on the SDS­PAGE gel, the samples were also concen­
trated with acetone. However, also in this case the gel presents a similar pattern, where
the proteins are not separated, therefore not visible (7.17 B). Figure 7.18 illustrates the
bands corresponding to the fourth construct. Very faded bands can be seen in proximity
of the white arrows, that have the correct size of 57.38 KDa.
Figure 7.18: SDS­PAGE gel showing very faded bands corresponding to the fourth con­
struct (57.38 KDa) expressed in S. boulardii.
Figure 7.19: SDS­PAGE showing the bands corresponding to the first and second con­
structs. On the left, two bands (indicated by the green and white arrows) might correspond
to the glycosylated (16 KDa or 17 KDa) and non glycosylated version (15.48 KDa) of the
first construct AH3. Bands are not visible for the second construct (30.48 KDa), on the
right.
46Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:53==
The expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was performed at pH 6.5. In this case the
SDS­PAGE gels run properly, supporting the theory that the acidic pH was affecting the
S.boulardii protein samples. Figure 7.19 shows the bands corresponding to the first con­
struct (AH3). In this case, two bands are present: one that has a size around 16 KDa
or 17 KDa (white arrows) and a second one having a correct size of 15.48 KDa (green
arrows). Possibly, S. cerevisiae is able to produce two versions of the second construct,
one glycosylated and one not. Alternatively, one of the bands might correspond to a native
protein secreted in the extracellular space by the yeast. A more precise information could
have been obtained by including a negative control of the WT yeasts. In fact, information
about the proteins naturally produced by the two yeasts (both Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and Saccharomyces boulardii) would have helped the interpretation of the results. Bands
corresponding to the second construct (30.48 KDa) are not visible on the SDS­PAGE,
meaning that S. cerevisiae might not be able to produce the second construct when cul­
tured at the given experimental conditions. Figure 7.20 shows the bands corresponding
to the fourth construct expressed in S. cerevisiae. The black arrows indicate the bands
of the correct size (57.38 KDa). However, the production seems to be very low, given the
low intensity of the bands.
Figure 7.20: SDS­PAGE showing the bands corresponding to the fourth construct ex­
pressed in S. cerevisiae that has a size of (57.38 KDa).
Unfortunately, due to lack of time the Western Blot couldn’t be performed for the super­
natants extracted from Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
47
==PAGE:54==
7.2.3
Pichia pastoris
The expression of the four constructs in Pichia pastoris was performed at the optimal
growth temperature for the organism, which is 30°C, in BMMY medium. The expression
was induced with 0.5 % methanol. Figure 7.21 shows the bands detected on SDS­PAGE
corresponding to the first and second constructs, while figure 7.22 the ones corresponding
to the expression of the third and fourth constructs. For each construct, 5 colonies were
picked for further analysis. For each colony, the expression was repeated three times
(experimental replicates) in order to validate the work. However, the SDS­PAGE was
performed only for one of the triplicates. The white arrows indicate the location of the
bands on the gels. From the obtained results, it is evident that the size of the first construct
AH3 is again bigger than expected. In this case, most probably undesired glycosylation
might have occurred, leading to an increase in the size of the target protein. This theory
is supported by the fact that the α secretion signal alone has a molecular weight of 9.34
KDa. If also in this case the secretion signal was not correctly removed, a band of a bigger
size would have been obtained. The obtained band has a molecular weight of around 17
KDa or 18 KDa. Alternatively, the charge of the glycans might have affected the position
of the proteins on the SDS­PAGE gel. All the five colonies picked were able to secrete the
first construct, while expression seems to be absent for colony number 2.1.1., expressing
the second construct. Bands are visible at the correct size (30.48 KDa) for the remaining
colonies expressing the third construct. In figure 7.22 bands corresponding to the correct
molecular weight of the third construct (44.43 KDa) can be seen. Expression failed for
the colony 3.4.1. The fourth construct (57.38 KDa) was successfully expressed in all the
five colonies examined. However, a lower production is observed for colony 4.1.1.
Figure 7.21: SDS­PAGE showing the bands corresponding to the first (17 KDa or 18 KDa)
and second construct (30.48 KDa), expressed in BMMY medium, induced with methanol,
30°C.
48Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:55==
Figure 7.22: SDS­PAGE showing the bands corresponding to the third (44.43 KDa) and
fourth construct (57.38 KDa), expressed in BMMY medium, induced with methanol, 30°C.
Figure 7.23: Western blot showing the bands corresponding to the first (17 KDa or 18
KDa) and second (30.48 KDa) constructs expressed in Pichia pastoris in BMMY medium,
30°C.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 7.24: Western blot showing the bands corresponding to the second (44.43 KDa)
and fourth (57.38 KDa) constructs expressed in Pichia pastoris in BMMY medium, 30°C.
Western Blot was performed for the four constructs expressend in Pichia pastoris, as it
can be seen in figures 7.23 and 7.24. The failed expression of colonies 2.1.1, 3.4.1 and
4.5.1 is confirmed also by the Western Blot. The gel was accidentally broken, therefore the
bands corresponding to the third constructs are moved. All the bands should be aligned to
the band corresponding to colony 3.5.1, and they should be positioned in correspondence
of the dotted line, having a size of approximately 44.43 KDa. The bands corresponding to
the fourth construct are located at the correct size of 57.38 KDa. From the SDS­PAGE and
Western Blot results, it is clear that the first construct AH3 presents a higher expression,
when compared to the other constructs.
50Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:57==
7.2.4
Mammalian cells
The expression of the four constructs in mammalian cells HEK293, CHO and expiCHO
was performed at 37°C, their optimal growth temperature. Unfortunately, due to lack of
time, it was not possible to perform the experiment in triplicates. Figure 7.25 illustrates the
SDS­PAGE and Western Blot results for the four constructs expressed in HEK293 cells.
Clear bands are visible at the expected sizes of 15.48 KDa, 30.48 KDa, 44.43 KDa and
57.38 KDa, respectively for the first, second, third and fourth constructs. Particularly, it
seems that the molecular weight of the first construct AH3 is accurate, meaning that any
undesired modification occurred during the process.
Figure 7.25: A. SDS­PAGE and B. Western Blot showing the bands corresponding to the
four constructs expressed in HEK293 cells.
Figure 7.26: SDS­PAGE displaying the bands corresponding to the four constructs, ex­
pressed in CHO and expiCHO cells.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.26 illustrates the proteins mix expressed by CHO and expiCHO cells. Differently
from HEK293, CHO and expiCHO cells secrete more proteins, and the bands correspond­
ing to the four proteins of interest are difficult to distinguish only by looking at the SDS­
PAGE gel. The bands are clearly visible on the Western Blot (figure 7.27). Also in this
case the first construct AH3 presents the expected size of 15.48 KDa. The second, third
and fourth construct have the expected sizes 30.48 KDa, 44.43 KDa and 57.38 KDa. In­
terestingly, the third construct seems to be more expressed than the other constructs in
CHO cells. In expiCHO the second, third and fourth constructs are highly expressed.
Figure 7.27: Western Blot showing the four constructs expressed in CHO and expiCHO
cells.
Figure 7.28: Positive control to verify the efficacy of CHO cells transfection. GFP protein,
expressed in the cytoplasm enable the cells to emit green colour under UV light.
Since transient transfection of CHO and expiCHO cells is more challenging than the one
for HEK293 cells, several optimization steps were required to obtain transfected cells and
52Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:59==
a successful heterologous protein expression. A positive control to verify the efficacy of
the new transfection protocol was included. The CHO cells were transfected with the
Antibody Expressing Positive Control Vector, containing a cytosolic Green Fluorescent
Protein (GFP) that, when correctly expressed, enables detection under UV light. Figure
7.28 shows the picture of CHO cells expressing the GFP, after transient transfection.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
53
==PAGE:60==
7.3
Quantitative analysis by ELISA
After qualitative analysis by SDS­PAGE and Western Blot, ELISA was performed in order
to quantify the amount of recombinant protein secreted by each organism and to evaluate
the efficiency of the secretion for proteins of increasing size and complexity. The method
used in this work consists in a direct ELISA. The ELISA plates are coated with Nickel are
designed to specifically bind to the 6xHis tag (at the N­terminal of the four constructs).
After the protein of interest was bound to the plate, the anti c­Myc antibody (the c­Myc is
present at the C­terminal of the four constructs) was used for detection. As a standard
for the yeast experiments the Multi Tag Protein (around 58kDa) was employed. Figure
7.29 shows the curve that best fit the absorbance values (λ=450 nm) obtained for the
wells containing the diluted standard proteins (y axis). On the x axis the concentrations of
the standard protein in each dilution (in μg/ml) are present. In this case, a second order
polynomial curve fits best the obtained values. The equation representing the curve is
y=0.7242x2­0.1859x+0.0459. The R2 value is 0.9661, that is a measure of how well the
curve fits the those values (max. value=1), and it indicates the relationship between the
dependent and the independent variables. The values of the absorbance obtained for the
samples with unknown concentrations were then substituted to the y in the equation and
then solved for the x value, that corresponds to the concentration of the target protein
(in μg/ml). This analysis was performed only for the highest expression values obtained
for each construct, that was also matching with the results obtained from the SDS­PAGE
and Western Blot for Saccharomyces boulardii, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Pichia
pastoris. Table 7.2 shows the final concentration in mg/L for each construct expressed in
the different yeasts at the specific pH conditions. The column Amount of protein (μg/ml)
displays the values of the protein concentration obtained by solving the curve equation.
Those values were then multiplied by the dilution factor to obtain the final concentration
(mg/L).
Figure 7.29: Standard curve obtained by plotting the standard protein (Multi tag protein)
concentration (mg/L) on the x axis, and its absorbance values at (λ=450 nm) on the y
axes. The curve was used to quantify the production in Saccharomyces boulardii, Sac­
charomyces cerevisiae and Pichia pastoris.
54Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:61==
Table 7.2: Table showing the concentration (in mg/L) of the four proteins of interest ex­
pressed in the three yeasts Saccharomyces boulardii, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Pichia pastoris. pH consitions and dilution factor used for the ELISA are included.
Organism
Construct
Replicate
pH
Amount
of protein
(μg/ml)
Dilution
factor
Amount
of protein
(mg/L)
S. boulardii
1st
/
5
/
10
/
2nd
/
5
/
10
/
4th
/
5
/
10
/
1st
/
7
0,314
10
3,14
1st
/
6
0,544
10
5,44
1st
/
5
/
10
/
S. cerevisiae
1st
1.4.1
6.5
1,654
10
16,54
1.4.2
1,712
10
17,12
1.4.3
1,726
10
17,26
2nd
2.4.1
6.5
0,764
10
7,64
2.4.2
0,797
10
7,97
2.4.3
0,814
10
8,14
4th
/
6.5
/
10
/
Pichia pastoris
1st
1.1.1
6
1,544
10
15,44
1.1.2
1,519
10
15,19
1.1.3
1,548
10
15,48
2nd
2.4.1
6
1,512
10
15,12
2.4.2
1,534
10
15,34
2.4.3
1,503
10
15,03
3rd
3.1.1
6
1,296
10
12,96
3.1.2
1,273
10
12,73
3.1.3
1,308
10
13,08
4th
4.3.1
6
1,396
10
13,96
4.3.2
1,428
10
14,28
4.3.3
1,393
10
13,93
The same procedure was followed for the quantification of the concentration of the re­
combinant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli and mammalian cells (CHO, expiCHO,
HEK293). Unfortunately, due to a mistake in the ELISA execution for CHO and expiCHO,
the results for those two cell lines could not be included.
For the quantification of the expression of the four constructs in Escherichia coli and
HEK293 the standard curve shown in figure 7.30 was used. The protein 1Cys5’AH3
(around 15.50 KDa) was employed as standard protein. The curve was obtained as previ­
ously described. However, in this case a logarithmic curve fits best the absorbance values
obtained for 1Cys5’AH3. The curve equation is y=0.138ln(x) + 0.4273 and the R2 value is
0.9703, meaning that the data fits well the model. Table 7.3 shows the final concentrations
(mg/L) obtained for the four constructs expressed in E. coli and HEK293.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.30: Standard curve obtained by plotting the standard protein (1Cys5’AH3) con­
centration (mg/L) on the x axis, and its absorbance values at (λ=450 nm) on the y axes.
The curve was used to quantify the production in Escherichia coli and HEK293.
Table 7.3: Table showing the concentration (in mg/L) of the four proteins of interest ex­
pressed in Escherichia coli and HEK293. The dilution factors used for ELISA are included.
Organism
Construct
Replicate
Amount
of protein
(μg/ml)
Dilution
factor
Amount
of protein
(mg/L)
Escherichia coli
1st con.
1.1
0.476
1
0.952
1.2
0.409
1
0.818
1.3
0.651
1
1.302
2nd con.
2.1
0.094
1
0.188
2.2
0.100
1
0.200
2.3
0.103
1
0.206
3rd con.
3.1
0.120
1
0.240
3.2
0.334
1
0.668
3.3
0.359
1
0.718
4th con.
4.1
0.204
1
0.408
4.2
0.239
1
0.478
4.3
0.243
1
0.486
HEK293
1st con.
/
6.378
1
12.756
2nd con.
/
14.361
1
28.722
3rd con.
/
95.875
1
191.75
4th con.
/
43.519
1
87.038
56Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:63==
8
Discussion
Currently new antibiotic resistance mechanisms are being developed by certain ribotypes
of Clostridium difficile, that threatens our ability to cure the disease CDI infection [7]. CDI
affects particularly elderly people and those who are already under antibiotic treatment.
In fact, the administration of antibiotics causes the disruption of the gut microflora and
facilitates the gut colonization by Clostridium difficile [12]. As a consequence, alterna­
tive treatments to antibiotics are required to fight against the spread of this pathogenic
bacteria and to alleviate the symptoms caused by the development of the disease. Nowa­
days, immunotherapy seems to be the preferred alternative method employed. However,
vaccines require long clinical trials and until now there is no evidence that they are com­
pletely efficacious, since they do not prevent the colonization and the transmission of
the bacteria. In fact, the pathogenicity of Clostridium difficile is related to its ability to
produce two toxins, TcdA and TcdB, and most of the currently produced drugs aim to
neutralize the toxins effect [26]. An alternative to antibody­based vaccines are toxin neu­
tralizing nanobodies. Nanobodies (VHHs) are antibody fragments, that present the ability
to bind hidden antigens and they have the advantage of being more soluble, due to their
small size, compared to full antibodies. However, as mentioned for the vaccine therapy,
the toxin neutralization by nanobodies cannot prevent transmission and colonization of
Clostridium difficile, but it aims to cure the symptoms of the disease [33]. The tetraspecific
construct VNA2­Tcd, used in this study, was discovered to be able to efficiently neutralize
both toxin A and toxin B, decreasing the morbidity and the mortality of CDI, when tested
on three animal models [34]. However, a limitation often encountered during the recom­
binant production of therapeutic proteins is the efficiency of the production, that can be
affected by different factors, such as the cell factory employed and the growth conditions.
In fact, based on the characteristics of the protein of interest and its definitive use, the
choice of the cell factory might be crucial for a successful expression. In fact, in order
to have a low cost and sustainable production, often the best expression host might be a
lower organism, such as bacteria or yeast. However, as soon as the complexity of the pro­
tein increases, these organisms are less suitable. Therefore, higher organisms such as
mammalian cells are usually preferred when the protein folding and the post­translational
modifications affect the protein function. This often occurs for therapeutic proteins, that
need to be non­immunogenic [40].
This study aims to help the choice of the most suitable cell factory for nanobody produc­
tion by considering the characteristics of the protein of interest. VNA2­Tcd construct was
split in three smaller constructs containing one (AH3), two (AH3­5D) and three (AH3­5D­
E3) VHHs. The three construct, together with the full size construct (AH3­5D­E3­AA6)
were expressed in bacteria, yeast and mammalian cells in order to compare the secretion
efficiency of the different cell factories and to understand which are the advantages and
disadvantages of each of them.
8.0.1
Bacteria
Escherichia coli
In this work, the expression of the four constructs in Escherichia coli was successful. The
first construct AH3 was expressed in both condition tested (LB+IPTG and Autoinduction
medium), as it can be seen by the bands of the correct size (15.48 kDa) on the Western
Blot. However, the best condition achieved for the expression of four constructs was
Autoinduction medium at 30°C. Surprisingly, the optimal temperature for expression was
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
57
==PAGE:64==
not matching the optimal growth temperature for Escherichia coli. An explanation might
be the presence of rare codons in the sequence of the recombinant protein. In fact, the
metabolism of E. coli is faster at 37°C, as well as its growth rate, while it is slower at
30°C. Probably, at 30°C the bacteria had more time to synthesize the tRNA needed for
the expression of the AH3 construct, while at 37°C the cells were spending more energy
on the cell growth, resulting in a lower expression of the recombinant protein. Another
interesting result was the presence of the secretion signal in the secreted protein. The
secretion signal is removed when the proteins are secreted in the periplasm. However, in
the case of the first construct, this process did not occur, leading to a protein of a bigger
size than expected. This can be explained by an incorrect folding of the protein, that
could have hidden the protease cutting site. Further studies needs to be conducted on
the protein folding and tridimensional structure of the nanobodies expressed in this study.
It was difficult to establish if this phenomenon occurred only for the first construct AH3
or it happened also to the other three. In fact, it is difficult to notice a small difference in
the protein size only by analysing the SDS­PAGE and Western blot, especially for bigger
proteins. However, it seems possible to express in E. coli small constructs, containing
only one VHH, as well as bigger ones, with two, three and four nanobodies. From the
Wester Blot results, it is not possible to conclude that one particular construct is more
expressed than others. They seem all to present the same expression level, as it can
see by the ELISA result. It is important to mention that the ELISA results give only a
rough idea of the yield produced by the different cell factories. In fact, only one standard
curve was used to quantify the production in both Escherichia coli and HEK293, while
a different curve should be made for each ELISA plate used, in order to eliminate the
variability between plates. This applies also to the yeast experiments, where only one
curve was obtained to calculate the concentration of the different constructs in S. boulardii,
S. cerevisiae and Pichia pasoris. Additionally, the size of the standard protein needs to
be taken into consideration when performing quantification by ELISA. In fact, ideally the
size of the standard protein should be similar to the one of the protein that needs to be
quantified. In fact, proteins of different size physically occupy the well differently, affecting
the accuracy of the detection.
8.0.2
Yeasts
Saccharomyces boulardii
From the results obtained from the expression of the four constructs in Saccharomyces
boulardii, it can be assumed that, even though this organism grows better at acidic con­
ditions (ph 5), it does not necessarily express better the protein of interest. The results
obtained from the ELISA confirms that there is not expression of the first and second con­
structs in S. boulardii at the given conditions. This also applies to the fourth construct that,
from the SDS­PAGE results, seemed to have a very low expression. Most probably those
bands correspond to a native protein naturally secreted by the yeast. The ELISA results
show that there was expression at pH 6 and pH 7. Therefore, the yeast is potentially
able to secrete the product, but it was cultured at non optimal conditions for nanobody
expression.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
From the results obtained from the expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, it can be
deduced that this yeast, at the given conditions of ph 6.5, can express the first construct.
Additionally, two bands can be seen for the AH3 construct. A glycosylated version of the
protein might be present, that generates a band bigger than expected. From the SDS­
PAGE, it seems tha there is not expression of the second construct. However, the ELISA
has shown signal for the second construct, and the concentration could be quantified. It
is important to keep in mind what stated before regarding the use of the standard curve.
58Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:65==
In fact, the ELISA results only provide an idea of the yield of the proteins secreted. The
fourth construct instead, was showing faded bands on the SDS­PAGE, but there was not
signal on the ELISA plate.
The absence of the qualitative analysis by Wester Blot for both expression in Saccha­
romyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii limits the amount of information that
can be deducted from the results. Additionally, negative controls with the WT yeast strains
were needed to be included, in order to have more information about the proteins naturally
secreted by the two organisms, and to guide towards a better interpretation of the results.
Pichia pastoris
The methanol induced expression of the four constructs was successful in the yeast Pichia
pastoris. The first construct seems to be more produced, compared to the other con­
structs, as confirmed by both SDS­PAGE and Western Blot. However, this is not con­
firmed by the ELISA quantification, where the level of production seems to be similar be­
tween constructs. However, due to the inaccuracy of the ELISA experienced in this work,
the results obtained from the qualitative analysis by SDS­PAGE and Western Blot are con­
sidered more accurate. Also in this case the first construct is affected by glycosylation,
since the size of the secreted protein is sightly bigger that expected. This phenomenon
might have occurred for the third construct as well, but further glycosylation studies are
needed to understand this process.
8.0.3
Mammalian cells
The results obtained from the SDS­PAGE and Western Blot of the mammalian cells HEK293,
CHO and expiCHO, show that the four constructs are successfully produced in these
three cell lines. The production level seems to be similar between constructs in HEK293.
Diffrenly, the third construct is produced more that the others in CHO cells. The expiCHO
cells seems to be particularly suitable for the production of the second, third and fourth
construct. The first construct presents lower expression level in both CHO and expiCHO
cells. Interestingly, the size of the first construct is the one expected, since the band
is closer to 15 KDa, meaning that any undesired post­translational modification has oc­
curred during the expression. High expression of the four constructs in HEK293 can be
confirmed also by ELISA. However, the yields of production do not look similar between
constructs, probably due to inaccuracy of the detection, as previously explained.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
59
==PAGE:66==
60Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:67==
9
Conclusion and future perspectives
From the results obtained from this work, it can be concluded that mono­ to multimeric
single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile can be cloned and expressed in a
range of different organisms. In fact, expression was successful in both Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic expression systems. However, given the therapeutic value of the VHHs in­
volved in the study, more considerations need to be done before choosing the best cell
factory for nanobody production. If the cost and time are the limiting factors, or the protein
of interest has a small size (around 15 KDa), then a lower organism (Escherichia coli, Sac­
charomyces cerevisiae or Pichia pastoris) might be a good option. However, as seen from
the presented work, in bacteria and yeast unexpected events, such as incorrect protein
processing or undesired glycosylation, might occur. This can lead to further processing
of the target protein, such as enzymatic deglycosylation, that might reduce the yield of
recombinant protein. However, Pichia pastoris seems to express well not only small pro­
teins, but also proteins having bigger size and higher complexity (30.48 KDa­57.38KDa),
but still their production might be affected by undesired post­translational modifications.
For the expression of bigger constructs, containing two, three or four VHHs, mammalian
cells are the most suitable expression system. In fact, it can be deducted that HEK293
cells secrete proteins of increasing size in similar amounts, and the protein complexity
does not seem to affect the expression level. On the other side, CHO cells are particu­
larly suitable for the secretion of proteins around 44.43 KDa. expiCHO cells present high
secretion level of larger proteins, from 30.48 KDa to 57.38 KDa. Moreover, when the first
construct was expressed in mammalian cells, the size of the target protein was the one ex­
pected (15.48 KDa), meaning that the VHHs were not affected by unwanted modifications.
However, it is difficult to draw a conclusion on the potential of the different cell factories
only by analysing the results obtained from this work, since many optimization steps still
could be done within each organism. For instance, different IPTG concentration could
be testesed in Escherichia coli. Moreover, different growth conditions could be applied to
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii. In Pichia pastoris qPCR could
have been conducted in order to link the expression level to the gene dosage. Finally, in
mammalian cells the secretion of the nanobodies fused with the Fc region of an IgG an­
tibody could be tested. In fact, many are the experiments that still need to be conducted
in order to fully exploit the potential of these cells factories. Last but not least, structure
and functional studies could be performed to confirm the toxin neutralizing ability and the
functionality of the four constructs expressed in this study.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
61
==PAGE:68==
62Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:69==
10
Appendix A
Table 10.1: Codon optimized sequences for Escherichia coli, CHO and expiCHO,
HEK293, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii and Pichia pas­
toris.
Bacteria
Escherichia coli
Sequence
name
DNA sequence
AH3
CAGGTTCAGCTGGTTGAAACCGGTGGTCTGGTTCAGCCTGGTGGTA
GCCTGCGTCTGAGCTGTGCAGCAAGCGGTTTTACCCTGGATTATTCA
AGCATTGGTTGGTTTCGTCAGGCACCGGGTAAAGAACGTGAAGGTG
TTAGCTGTATTAGCAGCAGCGGTGATAGCACCAAATATGCAGATAGC
GTTAAAGGTCGTTTTACCACCAGTCGTGATAATGCCAAAAATACCGT
TTACCTGCAGATGAATAGCCTGAAACCGGATGATACCGCAGTGTATT
ATTGTGCAGCATTTCGTGCAACCATGTGTGGTGTTTTTCCGCTGAGC
CCGTATGGTAAAGATGATTGGGGTAAAGGCACCCTGGTTACCGTTA
GCAGC
G4S
GGCGGTGGCGGAAGCGGAGGCGGTGGTAGTGGTGGTGGTGGTAGC
5D
CAGGTGCAGCTGGTAGAATCTGGTGGCGGTCTGGTGCAGCCAGGC
GGTTCACTGCGTCTGTCATGTGAAGCATCAGGCTTTACCTTAGATTA
TTATGGTATCGGCTGGTTTCGCCAGCCTCCTGGCAAAGAACGCGAA
GCAGTTTCATATATTAGCGCAAGCGCACGTACCATTCTGTATGCAGA
TTCAGTGAAAGGTCGCTTCACCATTTCACGCGATAACGCGAAAAAT
GCAGTTTATTTACAGATGAACTCCCTGAAACGTGAAGATACAGCCG
TTTATTACTGTGCACGTCGTCGTTTTAGCGCCAGCAGCGTTAATCGT
TGGCTGGCAGATGATTATGATGTTTGGGGTCGTGGCACCCAGGTTG
CAGTTAGCAGT
G3S
GGCGGTGGATCCGGTGGTGGATCTGGCGGAGGTAGCGGAGGTGG
TAGT
E3
CAGCTGCAATTAGTGGAAACTGGCGGTGGTTTAGTACAGCCAGGT
GGCTCTCTGCGCCTGAGTTGTGCCGCTTCTGGTTTTACCTTTAGCG
ATTATGTTATGACCTGGGTTCGCCAGGCACCAGGCAAGGGTCCTGA
ATGGATTGCCACCATTAATACCGATGGTAGCACCATGCGTGATGATA
GTACCAAAGGACGCTTTACAATTAGCCGTGACAATGCTAAAAACA
CCCTGTATCTGCAAATGACCAGTCTGAAGCCGGAAGATACTGCCCT
GTACTATTGTGCCCGTGGTCGTGTTATTTCAGCAAGCGCAATTCGTG
GTGCAGTTCGTGGTCCGGGTACACAGGTTACCGTGAGCAGC
G4S
GGTGGTGGCGGTAGTGGTGGCGGTGGCTCTGGTGGCGGTGGTTCA
AA6
CAGGTTCAACTGGTGGAAAGTGGTGGTGGCCTGGTTCAGACAGGC
GGAAGTCTGCGTTTAAGCTGCGCAAGCAGCGGTAGCATTGCAGGT
TTTGAAACCGTTACCTGGTCACGCCAAGCTCCGGGTAAAAGCCTG
CAGTGGGTTGCAAGCATGACCAAAACCAATAATGAGATCTATAGCG
ACAGCGTGAAAGGCCGTTTCATTATCTCTCGGGATAATGCGAAGAA
TACGGTGTACTTACAAATGAATTCACTGAAGCCTGAGGATACCGGT
GTGTATTTTTGTAAAGGTCCGGAACTGCGTGGTCAGGGTATTCAGG
TGACAGTGAGCAGC
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
63
==PAGE:70==
6­His
ATGCATCATCACCATCATCAT
c­Myc
GAACAGAAACTGATTAGCGAAGAAGATCTGTAA
H.R. 3’
GCTAACAAAGCCCGAAAGGA
H.R. 5’
TATGAAATACCTGCTGCCGACCGCTGCTGCTGGTCTGCTGCTCCT
CGCTGCCCAGCCGGCGATGGCC
Mammalian cells
CHO and expiCHO
AH3
CAGGTGCAGCTGGTTGAAACAGGCGGATTGGTTCAGCCTGGCGG
CTCCCTGAGACTGTCTTGTGCTGCTTCTGGCTTCACCCTGGACTA
CTCCTCCATCGGCTGGTTCAGACAGGCCCCTGGCAAAGAGAGAG
AGGGCGTCAGCTGCATCTCTTCCTCCGGCGACTCTACTAAGTACG
CCGACTCCGTGAAGGGCAGATTCACCACCTCTCGGGACAACGCC
AAGAACACCGTGTACCTGCAGATGAACTCCCTGAAGCCTGACGA
CACCGCCGTGTACTACTGTGCCGCCTTTAGAGCCACCATGTGCGG
CGTGTTCCCTCTGTCTCCTTACGGCAAGGACGATTGGGGCAAGGG
CACACTGGTCACAGTTTCTAGC
G4S
GGAGGCGGAGGATCTGGTGGTGGCGGATCTGGCGGCGGAGGTAGT
5D
CAAGTTCAGCTGGTGGAATCTGGCGGAGGCTTGGTGCAACCAGG
CGGATCTCTCAGACTGTCCTGCGAGGCCTCTGGCTTTACACTGGAT
TATTACGGCATCGGATGGTTCCGGCAGCCTCCAGGGAAAGAAAGG
GAAGCCGTGTCCTACATCTCCGCCAGCGCCAGAACCATCCTGTACG
CCGATAGTGTGAAAGGCCGGTTCACCATCTCCAGAGATAATGCCAA
GAATGCTGTGTATCTCCAGATGAATAGCCTGAAGCGCGAGGATACC
GCTGTGTATTACTGCGCCAGACGGCGGTTCTCCGCCTCTTCTGTGA
ATAGATGGCTGGCCGACGACTACGACGTGTGGGGAAGAGGAACA
CAGGTGGCCGTTTCTTCA
G3S
GGCGGTGGCTCCGGCGGAGGAAGCGGTGGCGGAAGCGGCGGTG
GATCT
E3
CAGCTTCAGTTGGTTGAGACTGGTGGCGGCCTTGTCCAACCTGGT
GGATCACTGAGACTGAGCTGCGCTGCTAGCGGCTTCACCTTCTCC
GACTACGTGATGACCTGGGTTCGACAGGCTCCCGGAAAGGGACC
TGAGTGGATCGCCACCATCAATACCGACGGCTCTACCATGCGGGA
CGACTCCACCAAAGGCAGGTTTACAATCAGCCGCGATAACGCTAA
GAATACCCTCTACCTCCAAATGACCAGTCTGAAACCCGAGGACAC
AGCCCTGTACTATTGCGCCAGAGGCAGAGTGATCAGCGCCTCTGC
TATTAGAGGCGCCGTCAGAGGCCCTGGCACACAAGTGACTGTTAG
TAGT
G4S
GGCGGAGGCGGATCAGGCGGAGGCGGTAGCGGTGGCGGTGGAAGT
AA6
CAGGTTCAGCTTGTTGAGTCAGGCGGCGGACTTGTGCAGACAGGT
GGAAGCCTGAGACTCTCCTGCGCTTCCTCTGGCTCTATCGCCGGCT
TCGAGACAGTGACCTGGTCTAGACAAGCCCCAGGCAAGTCTCTGC
AGTGGGTCGCCTCTATGACCAAGACCAACAACGAGATCTACTCCG
ACAGCGTCAAGGGGAGATTCATCATCAGCAGAGACAATGCTAAAA
ACACCGTCTATCTTCAAATGAACAGCTTGAAACCTGAAGATACCGG
GGTGTACTTCTGCAAGGGCCCTGAGTTGAGAGGCCAGGGCATCCA
AGTGACCGTGTCCTCT
6­His
CACCACCACCATCACCAC
c­Myc
GAGCAGAAGCTGATCTCCGAAGAGGACCTG
64Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:71==
HEK293
AH3
CAGGTGCAGCTGGTTGAAACAGGCGGACTGGTTCAGCCTGGCGGC
TCTCTGAGACTGTCTTGTGCCGCCTCTGGCTTCACCCTGGACTACT
CTAGCATCGGCTGGTTCAGACAGGCCCCTGGCAAAGAGAGAGAGG
GCGTCAGCTGTATCAGCAGCAGCGGCGACAGCACCAAATACGCCG
ATAGCGTGAAGGGCAGATTCACCACCTCCAGAGACAACGCCAAGA
ACACCGTGTACCTGCAGATGAACAGCCTGAAGCCTGACGACACCG
CCGTGTATTACTGCGCCGCCTTTAGAGCCACCATGTGCGGAGTGTT
TCCACTGAGCCCCTACGGCAAGGACGATTGGGGAAAGGGCACACT
GGTCACCGTTTCTAGC
G4S
GGTGGTGGCGGATCAGGTGGCGGTGGTTCAGGCGGCGGTGGATCT
5D
CAAGTTCAGCTGGTGGAATCTGGCGGTGGCCTTGTGCAACCTGGT
GGATCACTGAGACTGAGCTGCGAGGCCAGCGGCTTTACACTGGAT
TACTACGGCATCGGATGGTTTCGGCAGCCTCCAGGCAAAGAGCGG
GAAGCCGTTAGCTACATCAGCGCCAGCGCCAGAACAATCCTGTAC
GCCGATTCTGTGAAAGGCCGGTTCACCATCAGCCGGGATAATGCC
AAGAATGCCGTCTATCTCCAGATGAATTCCCTGAAGCGCGAGGATA
CAGCCGTGTACTATTGTGCCAGACGGCGGTTTAGCGCCAGCAGCG
TTAACAGATGGCTGGCCGACGACTACGACGTGTGGGGAAGAGGA
ACACAGGTGGCAGTTTCTTCC
G3S
GGTGGTGGATCCGGCGGAGGTTCTGGCGGAGGAAGCGGAGGCGG
ATCT
E3
CAACTGCAACTGGTTGAGACTGGTGGTGGACTCGTCCAACCTGG
CGGAAGTCTGAGACTTTCCTGCGCTGCCAGCGGATTCACCTTCAG
CGACTACGTGATGACCTGGGTTCGACAGGCTCCCGGAAAGGGAC
CTGAGTGGATCGCCACCATCAATACCGACGGCAGCACCATGAGAG
ATGACTCCACCAAAGGCCGCTTTACAATCTCCCGCGACAATGCCA
AAAACACGCTCTATCTGCAAATGACCTCTCTCAAGCCCGAGGACA
CCGCTCTCTACTACTGCGCCAGAGGCAGAGTGATTAGCGCCTCTG
CCATTAGAGGCGCCGTTAGAGGCCCTGGCACACAAGTGACAGTGT
CCAGC
G4S
GGCGGCGGAGGTAGTGGCGGCGGTGGCTCTGGCGGTGGCGGATCT
AA6
CAAGTGCAGCTTGTTGAGTCTGGCGGCGGATTGGTGCAGACAGGT
GGAAGCCTTAGGCTGAGCTGTGCCAGCTCTGGATCTATCGCCGGC
TTCGAGACAGTGACCTGGTCTAGACAGGCACCAGGCAAGTCTCTG
CAGTGGGTCGCCAGCATGACCAAGACCAACAACGAGATCTACAGC
GACAGCGTCAAAGGACGCTTCATCATCAGCAGAGATAACGCTAAA
AACACGGTTTACCTCCAAATGAATAGTCTGAAACCCGAGGATACCG
GGGTGTACTTCTGCAAGGGCCCTGAGCTTAGAGGCCAGGGAATCC
AAGTGACCGTGTCCAGC
6­His
CACCACCACCATCACCACC
c­Myc
GAGCAGAAGCTGATCTCCGAAGAGGACCTG
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
65
==PAGE:72==
Saccharmyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
AH3
CAGGTCCAACTCGTGGAAACTGGCGGTCTGGTACAACCAGGGGGG
TCTTTGAGATTATCATGTGCAGCTAGTGGTTTCACGCTGGATTACTCT
TCCATTGGCTGGTTCAGACAGGCACCAGGTAAGGAGAGGGAAGGG
GTCAGTTGCATATCCTCAAGCGGTGATTCGACCAAGTATGCTGATTC
CGTTAAAGGTAGGTTTACGACGTCTAGAGACAATGCTAAAAATACCG
TGTATTTGCAAATGAACTCTTTAAAACCCGATGATACAGCTGTATATT
ATTGTGCCGCTTTTAGGGCAACTATGTGCGGCGTTTTTCCACTAAGC
CCATACGGGAAAGATGACTGGGGTAAAGGTACTCTAGTTACAGTTT
CCTCC
G4S
GGGGGAGGTGGATCCGGTGGAGGTGGAAGTGGTGGGGGTGGTTCT
5D
CAAGTACAGTTAGTCGAATCAGGTGGTGGGTTAGTGCAACCGGGTG
GGAGCTTGAGATTATCATGCGAAGCCTCTGGTTTTACTTTAGACTAT
TATGGTATCGGTTGGTTCCGGCAGCCCCCTGGAAAGGAAAGGGAAG
CCGTCTCGTACATCAGCGCTAGCGCGAGAACTATTTTGTATGCTGATT
CAGTTAAGGGTAGATTTACTATTTCAAGAGACAATGCTAAAAATGCC
GTTTATTTGCAAATGAACAGTCTGAAGCGCGAAGATACAGCAGTTTA
CTACTGTGCTAGAAGAAGATTTTCCGCTTCATCGGTAAATAGATGGC
TTGCCGACGATTACGACGTTTGGGGTCGTGGTACCCAAGTTGCCGT
GTCTTCT
G3S
GGTGGTGGATCGGGCGGTGGTAGTGGTGGAGGATCGGGTGGAGG
CTCA
E3
CAATTGCAACTAGTTGAGACGGGGGGCGGACTTGTTCAACCTGGT
GGATCCTTAAGACTGTCCTGTGCGGCTTCAGGCTTCACTTTTTCCG
ACTATGTTATGACCTGGGTACGTCAAGCACCAGGCAAAGGTCCTG
AATGGATAGCTACGATTAATACTGATGGCAGTACAATGCGCGACGA
TTCTACTAAGGGAAGGTTTACAATTTCACGTGATAATGCTAAAAATA
CTCTTTATTTGCAAATGACATCATTGAAACCTGAGGATACAGCTTTA
TACTACTGCGCACGAGGTCGAGTCATAAGTGCGTCTGCAATCCGTG
GCGCGGTAAGAGGCCCTGGTACACAAGTCACCGTTTCTTCC
G4S
GGAGGAGGTGGTAGTGGTGGGGGCGGTTCAGGTGGTGGAGGCAGT
AA6
CAAGTGCAATTGGTAGAATCGGGTGGCGGCTTAGTTCAGACCGGC
GGATCTTTACGTCTCAGTTGTGCATCTTCTGGATCGATTGCAGGATT
CGAGACAGTGACTTGGAGCAGGCAGGCCCCAGGCAAATCTCTACA
GTGGGTCGCATCAATGACAAAGACCAATAACGAGATATACAGCGAT
TCTGTCAAAGGGAGATTTATTATTTCTAGGGATAACGCCAAAAACAC
AGTTTATCTACAAATGAACTCATTGAAGCCAGAAGATACCGGTGTG
TATTTCTGTAAGGGTCCGGAACTTAGAGGTCAAGGAATCCAGGTGA
CTGTATCTAGT
6­His
CATCATCACCATCACCAC
c­Myc
GAACAAAAACTTATTTCTGAAGAAGATCTG
Pichia pastoris
AH3
CAGGTTCAGTTGGTTGAGACTGGTGGTTTGGTTCAACCAGGTGG
TTCTTTGAGATTGTCCTGTGCTGCTTCCGGTTTCACTTTGGACTAC
TCTTCCATCGGTTGGTTCAGACAGGCTCCAGGTAAAGAACGTGAA
GGTGTTTCCTGTATTTCCTCCTCTGGTGACTCCACTAAGTACGCTG
ATTCTGTCAAGGGTAGATTCACCACCTCTAGAGACAACGCCAAGA
ACACCGTTTACCTGCAGATGAACTCTCTGAAGCCAGACGACACTG
CCGTTTACTACTGTGCAGCTTTCAGAGCTACCATGTGCGGTGTTTT
TCCATTGTCTCCATACGGTAAGGACGACTGGGGTAAGGGTACTTT
GGTTACTGTTTCTTCT
66Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:73==
G4S
GGTGGTGGTGGATCTGGTGGCGGAGGTAGCGGAGGTGGTGGTTCT
5D
CAGGTTCAATTGGTTGAATCCGGTGGTGGTTTGGTTCAACCAGGTG
GTTCTTTGAGATTGTCCTGTGAAGCTTCCGGTTTCACCTTGGACTAC
TACGGTATTGGTTGGTTCAGACAGCCACCAGGTAAAGAGAGAGAA
GCCGTTTCTTACATTTCCGCTTCCGCCAGAACTATCTTGTACGCTGAT
TCTGTCAAGGGCAGATTCACCATCTCCAGAGACAACGCTAAGAACG
CCGTTTACTTGCAGATGAACTCCCTGAAGAGAGAGGACACCGCTGT
TTACTACTGTGCCAGAAGAAGATTCTCCGCCTCCTCCGTTAATAGAT
GGTTGGCTGATGATTACGACGTCTGGGGTAGAGGTACTCAAGTTGC
TGTTTCTTCT
G3S
GGTGGTGGATCTGGCGGTGGTTCAGGTGGCGGATCAGGTGGTGG
CTCT
E3
CAATTGCAACTTGTTGAAACTGGCGGAGGTCTTGTTCAGCCTGGT
GGTAGTTTGAGACTTTCTTGTGCTGCCTCCGGATTCACTTTCTCCG
ACTACGTTATGACCTGGGTTAGACAAGCTCCAGGTAAGGGTCCAG
AATGGATCGCTACTATTAACACTGACGGTTCCACTATGAGGGACGA
CTCTACTAAGGGTCGTTTCACTATTTCCCGTGATAACGCCAAGAAC
ACCCTGTACCTGCAAATGACTTCTCTGAAGCCAGAGGACACTGCC
TTGTACTATTGTGCTAGAGGTAGAGTCATCTCTGCCTCCGCTATTAG
AGGTGCTGTTAGAGGTCCTGGTACTCAGGTTACAGTATCTAGC
G4S
GGTGGTGGCGGTAGCGGTGGCGGAGGATCAGGCGGAGGTGGATCT
AA6
CAGGTTCAATTGGTTGAATCCGGTGGTGGTTTGGTTCAAACTGGTG
GTTCTTTGAGATTGTCCTGTGCTTCCTCTGGTTCCATTGCTGGTTTC
GAGACTGTTACTTGGTCCAGACAAGCTCCAGGTAAGTCCTTGCAA
TGGGTTGCTTCCATGACCAAGACCAACAACGAAATCTACTCCGAC
TCCGTCAAGGGTAGATTCATCATCTCCAGAGACAACGCCAAGAAC
ACCGTCTACTTGCAGATGAACTCTCTGAAGCCAGAGGACACTGGT
GTCTATTTCTGTAAGGGTCCAGAGTTGAGAGGTCAGGGTATCCAA
GTTACTGTTTCCTCT
6­His
CATCATCACCATCACCAC
c­Myc
GAGCAGAAGTTGATTTCCGAAGAGGACTTGTGA
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
67
==PAGE:74==
Table 10.2: Primers sequences used for the amplification of inserts and vectors for
the expression in Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic cell factories.
Amplification primers
Primer name
Primer sequence
Sequence
size
Escherichia coli
Hip059
GTCGGCAGCAGGTATTTCATA
5352 bp
Hip060
GCTAACAAAGCCCGAAAGGA
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii
AH3
ISCpr003
CTcatcatcaccatcaccacCAGGTCCAACTCGTGGAAAC
418 bp
ISCpr004
TCAGAAATAAGTTTTTGTTCGGAGGAAACTGTAACTAGAGT
AH3+5D
ISCpr003
CTcatcatcaccatcaccacCAGGTCCAACTCGTGGAAAC
464 bp
ISCpr008
CCACCGGATCCACCTCCCCCAGAACCACCCCCACCACTTC
ISCpr009
GAAGTGGTGGGGGTGGTTCTGGGGGAGGTGGATCCGGTGG
494 bp
ISCpr010
TCAGAAATAAGTTTTTGTTCAGAAGACACGGCAACTTGGGT
ISCpr030
agttagTCGAATCAGGTGGTGGGTTAG
6338 bp
ISCpr031
gtacttgAGAACCACCCCCACCACT
2ndnew_insert_FWD
GAAGTGGTGGGGGTGGTTCTCAAGTACAGTTAGTCGAATCAGG
421 bp
2ndnew_insert_REV
TCAGAAATAAGTTTTTGTTCAGAAGACACGGCAACTTGGG
2ndnew_backbone_FWD
CCCAAGTTGCCGTGTCTTCTGAACAAAAACTTATTTCTGAAGAAGATCT
5997 bp
2ndnew_backbone_REV
GATTCGACTAACTGTACTTGAGAACCACCCCCACCACTTC
AH3+5D+E3
AH3.5D.E3_FW
CACAAGTCACCGTTTCTTCCGAACAAAAACTTATTTCTGAAGAAGA
5574 bp
AH3.5D.E3_RV
GTTTCCACGAGTTGGACCTGgtggtgatggtgatgatgAG
back.3rd_4th_FW
CTcatcatcaccatcaccacCAGGTCCAACTCGTGGAAAC
1255 bp
back.3rd_4th_REV
TCAGAAATAAGTTTTTGTTCGGAAGAAACGGTGACTTGTG
AH3+5D+E3+AA6
DDpr736
TCCAGGTGACTGTATCTAGTATGGAACAAAAACTTATTTCTGAAG
5577 bp
DDpr737
GTTTCCACGAGTTGGACCTGgtggtgatggtgatgatgAG
DDpr738
CTcatcatcaccatcaccacCAGGTCCAACTCGTGGAAAC
463 bp
DDpr739
GATTCGACTAACTGTACTTGAGAACCACCCCCACCACTTC
DDpr740
GAAGTGGTGGGGGTGGTTCTCAAGTACAGTTAGTCGAATCAGGT
877 bp
DDpr741
GATTCTACCAATTGCACTTGACTGCCTCCACCACCTGAAC
DDpr742
GTTCAGGTGGTGGAGGCAGTCAAGTGCAATTGGTAGAATCG
373 bp
DDpr743
GAAATAAGTTTTTGTTCCATACTAGATACAGTCACCTGGA
68Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:75==
Amplification primers
Primer name
Primer sequence
Sequence
size
Pichia pastoris
His_myc_FW
gttgatttccgaagaggacttgtgaTCAAGAGGATGTCAGAATG
3013 bp
His_myc_REV
ttctgctcgtggtgatggtgatgatgAGCTTCAGCCTCTCTTTTC
AH3_1st_Pp_FWD
CTCATCATCACCATCACCACCAGGTTCAGTTGGTTGAGAC
418 bp
AH3_1st_Pp_REV
TCGGAAATCAACTTCTGCTCAGAAGAAACAGTAACCAAAGTAC
ISC030_1st_Pp_FWD
CTTTGGTTACTGTTTCTTCTGAGCAGAAGTTGATTTCCGA
3013 bp
ISC030_1st_Pp_REV
GTCTCAACCAACTGAACCTGGTGGTGATGGTGATGATGAG
5D_2nd_Pp_FWD
GTAGCGGAGGTGGTGGTTCTCAGGTTCAATTGGTTGAATCC
421 bp
5D_2nd_Pp_REV
TCGGAAATCAACTTCTGCTCAGAAGAAACAGCAACTTGAG
AH3_1st_Pp_FWD
CTCATCATCACCATCACCACCAGGTTCAGTTGGTTGAGAC
443 bp
AH3_2nd_Pp_REV
GATTCAACCAATTGAACCTGAGAACCACCACCTCCGCTAC
ISC031_2nd_Pp_FWD
CTCAAGTTGCTGTTTCTTCTGAGCAGAAGTTGATTTCCGA
3013 bp
ISC030_1st_Pp_REV
GTCTCAACCAACTGAACCTGGTGGTGATGGTGATGATGAG
5D_2nd_Pp_FWD
GTAGCGGAGGTGGTGGTTCTCAGGTTCAATTGGTTGAATCC
832 bp
5D­E3_3rd_Pp_REV
TCGGAAATCAACTTCTGCTCGCTAGATACTGTAACCTGAGT
AH3_1st_Pp_FWD
CTCATCATCACCATCACCACCAGGTTCAGTTGGTTGAGACT
443 bp
AH3_2nd_Pp_REV
GATTCAACCAATTGAACCTGAGAACCACCACCTCCGCTAC
ISC032_3rd_Pp_FWD
CTCAGGTTACAGTATCTAGCGAGCAGAAGTTGATTTCCGA
3013 bp
ISC030_1st_Pp_REV
GTCTCAACCAACTGAACCTGGTGGTGATGGTGATGATGAG
5D_2nd_Pp_FWD
GTAGCGGAGGTGGTGGTTCTCAGGTTCAATTGGTTGAATCCG
877 bp
5D­E3_4th_Pp_REV
GATTCAACCAATTGAACCTGAGATCCACCTCCGCCTGATC
AA6_4th_Pp_FWD
GATCAGGCGGAGGTGGATCTCAGGTTCAATTGGTTGAATCC
373 bp
AA6_4th_Pp_REV
TCGGAAATCAACTTCTGCTCAGAGGAAACAGTAACTTGGAT
AH3_1st_Pp_FWD
CTCATCATCACCATCACCACCAGGTTCAGTTGGTTGAGACT
443 bp
AH3_2nd_Pp_REV
GATTCAACCAATTGAACCTGAGAACCACCACCTCCGCTAC
ISC032_3rd_Pp_FWD
TCCAAGTTACTGTTTCCTCTGAGCAGAAGTTGATTTCCGA
3013 bp
ISC030_1st_Pp_REV
GTCTCAACCAACTGAACCTGGTGGTGATGGTGATGATGAG
HEK 293
AH3_HEK_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
429 bp
AH3_HEK_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
69
==PAGE:76==
Amplification primers
Primer name
Primer sequence
Sequence
size
HEK 293
AH3_5D_HEK_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
855 bp
AH3_5D_HEK_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
AH3_5D_E3_HEK_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
1266 bp
AH3_5D_E3_HEK_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
AH3_5D_E3_AA6_HEK_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
1644 bp
AH3_5D_E3_AA6_HEK_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
backbone_FWD
TCTCCGAAGAGGACCTGTGAgatcagcctcgactgtgcct
4960 bp
backbone_REV
TGGTGGTGATGGTGGTGGTGAGAGTAGGCGCTGGAGAACA
CHO/expicHO
AH3_C.griseus_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
429 bp
AH3_C.griseus_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
AH3_5D_C.griseus_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
855 bp
AH3_5D_C.griseus_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
AH3_5D_E3_C.griseus_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
1266 bp
AH3_5D_E3_C.griseus_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
AH3_5D_E3_AA6_C.griseus_FWD
TGTTCTCCAGCGCCTACTCTCACCACCACCATCACCACCA
1644 bp
AH3_5D_E3_AA6_C.griseus_REV
aggcacagtcgaggctgatcTCACAGGTCCTCTTCGGAGA
backbone_FWD
TCTCCGAAGAGGACCTGTGAgatcagcctcgactgtgcct
4960 bp
backbone_REV
TGGTGGTGATGGTGGTGGTGAGAGTAGGCGCTGGAGAACA
70Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:77==
Table 10.3: Sequencing primers used to verify the correct insertion of the four con­
structs in the Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic expression vectors.
Sequencing primers
Primer name
Primer sequence
Escherichia coli
pET22b_ins.ver_FW
TCCTTTCGGGCTTTGTTAGC
pET22b_ins.ver_RV
TATGAAATACCTGCTGCCGAC
3´ Seq primer FOR
CGCCGCTACAGGGCG
5´ Seq primer REV
AACAATTCCCCTCTA
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii
ISCpr025
CCAGCATTGCTGCTAAAGAAGAAGG
ISCpr026
CGGGAAAGATGACTGGGGTAAAGG
DDpr214
CTACTATTGCCAGCATTGCTGC
DDpr746
GGGAGCTTGAGATTATCATGCGAAGC
DDpr745
CAATGCGCGACGATTCTACT
DDpr004
gatctgtcgggtgtctgcttctc
Sb_seq_5D_REV
GTGCTTGACGTACCCAGGTCATAAC
Pichia pastoris
Pp_correct_insert_FWD
ATTCGCAGCATCCTCCGCATTAGCT
Pp_seq_5D
CAGCTTTCAGAGCTACCATGTGCG
Pp_seq_E3
GAAGAGAGAGGACACCGCTGTTTAC
Pp_seq_AA6
GCCAGAGGACACTGCCTTGTACTAT
HEK293, CHO and expiCHO
Primer001
tgtacggtgggaggt
Primer002
gaatagaatgacacc
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
71
==PAGE:78==
11
Appendix B
Components for autoinduction media ZY medium (1L)
ZY medium (1L) 10 g N­Z amine AS (Sigma Aldrich #N4517), 5 g Yeast Extract. Dissolve
in distilled water, autoclave, and store at room temperature.
1M MgSO4 Dissolve in H2O, autoclave, and store at room temperature.
50x 5052 25% (w/v) glycerol, 2.5% (w/v) glucose, 10% (w/v) α­lactose. Dissolve in H2O,
autoclave, and store at room temperature.
50xM 1.25 M KH2PO4, 2.5 M NH4Cl, 0.25 M Na2SO4. Dissolve in H2O, autoclave, and
store at room temperature.
100 mg/mL Ampicillin Weigh Ampicillin in a hood to avoid exposure to airborn particles.
Dissolve in water, filter sterilise, and store in aliquots at ­20°C.
Metals mix ­ add in order written (10 mL)
Metals mixing ratio
Metal
Volume
Final
concentration
1
Distilled MilliQ
3.6mL
N/A
2
0.1M stock FeCl3 • 6H2O dissolved in ∼0.1M HCl
5mL
50mM
3
1M stock CaCl2
200µL
20mM
4
1M stock MnCl2 • 4 H2O
100µL
10mM
5
1M stock ZnSO4 • 7 H2O
100µL
10mM
6
0.2 M stock CoCl2 • 6 H2O
100µL
2mM
7
0.1M stock CuCl2 • 2 H2O
200µL
2mM
8
0.2M stock NiCl2 • 6 H2O
100µL
2mM
9
0.1M stock Na2MoO4 • 2 H2O
200µL
2mM
10
0.1M stock Na2SeO3 • 5 H2O
200µL
2mM
11
0.1M stock H3BO3
200µL
2mM
72Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. Antibiotic resistance. 2020. URL: https://www.who.int/
news-room/fact-sheets/detail/antibiotic-resistance.
[2]
Centers for Disease Control et al. Antibiotic resistance threats in the United States,
2019. 2019. URL: https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/82532.
[3]
Jim O’Neill et al. “Review on antimicrobial resistance: tackling drug­resistant infec­
tions globally: final report and recommendations.” In: Review on antimicrobial resis­
tance: tackling drug­resistant infections globally: final report and recommendations.
(2016).
[4]
Ivan C Hall and Elizabeth O’toole. “Intestinal flora in new­born infants: with a de­
scription of a new pathogenic anaerobe, Bacillus difficilis”. In: American journal of
diseases of children 49.2 (1935), pp. 390–402.
[5]
Jacek Czepiel et al. “Clostridium difficile infection”. In: European Journal of Clinical
Microbiology & Infectious Diseases 38.7 (2019), pp. 1211–1221.
[6]
Ana C De Roo and Scott E Regenbogen. “Clostridium difficile infection: an epidemi­
ology update”. In: Clinics in colon and rectal surgery 33.02 (2020), pp. 049–057.
[7]
Philippe Bidet et al. “Development of a new PCR­ribotyping method for Clostridium
difficile based on ribosomal RNA gene sequencing”. In: FEMS microbiology letters
175.2 (1999), pp. 261–266.
[8]
Valérie Bouchet, Heather Huot, and Richard Goldstein. “Molecular genetic basis of
ribotyping”. In: Clinical microbiology reviews 21.2 (2008), pp. 262–273.
[9]
Travis J Kochan et al. “Intestinal calcium and bile salts facilitate germination of
Clostridium difficile spores”. In: PLoS pathogens 13.7 (2017), e1006443.
[10]
Jacek Czepiel et al. “Clostridium difficile infection”. In: European Journal of Clinical
Microbiology & Infectious Diseases 38.7 (2019), pp. 1211–1221.
[11]
Ruth K Dudek­Wicher, Adam Junka, and Marzenna Bartoszewicz. “The influence
of antibiotics and dietary components on gut microbiota”. In: Przeglad gastroentero­
logiczny 13.2 (2018), p. 85.
[12]
Csaba Fehér, Alex Soriano, and Josep Mensa. “A review of experimental and off­
label therapies for Clostridium difficile infection”. In: Infectious diseases and therapy
6.1 (2017), pp. 1–35.
[13]
Rory Nelson Pruitt and D Borden Lacy. “Toward a structural understanding of Clostrid­
ium difficile toxins A and B”. In: Frontiers in cellular and infection microbiology 2
(2012), p. 28.
[14]
Martina Egerer et al. “Auto­catalytic cleavage of Clostridium difficile toxins A and B
depends on cysteine protease activity”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 282.35
(2007), pp. 25314–25321.
[15]
Klaus Aktories and Ingo Just. “Monoglucosylation of low­molecular­mass GTP­binding
Rho proteins by clostridial cytotoxins”. In: Trends in cell biology 5.12 (1995), pp. 441–
443.
[16]
Thomas Jank, Torsten Giesemann, and Klaus Aktories. “Rho­glucosylating Clostrid­
ium difficile toxins A and B: new insights into structure and function”. In: Glycobiology
17.4 (2007), 15R–22R.
[17]
Chetana Vaishnavi et al. “Clinical spectrum & pathogenesis of Clostridium difficile
associated diseases”. In: Indian Journal of Medical Research 131.4 (2010), p. 487.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
73
==PAGE:80==
[18]
L Clifford McDonald et al. “Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile in­
fection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA)”. In:
Clinical infectious diseases 66.7 (2018), e1–e48.
[19]
Sylvia B Debast et al. “European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Dis­
eases: update of the treatment guidance document for Clostridium difficile infection”.
In: Clinical microbiology and infection 20 (2014), pp. 1–26.
[20]
DavidG Teasley et al. “Prospective randomised trial of metronidazole versus van­
comycin for Clostridium­difficile­associated diarrhoea and colitis”. In: The Lancet
322.8358 (1983), pp. 1043–1046.
[21]
Fred A Zar et al. “A comparison of vancomycin and metronidazole for the treatment
of Clostridium difficile–associated diarrhea, stratified by disease severity”. In: Clini­
cal Infectious Diseases 45.3 (2007), pp. 302–307.
[22]
Wafa N Al­Nassir et al. “Both oral metronidazole and oral vancomycin promote per­
sistent overgrowth of vancomycin­resistant enterococci during treatment of Clostrid­
ium difficile­associated disease”. In: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 52.7
(2008), pp. 2403–2406.
[23]
Thomas J Louie et al. “Tolevamer, a novel nonantibiotic polymer, compared with van­
comycin in the treatment of mild to moderately severe Clostridium difficile–associated
diarrhea”. In: Clinical infectious diseases 43.4 (2006), pp. 411–420.
[24]
Eric Wombwell et al. “The effect of Saccharomyces boulardii primary prevention
on risk of hospital­onset Clostridioides difficile infection in hospitalized patients ad­
ministered antibiotics frequently associated with C. difficile infection”. In: Clinical
Infectious Diseases 73.9 (2021), e2512–e2518.
[25]
Marjorie Pizarro­Guajardo et al. “New insights for vaccine development against
Clostridium difficile infections”. In: Anaerobe 58 (2019), pp. 73–79.
[26]
TV Riley, D Lyras, and GR Douce. “Status of vaccine research and development for
Clostridium difficile”. In: Vaccine 37.50 (2019), pp. 7300–7306.
[27]
Pfizer Inc. Phase 3 CLOVER Trial for Pfizer’s Investigational Clostridioides Diffi­
cile Vaccine Indicates Strong Potential Effect in Reducing Duration and Severity
of Disease Based on Secondary Endpoints. 2022. URL: https://www.pfizer.com/
news/press-release/press-release-detail/phase-3-clover-trial-pfizers-investigational-
clostridioides.
[28]
Jeffrey M Libby and Tracy D Wilkins. “Production of antitoxins to two toxins of
Clostridium difficile and immunological comparison of the toxins by cross­neutralization
studies”. In: Infection and Immunity 35.1 (1982), pp. 374–376.
[29]
John A Kink and Jim A Williams. “Antibodies to recombinant Clostridium difficile tox­
ins A and B are an effective treatment and prevent relapse of C. difficile­associated
disease in a hamster model of infection”. In: Infection and immunity 66.5 (1998),
pp. 2018–2025.
[30]
Séverine Péchiné, Claire Janoir, and Anne Collignon. “Emerging monoclonal anti­
bodies against Clostridium difficile infection”. In: Expert Opinion on Biological Ther­
apy 17.4 (2017), pp. 415–427.
[31]
Serge Muyldermans. “Nanobodies: natural single­domain antibodies”. In: Annual
review of biochemistry 82 (2013), pp. 775–797.
[32]
Greg Hussack et al. “Neutralization of Clostridium difficile toxin A with single­domain
antibodies targeting the cell receptor binding domain”. In: Journal of Biological Chem­
istry 286.11 (2011), pp. 8961–8976.
74Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:81==
[33]
Zhiyong Yang et al. “A novel multivalent, single­domain antibody targeting TcdA
and TcdB prevents fulminant Clostridium difficile infection in mice”. In: The Journal
of infectious diseases 210.6 (2014), pp. 964–972.
[34]
Diane J Schmidt et al. “A tetraspecific VHH­based neutralizing antibody modifies
disease outcome in three animal models of Clostridium difficile infection”. In: Clinical
and Vaccine Immunology 23.9 (2016), pp. 774–784.
[35]
Kevin Chen et al. “A probiotic yeast­based immunotherapy against Clostridioides
difficile infection”. In: Science translational medicine 12.567 (2020), eaax4905.
[36]
Tahir S Pillay and Serge Muyldermans. “Application of single­domain antibodies
(“nanobodies”) to laboratory diagnosis”. In: Ann. Lab. Med 41.6 (2021), pp. 549–
558.
[37]
Joost A Kolkman and Debbie A Law. “Nanobodies–from llamas to therapeutic pro­
teins”. In: Drug discovery today: technologies 7.2 (2010), e139–e146.
[38]
Dana M Francis and Rebecca Page. “Strategies to optimize protein expression in
E. coli”. In: Current protocols in protein science 61.1 (2010), pp. 5–24.
[39]
Tatsuya Niwa et al. “Bimodal protein solubility distribution revealed by an aggrega­
tion analysis of the entire ensemble of Escherichia coli proteins”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 106.11 (2009), pp. 4201–4206.
[40]
Md Fakruddin et al. “Critical factors affecting the success of cloning, expression,
and mass production of enzymes by recombinant E. coli”. In: International Scholarly
Research Notices 2013 (2013).
[41]
Yichun Xu et al. “Codon usage bias regulates gene expression and protein con­
formation in yeast expression system P. pastoris”. In: Microbial cell factories 20.1
(2021), pp. 1–15.
[42]
CUSABIO TECHNOLOGY LLC. How to choose a suitable expression vector? 2007.
URL: https://www.cusabio.com/c-20273.html.
[43]
Bhakti Bajpai. “High capacity vectors”. In: Advances in biotechnology. Springer,
2014, pp. 1–10.
[44]
Kristina Nordén et al. “Increasing gene dosage greatly enhances recombinant ex­
pression of aquaporins in Pichia pastoris”. In: Bmc Biotechnology 11.1 (2011), pp. 1–
12.
[45]
Aleš Berlec and Borut Štrukelj. “Current state and recent advances in biopharma­
ceutical production in Escherichia coli, yeasts and mammalian cells”. In: Journal of
industrial microbiology and biotechnology 40.3­4 (2013), pp. 257–274.
[46]
Yongkang Liu and He Huang. “Expression of single­domain antibody in different
systems”. In: Applied microbiology and biotechnology 102.2 (2018), pp. 539–551.
[47]
Janusz Wesolowski et al. “Single domain antibodies: promising experimental and
therapeutic tools in infection and immunity”. In: Medical microbiology and immunol­
ogy 198.3 (2009), pp. 157–174.
[48]
Gökçe Günaydın et al. “Co­expression of anti­rotavirus proteins (llama VHH anti­
body fragments) in Lactobacillus: development and functionality of vectors contain­
ing two expression cassettes in tandem”. In: PloS one 9.4 (2014), e96409.
[49]
Jaume M Canaves et al. “Protein biophysical properties that correlate with crystal­
lization success in Thermotoga maritima: maximum clustering strategy for structural
genomics”. In: Journal of molecular biology 344.4 (2004), pp. 977–991.
[50]
Michael R Dyson et al. “Production of soluble mammalian proteins in Escherichia
coli: identification of protein features that correlate with successful expression”. In:
BMC biotechnology 4.1 (2004), pp. 1–18.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
75
==PAGE:82==
[51]
Lisa C Shriver­Lake et al. “Improved production of single domain antibodies with
two disulfide bonds by co­expression of chaperone proteins in the Escherichia coli
periplasm”. In: Journal of Immunological Methods 443 (2017), pp. 64–67.
[52]
Leon GJ Frenken et al. “Isolation of antigen specific llama VHH antibody fragments
and their high level secretion by Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Journal of biotech­
nology 78.1 (2000), pp. 11–21.
[53]
MM Harmsen, CB Van Solt, and HPD Fijten. “Enhancement of toxin­and virus­
neutralizing capacity of single­domain antibody fragments by N­glycosylation”. In:
Applied microbiology and biotechnology 84.6 (2009), pp. 1087–1094.
[54]
Aymen Ezzine et al. “Efficient expression of the anti­AahI’scorpion toxin nanobody
under a new functional form in a Pichia pastoris system”. In: Biotechnology and
applied biochemistry 59.1 (2012), pp. 15–21.
[55]
Eun Jung Thak et al. “Yeast synthetic biology for designed cell factories producing
secretory recombinant proteins”. In: FEMS Yeast Research 20.2 (2020), foaa009.
[56]
Ryosuke Mitsui and Ryosuke Yamada. “Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a microbial
cell factory”. In: Microbial Cell Factories Engineering for Production of Biomolecules.
Elsevier, 2021, pp. 319–333.
[57]
Anna Judith Schifferdecker et al. “The wine and beer yeast Dekkera bruxellensis”.
In: Yeast 31.9 (2014), pp. 323–332.
[58]
A Gorlani et al. “Antibody engineering reveals the important role of J segments
in the production efficiency of llama single­domain antibodies in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae”. In: Protein Engineering, Design & Selection 25.1 (2012), pp. 39–46.
[59]
Mudassar Ahmad et al. “Protein expression in Pichia pastoris: recent achievements
and perspectives for heterologous protein production”. In: Applied microbiology and
biotechnology 98.12 (2014), pp. 5301–5317.
[60]
Veeresh Juturu and Jin Chuan Wu. “Heterologous protein expression in Pichia pas­
toris: latest research progress and applications”. In: ChemBioChem 19.1 (2018),
pp. 7–21.
[61]
Xi Xi et al. “A comparative study and evaluation of anti­EGFR nanobodies expressed
in Pichia pastoris and Escherichia coli as antitumor moieties”. In: Protein Expression
and Purification 184 (2021), p. 105888.
[62]
Silvia Zucchelli et al. “Engineering translation in mammalian cell factories to in­
crease protein yield: the unexpected use of long non­coding SINEUP RNAs”. In:
Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 14 (2016), pp. 404–410.
[63]
Brigitte Gasser et al. “Protein folding and conformational stress in microbial cells
producing recombinant proteins: a host comparative overview”. In: Microbial cell
factories 7.1 (2008), pp. 1–18.
[64]
Vishal Agrawal et al. “Stable expression of chimeric heavy chain antibodies in CHO
cells”. In: Single Domain Antibodies. Springer, 2012, pp. 287–303.
[65]
Philip Thomas and Trevor G Smart. “HEK293 cell line: a vehicle for the expression
of recombinant proteins”. In: Journal of pharmacological and toxicological methods
51.3 (2005), pp. 187–200.
[66]
Jianwen Hu et al. “Human embryonic kidney 293 cells: a vehicle for biopharma­
ceutical manufacturing, structural biology, and electrophysiology”. In: Cells Tissues
Organs 205.1 (2018), pp. 1–8.
[67]
Joanne Marie M Del Rosario et al. “Protection from influenza by intramuscular gene
vector delivery of a broadly neutralizing nanobody does not depend on antibody
dependent cellular cytotoxicity”. In: Frontiers in immunology 11 (2020), p. 627.
76Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
==PAGE:83==
[68]
D Brömme et al. “Functional expression of human cathepsin S in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Purification and characterization of the recombinant enzyme.” In: Jour­
nal of Biological Chemistry 268.7 (1993), pp. 4832–4838.
[69]
THOMAS R Manney. “Expression of the BAR1 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae:
induction by the alpha mating pheromone of an activity associated with a secreted
protein”. In: Journal of bacteriology 155.1 (1983), pp. 291–301.
Generation and evaluation of mono­ to multimeric single domain antibodies against Clostridium difficile in
various host species
77
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 223
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
