==PAGE:1==
Conceptual modelling of a nature based
solution’s hydrological performance
Master Thesis
Author: Konstantinos Papamanolis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
Master Thesis
2 October, 2022
By
Konstantinos Papamanolis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn­
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Thesis Details
Author: Konstantinos Papamanolis ­ s202598
Supervisor: Dr. Hjalte Jomo Danielsen Sørup, Associate Professor, DTU Sustain
Credit points: 30 ECTS
Project period: 2 May 2022 ­ 2 October 2022
Konstantinos Papamanolis ­ s202598
Date
ii
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
02/10/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project falls under the subject of climate adaptation. One of the outcomes of the
witnessed climate change and expanding urbanization is an increase in the occurrence
and severity of floods. In urban areas, flooding has been traditionally dealt with the use
of piped drainage systems. Recently, nature based solutions (NBS) are gaining ground
over these conventional systems, as they constitute a sustainable alternative. The fact
that these solutions haven’t been around for a long time, results in limited information
regarding their effectiveness in handling flooding incidences.
The present thesis attempts to conceptualize and test the performance of a hydrological
model designed to simulate a nature based solution’s (NBS) operation. The goal was to
determine if the model could accurately predict the ”behaviour” of such setups during rain
episodes of various magnitudes. The resulting model is basically a simple mathemati­
cal set of equations that serve to dynamically represent hydrological processes that take
place in and around such setups. In order to preserve this simplicity, several assumptions
have been made regarding the processes and parameters that are encompassed to the
model. Available data, in form of time­series datasets of weather conditions and water el­
evations inside such a setup, will assist in evaluating the model’s simulating performance
by studying the convergence between the model’s outputs and the real situation .
The project will conclude with an overall discussion of this model’s efficiency and it’s appli­
cations, while examining the assumptions and conditions based on which it can be used.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extent my most endearing thanks to my supervisor, Associate Professor Dr.
Hjalte Jomo Danielsen Sørup, for 5 months of excellent cooperation. Thank you Hjalte!
For your patience, endearing comments on my work, and the time you have spent to
assist me in this endeavour.
I would also like to thank the people that stood by me through this period. These are my
parents and dear friends who heartfully advised me through this process and offered their
help in anyway they could. From sharing their opinion on a project matter, all the way
to forcing me to go out for a drink when I was overwhelmed. I’d like to thank Mr. Claus
Mouritsen of HOFOR that took time to give me a tour of the study area, to send valuable
data and share his knowledge and experience on the subject. His insights have truly been
crucial towards this project’s fruition. I would like to extend a special thanks to my very
good friend Phillipos Xeiloudakis, with whom we spent many hours online troubleshooting
several of Microsoft Excel’s ”irregularities”. Phillipos you taught me how to use Excel, and
for that, I owe you a dinner when I return.
iv
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
4
2.1
Hydrological modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Urban water cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Types of drainage systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Rainfall­runoff hydrologic components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Case study
18
3.1
Study area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Technical description of the roadbed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Methodology
22
4.1
Pre­processing and investigation of measurement data
. . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Model parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Hydrological model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Model output processing, analysis and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Results & Discussion
34
5.1
Pre­processing and investigation of measurement data
. . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2
Model parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Hydrological model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4
Model output processing, analysis and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Conclusions
61
References
63
A Rain Data
67
B Noteworthy events of the study period
70
C Original model ­ Individual events
73
D Calibrated model ­ Individual events
76
E
1st model variation ­ Individual events
79
F
2nd model variation ­ Individual events
82
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Flooding, and other natural weather­related events that are noticed around the world,
have become more frequent and intense due to climate change. Climate change has
increased the frequency and intensity of floods, and other natural weather­related events
that are noticed around the world.
Urbanization is becoming more prevalent globally, which is another factor contributing to
rising dangers of pluvial flooding in urban areas. According on a UN report released in
2008 [1], it is expected that roughly 70% of the global population will be residing in urban
areas by the year 2050. This will inevitably lead to an expansion of impervious surfaces
in urban areas, which will result in increased rainfall runoff, as water fails to infiltrate to
the soil. Additionally, the drainage systems that are currently operating in these areas are
usually not planned to handle excess water due to the changing climate and the extra
runoff resulting from urban expansion.
Being a coastal country, Denmark experiences cool, stormy summers and mild, wet win­
ters. However, the country’s climate is changing continuously, and precipitation volume is
one of several indications that can assist in the overall understanding of its development
course. The annual precipitation in Denmark is increasing and the weather is anticipated
to become more extreme in the future, with wetter winters and drier summers with heavy
storms that could lead to flooding. If no steps are taken to adapt to climate change, build­
ings, roads and farmland crops may suffer significant and costly damage. In recent years,
annual precipitation has increased from 650mm in 1870 to 750mm, an increase of 15%,
as seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The yearly precipitation trend in Denmark, measured in millimeters, from 1874
to 2019.(The Danish Meteorological Institute, 2020)
Until recently, stormwater management techniques only considered pipe systems as a
the only solution against flooding. Sewage systems, whether separate or combined, are
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
1
==PAGE:10==
planned for maximum capabilities based on different storm scenarios. These pipe sys­
tems, also known as traditional stormwater drainage, have shown to be insufficient to han­
dle all effects associated to urban runoff over the past few decades (Ramos et al.,2017)
[2]. Stormwater flooding is becoming more widespread in cities all around the world, as a
result of both climate change and urbanization, and infrastructure and natural resources
are being harmed.
In accordance with the national 2012 action plan, all Danish municipalities took up on im­
plementing a thorough strategy for local climate adaptation by December 2013 (Jensen et
al., 2016) [3], which would outline how the municipality would adjust to both higher annual
precipitation and extreme rain events in the future. The action plan, that was published
by the municipality of Copenhagen in 2011 [4], also includes a special focus on potential
growth through developing new solutions that contribute to green adaption. According
to the economic analysis, included in the same plan, implementing these natural based
solutions would result in the greatest net cost savings when compared to other scenarios
that exclusively use traditional flood mitigation technologies.
Although nature based solutions are starting to be widely implement and constructed in
various projects across Denmark, there is little documentation and proof to their robust­
ness and evaluation of their performance in relieving the sewer system of rainfall runoff.
Additionally, since their function is not accompanied by years of experience, as their con­
ventional drainage counterparts is, it is difficult to determine whether they are designed
and dimensioned properly (overdimensioning or underdimensioning). In case of overdi­
mensioning, this could imply that the investment for constructing these solutions is not
amortized and, possibly, a lot of money is being needlessly wasted. On the other hand, in
instances where these solutions are underdimensioned, further financial burden is added
due to uncontrolled floods causing damages. In any case, a lot of taxpayers’ money is in­
vested in setups like these. It is, therefore, important to study how these solutions operate
and ”behave” during rain episodes of different magnitudes. By having such knowledge,
a conclusion can be drawn regarding their effectiveness and further work can be carried
out to optimize the dimensioning and design method of these setups to make them more
efficient and cost effective.
Therefore, the question this study will try to answer is: ”Can the performance of a NBS
unit’s operation be predicted for rain events of different duration and magnitude?”
A way of assessing whether such setups work as intended is by trying to simulate their op­
eration. Modelling of the hydrological processes and flows, that take place in and around
such a system, could prove useful in determining any drainage system’s performance and
behaviour.
1.1
Objectives
This thesis aims at developing a hydrological model that simulates a roadbed’s (particular
type of NBS) performance in handling runoff from multiple rainfall events in an urban envi­
ronment. The model will be produced based on theoretical knowledge of the hydrological
processes that take place in and around these setups, and it’s output will be evaluated
with the use of available in situ measurements.
1.2
Literature review
A variety of older theses, projects, papers, books and online sources have been reviewed
in order to complete this project. The source for these documents was usually DTU Findit,
2
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:11==
the online material of some DTU courses, and some of them, that addressed a specific
topic of this thesis, were directly provided by the supervisor.
The book titled ”Urban Drainage”, by Butler et al. (2018) [5], was used as a foundation
for the theory surrounding hydrological processes and types of drainage systems. Vari­
ous articles that presented hydrological models that studied NBS have been reviewed. A
summary of the subject of some of them will be mentioned here: Locatelli et al. (2014) [6]
developed a model illustrating the overall retention capacity of a green roof including com­
ponents for surface and subsurface storage. Andersen et al. (2017) [7] created a math­
ematical model that simulates the flow of water between different retention ponds under
the effect of artificially created rain events. Yang et al. (2021) [8] implemented machine
learning (ML) techniques in order to directly learn the statistical correlations between the
hydrological responses of these solutions and the forcing variables of observation data,
and modeled a collection of different types of NBS. Hetzel (2018) [9] created a model
using EPA’s Stormwater Management Model (SWMM) to quantify the runoff volume re­
duction that resulted from retrofitting a neighborhood with raingardens. The procedure of
parameterizing and simulating hydrological processes, has been partially assisted by the
theses of Djurhuus (2019) [10] and Jacobsen (2021) [11].
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
2.1
Hydrological modelling
According to Marshall (2014) [12], ”Hydrological models are used to simulate the pro­
cesses and exchanges of water within a catchment or, in the case of global climate mod­
els, over the land surface on a continental scale. Catchment­scale models provide guid­
ance to water resource management, hydroelectric power production, flood forecasts, and
numerous other applications.” They are a simplified representation of a real­world system,
which helps in understanding, forecasting, and managing water resources.
2.1.1
Types of models
Model inputs, parameters, and the extent to which physical principles are utilized in the
model are used to categorize models. On the basis of the hydrological model’s param­
eters as a function of space , it may be categorized either as a lumped or a distributed
model (Yao et al., 1998) [13]. Using a single input of rainfall, lumped models treat the wa­
tershed as a single unit and disregard spatial variability, whereas distributed models rely
on simulating aspects of the earth’s surface that have an impact on various water balance
components. Models can also be classified based on time factor as static and dynamic.
The main distinction between static and dynamic system models is that, whereas a dy­
namic model refers to the system’s runtime model, a static model is the system’s model
outside of runtime [14]. Additionally, static models are at equilibrium or in a steady state
while dynamic models are constantly changing with respect to time. Models can also be
divided in deterministic and stohastic, where for a single set of input values, deterministic
models will create the same result, whereas stochastic models may yield multiple output
values (Devi et al., 2015) [15].
Further classification of hydrological models
Classification of hydrological models is not exact and different hydrologists may give dif­
ferent definitions. According to Jajarmizadeh et al. (2012) [16], the reason is that the
nature of models is often the same but many models have overlapping characteristics. A
well accepted classification, however, is following.
Empirical model (Black box): These models, which are observation­oriented and merely
use information from the available data without taking into account the characteristics
and workings of the hydrological system, are also known as data­driven models (Stella
at al.,2018) [17]. They use equations derived from concurrent input and output time se­
ries rather than the catchment’s physical processes. Regression and correlation models
are employed in statistically based techniques to determine the functional relationship
between inputs and outputs.
Parametric model (Grey box): These models complete an incomplete theoretical frame­
work using data (Bohlin, 2006) [18]. All of the constituent hydrological processes are de­
scribed in this model. They are made up of several interconnected reservoirs that serve
as a representation of the physical components of a watershed, which are replenished by
precipitation, infiltration, and percolation and drained by evaporation, runoff, drainage, etc.
This method employs semi­empirical equations, and the model parameters are evaluated
both through calibration and field data (Ghonchepour et al., 2021) [19].
Physically based model (White box): Physically based models use physically based equa­
tions to describe the hydrological processes that drive the catchment response and are
4
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:13==
based on our understanding of the physics of these processes (Seth, 2009) [20]. They
employ measurable state variables that are both time and space­dependent. Because
physical parameters are used, the physical model can address numerous flaws in the
other two models.
This categorization is not far from the opinion of Gosain et al. (2009) [21], that a broad
classification for hydrological models can be simplified in three categories: black­box,
conceptual and deterministic model. Undoubtedly, there are also subdivisions for these
categories.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Urban water cycle
The hydrologic cycle (or water cycle) is one of the most essential ideas in hydrology, and
in managing water resources generally. Water can be found in the atmosphere, seas,
lakes, rivers, soils, glaciers, and underground aquifers. Evaporation, transpiration, con­
densation, precipitation, infiltration, percolation, snowmelt, and runoff are examples of
processes that circulate water among these storage compartments. These processes
are also known as water cycle components.
Figure 2.1:
Impact of urbanisation on the water cycle.
(Obtained from graphic on
www.susdrain.org)
Landscape features and the hydrological response of watersheds are impacted by the
combined influences of urbanization, industrialization, and population increase (Konrad,
2003) [22]. Nevertheless, the primary structure of the hydrological cycle is still present in
urban areas, despite the fact that human activities have an impact on many aspects of the
natural environment with regards to water pathways and runoff losses. This hydrological
6
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:15==
cycle, however, is significantly altered due to the environmental impacts of urbanization,
accompanied by the need to provide basic water services to the population such as water
supply, sewage collection and treatment, and drainage. The key elements and pathways
of the urban water cycle can be seen in Figure 2.2
Figure 2.2: The main elements and pathways of the urban water cycle. (Rayan et al.,
2016) [23]
A major problem that the above mentioned factors are causing to an urban area’s water
cycle is water contamination. Water can be contaminated by oil, metals, waste, and other
pollutants when it comes in contact with urban surfaces like rooftops, roadways, and side­
walks (City of Melbourne) [24]. The result is that these pollutants are typically conveyed
directly into rivers, bays and seas since stormwater drains are not typically equipped with
treatment facilities. However, the most prominent water related catastrophe that can oc­
cur in an urban environment are floods, as they can cause human and animal casualties,
destruction of property and crops, and worsen health conditions due to enhancing the
transmission of waterborne disease (State of Queensland, 2011) [25]. In urban areas,
floods occur due to intense or prolonged rain events that produce runoff which cannot be
handled by the existing drainage infrastructure.
2.3
Types of drainage systems
Due to the connection between human activities and the natural water cycle, drainage
systems are required in developed metropolitan areas. Wastewater and stormwater are
the two types of water that require drainage in an urban environment.
Water that has been provided to support life, maintain a quality of living, and meet the
needs of industry is referred to as wastewater, which, if not drained after use, could lead
to pollution and pose health dangers. On the other hand, rainwater (or water coming from
any type of precipitation) that has dropped on a built­up area is referred to as stormwater.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
7
==PAGE:16==
If stormwater is not adequately drained, it would result in discomfort, damage, floods, and
further health problems. These two types of water are handled by urban drainage systems
with the intention of minimizing the negative effects on both the environment and human
life.
Drains conveying flow from individual properties or bigger areas make up piped systems.
The term ”sewerage” refers to the entire network of centralized infrastructure, including all
pipelines, manholes, buildings, pumping stations, etc. The two main forms of conventional
sewerage are combined systems, in which wastewater and stormwater flow together in
the same pipe, and separate systems, in which wastewater and stormwater are kept in
separate pipelines. Non­pipe systems (NBS) use natural processes like infiltration and
evapotranspiration, to manage stormwater locally (close to the point where runoff gener­
ates) (decentralized).
2.3.1
Conventional (pipe­based) drainage systems
Combined sewer systems
In this system both wastewater and rainwater are collected and conveyed to the Water
Treatment Plant (WTP) by the same pipe. According to the book written by Tsogkas
(1998) [26], rainfall becomes the predominant water source inside these systems, even
with minimum rainfall. Considering more severe rainfall cases, it is financially infeasible
to construct a sewer system that has the capacity to handle such volumes and also treat
them in the WTP (Butler et al., 2018) [5]. That’s why, during periods of moderate to severe
rainfall, flow above a certain level is diverted to a natural watercourse through structures
called combined sewer overflows (CSO’s), as to not allow the system to fill up and overflow
in populated areas.
Some of the advantages of combined sewer systems include:
• They are easy to supervise,as they are simpler systems consisting of only a single
pipe system.
• Smaller construction cost in comparison to other systems.
The primary problem of combined sewer overflows, is that when they are in use, signif­
icant amounts of untreated wastewater are released into the environment during rainy
weather. According to an article by Petrie (2021) [27], CSO’s can be sources of substan­
tial contamination to the receiving point of discharge.
The proportion of combined sewer systems in some EU countries as of 2016, according
to a report that was made as a part of an European Commission assessment [28] is given
below, in Table 2.1:
Table 2.1: Percentage of sewer systems that are combined (by total length)
Country
% of sewers being combined
Germany
43
France
32
Denmark
50
UK
70
Separate sewer systems
In separate sewer systems, wastewater and rainwater are split into two distinct pipe sys­
tems. Due to the relatively small supply of sewage, the sanitary pipeline has a smaller
diameter (cross­section) than the stormwater one. They are usually constructed on the
same side of the road with the stormwater pipe running on top of the sanitary pipe, so to
8
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:17==
avoid water contamination in cases of simultaneous leaking from both pipelines. Water
from the stormwater pipeline can be considered relatively clean (with some exceptions
e.g. rainwater washing waste off surfaces), as it doesn’t contain any wastewater and
is drained without treatment to the nearest recipient. Some of the advantages of these
systems include:
• Pumping costs are lower, since only wastewater is pumped.
• Pollution is genarally avoided through these systems.
• Operational costs of WTP are lower, since only wastewater is being treated.
However, these systems don’t come without disadvantages. It is obvious that, in construc­
tion cost terms they are more expensive than other systems to construct as they consist
of two pipe systems. The extra cost in comparison to combined sewer systems comes
from the sanitary pipeline, as the stormwater pipe usually has the same diameter of the
combined sewer pipe. Another drawback is that these systems are more complex and
therefore harder to supervise and maintain.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3.2
Sustainable drainage solutions (or nature based solutions)
Nature based solutions (NBS) are methods for managing surface water that consider
water quantity (floods), water quality (contamination), biodiversity (fauna and flora) and
amenity. NBS handle rainfall water close to where it falls and they do that by mimicking
natural drainage processes by enabling water to slowly percolate into the ground, store it,
and allow for gradual transportation to lower the storm peak (Charlesworth et. al., 2021)
[29]. They are in contrast to conventional stormwater management techniques, which
primarily rely on subterranean infrastructure like pipelines and basins and are designed
to move stormwater as effectively as possible away from populated areas without pro­
ducing overflows. There are several types of such systems, depending on the way they
handle stormwater, either though retention and/or detention or conveyance systems. Ex­
amples of NBS mentioned in the book of Butler et al. (2018) [5] are inlet controls (blue and
green roofs), infiltration devices (soakaways, trenches), vegetation surfaces (raingardens,
swales and bioretention systems), pervious pavements, filter drains, infiltration/drainage
basins and ponds.
Figure 2.3: Non­pipe (NBS) scheme (Butler et al., 2018) [5].
Roadbeds
Roadbeds are a certain type of NBS and will be the sole focus of this thesis. Roadbeds are
setups constructed at the side of a road which serve to alleviate the existing sewer sys­
tem by lowering stormwater runoff volumes and shorten and slow down discharge peaks
(Davis, 2008) [30]. They achieve that by decoupling the rainfall water that falls on impervi­
ous surfaces of their contributing catchment area, which are mainly roads and sidewalks.
The way they manage stormwater is by slowly seeping it to the ground, or eliminate it
through evapotranspiration. Furthermore, it has been shown that through the process of
infiltration, they protect water quality by removing stormwater contaminants (Davis et. al.,
2003) [31]. Due to varying climatic conditions, precipitation patterns, construction meth­
ods, and their materials, roadbed effectiveness in terms of stormwater management may
differ between different geographical locations. More details about their operation can be
found in section 3.2. A typical such setup is seen in Figure 2.4
10
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.4: A roadbed located in Limjordsvej st., Vanløse, Copenhagen, Denmark (Photo
from personal collection)
2.4
Rainfall­runoff hydrologic components
In order to explain the function of these setups and be able to model their performance,
it is crucial to understand the theory behind all the hydrological processes that take place
from the moment that water falls from the sky until it leaves the roadbed.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: Hydrologic processes involved in the function of roadbeds.
2.4.1
Precipitation
Precipitation is the total amount of water that falls from the sky. Precipitation can fall on
the ground in a liquid state as drizzle or rain and in a solid state as snow or hail. On some
occasions, both states can be met (e.g., hail and rain in thunderstorms). Regularly, differ­
ent weather systems produce either winter type weather ­ mainly with stratiform clouds, or
summer type weather­ mainly with cumuliform clouds. In stratiform clouds, rain and snow
phenomena have a long duration lasting from an hour to days (high records of months). In
cumuliform clouds, rain showers, storms, or thunderstorms (with hail) last from 20 minutes
to hour, with exception in severe types of supercells thunderstorms that show a lifetime
of 4­5 hours (Bunkers et. al.) [32].
Precipitation is measured in height of rain, counted in millimeters (mm), by rain gauges.
A height of 1 mm rain counts 1 l of water rain falling over 1 m2 surface, under the as­
sumption that from the falling quantity of water, no soil absorption, runoff or evaporation
takes place before the measurement. In most meteorological automatic stations, the type
of precipitation (i.e., snow, rain, hail) cannot be differentiated. Thus, the measurement
of rain is actually the accumulative precipitation (morning drizzle, rain, melting water of
snow or hail).
Rain intensity
Setting aside the magnitude of total height of rain (hourly, daily, monthly, yearly), an im­
portant parameter is the rain intensity which divides the above portion of water to the
corresponded time durance. The rapidity of rain is the natural magnitude that is esti­
mated with intensity and is measured in mm/hr. World Meteorological Organization’s
(WMO) classification of the intensity of rain in an evenly distributed matter, as seen in
Pedrozo­Acuña et al. (2017) [33], is illustrated in Table 2.2.
12
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.2: Rainfall classification according to the WMO.
Classification
Intensity (mm/h)
Light rainfall
5 < i < 9.99
Moderate rainfall
10 < i < 15.99
Heavy rainfall
16 < i < 39.99
Very strong rainfall
i > 40
In the direction of precipitation management, crucial part of rainfall mechanism under­
standing is whether a rainfall system is producing continuous precipitation over a stan­
dard location, or isolated episodes of rain, or a combination of those. The reason for this
distinction is that the magnitude of rainfall intensity differs significantly from type to type.
In continuous winter type rain from stratiform clouds the rain intensity is light but the du­
ration is big, while in summer type rain from cumuliform clouds, the rain intensity is heavy
and the duration is small. In these two categories, the same total amount of rainwater is
measured as a total, but the rapidity causes different soil absorption capacity and run off.
In any case, there needs to be a definition on what segregates rain events on single or
not. This thesis adopts the definition of Locatelli et al. (2014) [6] on single rain events as:
”rainfall periods separated by more than an hour”, which, according to the same paper, is
also the definition adopted in Denmark.
2.4.2
Catchment area
According to (J.M.K.C. Donev et al.,2018) [34], a catchment is defined as an ”area that
collects precipitation and drains it into a network of water channels. This network often
drains into a larger outlet, such as a river, reservoir, or body of water”. In this study, the
catchment area is considered as the theoretical area that contributes runoff from rainfall
water to the studied roadbed.
Characterising the type of the surface in terms of water permeability is a necessary step
towards quantifying runoff generation. The proportion of impervious over pervious sur­
faces in a catchment area is an indicator for the amount of rainfall that cannot infiltrate to
the ground and will start flowing on the surface. In urban environments, such as the one
that will be studied in this project, surfaces are predominantly characterised as impervi­
ous, which direclty results in higher amounts of runoff (Strohbach et al., 2019).
Determining the size of a catchment area also is crucial for quantifying runoff volumes.
There are many methods through which delinenation of a catchment can be achieved. The
raster seeding method, the Thiessen polygon method and the outlet matching method
are some examples (Johnston et al., 2009) [35]. Some tools for achieving catchment
delineation are GIS and SCALGO Live. Although it is possible to theoretically delimit the
catchment boundaries of the catchment area, it can however be met with great uncertainty
(Miller et al., 1996) [36].
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
13
==PAGE:22==
2.4.3
Runoff losses
Figure 2.6: Illustration of processes that affect runoff production in urban areas (Rammal
et al., 2020) [37]
The quantification of the rainfall runoff volumes that act as inflow to each setup requires the
identification of the hydrological processes responsible for all the rainfall volume losses
that occur in the beginning of a rain event, and also the losses that occur during and
after the rain event (Rammal et al., 2020) [37]. A portion of the rainfall that reaches
the catchment surface never runs off. It is “lost” before water starts conveying or during
and after runnoff is taking place. Water can be trapped in depressions in the surface,
be intercepted and retained by vegetation, be infiltrated to the ground or lost through
evapotranspiration (Butler et al., 2018) [5].
These processes are broken down into two categories: Initial and continuous losses. The
purpose of determining these losses is to output an effective rainfall volume by excluding
them, as they do not contribute to the rainfall volume that will convey in the roadbed.
Initial losses
Initial losses make up the rainfall volume required to wet up the catchment before the
onset of runoff. The key elements that prevent runoff from forming at the start of rain
events are surface wetting, vegetation foliage interception and the filling of depressions
in the catchment surface. Rainfall that is intercepted is captured and held back by plants.
After a brief period of retention, extra raindrops can trickle through the foliage or run to the
soil above the stems. The interception rate then quickly becomes close to zero. Small in
magnitude (≈1mm), the interception loss for impermeable regions is typically ignored or
combined with depression storage. Rainwater that has accumulated in tiny depressions
on the catchment surface and is unable to drain out is accounted for as depression stor­
age. The held water will eventually be eliminated by infiltration and/or evapotranspiration.
Surface type, slope, and rainfall return period are variables influencing the size of depres­
sion storage (Butler et al., 2018) [5].Depression storage d (mm) can be calculated using
14
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:23==
the following equation:
d = k1
√s
(2.1)
Where:
k1= coefficient that varies depending on the surface type (0.07 for impermeable surfaces
and 0.28 for permeable surfaces) (mm)
s= ground slope (−).
Continuous losses
Runoff losses during and after the rainfall event are defined as continuous losses. Evap­
otranspiration and infiltration are the two most prominent causes of the ongoing water
removal from the surface runoff.
Evapotranspiration is the vaporisation of water from plants and open water bodies and
therefore its removal from surface runoff. There are several methods in the literature for
calculating evapotranspiration. Selection of the appropriate method relies, among others,
on available data and also scale (daily, weekly or monthly evapotranspiration). Zhao
et al.’s paper (2013) includes some of the most note­worthy equations for calculating
evapotranspiration. A prominent example of such an equation is the Penman­Monteith
equation:
ET =
0.408∆(Rn −G) + γ
900
T+273u2(es −ea)
∆+ γ(1 + 0.34u2)
(2.2)
Where:
Symbol
Explanation
Unit
ET
Reference evapotranspiration
mm/day
Rn
Net radiation at the crop surface
MJ/(m2 ∗day)
G
Soil heat flux density
MJ/(m2 ∗day)
T
Mean daily air temperature at 2 m height
◦C
u2
Wind speed at 2 m height
m/sec
es
Saturation vapour pressure
kPa
ea
Actual vapour pressure
kPa
es −ea
Saturation vapour pressure deficit
kPa
∆
Slope vapour pressure curve
kPa/◦C
γ
Psychrometric constant
kPa/◦C
In Denmark, evapotranspiration is in the order of magnitude of few mm/day as seen in
Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Monthly averages of potential evaporation in mm/day during 1989­2010 in
Amager, Denmark. (Jakobsen, 2021) [11]
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
0.21
0.46
1.09
2.10
3.09
3.50
3.59
2.87
1.78
0.83
0.29
0.15
Rainfall permeating the soil pores via the ground surface is referred to as infiltration. The
rate at which water seeps through a soil layer is known as its infiltration capacity, which
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
15
==PAGE:24==
often starts off high, before dropping exponentially to a final quasi­steady rate as the top
soil zone becomes saturated (Butler et al., 2018) [5]. The rate is determined by a number
of elements, such as the type and porosity of soil type, initial saturation, ground cover,
and the groundwater level.
The following figure published on a report by Suripin et al. (2021) [38] shows hydrological
conductivities based on different soil types.
Figure 2.7: Typical infiltration rates based on soil types (Suripin et al., 2021) [38]
A well­known method for calculating infiltration as a function of time is the Horton equation:
f = fc + (f0 −fc)e−kt
(2.3)
Where:
Symbol
Explanation
Unit
f0
Initial infiltration rate (maximum)
mm/h
fc
Final (lower) infiltration rate
mm/h
k
Decay constant specific to the soil
1/h
When it comes to infiltration rates from within a soakaway, Djurhuus (2019) [10] demon­
strates in her thesis that the rate at which water is seeping to the ground from the soak­
away depends on it’s dimensions and the height of the water at that given moment. In
Djurhuus’ project, the soakaway’s infiltration rate is calculated with an approximation of
Darcy’s law, which states:
Q(h) = K ∗A(h)
(2.4)
Where:
16
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:25==
Symbol
Explanation
Unit
Q(h)
Flow in the soakaway as a function of the water level h
m3/s
K
Hydraulic conductivity
m/s
A(h)
Charged area as a function of the water level h
m2
it is assumed that infiltration takes place both through the bottom and sides of the studied
soakaway. Hydraulic conductivities vary between the sides and the bottom of the soak­
away (Djurhuus, 2019) [10] with the conductivity in the bottom always being smaller due
to clogging over time, as sedimentation is obstructing the pores of the ground. Therefore,
Equation 2.4 can be rewritten as:
Q(t) = Kbottom ∗Abottom + Kside ∗Aside
(2.5)
And finally, infiltration rate inside a soakaway can be calculated for a given time­step as:
Q(t) = Kbottom ∗(b ∗l) + Kside ∗2 ∗h(t) ∗(b + l)
(2.6)
2.4.4
Groundwater
Groundwater is defined as the water that circulates (or is located) under the surface of
the ground in various sedimentary layers (sand, gravel, etc.). Groundwater usually re­
sults from precipitation (rain, snow, hail) which, under the influence of gravity and other
forces, penetrates the ground and then moves in various directions until it meets some
”watertight” layer, forming an aquifer. Τhe groundwater level does not remain constant
due to water movements between the surface and underground through processes such
as pumping and recharge which may be natural (water cycle) or manmade (i.e., ”artificial
groundwater recharge”). Groundwater is also prone to seasonal variations (Nygren et al.,
2020) [39], meaning that the groundwater level is higher during the winter season and
lower during the summer season.
Groundwater level is also an important factor to consider when setting up a hydrological
model. By monitoring the level of the groundwater table it is easy to detect unwanted
interactions with the studied setup during extreme phenomena, and explain any resulting
impairments of it’s function. In­situ groundwater level measurements are crucial prior to
the setup’s design and construction. Because groundwater levels change with the sea­
sons, it is crucial to calculate the maximum level while accounting for seasonal variation.
The reason is that there needs to be a safety distance between the underground base
of the setup and the uppermost limit of the groundwater [40]. This is happening to avoid
groundwater contamination, by forcing the runoff water to infiltrate through a layer of soil
before reaching the groundwater table. Additionally, If the groundwater levels are going to
be close to the setup’s underground base, water that seeps into the soils below may have
a mounding effect that raises the groundwater levels nearby. In particular circumstances,
the groundwater levels might be extremely sensitive to any new water sources. Some­
times, water from soakaways can significantly raise the groundwater levels in a certain
location which may have an impact on surrounding subsurface infrastructure like tanks
or basements that may not have been built to withstand high groundwater levels [40].
Finally, if groundwater level reaches the soakaway’s elevation, it could lead to reverse
infiltration (aka. water seeping from the ground to the soakaway) which could significantly
impact the roadbed’s operation.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Case study
3.1
Study area
The roadbed that will be studied is located on Limfjordsvej street in Vanløse, Copen­
hagen, Denmark. The greater Copenhagen’s utility company HOFOR (Hovedstadsom­
rådets Forsyningsselskab) has constructed in 2019 and currently maintains a series of
these setups along the street. The roadbeds are all constructed under the same prin­
ciple, with their size varying slightly to accomodate different runoff volumes due to their
contributing areas being different in size. Additionally, the roadbeds’ type is different de­
pending on which side of the road they are situated, due to the district heating pipe running
under one side of the road pavement. The different types are regarding the roadbed’s un­
derground structure so to not interfere with the pipe. The studied roadbed is located in the
side of the road where no pipe runs underground and it’s type will be explained in depth
in section 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Location of the roadbed to be studied, Google earth
3.2
Technical description of the roadbed
As mentioned before, the purpose of a roadbed is to relieve the sewer system by de­
coupling the rainfall runoff from impervious areas. The way it manages stormwater is by
seeping it to the ground or eliminating it through evapotranspiration. Technical drawings
of the roadbed can be seen in Figure 3.2 & Figure 3.3
18
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: Cross section of the roadbed, technical drawings provided by HOFOR, Auto­
cad 2022
Figure 3.3: Plan view of the roadbed, technical drawings provided by HOFOR, Autocad
2022
Despite having been constructed on one side of the road, each individual system is re­
ceiving runnoff from both sidewalks and sides of the road. This is achieved by a grate,
constructed on the opposite side of where the roadbed is situated, that collects water and
conveying it to the roadbed through gravity by an underground pipe as seen in Figure 3.3.
The setup’s function is as follows. The circled numbers refer to the setup’s components,
as these are seen in Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.3.
• Initially, runoff water from the catchment area flows in the well labeled as 1 , either
directly or via the grate located in the opposite side of the street. The well’s role
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
19
==PAGE:28==
is to bypass water directly to the sewer during winter months, only in cases where
the responsible municipality uses salt to defrost the streets and sidewalks. This is
done to avoid salty water entering the rainbed that could kill the flora. The well’s lid
is opened and closed manually by a HOFOR’s technician. When the lid is closed,
which is the case in this study, the well overflows water into the garden.
• Upon entering the garden, water is distributed evenly throughout the surface with
the help of an open channel iron pipe and begins seeping through a 40 cm filter soil
2 , whose purpose is cleaning the water from pollutants.
• Below the filter soil lies a soakaway 3 that is stabilized with the use of rainwater
cassettes. The location of the soakaway in relation to the raingarden is what deter­
mines the roadbed’s type. Setups located on the opposite side of the street (where
the heating pipe is located) have their soakaways across the road and water is con­
veyed to them through a pipe. The soakaway’s role is to store rainfall water that will
later infiltrate to the ground. These soakaways are typically equipped with plastic
cassettes and have a porosity of 95­98%.
• In the event where the soakaway’s maximum capacity is reached, water is being led
to the sewer through a ø110 pipe located on the top of the soakaway. If the inflow to
the garden is faster that the seepage through the filter soil, and water starts ponding,
a ø315 pipe 4 bypasses excess water directly to the soakaway without filtering.
• During extreme rainfall phenomena, when the soakaway fills completely and inflow
to the garden is bigger than the soakaway’s outflows, a ø425 pipe with a dome grate
5 overflows excess water directly to the sewer.
.
3.3
Measurements
During 2021, HOFOR collaborated with another company, Dryp, to begin monitoring how
these setups respond to various rain events. Available data for this study are concerning
a period from 17th of May 2021 until the 30th of September 2021.
3.3.1
Weather data
Meteorological data on the area are provided by a climate monitoring station, operated by
the same company, which is located in the back garden of on of the residences adjacent to
the street. The station records humidity (absolute and relative), pressure, global radiation,
temperature, wind speed and direction, and most importantly rainfall. Out of all the data
that the climate station makes recordings of, only rainfall intensities and global radiation
are of use in this study. This data consists of the rainfall intensity in millimetres of rain per
hour (mm/h) and global radiation in watts per square meter (W/m2) with a time step of
3 minutes (1 recording every 3 minutes) for the whole study period.
3.3.2
Water elevation sensors
Two sensors were installed inside the studied rainbed, one inside the soakaway and the
other inside the roadbed’s outlet well, with both measuring water elevation. A third sensor
was placed inside a 2 m deep borehole, located 1 m away from the roadbed. This borehole
was drilled prior to the construction of the roadbeds to determine the soil’s quality and
hydraulic conductivity. The third sensor is used for measuring the groundwater level. The
sensors recorded water levels in meters (m) with a reference point (0.00 m) set at the
bottom of each structure, as explained by Mr. Mouritsen [41] of HOFOR. The sensors
20
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:29==
recorded water levels with an irregular time interval between value recordings for the
whole study duration.
The data from these measurements will be utilized for this project by using the climate sta­
tion’s and water elevation sensors’ recordings both as input to the model and as validation
for the model’s outputs, respectively.
Figure 3.4: Groundwater level sensor (left) and climate monitoring station (right) ­ (Photos
from personal collection).
3.3.3
Measurement gaps
It is important to mention that recordings are not taking place throughout the entire period
from 17th of May 2021 until the 30th of September 2021, as gaps appear in the data for
reasons unknown. In the majority of cases, recording gaps regarding a certain period
appear in all instruments at the same time. It could also happen that a period has been
recorded either by one or many instruments, but not from all of them. This gap could
range from some hours of a day not having measurements, all the way up to weeks of
missing data.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Methodology
4.1
Pre­processing and investigation of measurement data
Prior to setting up the model, it is important to examine and process the available mea­
surement data. The examination of data will investigate the meaning behind the values as
well as their accuracy and validity. Processing is then necessary,to assist in a preceding
preliminary investigation of the data, which hopes to prove a causal relationship between
the different datasets, and to assure that the data can be encompassed smoothly in the
model.
4.1.1
Rainfall data
Processing of rainfall data
Figure 4.1: Climate station ­ Rain intensity recordings (mm/h)
Raw rainfall data in the form of intensity per time step (Figure 4.1) is not a well­representing
indicator of the magnitude of a rain event. In this form, locating noteworthy rain episodes,
which could assist in the preliminary causal relationship examination between datasets,
is quite complicated. As mentioned in subsection 2.4.1, event­wise intensity and accumu­
lated water depth are well established indicators that can classify a rain event’s magnitude.
Based on the definition of single rain episodes that was adopted in this project, rain events
from the recordings will be segregated and total depths and intensities will be calculated
for each one.
Investigation of rainfall data
The registered rainfall recordings of the two closest meteorological stations at Lygten and
Landbohojskolen were also obtained. These will be used to investigate the credibility
of the measurements of Dryp’s climate monitoring station. This examination will take
place by comparing the rainfall data provided by the station, with the ones from Lygten
and Landbohojskolen. The locations and distance between those stations are seen in
Figure 4.2
22
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: The locations of Dryp’s meteorological station (red) and official stations (blue),
Google earth
Data for the two official meteorological stations was received in the .km2 file format from
The Water Pollution Committee of The Society of Danish Engineers. This format consists
of a status bar and a series of fixed format rain intensities, as illustrated in Figure 4.3 and
explained in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.3: Example of a rain event given in the .km2 format.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 4.1: Elements of Figure 4.3 explained
Element
Information
1
Rain type (1:Measured, 2:Modified manually, 3:Artificial rain)
2
Start of rain event (YYYYMMDD)
3
Start of event in hours and minutes (HHMM)
4
Station number
5
Event length in minutes
6
Time resolution in minutes (integer)
7
Precipitation amount in mm
8
Status information regarding quality control
9
additional information on quality control
10
intensity recorded every minute (µm/s)
These files were converted with the help of a python module located online (Rasmus
Nielsen, 2013) [42] to an .xlsx file format, suitable for a comparison to take place in Mi­
crosoft Excel. Due to the large distances between these stations and the known spatial
and temporal rainfall variations occurring due to various geographical and climatologi­
cal factors of a given area (elevation, aspect, slope and wind directions), it is difficult to
validate Dryp’s station data by comparing with the official stations. Additionally, Dryp sta­
tion’s output measurements are very crude (mm/h), whereas the two neighboring official
stations are measuring more precisely in µm/s. Therefore, due to the above­mentioned
reasons, a comparison in minute scale wouldn’t make much sense in this case. On these
grounds, the comparison takes place by contrasting the daily mm of rain recorded in all
three stations.
4.1.2
Sensors’ data
Processing of sensors’ data
The first part of the sensors’ data pre­processing aims to adjust the data so to be in the
same time­step, and refer to the same period, as the rainfall data does. The time step
and period of recordings of the weather station was chosen as the point of reference in
this study, due to the fact that it covers a larger period of recordings than the sensors do.
Additionaly, the model’s input relies on the rain recordings to be able to operate, so it also
needs to be based on the same time­step.
The irregular time step between sensors’ recordings is a problem, as prior to setting up a
model it is necessary to conduct a preliminary correlation check between rainfall and wa­
ter elevations data to decide if the data can support the creation of a model. Therefore,
the first important step is to interpolate the water elevation values to time steps corre­
sponding with the 3­minute time step of the climate monitoring station. Having recordings
of all components in the same time step is crucial for further comparisons and analysis.
Calibration of the water elevation data will be achieved by interpolating the values with
the weighted average method (Figure 4.4 & Equation 4.1).
24
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.4: Weighted average interpolation of values.
(X −X1)
(X2 −X1) = (Y −Y1)
(Y2 −Y1)
(4.1)
or
Y = Y1 + (X −X1) (Y2 −Y1)
(X2 −X1)
(4.2)
For example, if data is available for two time steps:
ts12.11 = 0.034m
ts12.17 = 0.045m
The water level at time step 12.15 (which will also be a time step of the climate station’s
recordings) is calculated as:
Y = 0.034 + (12.15 −12.11)(0.045 −0.034)
(12.17 −12.11) = 0.034 + 4
6 ∗0.011 = 0.041 m
(4.3)
This method also serves in filtering out data recorded from the sensors that are regarding
a period not monitored by the weather station.
Investigation of sensors’ data
The investigation on the accuracy of the sensors’ recordings will rely on an examination
of the recordings’ behaviour in relation to corresponding rain events. This investigation
will be based on visual observations of the time series graphs containing both rainfall data
and the sensors’ recordings.
Filtering of erroneous recordings
Following the investigation of the sensors’ data, it is important to examine the data in
search of recordings that don’t make sense either on their own or in comparison to rainfall
data. Examples would be recordings with negative values or recordings showing signif­
icant changes to water elevations that are not supported by corresponding rain events.
Such erroneous data could result from malfunctioning or poorly calibrated sensors, water
activities that don’t result from rain, etc. This data, then, has to be filtered out or adjusted
so to not interfere with the evaluation of the model’s results. The simple reason for that
is that these sources of erroneous recordings cannot be encompassed and simulated by
the model.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
25
==PAGE:34==
4.1.3
Measurement gaps
As mentioned in subsection 3.3.3, gaps in recordings are noticed in both the weather sta­
tion and the three sensors. However, as explained in subsubsection 4.1.2, only the time­
series of the weather station is important, as the model will rely on the same time­steps.
Further analysis of the data can help in locating these missing time­steps. The method
used for answering this question includes producing an artificial time­series consisting of
all possible time­steps of the study period (17th of May 2021 until the 30th of September
2021). It is reminded that the weather station makes one recording every three minutes.
Therefore, the created time­series will follow the same time­step. Subsequently, analysis
will be based on extracting the missing time­steps by comparing the time­series of the
weather station with the artificial ”complete” set of time­steps.
4.2
Model parameters
Previous to setting up a model, it is necessary to describe and determine all the param­
eters that will act as input to it. Some of them are known, some can be calculated and
some have to be approximated using previous literature, experience and logic.
4.2.1
Rainfall input
The water input parameter is perhaps the most essential component of any hydrological
model. Rainfall, in the form of time­step data, will act as the sole water input parameter
in this study.
4.2.2
Groundwater level
The source of groundwater levels for this project is coming from the installed sensor mea­
surements. As mentioned in section 3.1 and seen in Figure 3.4, the sensor is located
inside a 2 meter deep borehole. The sensor measures the groundwater level by using a
reference point (0.00m) as the bottom of the borehole.
4.2.3
Dimensions of the setup
The dimensions of the roadbed,the underlying soakaway and the preceding salt well are
essential for calculating runoff and detention volumes. Additionally, knowing the surface
area of the rain bed is helpful in quantifying water loses due to wetting, evapotranspiration
and water inputs to the soakaway by infiltration. These dimensions will either be directly
obtained or calculated with the help of the setup’s technical drawings that were provided,
upon request, by HOFOR (Figure 3.2 & Figure 3.3).
The drawings were provided in a PDF file format and will be converted to the DWG file
format, which is suitable for investigation to take place in AUTODESK’s software, Autocad.
Since the drawings are in scale, all that’s left is using a known in­software dimension of
a feature of the setup. In this case, for example, the height of the soakaway, which is
known to be 60 cm, will be used as a reference. By knowing the in­software dimension
of the height of the soakaway, it’s easy to find every dimension of interest by using the
mathematical rule of three.
4.2.4
Catchment area of the roadbed
The contributing catchment’s area can be estimated with the use of the online software
SCALGO Live. The reasons for this choice were prior familiarity with the software and
personal preference over time consuming theoretical or mathematical methods. By us­
ing SCALGO Live it is possible to get a rough estimation of the extent of the roadbed’s
contributing catchment area. An assumption that will be used in the calculations is that
the roadbed is only supposed to collect runnoff from either the street or the sidewalks, as
the adjacent residences are required to handle their rainfall runoff within the limits of their
26
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:35==
own property. The analysis starts by increasing the elevation of the terrain section that
is occupied by streets and sidewalks. This happens in order to to block water from sur­
faces other than the street and sidewalks from entering the roadbed. Afterwards, in the
terrain that is occupied by the roadbeds, the elevation is decreased, so to simulate their
underground structure. The final assumption is that the water depth of the rain event, that
will be used by SCALGO for the calculations, will be set according to the maximum depth
event that will be found on the study period. The reason behind this is that the calculated
catchment area of the roadbed could vary depending on the magnitude of the rain events
that will fall on it.
4.2.5
Initial runoff losses
The initial runoff losses of an area can be calculated by adding the expected wetting
losses with an area’s depressions storage. The latter can be calculated by Equation 2.1.
This formula requires knowing the average slope of the area to be studied. Calculat­
ing the average slope of the roadbed’s catchment area was made possible with QGIS,
in which a digital elevation model (DEM) of Denmark, obtained through Dataforsyningen,
was utilized, along with a shapefile (SHP) showing the roadbed’s catchment area’s extent.
(Downloaded from SCALGO Live). Combining these two yields a raster file showing the
slope in every point of the area’s surface. Then it is easy to output the mean slope value
of the area. This number can then be accompanied with the coefficient 0.07 for impervi­
ous areas to yield the storage of the area’s depressions. Regarding additional losses in
the catchment area, interception and wetting losses on impervious surfaces usually ac­
count for an 0.10­1 mm of rainfall (subsubsection 2.4.3). Regarding the raingarden of the
rainbed no depression storage is taken into account as the surface is permeable. Instead,
wetting losses will make up all of the initial losses and will account for 1­10 mm of rain.
4.2.6
Continuous runoff losses
Infiltration
As seen in subsubsection 2.4.3, infiltration can be calculated with the Horton formula.
However, this would require deep knowledge about the media’s properties and also data
that can be obtained through lab tests of the soil. Such data is not available for this study.
As mentioned above, the catchment area is entirely impervious. During a personal visit to
the study area, it was found that both the road and sidewalks are in good state but slightly
degraded. This finding will assist in picking an appropriate infiltration rate from Table 2
of Rammal et al.’s paper (2020, p. 9) [37], which focuses in depth on runoff losses. The
rate at which water infiltrates from the raingarden, though the filter soil, to the soakaway
can be calculated by knowing the hydraulic conductivity of the filter soil. This figure will
be obtained from the technical characteristics and features of the setup.
Evapotranspiration
The calculation of evapotranspiration would require a large amount of data regarding tem­
perature, radiation and crops types and properties among others, for the continuous pe­
riod of the study. Such data are not available for this study, and, given the fact that
evapotranspiration’s effect is small compared to other processes, it has to be approxi­
mated. To calculate the effect of evapotranspiration, global radiation data provided by
Dryp’s climate monitoring station will be combined with historical evapotranspiration data
from Table 2.3. Global radiation data is an indicative index of the sunshine duration over
the study area and hence shows when evapotranspiration is taking place. The time step
of global radiation recordings is matching the one of rainfall data, which is a recording
every 3 minutes. The amount of evapotranspiration in mm in each time step is found
by multiplying the historical average daily evapotranspiration of the time step’s month, as
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
27
==PAGE:36==
found in Table 2.3, with the global radiation of the time step, divided by the sum of global
radiation of the time step’s day. To put that in simpler terms, an example is given.
Time step: 17­05­2021 17:48:02
Global radiation in the time step: 100 W/m2
Sum of global radiation on the 17­05­2021 : 2000 W/m2
The amount of evapotranspiration taking place in this particular time step can be found
as:
ETtime−step = 100
2000 ∗3.09 = 0.1545 mm
(4.4)
4.2.7
Infiltration rate from within the soakaway
This project will adopt the method for calculating a dynamic infiltration rate in the soak­
away that was explained in theory. Therefore, besides the soakaway’s dimensions, the
hydraulic conductivities of the sides and bottom surface of the soakaway will be required.
This project assumes no deterioration in the soakaway’s ability to infiltrate water due to
clogging for the whole duration of the study. Therefore, the soakaway’s hydraulic conduc­
tivity remains steady throughout the study period. The values of Kbottom and Kside cannot
be known without prior testing of the soil.
4.3
Hydrological model
A dynamic,lumped and deterministic conceptual model was developed in Microsoft Excel
to simulate the dynamic flow of water from the moment it rains down, until it leaves the
studied system. The point was to simulate the height of water inside the soakaway and
compare it with the measurements. The model runs for the period lasting from 17th of May
2021 until the 30th of September 2021, with a time­step identical to that of the weather
station’s recordings.
Input section) The model starts with the two measurement data, rainfall intensity (mm/h)
and global radiation (W/m2), as input data in time step scale. The raw rainfall data’s
units are converted to mm/3min (time −step = 3min) and also the method described in
subsection 4.2.6 is utilized to extract the potential evapotranspiration, also in mm/3min.
The model continues by simulating the series of steps shown in Figure 4.5. These are:
1) Rain falls on the catchment surface. Water is initially ”lost” to wet the catchment until
overland flow starts. The model is set to reset the wetting status of the catchment at the
turn of the day. Furthermore, water is subject to the continuous losses of evapotranspira­
tion and infiltration to the ground. It is noteworthy to mention that evapotranspiration, as
described in subsection 4.2.6, only applies to water that hasn’t been trapped in depres­
sions or otherwise ”lost” due to wetting. Although the water that is trapped in depressions
is removed from the surface mainly through evaporation, especially in impervious sur­
faces, in the model it is considered to be permanenlty lost and is removed from the mass
balance.
Runoff =
{
0
: surface = dry
Rain −Infiltration −ET
: surface = wet
(4.5)
2) Rainwater, that isn’t lost due to the above­mentioned reasons, is conveyed to the salt
well that precedes the setup. In this study, it is assumed that, the salt well’s bottom lid is
28
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:37==
closed so that water ponds and eventually overflows to the roadbed. Once this happens,
the well remains filled for the rest of the simulation and serves no other purpose.
Runoff =
{
0
: well ≤0.06m3
Runoff from catchment area
: well < 0.06m3
(4.6)
3) Overflowing water from the well, accompanied by direct rainfall, is used as input for the
above­ground part of the roadbed. This water undergoes wetting losses, along with the
continuous loss of evapotranspiration. Wetting status of the rainbed is again set to reset
at the turn of the day. The remaining water volume ponds inside the garden and slowly
seeps through the filter soil, or gets bypassed directly to the soakaway if it reaches a height
of 7 cm. Overflow to the sewer is not taken into account in this part, as the preliminary
data investigation along with the known parameters, suggest that overflow cannot take
place under theoretical and modellable conditions. The main reason for that is that it is
assumed that the ø315 bypass pipe will never reach maximum flow (≈300l/sec) with
these weather conditions.
Raingarden water =



0
: dry
Input −ET −Infiltration
: water level ≤7cm
Input −ET −Infiltration −Bypass
: water level > 7cm
(4.7)
4) The infiltrating water from the garden, along with the bypassed water, act as input to
this part. Water is collected inside the soakaway, from which it infiltrates to the ground,
with a rate depending on the height of the water inside the soakaway. Here too, overflow
to the outlet well is not taken into account, as the preliminary data investigation doesn’t
hint the soakaway ever reaching it’s maximum storage throughout the study period. The
soakaway has a total volume 3.6 m3, which, with a 95% porosity, can accommodate 3.42
m3 of water. It is reminded that the outlet drain connecting the soakaway with the sewer
is located at the top of the soakaway and is only used in cases where the soakaway
completely fills.
Soakaway water = Input −Infiltration
(4.8)
The model assumes no time delay between the different processes.
This practically
means, that all processes happen instantly, within the same time step.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.5: Flow diagram showing the different processes that are simulated by the model.
4.4
Model output processing, analysis and evaluation
4.4.1
Noteworthy events of the study period
As explained in section 4.3, the model is designed to operate for a rather large period of
time and is not intended for studying individual rain events. However, in order to eval­
uate a model’s performance, it is important to also focus on rain events individually, so
to investigate consistency. It is essential to know whether the model ”behaves” similarly
on all major rain events of the study or if there are hidden factors that could negatively
impact it’s performance throughout these events. These events will be chosen from the
filtered water level recordings of the second sensor. The events will be chosen based on
the largest water elevations in the soakaway that are noticed. The reason for choosing
this criterion, over picking the most intense or maximum depth rain events for example, is
that these recordings show the point of time where the roadbed’s function was challenged
the most.
4.4.2
Segragation of parameters
As it’s clear by now, some of the parameters that were utilized by the model are not known
beforehand and have to be approximated. Depending on the impact each of these param­
eters incur to the model, the output results’ uncertainty could vary significantly. Therefore,
before analysing and processing the results of the model, it’s crucial to segregate these
parameters in two categories, certain and uncertain. Certain parameters are those that
are either directly provided by available data and information, or can be calculated accu­
rately. They are also parameters with high uncertainty values that have insignificant im­
pact to the model’s outputs. Uncertain parameters, on the other hand, are those that are
either unknown and can’t be calculated purely theoretically, or their true value lies within
a range of calculated values. These parameters influence the model’s output greatly and
will be the basis of the model’s calibration.
4.4.3
Performance metrics
Performance metrics refers to the criteria based on which the model’s outputs will be
evaluated, in comparison to the sensor’s measurements or to other simulations that use
a different set of parameters. These are quantifiable features of either the model’s output
or the sensor’s recordings of the water elevation inside the soakaway. These metrics can
be applied on both the whole model period and the individual events that were chosen. It
is crucial to also mention that, although these metrics are useful for comparing different
simulation with different parameters, the rain input parameter always stays the same. The
30
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:39==
criteria that have been chosen are four and they will be explained in detail below:
Inflow rate to the soakaway
This is the difference in the soakaway’s mean inflow rate between a simulation of interest
and a control simulation of the model. This criterion is trying to portray the cumulative
impact of all the processes that preceded the moment that water enters the soakaway.
By studying and comparing the incoming volume to the soakaway for two simulations, the
user can get a much clearer idea of what could be different regarding wetting conditions
and catchment area sizes for his simulation versus the control simulation. If the control
simulation is referring to the sensor’s measurements, mean inflow can be easily converted
from the water height, since the dimensions and porosity of the soakaway are known
parameters.
p1(%) = finc.sim. −finc.contr.
finc.contr.
∗100
(4.9)
Maximum water elevation in the soakaway
This is the difference in the soakaway’s maximum water elevation between a simulation of
interest and a control simulation of the model. It is a single value regardless on whether
the whole model period or an individual event is evaluated. This criterion is trying to
portray the extend to which the setup’s capabilities have been reached, and is useful in
illustrating how different sets of parameters can ”test” these capabilities.
p2(%) = hmax.sim. −hmax.contr.
hmax.contr.
∗100
(4.10)
Infiltration rate of water leaving the soakaway
Another important feature that can be extracted from the dynamic water elevation of the
soakaway is the rate with which it empties. This feature is basically useful in comparing
the mean rates with which water is leaving the soakaway between two simulations. As it is
already explained in subsection 4.2.7, the infiltration rate inside the soakaway depends on
the hydraulic conductivities of both it’s bottom and it’s side surfaces. These parameters
are expected to play a vital role in the model results, since the uncertainty that is tied
to the fact that their values are unknown is high. Additionally, it is desirable to examine
the credibility of the assumption that was made earlier about the hydraulic conductivities
remaining constant throughout the study period. This metric relies on the comparison of
the mean infiltration rate of two simulations, either in an individual event, or throughout
the study period.
p3(%) = fout.sim. −fout.contr.
fout.contr.
∗100
(4.11)
Duration of wetting time of the soakaway
This final criterion offers a general overview of the soakaway’s function as it encompasses
the processes taking place prior to water entering the soakaway, and also the process of
water seeping out of it. It works by comparing the amount of time steps in which water was
present inside the soakaway, between a simulation of interest and a control simulation or
sensor measurements.
p4(%) =
∑wsim. −∑wcontr.
∑wcontr.
∗100
(4.12)
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
31
==PAGE:40==
Convergence of the studied simulation with the control one is achieved with values close
to zero for all the above equations.
4.4.4
Calibration and Validation
Finding a specific set of model parameters that accurately capture the behavior of the
system is known as model calibration, and it may be done by comparing model outputs
with the sensor’s recordings of the soakaway’s water elevation. The performance metrics
that were presented above will be utilised for this attempt in order to quantify the conver­
gence of the calibrated model’s outputs with the actual situation that is portrayed by the
sensor’s recordings. The attempt will aim at a combination of parameters that will lead all
the four performance equations to a value as close to zero as possible. The parameters
that have been picked for calibration are the uncertain ones as their values are tied to
higher uncertainty and their impact on the model’s outputs are higher. The method of trial
and error will be chosen for manual calibration as the performance metrics of different
sets of parameter values will be compared and the most favourable will be picked.
4.4.5
Sensitivity analysis
The next step after calibrating and validating the model is performing a sensitivity analysis
on the parameters whose values are thought to have a high impact on the model’s output.
Sensitivity analysis looks at how different types of uncertainty in a mathematical model
affect the overall level of uncertainty in the model. Basically, this part of the analysis tries
to answer how these parameters influence the results of the model and to what extent.
The way this analysis will be done in this project is by running different simulations of the
model where the uncertain parameters’ values are changed. These changes will occur
four times in total for each parameter, where their calibrated value will be multiplied by the
factors ­0.5,0.5,2,3. During each simulation, all the parameters will remain constant to
their calibrated values, except only the studied parameter. The four performance metrics,
that were presented above, will be used to quantify the impact these parameters have
on the model’s outputs, by comparing each simulations with the calibrated model. The
results of this analysis will include both the full study period and also the individual events
that were previously picked.
4.4.6
Investigation of metrics’ correlation to rain events’ magnitude
It’s a well known fact that floods are caused mainly by short and intense rain events,
rather than long mild ones. An interesting examination would be to check if the perfor­
mance metrics that were used for evaluating the model are correlated at all to the corre­
sponding rain events’ magnitudes. Performance metrics are designed to fluctuate when
a parameter’s value is change. It would be, however, interesting to know if these metrics
are depth­driven or intensity­driven. This will be proven by creating graphs showing the
performance scores of a criterion in all 6 individual events, accompanied by either the
corresponding rain depth or the maximum intensity.
4.4.7
More detailed versions
In order to provide an even more detailed depiction of the setup’s function, two additional
variations of the model have been produced. In essence, this attempt aims at a set of the
four performance metrics whose results are closer to zero. This attempt was initially made
during the original model’s calibration, but is expected to yield unsatisfactory results, due
to the simplistic nature of the model.
1st variation ­ Filter soil can store water
The original version of the model regards the process of water seeping through the filter
soil as instant. Basically, the filter soil is regarded as a ”membrane” from which everything
that goes in comes out simultaneously. In reality, however, water that enters the filter soil
32
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:41==
will seep for some time before leaking to the soakaway. Hence, the concept of time delay
is introduced in this version of the model, where water that enters the filter soil, will exit
it after a certain amount of time steps. The other addition that this version provides, is
that the filter soil now has a storage. Inflow rate to the soil depends on whether the soil is
fully saturated or not. Considering that the soil can hold a water volume equal to a certain
percentage of it’s total volume, without seeping it, outflow from the soil ceases once water
volume in the soil reduces to this percentage. Water that is now trapped inside the soil
will be eliminated by evapotranspiration.
It is important to mention, however, that this version is rather detailed compared to the
original model, and violates the ” the simpler the better” rule surrounding models. it will
be used as a last resort, and only if the original, simpler model fails to produce decent
results.
Figure 4.6: Flow diagram showing the processes that are simulated by this version of the
model.
2nd variation ­ Wetting losses reset differently
The original model has a general approach in resetting the wetting status of surfaces.
On midnight everyday, the ”cell”, that holds the amount of water that was used to wet a
surface, is being reset to zero.
Since the period that is studied hosts few rain events, (Figure 4.1), it’s rather easy to
notice that the intervening time between two events can range between some hours and
some months. Regarding runoff losses, theory suggests that a surface is either dry or
wet. In reality however, there are different levels of ”wet” and ”dry”, especially if pervious
areas are involved in the study area. According to the assumption made earlier, the entire
catchment area of the roadbed is regarded as fully impervious. However, in real life, it is
highly unlikely that there isn’t a small percentage of pervious area that would take longer
than one day to dry up.
This version of the model doesn’t reset the wetting amount every midnight, it just subtracts
a stable amount every day. By doing this it creates different levels of wetting conditions
depending on how long time has passed since the last rainfall event.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
33
==PAGE:42==
5
Results & Discussion
5.1
Pre­processing and investigation of measurement data
5.1.1
Rainfall data
Results from the segregation of rain events into single events show that the most intense
rain event was a 5.99 mm/h and 5.09 mm rain episode that lasted less than an hour
on the 27th of September 2021, whereas the most noteworthy episode depth­wise was a
20.92 mm and 1.06 mm/h episode that lasted several hours between the 9th and 10th of
July 2021. The author’s suspicion, that the period of recording would be dry and not host
any surprises in terms of major rain events, became a certainty, as the most noteworthy
rain events of this period are barely classified as light, according to Table 2.2. Results can
be seen in Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2. Note that the lighter events have been excluded
from the graph, with Figure 5.1 showing rain events whose mean intensity exceeds 0.50
mm/h, while Figure 5.2 shows rain events whose depth exceeded 3 mm.
Processing of rainfall data
Figure 5.1: Mean intensity of segregated single rain events
Figure 5.2: Total water depth of segregated single rain events
34
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:43==
Investigation of rainfall data
Figure 5.3: Resulting graph from the comparison of the local weather station’s data to the
data of the two closest official meteorological stations
Results of the comparison, which can be seen in Table A.1 of the Appendix, show that,
despite corresponding values not being identical between the three stations on a given
day due to temporal and spatial variation, there is a correlation. The corresponding val­
ues are usually in the same order of magnitude, and zero values showing days without
rain, exist in all three stations at the same day. It is noteworthy to mention, that the study
period is characterized as relatively dry, as no extreme phenomena are taking place. This
makes the comparison more challenging as the chances of noticing great deviations be­
tween recorded values is minimum, as only minor rain events are studied. Additionally,
data received from the meteorological stations concern only time periods that noteworthy
rain events takes place, whereas Dryp’s station is usually recording non­stop for the study
period. Another possible reason for the noted differences, could be that more rain events
took place in these months, but the official meteorological stations disclosed them either
due to technical errors, planned shutdowns or either because the measurements weren’t
approved, due to incorrect conditions of measurement. Taking these points into consid­
eration, it is relatively safe to assume that Dryp stations’ measurements are accurate and
can be used as input for the hydrological model.
5.1.2
Investigation of sensors’ recordings
Having all data on the same time step and period allows for a preliminary comparison
between rainfall values and water elevations to take place.
Sensor 1 ­ Groundwater level
As it is previously mentioned, groundwater gets recharged during rainfall events, which
could also imply a vertical raising of it’s level. This relationship can be spotted in the
graphs, especially in the recordings between the 26th of June to the 16th of July, where
sharp spikes appear to take hold in the groundwater level. It is also worth to mention
that the highest recorded groundwater level (124.5 mm) coincides with the biggest rain
depth event (20.92 mm) that was found in the rain recordings. The sudden drops and
raises that are recorded during a time when no rain event takes place, as well as the
negative value recordings, are of unknown cause. No attempt has been made to explain
such behaviour, since the fluctuations are of small magnitude (few cm). Speculations
include unrelated to the study water activities (e.g. garden watering) that could interfere
with the groundwater level and also displacements or errors by the sensor. However,
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
35
==PAGE:44==
setting aside these irregularities, it is safe to say that the groundwater level responds well
to corresponding rainfall stimuli.
Figure 5.4: Sensor 1 ­ Groundwater elevation (mm)
Sensor 2 ­ Water level in the soakaway
Similarly with groundwater level, water level in the roadbed’s soakaway appears to have a
direct relationship with rain occurrence, as expected. Sudden spikes in the water level are
taking place during the same time as the most intense events of the recording period do.
Again, irregularities still appear, which are more sensitive to external water related activi­
ties as the storage of the soakaway is far smaller than an underground aquifer’s volume
can be, for example. Small scale activities, such as someone washing a car upstream of
the roadbed, could interfere with the recordings. Therefore, the uncertainty tied with this
sensor is greater than sensor 1. Again, the second highest recorded groundwater level
(402.2 mm) coincides with the biggest rain depth event (20.92 mm ), which is a good
indication of a causal relationship between the datasets.
Figure 5.5: Sensor 2 ­ Water level in the soakaway(mm)
Sensor 3 ­ Water level in the outlet well
The base of the outlet drain of the roadbed’s outlet well is located 50 cm above the base
of the well, as depicted in Figure 3.2. However, as illustrated in Figure 5.6, the recordings
hint that the water is reaching a level of approximately 71 cm before draining out of the well.
This happens because the outlet pipe of the well is equipped with a siphon, so to avoid the
36
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:45==
emerging of unpleasant smells of the sewer system to the well and consequently to the
street surface through the rainbed’s overflow drain. The rises that are recorded above this
level are baffling, as it is previously implied that the overall dry weather conditions, along
with the water level recordings of the soakaway, which never reach the maximum (60
cm), won’t cause an overflow of the setup to the sewers. The answer to this phenomenon
is believed to lie in the aboveground part of the setup. By studying the data closely, it
is noticed that the sharp rises of water level in the well are happening shortly after a
rather high rain intensity is recorded in as little as one time step. This goes to show
that even 3 minutes of intense raining (e.g. 50 mm/h ) is enough to overwhelm the
rainbed part of the setup, and cause it to bypass water directly to the outlet well, despite
the fact that the soakaway can still receive water. This could possibly happen due to
a simultaneous maxing of the soil’s infiltration rate and the flow of the ø315 soakaway
bypass pipe, however this is extremely unlikely with the given rainfall data and the size
of the soakaway bypass drain pipe. Theoretically, if the water level in the rainbed rose to
7 cm of height, the pipe to the soakaway would start to bypass water. If, however, water
level continues to rise and reaches 10 cm, it will overflow to the outlet well. In practise,
however, it could be that things are different with these threshold heights, either due to
construction errors or either due to soil corrosion or transportation after years of use.
Figure 5.6: Sensor 3 ­ Water level in the outlet well (mm)
Filtering of erroneous recordings
Investigation and further processing of measurement data in an attempt to exclude illogical
recordings from the dataset is regarding only the second sensor. Water elevation inside
the soakaway is the only index upon which the model’s simulating performance will be
evaluated. The other two sensors will not be utilised in this study, as their examination
in subsection 5.1.2 didn’t show an interference with the roadbed’s operation that can be
modelled.
Upon analysing data from sensor 2 in combination with the respective rain intensities it
was made possible to pinpoint which parts of the recordings seemed illogical.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.7: Sensor 2 ­ Examples of illogical recordings made by sensor 2
The cases from Figure 5.7 will be analysed here so to outline the strategy that was fol­
lowed to filter unwanted data from the whole dataset. It is important to remember that this
particular sensor measures water level by having the bottom surface of the soakaway as
the reference point. Hence, a recording having the value 0 implies that the soakaway has
no water:
• Red zones 1 , 3 and 4 show cases where negative water levels are recorded.
These recordings are attributed to faulty or poorly calibrated sensor equipment,
since water level below the base of the soakaway can not be recorded. However,
with the exception of data located in zone 1 , every other instance of negative val­
ues follows a certain pattern. They all are successive to a period where water level
in the soakaway was elevated. Therefore, after the cessation of a rain event, the
soakaway’s water level begins to decrease as water seeps into the ground. During
this phase the sensor’s recordings are showing a descending trajectory from high
to negative water levels, that, shortly after, start ascending towards an equilibrium
level. Therefore, the negative recordings are all unwanted and they will be treated
by appointing the value zero to them.
• Red zones 1 and 2 show cases where water elevation in the soakaway appears
to be rising without the simultaneous presence of a rain event. Cases like these
could be the result of faulty or poorly calibrated sensor equipment, but they could
also result from water entering the soakaway that isn’t related to rain events. Such
recordings are unwanted as the processes that produce them cannot me modelled
or simulated. Additionally they will interfere with the model’s evaluation procedure.
Hence, they will be removed by appointing the value zero to them.
• Another thing to notice while studying Figure 5.7 is that the equilibrium level of the
soakaway appears to be slightly increasing as time passes. This equilibrium level
corresponds to the soakaway being empty of water, and is illustrated in the graph
as small amplitude horizontal waves. This wavy line is attributed to the sensor’s
accuracy, as it’s recordings could fluctuate ±2mm every time­step, but in reality the
38
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:47==
sensor’s location hasn’t changed. The way this data was treated was by finding
the average value around which all ”equilibrium” recordings fluctuated. Data was
separated into different periods as this average value changed. Finally, the average
value of each corresponding period was subtracted from each recording so that the
equilibrium recordings of each period revolve around the value 0 (the red line).
The resulting filtered data is illustrated in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Water elevation in the soakaway after filtering of data
5.1.3
Measurement gaps
Analysis of the data showed that, if the weather station made a recording every three min­
utes, as planned, for the whole study period (17th of May 2021 until the 30th of September
2021), it would have registered 65317 recordings. Instead, the real number is 39064 time­
steps with a recording. This practically means that the weather station recorded roughly
60% out of all the recordings that it could potentially record during the study period.
Comparing the time series of the weather station with the artificial time­series that had
all possible recording time­steps was, thankfully, easy. That’s because, it was noticed,
that the weather station made recordings on fixed times every day. Recordings start on
00.00 am daily and, if an interruption occurs, they continue on the time step that they
should. Basically, days that are fully recorded, should always have 480 recordings and
all of them happen at the same hour and minute every day throughout the whole study
period. This is very convenient because the artificially created time­series relies on the
same rules, which means that all the time­steps of the weather station can be also found
on the artificial time­series. Therefore, a comparison on time­step scale is possible and
the missing recordings can be located.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.9: Available recordings of Dryp’s weather monitoring station for the period be­
tween 17th of May 2021 until the 30th of September 2021
Figure 5.9 is a scatter graph showing bullets in time­steps where the weather station has
registered a recording. Unfortunately, due to the high amount of data, this was perhaps
the best way to present the results of this analysis. This graph could be misleading, as
the reader could assume that periods that are covered by a continuous blue line are fully
recorded. This is not the case most of the times, however, as a recording gap of a just a
few hours in a certain day cannot be picked up by observing this graph, due to the large
scale of data. It is, however, useful in locating larger periods without climate recordings.
5.2
Model parameters
This section will present the results of the various methods that were utilized in order to
calculate the parameters’ values of the model.
5.2.1
Rainfall input
According to the admission that happened after the examination that took place in sub­
section 4.1.1, it is safe to assume that the rainfall data that was used as input to the model
was accurate.
5.2.2
Groundwater level
Figure 5.4 shows that the maximum level recorded throughout the study period is 12.5
cm which would put the groundwater level 1.88 m below the ground. Since the base
of the soakaway lies at 1.10 m below ground, as recorded in the technical drawings,
the roadbed’s operation is not impacted at all by the groundwater. Therefore, the model
will assume no interactions between the groundwater level and the roadbed, other than
infiltration from the latter.
5.2.3
Dimensions of the setup
The dimensions of the setup features were obtained from technical drawings. The surface
area of the rain bed was found to be 6.62 m2, while the dimensions of the soakaway were
found to be 5.0 m x 1.2 m x 0.6 m, which amounts to a total volume of 3.6 m3. Also the
40
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:49==
filter soil was found to be 40 cm thick and finally, the volume that the salt well, located in
the entry of the setup, can host, is 0.06 m3.
Figure 5.10: Surface area of the roadbed’s raingarden, Autocad 2022
Figure 5.11: Cross section of the roadbed (perpendicular to the road), Autocad 2022
Figure 5.12: Cross section of the roadbed (parallel to the road), Autocad 2022
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
41
==PAGE:50==
5.2.4
Catchment area of the roadbed
Results from the analysis at Scalgo Live show a catchment area of 423.52 m2 for the
roadbed of interest. However, Mr. Mouritsen [41] revealed that HOFOR’s calculations for
the catchment area of this particular roadbed was 320,58 m2. In both cases the calculated
surface area is characterized entirely as impervious. It is therefore safe to assume that
the real surface area corresponds to a value close to the above­mentioned ones.
Runoff generated in other areas could possibly be conveyed to the studied catchment area
which is also a great uncertainty factor. This runoff could add to the one already resulting
from the area and could affect the results. However, given that the rainfall events of the
period are light, this low risk will be encompassed to the uncertainty of the catchment
area’s true size.
Figure 5.13: Water level in the soakaway throughout the study period, according to model
predictions(blue) and sensor measurements (orange), SCALGO Live
42
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:51==
5.2.5
Initial runoff losses
Figure 5.14: Analysis on QGIS shows an average slope of the area of 3.838%, QGIS
The analysis at QGIS produced a mean slope of the catchment area of 3.838%. By using
Equation 2.1 the depressions storage of the roadbed’s catchment area can be quantified:
d =
0.07
√
0.03838 = 0.36 mm
(5.1)
This number will be added to the wetting losses of the catchment area (0.1mm­1mm) to
calculate the total initial losses. As mentioned before, the raingarden’s initial losses will
be set between 1mm and 10mm.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
43
==PAGE:52==
5.2.6
Continuous runoff losses
Infiltration
According to Table 2 of (Rammal et al., 2020, p. 9) [37], the infiltration rate of slightly de­
graded paved areas is 0.36 mm/h or 10−7 m/s. As this value is negligible, it is assumed
that it’ll remain steady throughout the study period, regardless of soil saturation. Regard­
ing the rate at which water infiltrates though the 40 cm filter soil to the soakaway can be
calculated by knowing the hydraulic conductivity of the filter soil, which Mr. Mouritsen [41]
reveals it to be 10−4m/s. This infiltration rate will also remain steady, partly due to the
fact that there is no data to calculate a declining rate with the Horton formula. Addition­
ally, water that infiltrates through the soil is not ”lost” from the balance, as it ends up in
the roadbed’s soakaway. Therefore, a detailed simulation of the filter soil’s infiltration is
deemed not necessary.
Evapotranspiration
After applying the method described in subsubsection 4.2.6 it was possible to calculate
the potential effect of evapotranspiration for every time step of the model.
5.2.7
Infiltration rate from within the soakaway
A geotechnical report by the company Franck Miljø & Geoteknik A/S, conducted in the
area in February 2018, provides an indication of the value of the soakaway’s hydraulic
conductivity, which is 4 ∗10−8m/s. Being so small, this value is immediately disregarded
as it doesn’t make sense. The values of Kbottom and Kside will be instead assigned values
close to, but smaller than, the hydraulic conductivity of the filter soil, to account for soil
compaction.
5.2.8
Summary of results
Table 5.1: Summary of calculated parameters
Parameter
Unit
Result
Catchment area
m2
320.58 ­ 423.52
Depression storage of catchment
mm
0.36
Wetting losses of catchment
mm
0.10­1.00
Infiltration rate of catchment
mm/s
0.0001
Salt well volume
m3
0.06
Raingarden area
m2
6.62
Wetting losses of raingarden
mm
10
Infiltration rate of raingarden
mm/s
0.10
Soakaway bypass threshold
m3
0.46
Soakaway length
m
5.00
Soakaway width
m
1.20
Soakaway height
m
0.60
Soakaway porosity
%
95
Hydraulic conductivity Side (kside)
mm/s
0.01­0.10
Hydraulic conductivity Bottom (kbot)
mm/s
0.01­0.10
5.3
Hydrological model
Assigning the values of Table 5.1 in the respective input fields of the model will produce
the first simulation of water elevation in the soakaway. The mean value has been selected
for the values in range. Summary of the values of the parameters that were in range can
be seen in Table 5.2 .
44
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:53==
Table 5.2: Values of the parameters that were used for the simulation
Parameter
Unit
Result
Catchment area
m2
372
Wetting losses of catchment
mm
0.50
Hydraulic conductivity Side (kside)
mm/s
0.05
Hydraulic conductivity Bottom (kbot)
mm/s
0.05
The outputs of the model are illustrated in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Model output (blue) and sensor measurements (orange) with the correspond­
ing rain intensities (red).
In this first simulation, the model appears to be behaving rather normally. Regarding the
model output, water level inside the soakaway increases simultaneously with coexisting
rain events, and is almost always backed by a simultaneous increase recorded by the
sensor. A graph, however, is not the best criterion upon which the performance of the
model can be examined. Aside from the maximum height of water in the soakaway, for
each event, no information can be obtained regarding incoming volume, infiltration rates,
etc. Further analysis is therefore required to evaluate the model’s performance.
5.4
Model output processing, analysis and evaluation
5.4.1
Noteworthy events of the study period
Using the resulting Figure 5.5 of the investigation that took place in subsection 5.1.2, the
six time periods with the highest recorded water level in the soakaway were selected as
the individual events that will be further studied. Each event begins with the onset of a
rainfall event and ends with the soakaway being empty of water. The events are shown
collectively in Figure 5.16 and individually in Appendix B
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.16: The six time periods with the highest noted activity inside the soakaway
Graphs of the individual events after the first simulation can be found in Appendix C
5.4.2
Segragation of parameters
Following the calculation of parameters that took place in section 5.2, there is now a clear
picture of their certainty or uncertainty, following the criteria that were established for this
distinction.
Certain Parameters
Table 5.3: Certain parameters with the grounds for classification
Certain Parameter
Reason for classification
Depression storage of catchment
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Infiltration rate of catchment
Minor impact on model outputs
Salt well volume
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Raingarden area
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Wetting losses of raingarden
Minor impact on model outputs
Infiltration rate of raingarden
Directly provided value, minor impact to outputs
Soakaway bypass threshold
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Soakaway length
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Soakaway width
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Soakaway height
Available data allows for accurate calculation
Porosity
Directly provided value
46
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:55==
Uncertain parameters
Table 5.4: Unertain parameters with the grounds for classification
Unertain Parameter
Reason for classification
Catchment area
Value in range, major impact on model outputs
Wetting losses on catchment
Major impact on model outputs
Hydraulic conductivity Side (kside)
Value approximated, major impact on outputs
Hydraulic conductivity Bottom (kbot)
Value approximated, major impact on outputs
5.4.3
Performance metrics
While applying the performance metrics to the model, it was noticed that their robustness
lagged behind when applied to the full period of the model (global), in comparison to the
six individual events (local).
The reason behind this phenomenon lies to the way the criteria methods were applied in
the model. For example, the first and third criteria, where the mean inflow rates in and
out of the soakaway are sought, are pretty straightforward and work as intended when
applied locally. When it comes to applying them globally, however, a great decrease
to the mean values of both the studied and control datasets is noted. This is perfectly
logical, as the rain events that occur in the six individual events are the most important of
the study, and mean inflow and outflow rates are expected to be higher than the means
of the whole study period. Additionally, if the sensor’s measurements are used as the
control simulation during evaluation, the erroneous recordings that exist in the dataset
could also negatively impact the calculation of the mean rates. This particular problem
mainly affects the global evaluation, as the individual events are relatively free of such
erroneous recordings. It is reminded that the sensor’s measurements were filtered to rid
them of the majority of these erroneous recordings. However, this happened to a certain
extent. This sort of deviation in the mean values will be a problem however, as it will make
the calibration task difficult. Choosing to calibrate the model on a global scale so it scores
well on the performance metrics will mean disregarding the evaluation results of the six
individual events.
This problem can be overcome if the method, for applying the 1st and 3rd criteria globally,
changes. Seeking the weighted average, instead of the mean average, of the inflow and
outflow rates of the soakaway seems to increase these averages to values close to those
of the individual events. The weight factor is set by the soakaway’s water elevation at that
particular time step, with high elevations having a bigger factor that the lower elevations.
Another example where the errors in the sensor’s recordings can impact the evaluation
process negatively can be seen in the last criterion ­ Duration of wetting time of the soak­
away. The method used for this criterion is comparing the amount of time steps with water
presence in the soakaway, between a study simulation and a control one. In the case
where the control simulation is set as the sensor’s measurements, it could happen that
the sensor’s recordings show that water is present in the soakaway when that’s not the
case. As explained in subsubsection 5.1.2, this is attributed to the device’s imperfections
and inaccurate recordings. This practically means that the soakaway can be empty of
water but the sensor doesn’t always translate this as a recording of 0 mm , as the model
does. Hence results an erroneous percentile difference between output and measure­
ments. This particular problem has been mitigated by choosing measurements above
3 mm (and not only 0 mm) to be included in the sum of wetted soakaway time­steps.
Despite that fact though, an uncertainty of errors always remains.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
47
==PAGE:56==
With all that in mind, here’s how the results of the original method, illustrated in Figure 5.15,
score in comparison to the sensor’s measurements
Table 5.5: Evaluation of the original model’s output in comparison to the sensor’s mea­
surements
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Globally
Locally
1
2
3
4
5
6
p1
­37.28
­79.52
­30.09
­18.84
­79.76
48.09
­17.08
p2
­39.14
­72.13
­48.17
­39.14
­94.16
­25.86
­13.19
p3
1408.46
1440.20
527.20
413.50
176.69
573.36
812.16
p4
­81.85
­94.51
­80.66
­78.02
­93.18
­76.74
­88.05
The first thing to notice after analysing the results is that the percentile differences vary
a lot between the different events and also the full period. Model seems to ”behave”
differently in all of them. Further discussion on the reasons behind this phenomenon will
take place later in the chapter. In more detail however, and keeping in mind the results
from this particular set of parameters, the major problem lies in the 3rd criterion, i.e. the
difference noted between the infiltration rate from the soakaway according to the model
simulation and the measurements. Focusing on the full period of the model, it’s implied
that the average rate that water exits the soakaway is 14 times larger than the infiltration
rate suggested by the measurements. This deems the original model unacceptable and
therefore a calibration of the parameters is necessary.
5.4.4
Calibration and Validation
Pre­calibration consideration and problems
Calibration and validation of the hydrological model proves to be quite a challenging en­
deavour. This is partly due to the model’s simplistic nature, where there was an effort
in portraying the hydrological processes in an uncomplicated, low detail manner. This
preference in ”the simpler the better” principle of models is bound to cause a divergence
between model outputs and the real life situation of any subject of study. A direct conse­
quence of this divergence is that the calibration capabilities of any such model are limited.
Another reason that complicates matters, and was partly solved in subsection 5.4.3, is that
the performance metrics, that will be used for guiding the calibration process, are not op­
timal for studying the whole study period. Calibrating the model will aim at optimizing the
four criteria globally, which unfortunately means that there won’t be a special focus on the
six individual events’ performance metrics.
These limitations are feared to lead to a final calibrated model that cannot adequately
fulfill all the performance metrics criteria perfectly. Fulfilment of all the criteria would mean
having an ideal scenario where a calibrated model yields all performance metrics close to
zero, when compared to the real­life soakaway water elevation, that is portrayed by the
measurements of sensor 2.
Discussion of strategies for overcoming these problems
The possibility of having percentile differences close to zero, between the calibrated model
and the sensor’s measurements, for all four criteria, is therefore off the table. As such,
it is important to contemplate on the strategy with which calibration will be completed, so
that model validation is satisfactory. Two options exist. Option one is choosing a set of
two or maximum three of those criteria that, after calibration, will have a minuscule per­
centile difference from the sensor’s measurements, and completely ignore the remaining
48
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:57==
criteria. Option two would be to try and hit a ”sweet post” for all the metrics simultane­
ously, which would bring all of them to minimum difference with the measurements, but
non of them close to minuscule differences. This latter option seems more logical, as
the idea of ignoring a set of criteria for the sake of perfecting others seems irresponsible.
One important thing to mention about the preferred strategy is that, although all criteria
are taken into account, a hierarchy will be kept during their optimization, according to the
importance surrounding what they portray. It can be agreed that the 2nd criterion, for ex­
ample, which compares max height for a duration of months is far less important than the
4th criterion that compares wetting times. The last part of this pre­calibration discussion
is about the noted divergence between the 3rd and 4th criterion. It is noted that there is
no set of parameters possible that can make the model have a minuscule difference to
the measurements for both these criteria at the same time. This can, again, be attributed
to unfiltered errors in sensor measurements and the simple nature of the model.
Calibrated model results and validation
As explained in methodology, calibration of the model will rely only on the high impact
uncertain parameters so to limit complexity. By keeping the certain parameters stable,
several combinations of uncertain parameters values have been manually tested in order
to find the match that fulfils the strategy explained above. A summary of the calibrated
values of the uncertain parameters can be seen in Table 5.6 .
Table 5.6: Calibrated values of the parameters that were used for the simulation
Parameter
Unit
Result
Catchment area
m2
200
Wetting losses of catchment
mm
1.00
Hydraulic conductivity Bottom (kbot)
mm/s
0.004
Hydraulic conductivity Side (kside)
mm/s
0.007
An illustration of the the model results can be seen in Figure 5.17, while the performance
metrics of the calibration process can be seen in Table 5.7. Graphs of the individual events
of the calibrated model can be found in Appendix D
Figure 5.17: Calibrated model output (blue) and sensor measurements (orange) with the
corresponding rain intensities (red).
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
49
==PAGE:58==
Table 5.7: Evaluation of the calibrated model’s output in comparison to the sensor’s mea­
surements
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Full period
Individual events
1
2
3
4
5
6
p1
­6.01
­73.85
­9.90
­1.10
­40.12
43.86
23.53
p2
0.03
­69.93
1.27
­17.88
­37.92
47.45
51.40
p3
­4.69
­22.77
­3.00
­19.86
­25.08
7.19
43.39
p4
13.93
­56.54
­1.16
1.21
­16.02
4.39
­25.37
Discussion on the results
Given the earlier reservations, the results of Table 5.7 seem unexpectedly satisfactory. A
very decent score in the performance metrics has been achieved globally, accompanied
with a significant improvement of the performance percentages locally. In this part, an
in­depth discussion will take place about some of the most noteworthy observations of
the calibration results
Smaller catchment area
The most surprising observation made through the calibrating process was the resulting
value of the catchment area. 200 m2 of contributing surface is a value way off the 320.58 ­
423.52 m2 range that was anticipated. This could be attributed to either one of three possi­
ble reasons. Reason one could be that the hydrological model is very faulty in it’s structure
and thus the resulting error is great. Reason two could be that HOFOR calculated and
provided a wrong figure and­or the analysis in SCALGO was crude and/or erroneous.
The third and most plausible reason is that the contributing catchment area isn’t always
constant and is indeed tied to the magnitude of rain events. This possibility was hinted
very early during this project during the analysis at SCALGO. In subsection 4.2.4, in order
to extract a catchment area from SCALGO, it was explained that a rain depth value had
to be assigned as input for the analysis to take place. During which point,the maximum
documented rain depth of a single rain event of the whole study period was assigned (21
mm) and thus the resulting 423.52 m2. At this point it makes very much sense that the
parameter’s value is so smaller, as, throughout the study period of the model, multiple rain
events exist whose rain depth is much smaller. Therefore, it could be that the catchment
area parameter portrays a combination or an average value of all the different sizes the
catchment had throughout the study.
Varying model ”behaviour” in the individual events
As mentioned earlier, it is noticed that the performance metrics percentages vary between
the individual events. It’s as if the model accurately predicts water elevation in one event,
when it does so poorly in another. As already noticed earlier, a catchment area whose
size depends on the magnitude of rain event could be part of the reason behind this
observation. The fact that the catchment area’s surface is assumed to be constant for
simplicity reasons will inevitably lead to temporal variations of the model’s behaviour.
Other parameters’ values also appear to be changing over time. Upon studying the graphs
of the individual events (Appendix B),it’s apparent that the rate with which the soakaway
empties (declining line’s slope) is different for all events. This can be partly attributed
to the fact that the emptying rate is dependent on the water elevation inside the soak­
away (Equation 2.6. This could, therefore, imply that the hydraulic conductivities of the
bottom and side surfaces are constant for the whole study duration, and, given that the
soakaway’s dimensions and porosity don’t change, only water elevation in the soakaway
affects the infiltration rate. Literature, however, suggests otherwise. In Djurhuus’ the­
50
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:59==
sis[10] it is noticed that hydraulics conductivities’ values appear to be decreasing as time
passes due to clogging and soil sedimentation. This phenomenon mainly affects the bot­
tom surface of the soakaway, hence hydraulic conductivity of the bottom surface is noticed
to be smaller compared to sides.
Wetting capacity of the catchment area is also suspected to not be constant. As it can
be noticed in Figure 5.17, there are instances where the model predicts high water ele­
vations, while at the same time, the sensors record minimal changes in the soakaway’s
water height. These occasions are mainly noticed after long periods of dry weather. This
hints the possibility of different levels of wetting conditions depending on how long time
has passed since the last rainfall event. This observation was so apparent, even from ear­
lier stages of the project, that led to the creation of a more detailed version of the model
which didn’t consider the wetting capacity of the catchment area as constant (subsubsec­
tion 4.4.7).
Extra observations and uncertainties
The fact that the uncertain parameters do not remain constant throughout the study period
means a similar behaviour to some of the certain ones. Besides the parameters, however,
this part will list some additional reasons that are believed to contribute to the divergence
of the model predictions from the measurements.
• Water is lost to the sewer. Investigation of sensor’s data (subsection 5.1.2), sug­
gests that during time­steps when rain is of significant intensity, water elevation in
the outlet well is increasing. This phenomenon cannot be simulated by the model
as it is believed to be attributed to technical deficiencies of the setup. Therefore, in
the model simulations, this part of water ends up in the soakaway causing increased
water elevations in comparison to measurements.
• Time step of measurements is crude. A personal thought is that the time step of
three minutes, used by Dryp’s weather monitoring station is rather large. As rain is
the sole water input parameter to this model, the uncertainty tied to the scale of this
time step is high. This is because the water volume entering the mass balance each
time step is dependent on a single recording which is evenly distributed throughout
the three minutes. Especially regarding high intensity recordings, it could be that a
lot more water is entering the mass balance than it did in reality.
5.4.5
Sensitivity analysis of Uncertain parameters
(Presentation and discussion of results will be based only on the performance metrics
scores and not on the 100+ graphs that resulted from the analysis. This won’t take a toll
on the overall process, as important observation that are based on these graphs will be
explained in writing.
Catchment Area
To test the sensitivity of the catchment area’s parameter, the following values have been
tested:
• ­50 % = 100 m2
• +50 % = 300 m2
• +100 % = 400 m2
• +200 % = 600 m2
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 5.8: Performance metrics scores of sensitivity analysis of the catchment’s area
parameter
Parameter
Multiplication
factor
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Full period
Individual events
1
2
3
4
5
6
Catchment
area
­50 %
p1
­28.26
­69.09
­55.81
­54.83
­64.71
­54.34
­57.06
p2
­56.89
­66.37
­56.89
­59.19
­73.06
­63.54
­56.16
p3
­30.56
­18.51
­25.48
­27.52
­30.60
­29.79
­22.79
p4
­42.64
­60.19
­37.38
­24.82
­47.35
­22.28
­41.57
+50 %
p1
27.27
63.63
56.74
53.78
55.99
56.19
61.82
p2
60.72
57.55
60.72
61.63
99.28
65.13
59.50
p3
28.01
2.41
31.59
35.26
31.43
35.09
18.65
p4
29.25
55.34
4.70
0.48
22.26
0.25
29.21
+100 %
p1
54.23
128.48
115.15
106.83
112.11
111.42
122.59
p2
123.05
115.53
123.05
123.69
198.61
128.97
117.24
p3
55.13
7.45
62.21
69.63
68.72
69.19
37.12
p4
51.97
106.80
9.20
0.48
22.26
0.25
46.07
+200%
p1
106.74
245.94
228.87
213.01
224.41
220.80
241.03
p2
247.34
456.42
247.34
255.37
397.47
256.25
232.59
p3
107.13
52.72
124.33
140.91
142.40
138.77
87.58
p4
83.22
130.10
13.50
0.48
22.26
0.25
46.07
Overall results point to the parameter being sensitive. The general trend is that changing
the size of the catchment area leads to the simulation producing significantly different
results than the calibrated model does. It was expected that the size of the catchment
area is a very influential parameter, since it’s combination with the corresponding rain
intensity results in the water volume that enters the mass balance of the study. In more
detail, it was noticed that:
• Inflow rate to the soakaway (p1) appears to change linearly with the fluctuations of
the parameter’s value, both globally and locally. This observation leads to the ascer­
tainment that the catchment’s size is the most prominent and influential parameter
involved in all the processes preceding water entering the soakaway.
• Maximum water elevation in the soakaway (p2) also appears to change linearly
with the fluctuations of the parameter’s value, both globally and locally. The only
exception is the first event, which took place on a period succeeding another rain
event. As noticed in Figure D.1, although the model outputs, in the beginning of the
event, show an empty soakaway, the sensor’s recordings don’t. This also happens
when the catchment’s size is increased. Therefore, p2 in the first event is heavily
impacted by the presence of water in the soakaway before it starts.
• Infiltration rate of water leaving the soakaway (p3) behaves similarly with p2 and
for exactly the same reasons. Onset of the first event with a non­empty soakaway
will increase the mean infiltration rate, as it depends on the water height in the soak­
away.
• Duration of wetting time of the soakaway (p4) doesn’t follow a linear relationship
with the parameter’s value. This is mainly attributed to the nature of this criterion,
as increasing the catchment size will only add some additional wetting time steps
towards the end of each rain event, to account for longer emptying times. This
extra time results to a minor difference from the calibrated model. Additionally, as
noticed in the individual events, p4 has a rather small upper limit value, after which
no amount of parameter increase can change it. This happens because, in the
calibrated model, soakaway has water inside most of the time of an individual event.
52
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:61==
Wetting losses of catchment
To test the sensitivity of the wetting losses’ parameter, the following values have been
tested:
• ­50 % = 0.5 mm
• +50 % = 1.5 mm
• +100 % = 2.0 mm
• +200 % = 3.0 mm
Table 5.9: Evaluation of the sensitivity analysis’ results in comparison to the outputs of
the calibrated model
Parameter
Multiplication
factor
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Full period
Individual events
1
2
3
4
5
6
Wetting losses
of catchment
­50 %
p1
0.22
21.29
1.91
­0.34
0.00
2.13
3.66
p2
0.00
26.37
0.00
2.48
0.00
1.88
6.06
p3
0.23
1.46
­2.45
1.41
0.00
0.35
0.45
p4
5.24
20.39
5.09
0.48
0.00
2.23
7.58
+50 %
p1
0.47
­17.15
­1.22
­3.00
­11.82
­2.16
­9.08
p2
0.00
­21.12
0.00
0.00
­19.19
­2.07
­6.66
p3
0.44
­1.26
1.65
3.06
­4.78
­1.50
­1.18
p4
­5.80
­14.56
­3.72
­5.73
­12.01
­0.74
­7.87
+100 %
p1
0.72
­67.77
­1.22
­4.47
­17.67
­2.67
­10.68
p2
0.00
­83.47
0.00
­2.00
­24.67
­2.56
­6.66
p3
0.85
­17.54
1.65
2.92
­6.09
­1.85
0.01
p4
­13.78
­57.28
­3.72
­7.16
­16.25
­1.24
­11.24
+200%
p1
­1.17
­94.70
­1.22
­7.66
­30.45
­20.55
­17.22
p2
0.00
­93.45
0.00
­6.51
­36.22
­22.82
­13.96
p3
­1.25
­7.73
1.65
0.59
­8.76
­12.09
­2.14
p4
­23.09
­92.23
­3.72
­8.35
­29.68
­4.70
­15.73
Overall results point to the parameter not being sensitive. Substantial differences to the
outputs of the calibrated model are not noticed to the simulations after testing different
wetting capacities, especially on a global scale. Although the catchment area is consid­
ered as entirely impervious, it was expected that the wetting capacity parameter would
be impactful to the model’s outputs, as the study is dealing with minor rain events. The
minor water volume that the catchment could hold back as wetting water was expected
to be substantial in comparison to the full water volume of the rain event. In general, it
appears that, in some events, raising the wetting capacity doesn’t influence the perfor­
mance metrics at all. This happens because the main activity in the soakaway in those
events, starts happening after the catchment surface is fully saturated. In more detail, it
was noticed that:
• Inflow rate to the soakaway (p1) appears to change linearly with the fluctuations
of the parameter’s value, on the local scale.
Exception to this rule are regard­
ing events that spread across several days, which means wetting capacity is re­
set. This process affects the performance metrics percentages, and leads to a non
linear behaviour. As expected, p1 appears to get smaller as the wetting capacity
increases, due to the soakaway receiving less inflow volumes compared to the cal­
ibrated model. Not much can be said about the global scale, as differences are
minuscule.
• Maximum water elevation in the soakaway (p2) is not affected by the parameter’s
fluctuations, on a global scale. Increasing the wetting capacity seems to attenu­
ate the max elevation of water in the soakaway on the local events. Exceptions
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
53
==PAGE:62==
are again regarding wetting resetting and starting saturation conditions of the catch­
ment.
• Infiltration rate of water leaving the soakaway (p3) is, in theory, impacted by the
fluctuation of the wetting capacity parameter’s value. The varying water volume that
will end up in the soakaway will affect the infiltration rate, which is partially tied to
the height (or volume) of the water present in the soakaway. In reality, however,
an erratic behaviour of the performance metrics is noticed. After carefully studying
the graphs produced by testing this parameter, this behaviour is again attributed
wetting resetting and starting saturation conditions of the catchment. To explain this,
simulations with lower wetting capacity had more instances where water elevation
rose above zero and emptied again in an individual event. This phenomenon affects
the calculation of mean soakaway infiltration.
• Duration of wetting time of the soakaway (p4) appears to follow a linear rela­
tionship with the fluctuating parameter’s value, both globally and locally. The only
exception is event #2 where the main soakaway activity starts after the wetting is
fully saturated, and all simulations with different wetting capacities lead to the same
outputs.
Hydraulic conductivity ­ Bottom (kbot)
To test the sensitivity of the soakaway’s bottom surface’s hydraulic conductivity parameter,
the following values have been tested:
• ­50 % = 0.002 mm/s
• +50 % = 0.006 mm/s
• +100 % = 0.008 mm/s
• +200 % = 0.012 mm/s
Table 5.10: Evaluation of the sensitivity analysis’ results in comparison to the outputs of
the calibrated model
Parameter
Multiplication
factor
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Full period
Individual events
1
2
3
4
5
6
Hydraulic conductivity
bottom (kbot)
­50 %
p1
­22.95
14.16
5.90
4.68
5.97
4.78
7.85
p2
10.47
7.71
10.47
11.63
49.11
13.22
6.31
p3
­22.45
­46.31
­17.60
­15.33
­15.70
­16.13
­32.61
p4
50.68
106.80
5.28
0.48
22.26
0.00
45.79
+50 %
p1
21.10
­12.48
­5.38
­4.53
­10.78
­4.56
­7.01
p2
­7.44
­6.97
­7.44
­9.46
­22.86
­13.17
­6.21
p3
20.27
38.44
26.06
18.89
25.31
18.70
28.33
p4
­25.11
­33.98
­22.90
­5.49
­28.62
­5.20
­24.44
+100 %
p1
39.91
­22.22
­10.33
­8.88
­21.14
­8.85
­13.11
p2
­12.46
­13.00
­12.46
­18.23
­38.83
­26.34
­12.31
p3
37.92
73.50
48.28
43.38
42.27
41.27
53.46
p4
­40.38
­53.40
­36.20
­22.20
­43.46
­21.53
­39.61
+200%
p1
75.19
­36.45
­19.34
­17.08
­38.86
­16.94
­23.42
p2
­22.49
­25.06
­22.49
­28.54
­69.10
­47.05
­23.35
p3
69.71
151.30
94.78
85.99
74.22
79.22
97.59
p4
­57.87
­71.84
­53.23
­42.72
­59.72
­42.57
­57.87
The soakaway’s bottom surface’s hydraulic conductivity parameter (kbot) seems to be
sensitive for the model’s outputs. kbot is representing the constant part of the soakaway’s
infiltration rate, as it only depends on the soakaway’s bottom surface dimensions. It is
noteworthy to mention that, according to the calibrated values of kbot and kside, infiltration
through the bottom surface is larger until a water height of 27.6 cm. Considering that
throughout the study period the soakaway’s water elevation reaches this height a few
54
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:63==
times, it’s safe to say that kbot is a more prominent and influential parameter compared to
kside overall. Some more detailed observations on the results include:
• Inflow rate to the soakaway (p1) appears to change linearly with the fluctuations
of the parameter’s value, both globally and locally. The change is proportional on
local scale. Theoretically, changing this parameter should not lead to changes in
incoming water volume but a different infiltration rate does seem to affect the mean
inflow rate on individual events. Faster emptying of the soakaway means it fills
slower. On the global scale, however, the relationship is inversely proportional. It is
believed that higher infiltration rate will lead to faster emptying of the soakaway and,
thus, small scale fluctuations of the water level in the soakaway will be eliminated
faster. These small events helped in reducing the mean inflow rate of the soakaway
and their faster elimination will result in bigger inflow rates to the soakaway.
• Maximum water elevation in the soakaway (p2) is linearly inversely proportional
to the values of kbot, as it should. Faster soakaway emptying means that the water
heights are reduced. This linear relationship is evident throughout Table 5.10, ex­
cept the 4th event, where with lower values of kbot the event starts with the soakaway
having water inside.
• Infiltration rate of water leaving the soakaway (p3) is linearly proportional to the
values of kbot. Faster soakaway emptying means a higher mean infiltration rate. This
linear relationship is evident throughout Table 5.10, except the 4th event, where with
lower values of kbot the event starts with the soakaway having water inside.
• Duration of wetting time of the soakaway (p4) doesn’t follow a linear relationship
with the parameter’s value. There is an inverse relationship, as expected, as faster
emptying of the soakaway means less wetting time. Similarly to the catchment area
parameter, p4 doesn’t behave proportionally for the same reasons.
Hydraulic conductivity ­ Side (kside)
To test the sensitivity of the soakaway’s side surfaces’ hydraulic conductivity parameter,
the following values have been tested:
• ­50 % = 0.0035 mm/s
• +50 % = 0.0105 mm/s
• +100 % = 0.014 mm/s
• +200 % = 0.021 mm/s
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
55
==PAGE:64==
Table 5.11: Evaluation of the sensitivity analysis’ results in comparison to the outputs of
the calibrated model
Parameter
Multiplication
factor
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Full period
Individual events
1
2
3
4
5
6
Hydraulic conductivity
side (kside)
­50 %
p1
­15.20
0.81
5.15
3.90
4.09
3.72
4.41
p2
10.47
1.01
11.74
9.94
17.99
9.19
4.19
p3
­22.45
­4.67
­12.06
­14.46
­8.21
­14.17
­11.66
p4
50.68
5.83
1.17
0.00
20.85
0.00
16.29
+50 %
p1
12.22
­0.80
­4.04
­2.89
­2.69
­3.03
­3.81
p2
­6.00
­1.00
­6.00
­7.61
­12.10
­7.96
­3.90
p3
11.77
2.74
12.04
8.47
5.72
8.52
9.77
p4
­9.21
­2.91
­13.11
­0.24
­12.01
0.00
­11.24
+100 %
p1
22.20
­1.60
­7.37
­5.18
­6.32
­5.66
­6.96
p2
­9.40
­2.00
­9.40
­13.90
­16.96
­14.95
­7.56
p3
21.29
7.01
23.40
14.57
10.30
15.14
16.71
p4
­15.90
­6.80
­22.11
­2.63
­18.37
­3.47
­19.10
+200%
p1
37.53
­3.17
­12.85
­8.53
­12.18
­9.82
­11.95
p2
­15.71
­3.89
­15.71
­21.06
­25.51
­26.58
­13.61
p3
35.63
10.85
40.30
28.94
17.48
28.07
28.83
p4
­25.45
­10.68
­33.07
­15.04
­27.56
­16.34
­30.06
The soakaway’s side surface’s hydraulic conductivity parameter (kside) appears to be less
sensitive than the bottom’s surface’s kbot. As explained already, for water elevations in the
soakaway below 27.6 cm, water infiltration through the sides of the soakaway is smaller
than the one in the bottom. However with different values for kside this threshold changes,
as an 200% increase on the parameter value, for example, would lead to a water elevation
of 9.2cm after which infiltration from the sides is higher. In these instances, where the side
conductivity is far larger than the bottom one, it could happen that kside becomes more
impactful than kbot, as, even with minimal rain events, more water is infiltrated through
the sides. In this set of values, however, it is doubtful that this is the case, as there are
numerous small rain events that lead the water elevation to rise to a maximum below this
threshold. This is evident by the smaller percentile differences that are found in Table 5.11
in comparison to Table 5.10. Regarding detailed observations, the same ones from kbot
apply also on this case.
56
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:65==
5.4.6
Investigation of metrics’ correlation to rain events’ magnitude
Figure 5.18: Correlation of performance metrics with corresponding rain event (left) and
maximum intensity (right).
Observing the produced graphs of the analysis leads to the conclusion that performance
metrics scores are not correlated to the rain events’ magnitude, whatsoever. An interest­
ing finding while studying Figure 5.18 is that the percentile difference between the model
and sensor’s measurements is usually minimised in the individual events with the heaviest
rain events, both depth­wise and intensity­wise. This serves in further proving the model’s
robustness in predicting accurate outputs during noteworthy weather phenomena.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
57
==PAGE:66==
Overall, it was noticed that the values of the uncertain parameters affect the model’s out­
puts, some in a greater way and some in a lesser. One of the reasons for which these
parameters were classified as uncertain was that their values were dubious, or there was
limited data for accurately calculating this value. This, added to the fact that all parame­
ters’ values are constant throughout the study, gives rise to the danger of erroneous model
outputs, if a wrong value were to be selected for these parameters. Prior knowledge of
these values or more accurate methods for approximating them could prove useful in
lowering the uncertainty of the model’s predictions.
5.4.7
More detailed versions
1st variation ­ Filter soil can store water
While analysing the outputs of this version of the model, it was discovered that it doesn’t
quite work as intended. While it tried to portray the setup’s filter soil in more detail, it failed
to predict results closer to the measurements, compared to the original model. To better
understand this failure, it’s worth looking on the resulting graphs of the individual events
in Appendix E.
The original model (yellow line) seems to better depict the setup’s performance in the
majority of events, compared to the more detailed variation. Both simulations use the
same set of parameters, which are the calibrated ones from Table 5.1 and Table 5.6.
These results could be improved, by having this variation undergo some parameters re­
calibration, and perhaps an altering of the performance metrics criteria to account for the
different structure. This has been attempted on some individual events to investigate if
the trouble for setting up these processes and analysing them was worth it. Overall this
attempt didn’t bear fruits as, with a more detailed model structure, more convergence was
expected to the real behaviour of the setup.
2nd variation ­ Wetting losses reset differently
The second variation differs from the first, in the sense that it doesn’t portray a more
detailed or elaborate version of the original model. The only difference is that the idea
used to simulate the drying of a wet surface has changed. This makes it harder to evaluate
it, as there is no debate of ”simplicity vs convergence to sensor’s measurements”, which
was the case in the 1st variation. This variation was designed to better predict rain events
that follow a long dry period. Such an event is the fourth, and, as seen in Figure F.4 of
Appendix F, using the same set of parameters, the 2nd variation’s results converge more
to the measurements than the original’s.
After deciding to keep the original model’s parameter’s values, but raising the wetting
capacity to 5 mm, to account for long dry periods, the following percentile differences
were calculated.
Table 5.12: Evaluation of the model’s 2nd variation outputs in comparison to the sensor’s
measurements
Performance metric
Difference from measurements (%)
Full period
Individual events
1
2
3
4
5
6
p1
­0.93
­98.87
­0.05
3.85
­37.94
65.35
39.01
p2
10.00
­99.33
7.41
­10.17
­26.04
71.74
78.58
p3
0.44
­63.56
­4.59
­15.79
­21.74
15.35
44.20
p4
14.73
­95.78
11.61
1.69
­7.42
8.53
­8.81
Upon comparing the results with the ones from Table 5.7 it seems that the evaluations
58
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:67==
scores are on the same level. Each version of the model scores better in some events,
while lagging in others. Since the majority of the project was centered around the original
model, it is believed that if this variant could be further optimised it could yield better
results.
5.4.8
Overall evaluation of the model
To summarize, it is believed that this model is adequate for simulating a roadbed’s oper­
ational performance, under certain conditions. It’s two major disadvantages are it’s fairly
simplistic approach in describing the hydrological processes that take place, but most
importantly, it’s the fact that it uses a static set of parameters’ values for long period sim­
ulations. It has become clear, through the analysis, that the assumption for static param­
eters is wrong, as their values depend on factors such as the magnitude of rain events,
duration of periods without rain, etc. However, to the model’s defence, the fact that the
provided study period hosted light rain events also complicated things as it increased the
uncertainty factor of a simple model’s predictions.
After a long process running multiple simulations and analysing data, it is though that
this model should be intended for simulating a roadbed’s operation on a small time scale.
It is true that the whole process of validating and calibrating the model was centered in
satisfying it’s global performance metrics. However,an unmentioned attempt has been
made to calibrate it’s parameter values so to improve the model’s predictions locally. One
such example is seen below in Figure 5.19
Figure 5.19: 4th event after local­oriented parameter calibration
This graph shows an impeccable performance of the model in predicting the roadbed’s op­
eration on a small time scale. This is, considering that calibration was achieved manually,
and excluding the small time deviation between model predictions and sensor measure­
ments(due to the model performing all processes on the same time step). Similar results
are also observed in the other individual events after the parameters have been tailored
for them.
This goes to show that the level of simplicity of this model is adequate for producing sat­
isfactory results. More elaborately structured versions have failed to produce predictions
closer to reality, in a level that it would make them worth it.
Using this model’s structure for longer time simulations would be possible but extremely
complicated. The reason behind this is that it would require a dynamic set of parame­
ters values where they would change, in every instance a condition that they depend on
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
59
==PAGE:68==
changes. For example, catchment area should be delineated separately for every rain
event, hydraulic conductivities should be assessed based on time passing (to account for
clogging), etc. This would also include braking down the theory behind these parameters
even further to investigate the reason behind their dynamic nature. As expected, such an
attempt would be highly laborious and it would require a huge amount of data, some of
which are hard to find and/or calculate.
60
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusions
The project commenced by explaining the danger of increasing occurrences and intensi­
ties of flooding in urban areas. It has described natural based solutions as an upcoming
drainage technology that gains more and more ground. The motivation for this project,
stemmed from the fact that these solutions are fairly recently implemented, and there isn’t
such experience on the way they operate and their overall effectiveness. This is further
backed by the fact that they are publicly funded structures, and that taxpayer’s money
should be spent as efficiently as possible. Thus, the research question of the project was
born: Can the performance of a NBS unit’s operation be predicted?”
The project has managed to suggest a methodology which answers the research question.
A hydrological model has been developed which, in it’s current form and under certain
conditions, is adequate for producing satisfactory predictions of the performance of a
roadbed’s operation. These conditions mainly regard the parameter’s values. When the
simulation takes place on relatively short time periods, a static set of model parameter’s
values is appropriate, while larger simulation periods should require dynamic values. The
level of detail of the model and the processes that it portrays are considered sufficient for
production of acceptable predictions.
All this, despite certain adversities that were faced throughout the thesis. It has been
implied throughout the project that a combination of factors, like the relatively dry study
period, imprecise and erroneous recordings by the water elevation sensors, crude time­
step recordings of weather station, uncertain or unknown values of some parameters and
general uncertainty of data, can lead to a higher uncertainty in the model’s performance
and evaluation procedure. Additionally, the various assumptions about the way hydrolog­
ical processes are portrayed by the model, and how they affect the water balance, further
increase the chances of incorrect model predictions. It is a personal opinion, that if data
were more accurate, and hosted more ”interesting” weather phenomena, the development
and evaluation procedure of the model would show even better results.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:71==
References
[1]
United Nations. “UNITED NATIONS EXPERT GROUP MEETING ON POPULA­
TION DISTRIBUTION, URBANIZATION, INTERNAL MIGRATION AND DEVEL­
OPMENT”. In: Economic and (January 2008).
[2]
Helena M. Ramos et al. “Urban floods adaptation and sustainable drainage mea­
sures”. In: Fluids 2 (4 2017). ISSN: 23115521. DOI: 10.3390/fluids2040061.
[3]
A. Jensen, H.Ø. Nielsen, and M.L. Nielsen. Climate adaptation in local governance:
Institutional barriers in Danish municipalities. 2016. URL: http://dce2.au.dk/pub/
SR104.pdf.
[4]
Københavns Klimatilpasningsplan. 2011. URL: https://kk.sites.itera.dk/apps/kk_
pub2/index.asp?mode=detalje&id=1270.
[5]
David Butler et al. Urban Drainage, 4Ed. 2018.
[6]
Luca Locatelli et al. “Modelling of green roof hydrological performance for urban
drainage applications”. In: Journal of Hydrology 519 (PD 2014). ISSN: 00221694.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.10.030.
[7]
Jonas Smit Andersen et al. “Characteristic rain events: A methodology for improving
the amenity value of stormwater control measures”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland)
9 (10 2017). ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su9101793.
[8]
Yang Yang and Ting Fong May Chui. “Modeling and interpreting hydrological re­
sponses of sustainable urban drainage systems with explainable machine learning
methods”. In: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 25 (11 2021). ISSN: 16077938.
DOI: 10.5194/hess-25-5839-2021.
[9]
John Charles Heltzel. “Modeling low impact development (LID) stormwater facilities
in an urban retrofit scenario: a case study at Davis Manor”. eng. In: (2019).
[10]
Vibe Djurhuus. “Evaluation of two stormwater infiltration trenches in central Copen­
hagen after 24 years of operation, Evaluering af to faskiner i København efter 24
års brug”. und. 2019.
[11]
Camilla Christiane Jakobsen. “Evaluating the performance of NBS treatment trains
through long­term simulations, Evaluering af seriekoblede LAR­anlæg gennem langtidssimu­
leringer”. und. 2021.
[12]
Marshall SJ. The Water Cycle. Reference Module in Earth Systems and Environ­
mental Sciences. Oxford: Elsevier; 2014.
[13]
Huaxia YAO et al. “COMPARISON OF DISTRIBUTED AND LUMPED HYDROLOG­
ICAL MODELS”. In: PROCEEDINGS OF HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING 42 (1998).
ISSN: 0916­7374. DOI: 10.2208/prohe.42.163.
[14]
Static Vs Dynamic Simulation in Quantitative Analysis. (2020, January 23). [On­
line]. Available: https://study.com/academy/lesson/static­vs­dynamic­simulation­in­
quantitative­analysis.html [Accessed: July 18, 2022].
[15]
Gayathri K Devi, B P Ganasri, and G S Dwarakish. “A Review on Hydrological Mod­
els: International Conference On Water Resources, Coastal and Ocean Engineering
(Icwrcoe 2015)”. In: Aquatic Procedia 4 (Icwrcoe 2015). ISSN: 2214­241X.
[16]
Milad Jajarmizadeh, Sobri Harun, and Mohsen Salarpour. “A review on theoretical
consideration and types of models in hydrology”. In: Journal of Environmental Sci­
ence and Technology 5 (5 2012). ISSN: 19947887. DOI: 10.3923/jest.2012.249.261.
[17]
Juan Stella and Glenn Warner. “Modelling a hydrologic Black­Box”. In: Tecnología
y Ciencias del Agua 9 (Feb. 2018), pp. 101–112. DOI: 10.24850/j-tyca-2018-01-07.
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
63
==PAGE:72==
[18]
Torsten Bohlin. Practical Grey­Box Process Identification: Theory and Applications.
2006.
[19]
Diba Ghonchepour et al. “A methodological framework for the hydrological model
selection process in water resource management projects”. In: Natural Resource
Modeling 34 (3 2021). ISSN: 19397445. DOI: 10.1111/nrm.12326.
[20]
S.M. Seth, (2009, September 1) Physically based hydrological modelling. Available:
https://www.geospatialworld.net/article/physically­based­hydrological­modelling/ [Ac­
cessed: July 18, 2022].
[21]
Gosain, A.K., A. Mani and C. Dwivedi, 2009. Hydrological Modelling­Literature Re­
view. Climawater, Report NO.1.
[22]
Christopher P. Konrad. “Effects of Urban Development on Floods”. In: U.S. Geo­
logical Survey d (November 2003).
[23]
Magdy M. Abou Rayan and Berge Djebedjian. “Urban water management chal­
lenges in developing countries: The Middle East and North Africa (MENA)”. In:
Handbook of Environmental Chemistry 47 (2016). ISSN: 1867979X. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-319-29337-0_10.
[24]
How does urbanisation impact the water cycle? City of Melbourne ­ Urban water
Available: https://urbanwater.melbourne.vic.gov.au/melbournes­water­story/how­does­
urbanisation­impact­the­water­cycle/ [Accessed: July 20, 2022].
[25]
State of Queensland. “Understanding Floods”. In: Medical Journal of Australia 2 (1
2011). ISSN: 0025­729X.
[26]
Christos E. Tsogkas. diktya apocheteusis kai epexergasia lymaton. Vol. 1. 1998.
[27]
Bruce Petrie. “A review of combined sewer overflows as a source of wastewater­
derived emerging contaminants in the environment and their management”. In: En­
vironmental Science and Pollution Research 28 (25 2021). ISSN: 16147499. DOI:
10.1007/s11356-021-14103-1.
[28]
Jan Cools et al. Final Report for Task 1.3: Assessment of impact of storm water
overflows from combined waste water collecting systems on water bodies (including
the marine environment) in the 28 EU Member States. Vol. 1. 2016.
[29]
Susanne M. Charlesworth, Mitchell McTough, and Andrew Adam­Bradford. “The
Design, Construction and Maintenance of a SuDS management Train to Address
Surface water Flows by Engaging the Community: Gawilan Refugee Camp, Ninewah
Governate, Kurdistan Region of Iraq”. In: Journal of Refugee Studies 34 (3 2021).
ISSN: 14716925. DOI: 10.1093/jrs/fez082.
[30]
Allen P. Davis. “Field Performance of Bioretention: Hydrology Impacts”. In: Journal
of Hydrologic Engineering 13 (2 2008). ISSN: 1084­0699. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)1084-
0699(2008)13:2(90).
[31]
Allen P. Davis et al. “Water Quality Improvement through Bioretention: Lead, Cop­
per, and Zinc Removal”. In: Water Environment Research 75 (1 2003). ISSN: 1061­
4303. DOI: 10.2175/106143003x140854.
[32]
Matthew J. Bunkers et al. A PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION OF SUPERCELL
LONGEVITY.
[33]
Adrián Pedrozo­Acuña et al. “Real­time and discrete precipitation monitoring in
mexico city: implementation and application”. In: HydroSenSoft, International Sym­
posium and Exhibition on Hydro­Environment Sensors and Software (2017).
[34]
J.M.K.C. Donev et al. (2018). Energy Education ­ Catchment [Online]. Available:
https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/Catchment. [Accessed: July 8, 2022].
[35]
Craig M. Johnston et al. Evaluation of catchment delineation methods for the medium­
resolution National Hydrography Dataset. 2009. DOI: 10.3133/sir20095233. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3133/sir20095233.
64
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:73==
[36]
D. MILLER and Jane Morrice. “An assessment of the uncertainty of delimited catch­
ment boundaries”. In: IAHS­AISH Publication (Jan. 1996).
[37]
Mohamad Rammal and Emmanuel Berthier. Runoff losses on urban surfaces during
frequent rainfall events: A review of observations and modeling attempts. 2020.
DOI: 10.3390/w12102777.
[38]
Suripin et al. “Minimize surface runoff from parking lots with permeable pavement
systems”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 700 (1
2021). ISSN: 17551315. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/700/1/012056.
[39]
Michelle Nygren et al. “Changes in seasonality of groundwater level fluctuations
in a temperate­cold climate transition zone”. In: Journal of Hydrology X 8 (2020),
p. 100062. ISSN: 2589­9155. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hydroa.2020.100062.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589915520300134.
[40]
CivilWeb Spreadsheets. Soakaway Design – Groundwater Level . Available: https://civilweb­
spreadsheets.com/drainage­design­spreadsheets/soakaway­size­calculator­spreadsheet/soakaw
design­groundwater­level/ [Accessed: July 13, 2022].
[41]
Personal communication with Mr. Claus Mouritsen, project manager of wastewater
and cloudburst pipelines of HOFOR].
[42]
Rasmus Nielsen, 2013 Read KMD2­formatted files from the Danish SVK­raingauges
Available: https://github.com/RVN91/readkm2/[Accessed : May20, 2022]..
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:75==
A
Rain Data
Table A.1: Daily cumulative rainfall (mm/day) between Dryp’s climate monitoring station
and the two closest official meteorological stations
Limfjordsvej
Landbohojskolen
Lygten
Date
mm/day
mm/day
mm/day
5/17/2021
0.018
0.000
0.000
5/18/2021
0.021
0.000
0.000
5/19/2021
0.027
0.000
0.000
5/20/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
5/26/2021
0.015
7.601
6.997
5/27/2021
0.031
9.600
3.600
5/28/2021
0.005
0.000
0.000
5/29/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
5/30/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
5/31/2021
0.006
0.000
0.000
6/1/2021
0.011
0.000
0.000
6/2/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
6/3/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
6/5/2021
0.006
0.000
0.000
6/6/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
6/7/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
6/8/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
6/9/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
6/10/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
6/11/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
6/12/2021
0.030
0.000
0.000
6/13/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
6/25/2021
0.072
0.000
0.000
6/26/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
6/27/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
6/28/2021
0.005
0.000
0.000
6/29/2021
0.101
0.000
0.000
6/30/2021
16.232
19.399
18.748
7/1/2021
5.267
20.200
16.252
7/2/2021
3.801
11.599
6.599
7/3/2021
6.140
22.600
0.000
7/4/2021
0.122
1.000
0.800
7/5/2021
0.115
0.000
0.000
7/6/2021
9.866
8.800
8.001
7/7/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
7/8/2021
0.004
0.000
0.000
7/9/2021
2.070
2.800
2.398
7/10/2021
18.907
23.801
21.600
7/11/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
7/12/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
67
==PAGE:76==
7/13/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
7/14/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
7/15/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
7/16/2021
0.614
1.400
5.200
7/17/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
7/18/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
7/19/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
7/20/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
7/21/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
7/22/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
7/23/2021
0.007
0.000
0.000
7/24/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
7/25/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
7/26/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
7/27/2021
2.682
0.000
1.000
8/9/2021
5.016
2.598
12.800
8/10/2021
3.885
1.200
3.800
8/11/2021
0.059
0.000
0.000
8/12/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
8/13/2021
0.226
0.000
0.000
8/14/2021
2.087
3.000
1.000
8/15/2021
2.105
4.199
3.400
8/16/2021
2.377
5.199
3.201
8/17/2021
19.677
36.399
39.400
8/18/2021
0.430
0.401
0.599
8/19/2021
0.046
0.000
0.000
8/20/2021
0.006
0.000
0.000
8/21/2021
0.004
0.000
0.000
8/22/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
8/23/2021
0.004
0.000
0.000
8/24/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
8/25/2021
0.308
4.199
3.400
8/26/2021
0.403
0.401
0.400
8/27/2021
9.743
12.001
11.199
8/28/2021
9.509
16.599
16.601
8/29/2021
0.325
0.000
0.000
8/30/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
8/31/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
9/1/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
9/2/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
9/3/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
9/4/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
9/5/2021
0.003
0.000
0.000
9/6/2021
0.002
0.000
0.000
9/7/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
9/8/2021
0.001
0.000
0.000
9/16/2021
0.001
1.105
1.646
9/20/2021
0.000
0.000
0.000
68
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:77==
9/26/2021
0.008
0.000
0.000
9/27/2021
9.711
15.000
12.000
9/28/2021
9.374
7.800
8.399
9/29/2021
12.012
14.401
12.801
9/30/2021
2.397
5.000
4.599
1/29/2022
0.241
0.000
0.000
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
69
==PAGE:78==
B
Noteworthy events of the study period
Figure B.1: 1st event
Figure B.2: 2nd event
70
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:79==
Figure B.3: 3rd event
Figure B.4: 4th event
Figure B.5: 5th event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure B.6: 6th event
72
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:81==
C
Original model ­ Individual events
Figure C.1: 1st event
Figure C.2: 2nd event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure C.3: 3rd event
Figure C.4: 4th event
Figure C.5: 5th event
74
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:83==
Figure C.6: 6th event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
75
==PAGE:84==
D
Calibrated model ­ Individual events
Figure D.1: 1st event
Figure D.2: 2nd event
76
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:85==
Figure D.3: 3rd event
Figure D.4: 4th event
Figure D.5: 5th event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure D.6: 6th event
78
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:87==
E
1st model variation ­ Individual events
Figure E.1: 1st event
Figure E.2: 2nd event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure E.3: 3rd event
Figure E.4: 4th event
Figure E.5: 5th event
80
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:89==
Figure E.6: 6th event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
81
==PAGE:90==
F
2nd model variation ­ Individual events
Figure F.1: 1st event
Figure F.2: 2nd event
82
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:91==
Figure F.3: 3rd event
Figure F.4: 4th event
Figure F.5: 5th event
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure F.6: 6th event
84
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
==PAGE:93==
Conceptual modelling of a nature based solution’s hydrological performance
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://sustain.dtu.dk
