==PAGE:1==
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
by Naika Antalion, Clara Giarrusso
Master Thesis, December 2022
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis, December 2022
December, 2022
By
Naika Antalion, Clara Giarrusso
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Marine and Coastal Engineer-
ing, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Naika Antalion, Clara Giarrusso - s206103, s206049
Signature
Signature
Date
ii
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
04 - 12 - 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Over the recent years, the use of rock-filled mesh bags in the offshore environment is pro-
moted for a variety of applications such as scour protection around monopiles, spot-dumping, and
pipeline/cable stabilization (temporary or permanent).
One major design challenge is that the vendors provide limited guidance as to mesh bag sta-
bility under the action of hydrodynamic forcing. Furthermore, the authors have not identified any
empirical evidence supporting vendors’ incipient velocity. On the other hand, the authors have
identified designs performed assuming rock-filled mesh bags to be gabions and designed accord-
ing to CIRIA C683 (2007), where formulas are (i) derived for steady current yet applied to waves
and (ii) contains several tuning coefficients. The design uncertainties raise concerns as to the in-
herent uncertainties in stability assessments based on desk studies, and whether the assessments
are even applicable in offshore, wave-dominated environments.
The present work will present small-scale laboratory tests of the stability of individual rock-
filled mesh bags under the action of waves and current, where mesh bags are tested for smooth and
rough beds, respectively. The grouping effect known to increase stability (Riezebos et al., 2021) is
not accounted for. The scale factor is roughly 1:36 and a variety of material densities were applied
in the tests. The combined experimental effort results in an empirical proposal for a critical mobility
number for rock-filled mesh bags under hydrodynamic forcing; the mobility number is a function
of the Keulegan-Carpenter number.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to our supervisors Erik Damgaard Christensen and Niels
Gjoel Jacobsen for their support, guidance and encouragement through this study. Their contribu-
tion and suggestions were fundamental for the implementation of this research.
We would like to thank our families and all our friends and colleagues for the support and love
they have given us over the years.
In the end we would like to thank ourselves for the strength, patience and collaborative spirit
demonstrated during these last 5 months, without which we probably would not have reached this
milestone..
iv
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Previous studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Sediment transport
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Analysis of the flow around the stone bags under steady current
. . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Analysis of the flow around the stone bags in presence of waves . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Boundary layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Forces acting on the stone bags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Hydraulic failure modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Estimation of the porosity and density of an element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.8
Porous media resistance and Pressure gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Experiment Set-Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Models Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Steady current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Bed conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Hydraulic failure modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Data Acquisition and Processing
46
4.1
Regular waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Steady current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Experimental Results
49
5.1
Pressure Analysis for regular waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Mobility Diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Velocity profile analysis - Steady current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Forces Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.5
Hydraulic failure analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6
Conclusions
85
6.1
Future studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
Bibliography
87
A Appendix
88
A.1
Ursell dependency analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B Appendix
90
B.1
Flumes sketches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.2
Calibration procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
B.3
Test Tables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
v
==PAGE:8==
C Appendix
111
C.1
Model Scaling of the rock bags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
C.2
Rock bags parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
C.3
Contact area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
C.4
Image analysis for total volume of the rock bags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
D Appendix
118
D.1
Pressure gradient analysis - Reduced momentum equation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
118
D.2
Comparison between the speed of the flow inside and outside the rock bags . . .
119
D.3
Estimation of the incipient motion condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
D.4
Estimation of the roughness of the bag surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
vi
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Objectives
The aim of this thesis project is to investigate the stability limits of the “Rock-filled mesh bags”
or “Filter Units” (patented name). This method is used in multiple offshore works, as temporary
stabilization (e.g. between offshore operations like cable laying and cable stabilization) and per-
manent stabilization (e.g. scour protections, cable and pipeline protection), as Figure 1.2 shows,
from the Japanese manufacturer Kyowa Co. Ltd. LTD (2014).
Figure 1.1: Concepts sketch from Kyowa Co. Ltd. LTD (2014).
Therefore, in order to identify the stability limits (such as point and type of failure), several
physical tests are carried out in the laboratory facilities at DTU (building 114, Marine and Coastal
Engineering Laboratory, flumes 1 and 3), characterized by several scenarios (only regular waves,
only steady currents, smooth and rough bed) and bag configurations (15 Rock-filled mesh bags,
with three different materials and sizes).
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: The 15 design rock bags created for the sake of the experiments
The objective of these tests is to identify the critical velocity and the most efficient stone bags
group layout. Therefore, in order to satisfy these objectives, extensive laboratory investigations
are performed, which consisted of the evaluation of the point of failure of the rock bags, consider-
ing three types of material: low, medium and normal density stones. This evaluation consists of
different phases: assessments of velocity signal and surface elevation, from which some fundamen-
tal parameters (Reynolds and KC numbers, reflective coefficients, free-stream velocity magnitude,
etc) are calculated to generate several stability diagrams; analysis of the effects of regular waves
and steady current on these rock bags, with and without a rough bed (which was built using a 3 cm
layer of normal density stones); visualization of the flow around the stone bags, which includes
verifying that the flow is not passing through the rock bags. Detailed descriptions of all these
phases and all the parameters are given in the specific sections of this investigation report.
For the sake of knowledge, scour processes are erosion phenomena of the seabed around sub-
marine structures, such as pipelines (in which the scour may cause the suspended free spans of the
sediments), piles and monopiles’ foundations. Therefore, the scour is strictly related to sediment
transport phenomena, which may occur in presence of a direct flow and when the seabed is erodi-
ble. In fact, the scour phenomenon is mainly inducted by the interaction between the sediment
deposited on the seabed and the effect of waves and currents (or the combination of both), due
to the presence the aforementioned structures. A theoretical description of this phenomenon is
illustrated in chapter 2, regarding the theoretical background.
1.2
Previous studies
Rock-filled mesh bags is a relatively new scour protection application. For this reason, there
are only few manufactures around the world whose main business is manufacturing and installa-
tion of these bags: Kyowa Co. Ltd. (LTD (2014)) and Medakosen (Medakosen), from Japan;
Pipe Shield (Freespan Correction - PRP Units (n.d.)) from UK; Jeager Mare (Jager Mare) from
Germany. Some similarities to this method of scour protection can be found in the gabion cages,
2
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.4: Shape of the filter Units before stuffing stones from Kyowa Co. Ltd. LTD (2014)
which consist in steel cages generally containing stones, assembled and placed in a specific site for
protection (Spa (2022)).
However, there is not much information available regarding the stability limits, which is a key
input for the design. When the information is in some way available, most of the knowledge is
based on the studies carried by Kyowa Co. Ltd. LTD (2014), for example, as reported by Ridge-
way Marine Marine (2017) which addresses the Rock Bags as ”Kyowa’s Filter Units”. None of the
companies that implemented this method share the engineering studies behind the Filter Units/Rock
Bags with the public and/or other companies, probably for commercial reason and to maintain the
exclusivity of the business.
In fact, Kyowa Co. Ltd. LTD (2014) shared some data (and some sketches) related to the
possible use of the Filter Units, the features (flexibility, high productivity, scour protection, high
durability), as illustrated in Figure 1.2 and 1.3, and some products specifications illustrated in
Figure 1.4 and 3.3. However, they did not share the study concerning the engineering support to
all these concepts.
Figure 1.3: Maintenance work for a cable sketch that can be done using the Kyowa’s Filter Units
LTD (2014)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical Background
The following chapter illustrates the theoretical background which characterize this experimen-
tal study. The first part illustrates a brief description of the scour phenomenon and why it is related
to the sediment transport. While, within the second part the flow around the rock bags is inves-
tigated, mainly considering two separate metocean conditions: regular waves and steady current.
Hence, in the case of regular waves, the linear wave theory, its applicability and the wave reflection
analysis are explained.
Moreover, in both cases, two sub-conditions are investigated: smooth and rough bed. In fact,
the boundary layers generated by the flow, the forces acting on the rock bags and the hydraulic
failure modes are investigated and theoretically described.
2.1
Sediment transport
Sediment transport is the movement of solid particles either in oceans or rivers, and it occurs
when the driving forces are bigger than the stabilizing forces (see section 2.5). In this research, an
open sea is considered, and the scenarios of waves and current only are simulated in flumes 1 and
3 of DTU facilities. The characteristics of those apparatus are specified in subsection 3.1.1 and
subsection 3.1.1 respectively.
Considering a steady flow over a bed made of non-cohesive particles, these particles are not
moving at small flow velocities. However, when the flow velocity becomes large enough, the driv-
ing forces on the grains will exceed their stability forces, and the particles will start to move. This
is called the critical flow velocity J. Fredsøe (1992).
Therefore, the incipient motion condition starts when the force from the flow surrounding a
particle is in equilibrium to its retaining force. When this phenomenon occurs, the contact between
the bed and the particles generate the bed shear stress τ, which varies in the cases of steady current
and regular waves, as will be explained later whitin this chapter.
2.1.1
Shields parameter
The threshold of the particle motion is supposed to be attained for a given ratio between the
driving and stabilizing forces J. Fredsøe (1992). This relation is represented by the Shields param-
eter, illustrated in Equation 2.1.
θ =
U 2
f
(s −1)gD
(2.1)
Where Uf is the friction velocity which is inducted by the force that try to set the grain parti-
cles to move; in the denominator s is relative density (given by the ratio between the density of
the fluid and the density of the material), g = 9.81 m/s2 is gravity acceleration and D the particles
diameter. The combination of these terms constitutes the force that is opposing to the movement
of the analysed object.
The Shields parameter depicted in equation Equation 2.1 is adopted in the analysis of the
present investigation. Hence, this variable becomes what is called Mobility Number, and it is
adjusted for the case of current and waves only explained in subsection 2.2.1 and subsection 2.3.5
respectively.
4
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
Scour process
The presence of a structure in a marine environment alters the normal flow pattern in its sur-
roundings, and this alteration will produce an increment in the local sediment transport capacity
and thus leads to scour. Therefore, scour is the process of eroding the bed due to the sediment
transport as illustrated in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Example of scour phenomenon in a slender pile.
This concept is used to investigate at which flow velocity, the stone bags, used as scour pro-
tection, start moving. That means at a certain flow condition, the protection is not stable anymore
and leave uncovered the structure and then subjected to sediment transport, causing instability
problems.
2.2
Analysis of the flow around the stone bags under steady current
Considering a steady current and different discharge values Q, the current’s depth average
velocities (V ), at which the design stone bags begins to move, are investigated. Therefore, these
velocities are calculated using Equation 2.2.
V = Q
A
(2.2)
Where A is the cross sectional area of flume 3, which is given by the product between the water
depth and the width of the channel.
The most important parameter which define the flow regime is the Reynolds number, which is
the ratio between inertia and viscous forces of the fluid:
Re = RV
ν
(2.3)
Where R = A/P is the hydraulic radius in an open wide channel (A = bh cross-section are of the
channel and P the wet perimeter)1, V the speed of the flow (water depth average velocity) and ν
is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid. Fredsøe (2008)
The Reynolds number describes the flow patterns and how it changes when an object is placed
within the fluid. Hence, this parameter is used to describe the transition from laminar to turbulent
flow pattern.
1In this study case the hydraulic radius R is used as the characteristic length scale.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
5
==PAGE:14==
Furthermore, considering a uniform and fixed bed, the friction velocity and the bed shear stress
are defined according to Equation 2.4 and Equation 2.5 respectively.
Uf =
√τb
ρ
(2.4)
τb = 1
2ρfV 2
(2.5)
In which, f is the friction factor, which in the present work has to be estimated for the two analysed
cases: hydraulically smooth wall and hydraulically rough wall.
In general, the relation to find f can be found by the combination of Equation 2.4 and Equation 2.5,
which gives Equation 2.6:
V
Uf
=
√2
f
(2.6)
However, this relation does not take into account the shape and the type of grains, which charac-
terize the stone bags and the seabed. For this reason, a suitable way to calculate this parameter
was empirically formulated in 1939 by the Colebrook-White, illustrated in Equation 2.7). Fred-
søe (2008)
√2
f = 6.4 + 2.45ln
(
ks
R +
4.7
Re√f
)
(2.7)
Where, and ks = 2.5d50 is the Nikuradse’s number relative to the roughness of the material which
characterize the bed of the flume.
2.2.1
Mobility diagram in the case of current only
The mobility number is a variation of the Shields parameter and has the same interpretation. In
other words, this non-dimensional value represents the ratio between the driving forces, in terms of
depth average velocity U, and the stabilizing forces as product of the characteristics of an element,
relative density s and diameter D. This formulation is depicted in Equation 2.8.
Mob =
U 2
(s −1)gd
(2.8)
Once the mobility number is defined, then this parameter is plotted against the Reynolds num-
ber Re, which is determine with the following equation, where Uf is found from the combination
of Equation 2.6 and Equation 2.7. Then, the mobility diagram ends up as the sketch illustrated in
Figure 2.2, and the results are presented in the chapter 5.
Re = UfD
ν
(2.9)
Figure 2.2: Mobility diagram for the current only case.
6
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Analysis of the flow around the stone bags in presence of waves
The experiments are conducted by generating regular waves characterized by different wave
height and period. Thus, the interaction between oscillatory motion of the flow and the rock bags
(placed in the bed of the flume) generates several forces.
At the same time the waves are slightly subjected to reflection from the ramp at the end of the
flume, which does not have strong influence on the oscillatory flow around the stone bags, but
it is taken into account in this study. For this reason the following sections illustrate the general
linear wave theory and the theory behind the wave reflection used to conduct the reflection analysis.
2.3.1
Linear Wave Theory
The linear wave theory is the basic and most important way of describing the water waves
(assuming potential irrotational flow). The wave is considered sinusoidal, with constant wave
height H and period T (a sketch representing these parameter is illustrated in Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Linear Wave Theory, small amplitude waves sketch (Sumer and Fuhrman (2020))
The fluid particles move with circular or elliptical trajectories, for different water depths. In
fact, these particles have a specific velocity, which is described by its horizontal and vertical com-
ponent (see Equations 2.10 and 2.11), and it is function of several factors, such as the significant
wave height H and period T, the water depth h and the wave number k:
u = πH
T
cosh(k(z + h))
sinh(kh)
cos(ωt −kx)
(2.10)
w = −πH
T
sinh(k(z + h))
cosh(kh)
sin(ωt −kx)
(2.11)
In these equations z represents the distance from the mean water level (MWL) η, which is obtained
through the relation expressed in Equation 2.12:
η = H
2 cos(ωt −kx)
(2.12)
Where ω is the wave angular frequency which can be obtained from the relation:
ω = 2π
T
(2.13)
The angular frequency combined with the wave number and the water depth gives the linear dis-
persion relation ( see Equation 2.14):
ω2 = gktanh(kh)
(2.14)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
7
==PAGE:16==
In order to calculate k, the dispersion relation is applied. However, in some cases, the wave number
can be calculated from Equation 2.15, if L is known.
k = 2π
L
(2.15)
2.3.2
Applicability of Linear Wave Theory
The elaboration of a mobility diagram for the waves only scenario, which covers a significant
range of KC numbers considering the physical scale of the stone bags elaborated in the experi-
ments, can bring out the need of describing the non-linearity of the generated waves in the labora-
tory. Therefore, the Ursell number Ur, which is a non-dimensional parameter used to characterize
the different wave theories is analyzed.
The Ursell number is defined as the ratio between the non-linearity (i.e. wave height over the
water depth) to the shallowness (i.e. wavelength over water depth) of waves.
Ur = HL2
h3
=
(H
h
) (L
h
)2
(2.16)
Figure 2.4: Validity of periodic water waves according to Le Méhauté Méhauté (2013).
Figure 2.4 shows the regime of the wave theories, where τ represents the wave period T. And
it can be seen that for Ur>26, Cnoidal or Stream function theory must be applied.
The purpose of the investigation is to find out at which velocity the stone bags start to move, and
that happens when the in-line forces are slightly higher than the stabilizing forces. These concepts
8
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:17==
are explained in section 2.5. Consequently, it is important to determine if the non-linearity of the
waves, in terms of Ursell number, generated in the laboratory facility affects such in-line force.
The latter is defined as function of different parameters as depicted in the following equation.
Finline = f(Um, T, H, h, D, L, ρ, ν)
(2.17)
Where Um is the maximum orbital velocity, T is the wave period, H is the wave height, D
is the diameter of the stone bag, L is the wavelenght, ρ is the density of the water and ν is the
kinematic viscosity.
A simple dimensional analysis of Equation 2.17 is conducted and presented in section A.1,
which shows as result that the non-dimensional in-line force is mainly expressed as function of
mainly the Ursell number, KC number and Reynolds number.
Finline
ρU 2mD2 = f
(
KC, Re, Ur = HL2
h3 , H
L
)
(2.18)
From the equation above, it can be seen that there is a likelihood the Ursell number influences
in the analysis of the in-line force, and as consequence in the estimation of the incipient velocity
of the stone bags. More information regarding this matter is presented in subsection 3.3.1.
2.3.3
Wave Reflection Analysis
During this experimental study, the waves were propagating in a closed domain, until they
reached an artificial beach, which was supposed to absorb the energy from those incoming waves.
However, not all of this energy is absorbed, and for this reason it is partially reflected in form of
reflected waves, characterized by very small reflection coefficients. Therefore, a reflection analy-
sis is carried out to investigate the percentage of reflection read by the wave gauges (sensors) and
affecting the wave height. For this purpose, the following method (from Niels G. Jacobsen (2012))
is adopted.
Thus, this method separate the incoming from the reflected waves by generating a set of equa-
tions (illustrated by Equation 2.19) for a system of five waves gauges, considering N total harmonic
components.
ηi,1...5 = a0 +
N
∑
j=1
aI
jcos(j(ωti −kx1...5)) + bI
jsin(j(ωti −kx1...5))
+
N
∑
j=1
aR
j cos(j(ωti −kx1...5)) + bR
j sin(j(ωti −kx1...5))
(2.19)
Where i is referred to the M number of time steps: ti = t0, t0 + ∆t, ..., t0 + M∆t; aj and bj are
the harmonic amplitudes in the waves; a0 is the initial value of the mean water level registered
by each wave gauges, and ηi,1...5 are the surface elevation reconstructed considering the effect
of the reflection (and filtered by removing the all the frequencies above 8 Hz). Then, xi,1...5 is
the position where the wave gauges are located, considering the position of the first wave gauge
as the origin of the reference system; I and R are referred to the ”incoming” and ”reflected” waves.
Therefore, the results of this analysis are ”new” values of the surface elevation (ηrecon recon-
structed) corrected by the reflected and incoming wave heights; as well as the amplitude of incom-
ing and reflected waves, HI and HR respectively, used to calculate the relative waves coefficients.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3.4
Oscillatory flow around the stone bags
The purpose of this section is to investigate the hydrodynamic parameters that describe the
flow around the rock bags under analysis. However, there is no specific theory regarding the flow
around them, since this field is relatively new.
Therefore, considering the top view of these bags, the shape can be considered circular, since no
sharp corners are seen, and the diameter is approximately the same in both x and y direction (con-
sidering a reference system with the z-axes perpendicular to the bag). For these reasons, the theory
of the flow around a cylinder is applied to this study.
Therefore, as previously mentioned in section 2.2, the Reynolds number is a fundamental parame-
ter in the flow analysis, since it describes the flow patterns and how it changes when an object is
placed within the fluid.
Introducing the cylinder (or, as in this case, the rock bags) within the flow cause the Reynolds
number to increase rapidly from zero and generate an adverse pressure gradient, due to the di-
verging flow around it; eventually, two flow regions are created, as illustrated in Figure 2.7: the
boundary layer and the wake region. The waves’ action produce a thin oscillatory wave boundary
layer, just above the bed, due to the effect of the friction. The formation of a wave boundary layer
and the sediment transport processes are therefore related.
In this condition, an occurring phenomenon is the vortex shedding, which is the signal of the flow
separation.
Figure 2.5: Flow regions generated by the increasing Reynolds number. (B. Mutlu Sumer (2006))
In case of waves, the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC (see Equations 2.20 and 2.24) is taken
into account, which is a measure of the stroke of the motion (2a), relative to the diameter of the
object.
KC = UmT
D
(2.20)
Where T is the wave period; while, Um is the maximum velocity or free stream velocity magnitude
of the oscillatory motion, which is obtained, considering a sinusoidal flow, from the near bed orbital
velocity u in Equation 2.21:
u(x, 0, t) = Umcos(ωt −kx)
(2.21)
In which, x represents the distance between the wave gauges.
Therefore, the value of Um is found considering the Equation 2.22, which takes into account
the cosines and sines parts of the incident and reflected wave heights, calculated from the reflection
10
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:19==
coefficients (as explained in 2.3.3): HI
c , HI
s , HR
c and HR
s .
Um =
π
Tsinh(hk)(HI
c cos(ωt −kx)+ HI
s sin(ωt −kx)+ HR
c cos(ωt +kx)+ HR
c sin(ωt +kx))
(2.22)
This relation results in a matrix (with five columns, one for each wave gauge) containing all
the peak velocities extrapolated from the data collected during the experiments. The final maxi-
mum velocity Um is calculated as the maximum absolute value between all of those, and from this
parameter, the amplitude of the orbital motion a is calculated:
a = UmT
2π
(2.23)
Considering all these conditions, Equation 2.20 is rewritten as Equation 2.24:
KC = 2πa
D
(2.24)
In which 2a is the stroke of motion.
When the waves are exerting a force near the bed, the (maximum) bed shear stress τm (or τb) is
generated, which is a function of the maximum near bed orbital velocity found from Equation 2.22.
Thus, in the case of smooth bed, this parameter is defined as Equation 2.25 shows.
τm = U 2
mρ
(2.25)
However, in the case of rough bed, τm (or τb) is given by Equation 2.26.
τm = ρfwU 2
m
2
(2.26)
In which fw is the friction factor, defined as the resistance inducted by the friction between the
bottom of the flume and the flow, due to the roughness of the ebd.
The bed shear stress can also be used to estimate the Shields parameter (see also subsec-
tion 2.1.1) through Equation 2.27.
θ =
τ
(s −1)gD
(2.27)
The combination of the Reynolds number and the the Keulegan-Carpenter number give an
estimation of the flow pattern. In the case of a circular element, for KC > 1.1 the separation of
the flow start and the vortices begin to appear. For KC > 7, the vortex shedding phenomenon
begins. During each half period of the oscillatory flow, for increasing KC number, the number of
vortices that will shed increase, generating different regimes. Eventually, the first regime occurs
when 7 < KC < 15, called single pair; subsequently, the second regime, called double-pair
regime, occurs for 15 < KC < 24, and so on. (B. Mutlu Sumer (2006))
2.3.5
Mobility diagram in the case of regular waves
One more time, the Shields parameter is adapted to the mobility number for the waves only
scenario, and estimated through Equation 2.28 below.
Mob =
U 2
m
(s −1)gd
(2.28)
Where the driving forces are represented by the maximum near bed orbital velocity Um calcu-
lated applying Equation 2.22, and the stabilizing ones by the product of the relative density s and
diameter D of an element.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
11
==PAGE:20==
In the scenario of waves only, the mobility number is plotted in two ways. The first one is
against the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC and the second considering the Reynolds number Re,
which is determined from the following equation:
Re = D
ν
√τb
ρ
(2.29)
Where τb is found from the Equation 2.25. The sketches of the mobility diagrams are illustrated
in Figure 2.6 below, while the results are presented in the chapter 5.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: (a) Mobility number vs KC parameter. (b) Mobility number vs Re parameter.
2.4
Boundary layer
For definition, the boundary layer is the domain, very close to a fixed wall (in this case, the
bed of the flume) where the flow velocity goes through a large variation, following the direction
of the flow. In fact, within this layer, the speed of the flow increase from zero (due to the viscous
forces), until a constant value (free outer velocity) outside this domain.
Figure 2.7: Boundary layer along a fixed thin plate. empty citation
Therefore, this is the region of the bed where the shear stresses becomes stronger, causing the
sediment suspension and, eventually transport. The equation which defines the boundary layer is
a direct consequence of the Navier-Stokes equations 2.30 and 2.31, illustrated below.
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + ν
(
∂2u
∂x2 + ∂2u
∂y2
)
(2.30)
∂v
∂t + u∂v
∂x + v∂v
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p
∂y + ν
(
∂2v
∂x2 + ∂2v
∂y2
)
(2.31)
12
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:21==
In this study case, the horizontal variation is very small compared to the vertical variation. There-
fore, the NS equations can be reduced to:
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + ν ∂2u
∂x2
(2.32)
−1
ρ
∂p
∂y = 0
(2.33)
The developing of a stationary non-uniform boundary layer is also strictly related to the Reynolds
number. In fact, it is calculated using the relation in Equation 2.3 as function of hydraulic radius R.
In fact, the value of Re describes the transition between laminar to turbulent flow (see Figure 2.8).
For definition, Re = 4000 is the critical Reynolds number, for the flow along a plate. Therefore,
the flow regime will be laminar if Re < 4000, otherwise the flow will be in turbulent.
Figure 2.8: Transition from laminar to turbulent flow inside a non-stationary boundary layer, along
a fixed thin plate. No slip conditions.(Fredsøe (2008))
2.4.1
Stationary non-uniform boundary layer (Steady current)
From the reduced Navier-Stokes Equations, the generalized integrated momentum equation for
the boundary layer and for both laminar and turbulent flows is derived as Equation 2.34 shows.
∫δ
0
∂U
∂t + ∂
∂x
∫δ
0
U 2dy −u0
∂
∂x
∫δ
0
Udy = −δ
ρ
∂P
∂x −U 2
f
(2.34)
In which ∂P/∂x is the pressure gradient generated by the flow, u0 is the average velocity of the
flux, Uf is the friction velocity (see Equation 2.4).
In steady current conditions, the pressure gradient is very small, for this reason it is considered
equal to zero and neglected in Equation 2.34.
Moreover, the velocity profile inside the boundary layer is calculated using Equation 2.35, consid-
ering the height above the bed as equal to the thickness of the boundary layer: y = δ.
u0
Uf
= 1
κln
(
30y
ks
)
= 1
κln
(
30δ
ks
)
(2.35)
In which κ = 0.4 is the Von Karman costant.
From a further investigation (see chapter 5), the flow is found to be turbulent, and Equation 2.35
is used to calculate the value of δ, using the theoretical approaches illustrated within this section.
For the sake of simplicity, a parameter Z = Uf/κu0 is introduced, leading to Equation 2.36:
Z
(
30δ
ks
)
= 1
(2.36)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
13
==PAGE:22==
From which the variation in the boundary layer thickness along the plate is numerically calculated
from the ODE in Equation 2.37.
δ′ = dδ
dx =
κ2Z2
4Z3 −3Z2 + Z
(2.37)
Since, this is turbulent flow case, the thickness of the boundary layer is found multiplying δ′ by
the distance between the source of the current and the points where the measurements are taken x,
as illustrated in Equation 2.38.
δ = δ′x
(2.38)
The boundary layer theory is used to implement the velocity profiles which depends on the
conditions of the bed analysed (smooth and rough bed), as illustrated in section 5.3.
Smooth bed
In the case of smooth bed, the existence of what is defined as ”viscous sub-layer” becomes
quite relevant. In fact, near the smooth wall the total shear stress is constant and it is decomposed
in two terms: the viscous part and the turbulent part (see Equation 2.39). In proximity of the wall,
the turbulent term (−ρu
′v
′) is very small, and for this reason it is neglected. In this way the shear
stress becomes function only of the viscous sub-layer term:
τ = µdu0
dy + (−ρu
′v
′) ≈µdu0
dy
(2.39)
Integrating this term, the mean velocity distribution is derived as illustrated in Equation 2.40.
u0 =
U 2
f
ν y
(2.40)
Where y is the distance from the wall.
Applying the ”law wall” (see Equation 2.41, where y+ = yUf/ν is the non-dimensional dis-
tance from the wall from Sumer and Fuhrman (2020)) Equation 2.40 becomes Equation 2.42:
u0
Uf
= f(y+)
(2.41)
u0
Uf
= y+
(2.42)
From Sumer and Fuhrman (2020), y+ = 5, since after this value the transition from the viscous
sub-layer and the logarithmic layer begins. Therefore, from Equation 2.42, the thickness of the
viscous sub-layer is obtained from Equation 2.43.
δv = 5 ν
Uf
(2.43)
On the other hand, outside the viscous sub-layer, the effect of the turbulent term of Equation 2.39
becomes much larger than the viscous term. Therefore, in the shear stress relation, the viscosity
µs is neglected in favour of the turbulent part (see Equation 2.44).
du0
dy = d
dyF(τ, y, ρ)
(2.44)
The relation used to evaluate the velocity profile is called ”logarithmic law”, which is defined in
Equation 2.45. (Sumer and Fuhrman (2020))
u0
Uf
= Aln(y+) + B
(2.45)
14
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:23==
In which A = 2.5 = 1/κ and B = 5 is another constant parameter derived from experiment
conducted in pipe and boundary layer flows. The velocity distribution is illustrated in Figure 2.9,
from Sumer and Fuhrman (2020).
Figure 2.9: Distribution of the velocity in the case of smooth bed. Transition between viscous
sub-layer and logarithmic layer.
Rough bed
In the case of rough bed, Equation 2.38 is applied to calculate the thickness of the turbulent
boundary layer.
Figure 2.10: Distribution of the velocity in the case of rough bed (A = 1/κ).
In this case the viscous sub-layer is neglected because of the presence of the roughness element.
The reason is that the viscous sub-layer is in general very thin and, especially when the bed of the
flume is covered by a very closely spaced layer of the ND rocks (approx. 5 mm diameter), the
viscous sub-layer is even more thin and it is placed right at the surfaces of each of the roughness
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
15
==PAGE:24==
elements.
Therefore, since the layer of rocks covers the entire height of the of the viscous sub-layer (seen
in the case of the smooth bed), it is possible to assume that no sub-layer is present at all, and the
turbulence extends all the way to the boundary, through the roughness elements.
The velocity distribution profile is illustrated in Figure 2.10 from Sumer and Fuhrman (2020).
2.4.2
Wave boundary layer - Regular waves
In the case of regular waves, the velocity profile within the wave boundary layer have the
solution illustrated in Equation 2.46 (J. Fredsøe (1992)).
u(y, t) = Umsin(ωt) −Um exp
(
−y
δ1
)
sin
(
ωt −y
δ1
)
(2.46)
In which δ1 =
√
2ν/ω is the wave boundary layer thickness or Stokes length.
In case of rough bed, the boundary layer thickness is calculated as a function of the roughness
of the bed µs (see Equation 2.47, from J. Fredsøe (1992)), which varies in case of rough (3 cm
layer of ND rocks) or smooth (glass).
δ
kN
= 0.09
(
a
kN
)0.82
(2.47)
2.5
Forces acting on the stone bags
When the rock bags are exposed to a flow, the forces acting on them are mainly divided into
two groups: in line forces (x-axis) and the stabilizing forces (y-axis). These forces acting on the
rock bags are analytically estimated, in order to understand which are the equilibrium conditions
that cause the units to oscillate in the flow. In general terms, the force distribution is illustrated in
Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Distribution of forces on a cylinder under the effect of a moving mass of fluid.
The forces differs in case of steady current or regular waves. The main difference concern the
in-line forces, since in an oscillatory flow, the inertia force is considered to take into account the
unsteadiness of the flow and the drag force takes into account the direction of the flow.
16
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:25==
2.5.1
Stationary flow generated by steady current
The flow regime is affected by several factors such as the roughness of the surface, the cross-
sectional shape, the angle of attack, the turbulence and the wall shear stress. However, one of
the most important parameters which affects the flow is the Re number, as described in subsec-
tion 2.3.4.
In case of stationary flow, the forces components that affect the rock bags are the in-line/horizontal
(drag force) and the cross-flow/vertical directions (lift force).
The in-line force is the total mean drag (FD, Equation 2.48), and it is given by the contribu-
tion of two terms, the form or pressure drag (Fp, Equation 2.49) and the friction drag (Ff, Equa-
tion 2.50).
FD = Fp + Ff
(2.48)
Fp =
∫
A
pcos(ϕ)dA
(2.49)
Ff =
∫
A
τ0sin(ϕ)dA
(2.50)
In which, ϕ is the angle of attack, p is the mean pressure and τ0 is the wall shear stress on the cylinder
surface. The distribution of these parameters is illustrated in Figure 2.12 (B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)).
Figure 2.12: Distribution of the parameters describing the forces on a cylinder under the effect of
a steady current.
However, for Re > 104 the contribution of the friction drag accounts for less than 2-3%
(B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)), therefore, since in the case of study the Reynolds numbers are all of
the order of 104, this parameter is neglected. This means that the mean drag is equal to the pres-
sure drag (see Equation 2.49).
Furthermore, the angle of attack is ϕ = 0 due to the direction of the flow perpendicular to the rock
bag, hence the drag force is expressed as illustrated in Equation 2.51. ( B. Mutlu Sumer (2006))
FD = 1
2ρAS,frontCDU 2
(2.51)
In Equation 2.51, the drag force is function of the following parameters: U, the flow velocity,
ρ the fluid density, CD the mean drag coefficient 2, and AS,front the frontal area of the rock bag
(considered as an ellipsoid object), calculated using the relation in Equation 2.52.
AS = πhsD
4
(2.52)
2the drag coefficient is a constant dimensionless parameter which is used to quantify the drag or resistance of an
object under the effect of the moving mass of fluid
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
17
==PAGE:26==
In which, hs is the height of the stone bag and D its diameter.
Since the rock bag is placed on the bed of the flume, the mean flow is not symmetric and a mean
lift force exists. In fact, the lift force is inversely proportional to the gap ratio e/D (which represents
the distance of the rock bag from the bottom), which is zero. This means that the mean lift force
in this region assume its maximum value, and it is expressed as illustrated in Equation 2.53.
FL = 1
2ρAS,topU 2CL
(2.53)
In which, CL is the dimensionless lift coefficient 3, n is the porosity and AS,top is the top area
of the stone bags, considered as circular object and equal to:
AS,top = πD2
4
(2.54)
The internal forces, pressure distribution inside and outside the stone bags, as well as the bed
shear stress which affects them, will be deeply investigated in section 2.8.
2.5.2
Oscillatory flow generated by regular waves
In the case of oscillatory flow, the forces are divided in in-line and stabilizing forces, as pre-
viously stated within this chapter. The in-line force act on the horizontal direction and it is given
by the sum of the drag force FD (Equation 2.56) and the inertia force FM (Equation 2.58), as
illustrated in Equation 2.55. B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)
Finline = FD + FM
(2.55)
Where:
FD = 1
2ρAS,frontCDUm|Um|
(2.56)
FM = ρVSCM
dUm
dt
(2.57)
In Equation 2.56, the drag force is function of Um, the flow maximum velocity, defined in
subsection 2.3.4, which is expressed as Um|Um|, instead of U 2
m, to take into account the direction
of the flow ( which can be either positive or negative).
The inertia force, in Equation 2.57, for definition takes into account the acceleration (unsteadi-
ness) of the fluid dUm/dt. While, the parameter CM is the inertia coefficient obtained from the
relation: CM = Cm + 1, where Cm is the hydrodynamic mass coefficient.
Hence, Equation 2.57 is the result of the combination of two terms: the hydrodynamic mass
force, which is the necessary force to accelerate a stationary object under the effect of an oscil-
latory mass of fluid (called hydrodynamic or added mass, m′) expressed as ρVSCmdUm/dt =
m′dUm/dt; Froude-Krylov force FK = ρVSdUm/dt which is caused by the acceleration of the
flow in the field surrounding the object.
FM = ρVSCm
dUm
dt
+ ρVS
dUm
dt
(2.58)
In fact when the flow is accelerated, the FK is generated by the outer-flow region pressure gradient:
∂p
∂x = −ρdUm
dt
(2.59)
3The lift coefficient defines the lift generated by the interaction between a body that is lifted by a mass of fluid, which
surrounds it.
18
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:27==
Therefore, the inertia force FM can be expressed as a function of the outer-flow pressure gradient,
as presented in Equation 2.60.
FM = −VSCM
∂p
∂x
(2.60)
The total volume of the stone bag VS is geometrically estimated, considering the stone bag as
a semi-ellipsoid object, with equal radius in the x,y-direction, and equal to the height of the stone
bag in the z-direction (considering a reference Cartesian system with the z-axes perpendicular to
the stone bag and the x,y-axis parallel to it), calculated as Equation 2.61 shows.
VS = 4
3πhsD2
3
(2.61)
On the other hand, the stabilizing force is the Friction force, which is found from the combina-
tion of the normal/vertical components of the forces: the submerged weight of the bag (Ws), given
by its weight W = mg (mass of the bag multiplied by the gravitational acceleration) minus the
buoyancy B (i.e. WS = W −B), and the lift force (FL), from Equation 2.53. All these terms are
then multiplied by the friction coefficient of the bed µs, as illustrated in Equation 2.62. (B. Mutlu
Sumer (2006))
Fstab = (W −B −FL)µs
(2.62)
In which, B is the buoyancy from Equation 2.63.
B = VS(1 −n)ρg
(2.63)
2.6
Hydraulic failure modes
The purpose of this section is to theoretically describe the hydraulic failure modes which af-
fected the rock bags during the experiments: shore-ward (or seaward) sliding and overturning
around heel, illustrated in Figure 2.13.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: Hydraulic failure modes. (a) Shoreward (or seaward) sliding. (b) Overturning around
heel.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
19
==PAGE:28==
The first case (sliding, Figure 2.13 (a)) occurs under the effect of waves or currents, when the
bed of the flume is smooth (glass). The forces which affect the behavior of the bag are in-line
forces (Finline) and stabilizing forces (FStab), described in section 2.5.
However, the second case (overturning, Figure 2.13 (b)) occurs only when the bed of the flume
is covered by the 0.03 m layer of ND stones. In fact, the overturning is the results of the combined
momentum generated by the forces over a point of rotation, which are strong enough to raise, rotate
and roll the rock bag.
Therefore, these failure phenomena happen when the safety factors 4 between the stabilizing
and driving forces is less than 1 as shown in Equation 2.64 and Equation 2.65.
µs(Ws −FL −FU + FW )
Finline
≤1
(2.64)
In which, FU is the uplift force caused by the effect of the stagnation pressure from the ground
under the rock bag and FW is the force in the wake flow region of the rock bag.
MWs
MFinline + MFL + MFU + MFW
≤1
(2.65)
In Equation 2.65, the momentum generated by the submerged weight is the only parameter which
stabilize the rock bag; while, the momentum generated by all the other forces are causing the bag
to be unstable and as a consequence the overturning occurs.
In order to verify these relations, the contact area and the stagnation pressure must be found
for both cases: regular wave and steady current. This topic will be deeply investigated later in this
paper, in section 3.6.
2.7
Estimation of the porosity and density of an element
The porosity n is defined as the ratio of the volume of voids to the total volume of an element
Vt. In the present investigation the volume of voids is found in terms of volume of fresh water
occupied in the porous Vw, and this relationship is shown in Equation 2.66. Other important cor-
relations to be used and discussed in this study are the dry and bulk densities, ρR and ρB, depicted
in Equation 2.67 and Equation 2.68 respectively.
n = Vv
Vt
(2.66)
ρR =
mr
Vt(1 −n)Vt
(2.67)
ρB = (mr + mw)
Vt
(2.68)
Where mr and mw are the mass of the solids and water of an element correspondingly.
The calculation of those parameters and the evaluation of them are detailed in section 3.2 and
section C.2.
4The safety factors define the ”safe” conditions for a structure affected by specific forces (external forces and internal
forces).
20
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:29==
2.8
Porous media resistance and Pressure gradient
The aim of the following analysis is to estimate the inner velocity of the fluid U passing though
the stone bag, by investigating the porous media resistance (internal) force of the the stone bags,
due to the pressure gradient generated by the outer flow (external) applied in the elements.
Therefore, the model is based on the Volume Averaged Navier-Stoke equations, in order to
take into account the effect of the porosity, from Bjarne Jensen (2013).
The internal force Fi exerted in the stone bag is found from the Reynolds averaged reduced mo-
mentum equation (Equation 2.69) for the porous media.
(1 + Cm) ∂
∂t
ρ( ¯ui)
n
+ 1
n
∂
∂xj
ρ( ¯ui)( ¯uj)
n
= −∂(¯p)
∂t + gjxj
∂ρ
∂xi
+ 1
n
∂
∂xj
µ
(
∂( ¯ui)
∂xj
+ ∂( ¯uj)
∂xi
)
+ Fi
(2.69)
In which most of the terms are simplified, as illustrated in Equation 2.70 (a detailed description of
these simplifications is presented in section D.1).
In the end, the remaining parameters are the inertia term, the partial derivative of the internal pore
pressure (¯p) and the resistance of the porous media Fi.
(1 + Cm) 1
nρd ¯ui
dt = −d¯p
dx + Fi
(2.70)
The internal force Fi is calculated considering the extended Darcy-Forchheimer equation, from
the combination of linear and non-linear forces, which are expressed as illustrated in Equation 2.71.
(Bjarne Jensen (2013))
Fi = aρ( ¯ui) + bρ
√
( ¯uj)( ¯uj)( ¯ui)
(2.71)
In which, a and b are the resistance coefficients, which are respectively found from Equation 2.72
and Equation 2.73, which take into account porosity, viscosity and grains diameter.
a = α(1 −n)2
n3
µ
ρd2
50
(2.72)
b = β
(
1 + 7.5
KC
)
(1 −n)2
n3
1
d50
(2.73)
Where α = 500 and β = 2 are empirical coefficients, from Bjarne Jensen (2013), d50 is the average
grains diameter and the KC number is related to the grains: KC = UmT/nd50.
Therefore, from those relations Fi is obtained and used to calculate the internal velocity ¯ui = U
from Equation 2.70. However, in order to apply this relation, the wave induced pressure gradient
(dp/dx) must be found through Equation 2.74.
dp
dx = −kρgH
2
cosh[k(h + η)]
cosh(kh)
cos(ωt −kx)
(2.74)
For sake of simplicity the following variables are used to estimate the equation of the internal
velocity U.
k1 =
n
ρ(1 + Cm)
(2.75)
k2 = k1
dp
dx
(2.76)
k3 = k1aρ
(2.77)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
21
==PAGE:30==
k4 = bρg
(2.78)
Considering only the linear term from Equation 2.71, the internal velocity is depicted in Equa-
tion 2.79. On the other hand, considering the second order term from Equation 2.71, such internal
velocity becomes Equation 2.80.
Ut = k2(cos(kx −ωt)k3 + ωsin(kx −ωt))
k2
3 + ω2
(2.79)
Ut = −bgk32k4 −bgk4ω2 + sin(kx −ωt)k2k3ω + cos(kx −ωt)k2k32
k3(k2
3 + ω2)
(2.80)
The main difference between the results of these two equations is not much relevant, since adding
the non-linear term leads to very small value of the inner velocity, which is already very small, as
will be explained later in chapter 5, regarding the results of this analysis.
22
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:31==
3
Methodology
3.1
Experiment Set-Up
The aim of this study is to analyse how the stone bags behave under different meteocean condi-
tion ocurring in real life situations, and to ensure that they remain stable under the action of waves
and currents only. In order to do so, several laboratory scale experiments must be performed, and
for this reason a specific experimental setup is implemented.
The Experimental Set-up is characterized by several components, including the use of two
separate wave flumes (1 and 3) in building 114 at Danish Technical University, in which the exper-
iments are conducted, the wave and current generators installed in those flumes, the wave gauges
sensors to measure the elevation of the water level and to collect the related data, and 15 models
of design stone bags to be tested divided in: low density (LD bags), normal density (ND bags),
medium density (MD bags) and medium density new (MDnew bags), that will be described in
more details later in this chapter (see section 3.2).
Therefore, the experiments can be divided in two separate campaigns: the first one with the
experiments conducted in flume 1 (0.60 x 0.80 x 25 m) and the second one with the experiments
conducted in flume 3 (0.60 x 0.80 x 28 m).
During each campaign the data collected are analysed and several mobility diagrams imple-
mented showing how the bags are behaving during each experiment. The mobility diagrams are
made by plotting different parameters calculated for each test and for each stone bags through a
MATLAB script, using the raw data extracted from the wave gauges and a Data Acquisition sys-
tem, in which the wave gauges are defined.
Moreover, in both campaigns the test were done in two different conditions of bed of the flume:
smooth (without sediments or on the bottom of the flume) and rough bed (adding sediments on the
bottom of the flume).
These two conditions lead to variation in the movement of the bags under waves and current
condition, that will be analysed in more detail later in this report.
3.1.1
Flume 1
Flume 1 was used during the first campaign of experiments and it is characterized by the follow-
ing dimensions: 0.60x0.80x25 m. A hydraulic piston wave-maker (illustrated in figure Figure 3.1
(b) and (c) ) is used to generate regular waves (i.e. first order Navier-Stocks equation), which are
run by the Wave Synthesizer version 2.30 software developed by DHI. The wave generator is lo-
cated at one of the end of the flume, while a passive wave energy absorption mechanism (in figure
Figure 3.1 (a)), reproducing an artificial beach, is placed at the opposite side of the flume. The aim
of this structure is to absorb the breaking waves and reduce the effect of the reflection.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
23
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.1: (a) Flume 1. (b) Back view of the hydraulic piston wave-maker. (c) Front view of the
hydraulic piston wave-maker.
During the first campaign, for both smooth and rough bed (see Table B.2 and Table B.4 respec-
tively) around 600 experiments (20 for each stone bag) with only waves condition were carried out
for each stone bag type, with a constant water depth, h = 0.50 m, but with variable wave height
H = [0.05, 0.10, 0.125, 0.15]m and wave period T = [1, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, 2]s.
However, for the rough bed the number of tests is reduced from 20 to 15. All the test with
wave height H = 0.05m are neglected the reason of this technical choice is that for this really low
value of the wave height, the stone bags were not moving at all. Therefore, in order to save time
and avoid the possibility of having too many ’not-moving’ points in the mobility diagrams, these
5 tests were removed.
24
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:33==
3.1.2
Flume 3
The setup of flume 3 is the same as flume 1 (see subsection 3.1.1) and is illustrated in Figure 3.2,
except for the wave generator hydraulic pump and its length. The dimensions of flume 3 are 0.60
x 0.80 x 28 m. The main difference between flume 1 and 3 is that the second one can generate
currents, while the first can only generate waves. Both flumes can reach a maximum wave height
of H = 0.15 m.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: Flume 3. (a) Ramp at the end of flume 3. (b) Back view of the hydraulic piston wave-
maker. (c) Front view of the hydraulic piston wave-maker.
In this case, flume 3 is used for the second campaign of experiments, which can be divided in
two parts: the first part consisted in 25 tests for each stone bag, with smooth bed and rough bed,
in regular waves only conditions; the second part instead involved several experiments, again with
smooth and rough bed, but in currents only conditions.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
25
==PAGE:34==
The parameters tested in the first part of this second campaign are different and combined in
a different way compared to the parameters used during the first campaign (see Table B.2 and Ta-
ble B.4 respectively): water depth h = [0.50, 0.40, 0.30]m, wave period T = [1.0, 1.5, 2.25, 2.5]s
and wave height H = [0.10, 0.125, 0.15]m.
The experiments carried out with the sole use of currents, on the other hand, follow a different
modality compared to those with the sole use of waves. In fact, in this case, the starting water level
is a few centimeters lower than the predetermined one (for example instead of having h = 0.5 m
from the beginning, the initial water level will be set at h = 0.40/0.45 m). The predetermined
height will however be reached immediately after the activation of the system that triggers the flow
of currents inside the tank.
In this campaign of experiments a predetermined number of tests to be carried out was not con-
sidered, in fact the purpose was to observe for which flow values (discharge Q) inside the flume
the stone bags began to move. Consequently, given the diversity of characteristics, each of them
started to move for different flow values and for this reason the number of tests considered varies
from model to model.
In these tests the flow inside the flume 3 is gradually increased until the rock bags start to move.
Obviously, for each test performed, various flow rate values were collected, and among these, par-
ticular attention was paid to the flow rate value for which the model started to move. Hence, the
water depth average velocity was then calculated from this data.
The results obtained during this experiments will be described in more details later in this paper,
in chapter 5; while the tables with all the results obtained for each stone bag type are illustrated in
Appendix A.
3.2
Models Scaling
In this section, the characteristics and the method applied to design the rock bags used for the
experiments is analysed. From the studied carried by LTD (2014), the weights of the real scale
Filter Units are 2, 4 and 8 tons. Therefore, the rock bags used for the experiments are scaled using
the 4 and 8 tons models, with proportions 1:36. A sketch of the dimensions of a rock bag is given
in Figure 3.3, from LTD (2014).
LD, MD, MDnew and ND stands for low density, medium density mix 1, medium density mix
2 and normal density materials respectively.
Figure 3.3: Dimensions sketch of the rock bags.
26
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:35==
However, only the prototypes of bags ND03, LD03, MD03 and MD06 for the 4t full scale and
LD05 for the 8t full scale are created using those proportions.
The reason why dimensions and weights of the remaining prototypes are so different and do
not follow a specific proportion is a consequence of the results obtained during the first campaign
of experiments, carried out on the aforementioned prototypes. In fact, stone bags of different sizes
(and densities) involve a wider range of values for the KC number and, as a direct consequence, it
is possible to obtain a greater number of information regarding the behavior of the different models
in different environmental conditions. This topic will be thoroughly investigated in chapter 4 and
5, respectively regarding the way the data are processed and the results obtained.
In total, 15 prototype of filter units were realized, using a polyester net, and divided in four
groups depending on the material stuffed inside them, as illustrated in Table 3.2 (see also example
of ND rock bags in Figure 3.4). In general, two different materials are used: normal density (ND)
stones (d50 = 0.005 m, dry density ρ = 2450 kg/m3) and low density (LD) polyester stones
(d50 = 0.002m, dry density ρ = 1360 kg/m3).
Figure 3.4: Three different design ND rock bags
These two materials are then combined together, using two different proportions to obtain two
more groups of stone bags of mixed density materials: the MD rock bags (MD01 to MD03, dry
density ρ = 1720 kg/m3) are created using a proportion 2(LD) : 1(ND), considering that the den-
sity of the ND stones is almost the double of the density of the LD material; while, the MD new
rock bags (MD04 and MD06, dry density ρ = 1500 kg/m3) are created using a proportion of 6(LD)
: 1(ND), in order to have a mixed material with a total density lower than the previous one, but
higher than the LD material.
The parameters that characterize the materials stuffed inside the filter units, such as the porosity,
the dry and bulk density, are illustrated in Table 3.1, and the relative calculation and procedure are
illustrated in C.2.
Table 3.1: Characteristics of the materials used to create the stone bags: porosity, dry density and
bulk density.
Bag type
n
ρ [kg/m3]
ρB [kg/m3]
ND (from ND01 to ND03)
0.39
2450
1890
MD (from MD01 to MD 03)
0.39
1720
1420
MD new (from MD04 to MD06)
0.37
1500
1310
LD (from LD01 to LD 06)
0.42
1360
1210
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.2: The 15 design rock bags
Type
Mass[g]
Diameter[m]
Height[m]
ND01
35.7
0.050
0.018
ND02
50.8
0.060
0.020
ND03
85.7
0.070
0.022
MD01
35.7
0.055
0.019
MD02
50.8
0.065
0.019
MD03
85.7
0.075
0.025
MD04
35.7
0.048
0.025
MD05
50.8
0.057
0.026
MD06
85.7
0.072
0.028
LD01
35.7
0.055
0.022
LD02
50.8
0.065
0.025
LD03
85.7
0.080
0.027
LD04
129
0.090
0.029
LD05
170
0.100
0.030
LD06
200
0.110
0.031
3.2.1
Density to use in the tests
In section 2.8, the inner velocity of the fluid U passing the stone bag is depicted; and from it
the amount of fluid flowing through the stone bags can be estimated from a quantitative point of
view. From this, the use of dry or bulk density in the process analysis can be determined.
However, in order to get a better description of the behavior of the flow in both escenarios
of waves and current only, a qualitative test of the flow is performed via dye injection. The test
consists in releasing a small amount of red dye, used in the food industry, while the waves and
current are running. Therefore, the streamlines of the flow can be visualized, and recognise if the
flow is running through the bags or not.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: Waves only scenario.(a) beginning of the dye test. (b) the dye around the entire bag.
28
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: Current only scenario.(a) beginning of the dye test. (b) the dye around the entire bag.
From Figure 3.5 and Figure 3.6, it can be seen that the flow in the cases of waves and current
respectively are surrounding the stone bags and not passing through those elements. Therefore, the
bulk density ρβ must be used in the different calculations of mobility diagrams. This means that
when the stone bags are placed in the flume filled with water all their voids are replaced by water,
and that fluid becomes part of the stone bag, and the system (i.e. rock bag plus water inside the
voids) is acting as a whole when waves and current are run during the experiments.
3.3
Waves
In Flume 1 and 3, the waves are generated by a hydraulic piston system, which consists of
an oscillated panel made of polyvinyl chloride (i.e. wave maker) as already explained in subsec-
tion 3.1.1 and subsection 3.1.2.
The following table depicts the different metocean conditions applied in the laboratory, and in
subsection 3.3.1 the non-linearity of the combination of them is evaluated.
Table 3.3: Metocean condition for the waves only scenario
Water depth
Wave height
Wave period
h [m]
H [m]
T [s]
0.50
0.050
1.00
0.40
0.100
1.25
0.30
0.125
1.50
0.150
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
3.3.1
Analysis of the non-linearity
The mix of the metocean conditions shown in Table 3.3 gives 84 different scenarios, and they
are plotted together and having as background the Figure 2.4, which is the regime wave theory.
Therefore, in order to identify the wave theory the experiments can follow.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.7: Validity of periodic water waves according to Le Méhauté Méhauté (2013).
From Figure 3.7 it can be seen that Stokes higher order theories are predominant. And it must
be taken into account that those theories are more relevant in the estimations of particles velocities
in the surface elevation. However, the present investigation is focused in studying the behaviour
of the velocities close to the bed, where the stone bags are placed and are used as scour protection
for offshore structures.
Stokes first order wave theory (i.e. linear wave theory) is applicable until Ursell number Ur >
26, exceeding this threshold will make other wave theories more accurate for determining the
particles motion in the wave surface (e.g. Stokes higher order, Stream function theory, Cnoidal
theory), as illustrated in Figure 3.7. Nevertheless, linear wave theory is still the leading order
theory and is valid as first approximation. Therefore, an analysis of the velocities close to the bed
following first and second order theory is discussed in subsection 3.3.2.
3.3.2
Velocity close to the bed
An evaluation of the particle velocities profile applying first and second order wave theory is
made, so the effect of using linear or non-linear wave theory is analyzed.
The velocity profile based on linear wave theory is calculated using Equation 2.10. However,
in the case of second order wave theory, the formula that is applied if the following.
u = ckH
2
cosh(k(z + h))
sinh(kh)
cos(ωt −kx) + 3
16c(kH)2 cosh(2k(z + h))
sinh4(kh)
cos(2(ωt −kx)) (3.1)
Then, using two different metocean condition from Table 3.3, the velocities profiles are calcu-
lated applying Equation 2.10 and Equation 3.1. Then, they are plotted together and compared.
30
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:39==
The environmental conditions for the first case are H = 0.05m, T = 1 sec and h = 0.50m,
and the outcome is shown in Figure 3.8.
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u1stOrder
u2ndOrder
Figure 3.8: Vecolity profiles for 1st and 2nd order, Test 1
The second case considers H = 0.125m, T = 2 sec and h = 0.50m, and the comparison of
the velocity profiles are depicted in Figure 3.9.
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
u1stOrder
u2ndOrder
Figure 3.9: Vecolity profiles for 1st and 2nd order, Test 20
From Figure 3.8 and Figure 3.9, it can be seen that when the wave height is small (e.g 0.05m),
the velocity close to the bed is the same in the first and second order wave theory.
However, when the wave height becomes higher (e.g 0.125 or 0.15m), the velocities in the
bottom of the flume are different. Velocity from second order theory is around 10% higher than
the one found from first order wave theory.
During the analysis of the wave reflection phenomenon, first and second order wave theory are
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
31
==PAGE:40==
already considered. Hence, the orbital velocities (mainly the Um) also considers the second order
wave theory.
3.3.3
Wave Gauges
The purpose of the thesis project is to estimate at which environmental conditions the stone bags
start to move. Therefore, the scenarios of waves and current only are analyzed. The wavemaker of
flume 1 and 3 generate waves, and these are measured using five resistance wave gauges as shown
in Fig. 3.10, which illustrates the deployment and setup of these measuring instruments.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: Wave gauges.(a) wave gauges deployed in the flume. (b) layout of the positioning of
the wave gauges.
The signals of time series of the water levels are registered in the Data Acquisition software
as depicted in Fig. 3.11. After the respective calibration of the wave gauges, the collected data is
used for calculating the time series of the surface elevation and analyse the reflection phenomenon
in the different experiments.
Figure 3.11: Water levels registered in the Data Acquisition software.
Because the purpose of the investigation is to find out at which velocity the rock bags start to
move, the duration of the tests for the scenario of waves only is 2 minutes. During that period,
the water levels are stored and the identification of the status of the bags, which is explained in
chapter 4 are done.
32
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:41==
3.4
Steady current
The current is generated in flume 3 via a control panel shown in Figure 3.12, which measures
the discharge running along the flume, and the water depth varies in a proportional way to the
current magnitude. Then, the flow runs from an outlet located in the bottom of one end of such
flume as shown in Figure 3.12.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: Current generator.(a) control panel. (b) current outlet in flume 3.
Considering the five different types of rock bags presented in Table 3.2, the current is run
until the discharge at which they start to move. Therefore, different measurements of discharge
are noted along with the respective water depths in order to find the velocity at which the driving
forces are higher than the stabilizing forces and the respective mobility diagram. The analysis and
the outcome of tests are detailed in chapter 4 and chapter 5 respectively.
3.4.1
Velocity profile
In case of a steady current, the velocity profile of the flow near the bed of the flume (for both
cases, smooth and rough bed) is estimated by the use of a small propeller (see Figure 3.13).
Therefore, five different discharges are tested: 80 l/s, 110 l/s, 130 l/s, 150 l/s and 180 l/s. Further-
more, for each of these discharges 11 points are considered from the bottom to the surface, in order
to plot a clear distribution of velocity profile.
However, the propeller accuracy decreases approaching the surface of the water, but increase with
the increasing discharge of water, as can be seen from the test’s tables results illustrated in subsec-
tion B.3.3.
For this reason, since the 11th point is considered at the surface, the speed of the flow is cal-
culated using a basic physics principle: v = L/t. Therefore, two reference points A and B are
defined at a distance of 7 m (L) from each other (see Figure 3.14 (a)); then, a piece of paper (see
Figure 3.14 (b)) is placed on the surface of the water at A and, using a stopwatch the time t needed
to travel this distance to B is calculated.
The results are illustrated in chapter 5.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
33
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.13: Propeller (No. 5-284143) components. (a) Side view. (b) Top view. (c) Battery and
digital screen showing the resulting period and rps.
34
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14: (a) Section of the flume used for the measurement of the surface velocity (7 m). (b)
Example of (approx.) square piece of paper placed on the scale, used for the experiments.
3.5
Bed conditions
As shown in section 2.5, the friction coefficient of the bed is directly proportional to the stabi-
lizing forces of an element. therefore, two cases considering different bed conditions are analyzed
for the two scenarios: waves and current only.
The first case is considered as smooth bed, because the rock bags are directly placed over the bot-
tom of the flume which is made of glass as illustrated in Figure 3.15. Therefore the grain size of
the grain particles of the glass is considered d = 0.1 mm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.15: Smooth bed condition. (a)Overview of the rock bags over a smooth bed. (b) zoom-in
of a rock bag.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
35
==PAGE:44==
In the second case, a uniform rough bed made of normal density rocks (i.e. ND material) is
created in order to generate higher friction at the bottom of the flume 3 as depicted in Figure 3.16.
The average grain size of the ND material is d = 5 mm, and the dimensions of such bed are 2 m
length, 0.60 m width and 0.03 m thickness.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.16: Sequence of the creation of rough bed. (a) Pouring the ND material in the flume. (b)
Spreading uniformly the ND material. (c) Uniform bed.
36
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:45==
3.6
Hydraulic failure modes
The hydraulic failure modes of the filter units are inducted by the forces generated by the flow
hitting the rock bag. Therefore, the aim of this section is to analyse the hydraulic failure modes and
the correlated forces which affect the rock bags during the experiments, as described in section 2.6.
However, a preliminary investigation of the contact area of the filter units and the stagnation point
is described.
The forces affecting the rock bags are described in the sections 2.5, for both cases steady current
and regular waves (smooth and rough bed). These relations will be applied to some specific cases
and the results will be presented in chapter 5.
3.6.1
Rock bags contact area
The contact area of the rock bags is experimentally estimated, using red dye. The procedure
consist in impregnating the bottom of the rock bag with dye, then placing the bag on a white paper
and let the dye drys out (see step by step procedure in Figures C.3, C.4, C.5, C.6, in section C.3).
In this way the diameter of the stain left by the rock bag is measured and compared to the actual
diameter of the bag.
The difference between these values gives the position of the point where the bag touch the plate,
which is the contact area, necessary to calculate the forces and the corresponding momentum. This
procedure is carried out for four rock bags: ND03, LD03, MD03 and MD06, the results are illus-
trated in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Comparison between the geometrical characteristics of the rock bags and the obtained
contact area.
Bag
Diameter D [m]
Height hs [m]
Contact Dc [m]
LD03
0.08
0.027
0.075
MD03
0.075
0.025
0.067
MD06
0.0725
0.028
0.069
ND03
0.07
0.022
0.066
3.6.2
Stagnation pressure and analysis of failure modes
The stagnation point where the pressure is maximum and the velocity is zero. This is estimated
to be at the half of the height of the rock bag, as sketched in Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Location of the stagnation point.
Such estimation is based on the dye test explained in subsection 3.2.1 and the normalized
velocity from Ozgoren2012, shown in Figure 3.18.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
37
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.18: Estimation of the position of the stagnation point.(a) Dye test rock bag ND03. (b)
Normalized velocity around a sphere placed over a flat plate, Fig 4 from Ozgoren2012
From Figure 3.18 it can be seen that the point where the velocity is zero is approximately at
the half of the height of the rock bag (a), and of the sphere (b).
Steady current
The stagnation point is defined as the point where the flow hits the object (in this research
the rock bag), and therefore the flow speed is zero and the pressure is maximum. Considering
the effect of the steady current, the Bernoulli equation (see Equation 3.2) is applied between two
points, the first one far from the rock bag and the second one, exactly on it. As already mentioned,
the stagnation point is considered in the middle of the object along the y-axis, as illustrated in
Figure 3.19.
Figure 3.19: Sketch of the rock bag under the effect of a steady current.
38
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:47==
p1 + 1
2ρv2
1 = p2 + 1
2ρv2
2
(3.2)
Which is reduced to:
p1 + 1
2ρv2
1 = p2
(3.3)
In which, p1 = pstatic = ρg(h−y) is the static pressure (in current only case is the hydrostatic
pressure), and p2 = pstag is the stagnation pressure. However, the hydrostatic pressure is zero
because the same pressure is applied on both sides of the object. Therefore, the stagnation pressure
is simplified as illustrated in Equation 3.4
pstag = 1
2ρv2
1
(3.4)
In Figure 3.20, the forces which affect the rock bags and which can cause the sliding failure
are graphically illustrated.
Figure 3.20: Sketch of the forces acting on the rock bag under the effect of a steady current.
Therefore, in Figure 3.20, FU (estimated by Equation 3.7) is the uplift force due to the effect
of the stagnation pressure and it is characterized by a triangular distribution under the rock bag,
because it reaches its maximum magnitude on the front side, but it is zero at position x0, which
represents the half of the contact diameter Dc indicated in Equation 3.5.
FU is also a function of the contact area Au(x) (see Equation 3.6), which varies along the
distance between the stagnation point and the point of rotation x0 (see Equation 3.5, as function of
DC, the diameter of the contact area, found in subsection 3.6.1, and the total diameter of the rock
bags).
x0 = Dc
2
(3.5)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
39
==PAGE:48==
Au(x) = 2
∫x0
−Dc
2
√(D
2
)2
−x2dx
(3.6)
FU = 1
2pstagAu(x)
(3.7)
On the other hand, the force in the wake of the bag FW comes from the pressure in its rear, which is
described in Equation 3.9, as function of the area under the rock bag in the wake region Aw(x) (see
Equation 3.8) and it is given by the combination of all the vertical forces acting on the designed
rock bag.
Aw(x) = 2
∫
Dc
2
x0
√(D
2
)2
−x2dx
(3.8)
FW = 1
2kppstagAw(x)
(3.9)
In Equation 3.9, kp is the coefficient with respect to the stagnation pressure. As a first attempt,
that parameter is considered to be 1/2. This assumption is based on the pressure coefficients from
Seung-Jae Lee (2014) and shown in Figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21: Comparison of pressure coefficient at the front and rear stagnation points from differ-
ent studies, table 1 Seung-Jae Lee (2014).
The other forces affecting the rock bag which cause the sliding failure are: in-line (Finline) or
drag force FD, which is defined as the resisting force that a stream of fluid ”apply” to the motion
of a submerged body (rock bag) and it is parallel to the flow direction; then, Since the fluid exerts
a force on the object submerged, the stabilizing force, obtained from the lift force FL and the
submerged weight WS, defined as the components of force perpendicular to the flow direction,
which contrasts the drag force (all explained in details in section 2.5).
The momentum affecting the rock bag and which cause the overturning failure is illustrated in
Figure 3.22.
40
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.22: Sketch of the momentum forces acting on the rock bag, under the effect of a steady
current.
In Figure 3.22, the coefficients aw, aL, aFu, aFw, aFin are the arms of the forces used to
calculate the momentum over the point of rotation x0. Equation 3.10 shows the momentum of the
Finline force around the point of rotation.
Minline = FinlineaFin = Finline
1
2hs
(3.10)
The momentum of the weight Ws and lift force FL are depicted in Equation 3.11 and Equa-
tion 3.12.
MWs = WsaWs = Ws
Dc
2
(3.11)
MFL = FLaFL = FL
Dc
2
(3.12)
Regarding, the momentum of the uplift force depicted in Equation 3.16, this is calculated based
on the sketch of the top view of the rock bag illustrated in Figure 3.23, and the equation shown
in Equation 3.13, Equation 3.6, Equation 3.14 and Equation 3.15, which represent the pressure
gradient, the affected area of underneath the rock bag, the pressure below the bag, and the moment
arm respectively.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.23: Sketch of top view of a rock bag, under the effect of a steady current, with the inte-
gration parameters along the diameter of the bag.
Yu(x) =
(
1
2ρv2
1
x0 + D
2
)
x −x0 1
2ρv2
1
x0 + D
2
(3.13)
∆pu = Yu(x)Au(x)
(3.14)
aFu(x) = 2
3
(
x0 + D
2 −x
)
(3.15)
MFU =
∫x0
−D
2
∆puaFu(x)dx
(3.16)
Regarding the momentum from the force at the rear of the rock bag MFW shown in Equa-
tion 3.20, this is found from Equation 3.17 which represents the gradient of FW , the contact area
Equation 3.8, the pressure as a function of the position Equation 3.18, and the momentum arm
Equation 3.19.
Yw(x) =
(
1
4ρv2
1
D
2 −x0
)
x −x0 1
2ρv2
1
x0 + D
2
(3.17)
∆pw = Yw(x)Aw(x)
(3.18)
aFw(x) = 2
3
(D −Dc
2
−x + x0
)
(3.19)
MFW =
∫
D
2
x0
∆pwaFw(x)dx
(3.20)
Regular waves
The a similar procedure is applied to calculate the stagnation pressure for the case of regular
waves (see Figure 3.24). However, in this case the static pressure is given by the sum of the wave-
induced pressure p+ and the dynamic pressure.
42
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.24: Sketch of rock bag under the effect of regular waves and Bernoulli equation consid-
erations.
Therefore, the pressure at the stagnation point is calculated according to Equation 3.21.
pstag = p+ + 1
2ρU 2
m
(3.21)
As explained in subsection 2.5.2, the horizontal force is given by the contribution of the drag force
and the inertia force. The latter takes into account the unsteadiness of the flow, in fact it is gen-
erated by the motion of the waves. The acceleration of the flow generates a pressure gradient
around the rock bag, which consequently generates a force, the Froude-Krylov force FK (see sub-
section 2.5.2), that can also be expressed as a volume integral, according to the Gauss theorem
(B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)):
FK = −
∫
V
∂p
∂xdV
(3.22)
The pressure p is equal to the wave-induced pressure p+ (in the front side of the bag) defined by
the following equation.
p+ = ρgH
2
cosh(ky)
sinh(kD)sin(ωt −kx)
(3.23)
Therefore, the pressure gradient is obtained from the derivative of Equation 3.23 respect to x and
then, the obtained value is integrated according to Equation 3.22. The result is applied to the inertia
force FM in Equation 2.58, and Equation 3.24 is obtained.
FM = −kρgH
2
cosh[k(h + η)]
cosh(kh)
cos(ωt −kx)V CM
(3.24)
The sliding failure in the case of regular waves is illustrated in Figure 3.25. The overturn-
ing failure is also depicted in the sketch in Figure 3.26. Both follow the same criterion detailed
described in Equation 2.64 and Equation 2.65.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.25: Sketch of the forces acting on the rock bag under the effect of waves only, smooth
bed.
Figure 3.26: Sketch of the momentum acting on the rock bag under the effect of waves only, rough
bed.
Figure 3.27 represents the top view of a stone bag, in which kw and kp are two hypothetical
coefficients related to the width of the rock bag and to the stagnation pressure respectively.
44
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.27: Sketch of top view of a rock bag, under the effect of regular waves.
Therefore, the pressure along the diameter of the rock bag, generated by the uplift force FU is
expressed as a function of the pressure gradient given by Equation 2.74, and the latter depends on
kw and kp parameters, as shown in Equation 3.25.
p(x) =
[
dp
dx(kp, kw)
]
(x −x0)
(3.25)
Finally, the momentum of the uplift force is the product of the pressure depicted in Equa-
tion 3.25, the width coefficient kw and the arm moment x −x0, as illustrated in Equation 3.26.
MFu =
∫x0
−Dt/2
(x −x0)p(x)dx
(3.26)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
45
==PAGE:54==
4
Data Acquisition and Processing
The purpose of this chapter is to describe how the data are acquired and processed during the
different test campaigns. In fact, the two following sections describe the cases of regular waves
and steady current respectively, since the procedures applied for the analysis of the data are slightly
different.
4.1
Regular waves
As explained in chapter 3, subsection 3.3.3, all the signals detected by the five wave gauges
(WG1, WG2, WG3, WG4, WG5) during 2 min is acquired using a DAQ software, which exports
the raw data in form of text files. These text files, which contain all the different values of the time
and voltage registered during each experiment are then transferred in Matlab script in which they
are processed.
The first step is to calibrate the wave gauges before the tests are performed, the details are
explained in Appendix A.
Once the equipment is calibrated, the measurement of the surface elevations from the different
tests are analyzed. Therefore, since a certain amount of noise is registered, the next step of the
data processing is filtering out all frequencies f above 8 Hz, from the obtained values of the mean
water level (MWL, ηn,filt). Therefore, the resulting values of the MWL are plotted against the
time. An example of the resulting time series is illustrated in Figure 4.1, which shows the time
series obtained for the test analysis conducted over the first test in the case of smooth bed (Test 1:
wave height H = 0.05 m, period T = 1 s and water depth h = 0.5 m).
In Figure 4.1, each coloured line correspond to the change in the surface elevation over the time
(2 min) detected by the five wave gauges. Moreover, Figure 4.1 shows some very high peaks at the
beginning of the experiment, due to the impact of the first waves on the wave gauges; the opposite
is detected approaching the end of the two minutes, because the impact of the waves becomes less
and less. Therefore, in order to have a clear view of the trend of surface elevation, a smaller range
of time between 30 s and 40 s is showed in Figure 4.2.
The next step consists in the wave reflection analysis (WRA) for regular waves, in which the
MWL is again filtered considering the reflection caused by the ramp at the end of the flume, accord-
ing to Equation 2.19, in subsection 2.3.3 (chapter 2), regarding the theory behind this procedure.
The main result of this analysis is the MWL corrected by the reflection (ηrecon, from Equa-
tion 2.19) registered by each wave gauge. In order to compare the accuracy of this procedure,
these new parameters are plotted together with the time series of the surface elevation filtered by
the frequency, as illustrated in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3 highlights that the values of η are quite accurate, since they are overlapping the
values of ηrecon obtained through the WRA. Approximately the same results are obtained for all
the tests, with some exception for the last campaign of experiments, in which the water depth was
too shallow compared to the capacity of the flume.
However, other important parameters are obtained from the WRA, such as the amplitude of
the reflected and incident waves and, as a consequence, the reflection coefficient (KR), which is
given by the ratio between those amplitudes, registered in each experiment.
For each rock type, three rock bags are placed under three of the five wave gauges, from the
smallest to the biggest: bag 1 under WG1, bag 2 under WG3 and bag 3 under WG5. The reasons
why the rock bags are placed in this order and below these WGs are mainly two. On the one hand,
46
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:55==
0
50
100
150
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
 [m]
WG1
WG2
WG3
WG4
WG5
Figure 4.1: Test 1, smooth bed, regular waves, surface elevation signal registered by the five wave
gauges.
30
32
34
36
38
40
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
 [m]
WG1
WG2
WG3
WG4
WG5
Figure 4.2: Test 1. Close up view of the surface elevation signal registered by the five wave gauges.
there must be enough space between them, so that they do not affect each other, if they move due
to the flow hitting them; while, on the other hand, the flow speed must not be influenced by the
presence of the next rock bag.
Therefore, for these three rock bags, the main parameters obtained through the analysis of each
test are KC, Re and Mob numbers (respectively using Equation 2.24, 2.29, 2.28).
These values are used to plot the mobility diagrams relatively to the behavior of the rock bags under
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
47
==PAGE:56==
30
32
34
36
38
40
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
 [m]
WG1
WG2
WG3
WG4
WG5
recon
Figure 4.3: Test 1.
the different conditions illustrated in the test tables (Tables B.2, B.4, B.3 and B.5, in Appendix B).
Therefore, the mobility diagrams can be considered as the step which follows the test analysis (see
section 5.2). This procedure is carried for both cases of smooth and rough bed.
4.2
Steady current
In order to detect if the control panel is showing the right discharge when generating the cur-
rent, a calibration procedure is performed and detailed in Appendix A.
In this case, the tests conditions slightly varies for each bag type, since they began to move for
different values of the discharge.
In both cases of smooth bed and rough bed, and for each test, the water depth is kept approximately
constant: h ≈0.50 m and h ≈0.47 m (which takes into account the 3 cm layer of ND rocks) re-
spectively. The discharge Q is gradually increased until all the bags move. This means that for
each type of rock bag (LD, LD big, MD, MD new, ND) the incipient motion (the point when the
bag began to move) changes.
In the case of the smooth bed, one batch of experiments is carried out for each bag type; while,
for the rough bed, two batches of experiments are carried out, because only one batch of experi-
ments was not giving enough points in the mobility diagrams. All the several tests of this second
campaign are illustrated in Appendix A.
Also in this case, for each rock type, the three rock bags are placed in the same positions as
in the case of regular waves as reference position (under the same wave gauges, even tough the
wave gauges are not giving any specific contribution in this case, because only steady currents
are tested). Therefore, taking into consideration the theory related to the case of a steady current
affecting the individual rock bag (illustrated in chapter 2, section 2.2), the mobility Mob number
and the Reynolds Re number for the case of steady current are found according to Equation 2.8
and 2.9. These parameter are used to plot the mobility diagrams as illustrated in section 5.2).
48
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:57==
5
Experimental Results
5.1
Pressure Analysis for regular waves
The purpose of the pressure analysis is to estimate the inner velocity of the fluid passing through
the voids of the rock bags, using the porous media resistance (internal force), caused by the wave
inducted pressure gradient, which is generated by the external forces affecting the object (see sec-
tion 2.8 for the theoretical background).
Therefore, the internal velocity of ND03, MD03, LD03 and MD06 is calculated by the dif-
ferential relation dU/dt, analytically obtained according to Equation 2.70. The resulting formula,
illustrated in Equation 2.79, represents the linear term of the Darcy-Forchheimer law in Equa-
tion 2.71.
The speed of the flow within the aforementioned design rock bags (Ut) and the maximum flow’s
speed outside the rock bag (Um) are then plotted against the time, for the smooth and the rough
bed cases (separately), as illustrated in the following graphs. The test conditions considered are
showed in Table 5.1. 1
Table 5.1: Tests conditions for which the inside and maximum speed of the flow are plotted.
Smooth bed
Test name
H
T
h
LD03
MD03
MD06
ND03
Test6
0.100
1.000
0.500
1
0
0
0
Test14
0.150
1.750
0.500
1
2
1
0
Test24
0.125
2.500
0.500
2
1
1
0
Test38
0.150
1.500
0.400
2
1
1
0
Rough bed
Test name
H
T
h
LD03
MD03
MD06
ND03
Test6
0.100
1.000
0.470
0
0
0
0
Test14
0.150
1.750
0.470
2
0
0
0
Test24
0.125
2.500
0.470
2
0
0
0
Test38
0.150
1.500
0.370
2
1
1
0
Specifically, the first comparison is made between the tests carried out in the case of smooth
bed, while the second comparison is made between the same tests but in the case of rough bed: test
6, test 14, test 24 and test 38 (see Table 5.1). These tests are chosen with the aim of having a certain
variety of conditions (period, wave height and water depth), in order to demonstrate that the theory
under investigation is verified in all the possible conditions tested during the experiments.
1Not moving = 0; rocking = 1; moving = 2.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
49
==PAGE:58==
Figures 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4 illustrate the comparison between the velocity of the flow inside
and outside of the four different rock bags, in smooth bed conditions, for test 14.
30
32
34
36
38
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.1: Smooth bed test 14, bag LD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.2: Smooth bed test 14, bag MD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.3: Smooth bed test 14, bag MD06.
50
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:59==
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.4: Rough bed test 14, bag ND03.
Furthermore the maximum inner and outer velocity of the flow within this specific tests are
illustrated in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Test 14, smooth bed . Comparison between inner and outer velocity of the flow, respect
to each rock bag.
Test 14
Bag
Um(m/s)
Ut (m/s)
Ut/Um
LD03
0.240
0.0004079
0.17%
MD03
0.0038
2%
MD06
0.0013
1%
ND03
0.0062
3%
As illustrated in the aforementioned figures and in Table 5.2, the inner velocity is very small
compared to the velocity of the flow outside the rock bags.
The same procedure is applied for the rough bed conditions, with test 24, as Figures 5.5, D.18, 5.7
and 5.8 show. The maximum values of the inner and outer speed of the flow, as well as their ratio
are illustrated in Table 5.3.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.5: Rough bed test 24, bag LD03.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
51
==PAGE:60==
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.6: Rough bed test 24, bag MD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.7: Rough bed test 24, bag MD06.
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure 5.8: Rough bed test 24, bag ND03.
52
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:61==
Table 5.3: Test 24, rough bed . Comparison between inner and outer velocity of the flow, respect
to each rock bag.
Test 24
Bag
Um(m/s)
Ut (m/s)
LD03
0.22
0.0011
0.0%
MD03
0.0016
0.0%
MD06
0.0015
0.0%
ND03
0.0055
0.0%
The same comparison is done also for the other tests but the graphs are illustrated in section D.2.
The plots and the tables show how the speed of the flow within the design rock bags (blue line)
is really small, and represents less then 5% compared to the speed of the flow outside it (red line).
Therefore, these results validate the hypothesis that the amount of fluid that pass through the porous
media is very small and therefore, for the sake of calculations the bulk density (ρB) must be used.
This theory is also experimentally confirmed by the qualitative tests done using the dye injection,
explained in subsection 3.2.1 of the Methodology.
5.2
Mobility Diagrams
In this section, the mobility diagrams are defined, plotted and analysed. The aim of the inves-
tigation is to find the incipient motion condition, that means at which mobility parameter Mob
the rock bags start to move. To do so, the reaction of the rock bags due to the waves and current
conditions are defined as follows.
• Not moving: the rock bag is not moving at all, which means the stabilizing forces are strong
enough to prevent any movement of the element due to the presence of in-line force. This
condition is represented by green points in the mobility diagrams.
• Rocking: the bags is moving from side to side on its own position in the case of waves only
scenario, due to the presence of orbital velocities, and it is ready to start moving. In the
scenario of current only, the bag just starts the motion in the direction of the flow velocity.
I both, waves and current only instances, the retaining (i.e. stabilizing) forces are in equilib-
rium with the driving (i.e. in-line ) forces, and this is called incipient motion condition. In
the mobility diagrams this scenario is defined by blue points.
• Moving: The rock bag is moving, it can either slide or roll, depending on the type of bed.
This condition is achieved because the in-line forces exceeds the stabilizing forces. This
condition is illustrated by red points in the mobility diagrams.
5.2.1
Waves only - smooth bed
Regular waves in a smooth bed (i.e. bed made of glass) are run in order to elaborate the mo-
bility diagrams. Therefore, the 46 tests shown in Table B.2 and Table B.3 are executed, the data
from them are processed, and the results are depicted in Figure 5.11.
In the waves only case, the waves generate orbital velocities, which can be felt by the rock
bags placed in the bottom of the flume. Therefore, when the rock bags are in rocking condition,
they start to move from side to side on their original position as illustrated in Figure 5.9. This
behavior is similar to the motion of the ship, specifically the roll (i.e. rotation about x-axis), but
with a restriction in the bottom.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.9: Rocking effect in waves only scenario, smooth bed.
When the in-line force is increased beyond the incipient motion condition, the bags are oscillat-
ing and sliding at the same time in the direction of the waves. The sketch of this effect is depicted
in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Sliding effect in waves only scenario, smooth bed.
From Figure 5.11, it can be seen that the mobility number, shown in y-axis, for the three condi-
tions (not moving, rocking and moving), is increasing as the KC number grows. Also, it is noticed
that the cloud of points of the rocking condition, is between not moving and moving status, which
make sense since it represents the transition from not moving to moving.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Figure 5.11: Mob vs KC, waves only case, smooth bed.
54
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:63==
103
104
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Figure 5.12: Mob vs Re, waves only case, smooth bed.
As already mentioned, at incipient motion condition (i.e. rocking in the present investigation),
driving and stabilizing forces of the bags are in equilibrium, meaning that those elements are just
about to move. As illustrated in Figure 5.11, rock bags with KC= 2, start moving at around
Mob=0.05, then bags with KC= 4 have incipient motion at approximately Mob=0.15. And until
KC= 8, the growth of Mob follows a logarithmic path until it reaches Mob=0.2. From KC= 8 to
KC= 12, the behavior of the rocking condition is exponential, arriving to a Mob=0.3.
The mobility parameter Mob is also plotted considering Reynolds number Re in the x-axis as
shown in Figure 5.15. However, the distribution of the data for the three conditions is not clear, so
the diagram of KC vs Mob is kept and analyzed in ?? to find the equation of the incipient motion
condition for the smooth bed scenario.
5.2.2
Waves only - rough bed
In contrast to the smooth bed scenario, when the driving forces are strong enough to move the
rock bags the models start rolling around a rotation point in the same direction of the waves as
shown in Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: Sliding effect in waves only scenario, rough bed.
Similar to the case of smooth bed, the results of the 41 tests in the rough bed made of ND
material and the respective characterization are depicted in Figure 5.14.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
55
==PAGE:64==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
10-2
10-1
100
Figure 5.14: Mob vs KC, waves only case, rough bed.
From Figure 5.11, rock bags with KC= 2, start moving at around Mob=0.1, then bags with
KC= 4 have incipient motion at approximately Mob=0.2. Until KC= 8, the growth of Mob fol-
lows a logarithmic path until it reaches Mob=0.3. From KC= 8 to KC= 12, the behavior of the
rocking condition is exponential, arriving to a Mob=0.5.
Similar to the case of regular waves and smooth bed scenario, the mobility parameter Mob is
also plotted considering Reynolds number Re in the x-axis as shown in Figure 5.15. However, the
distribution of the data for the three conditions is not clear, hence the diagram of KC vs Mob is
kept and analyzed in subsection 5.2.5 to find the equation of the incipient motion condition for the
smooth bed scenario.
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
104
10-2
10-1
100
Figure 5.15: Mob vs Re, waves only case, rough bed.
Comparing the two mobility diagrams, the one from the smooth bed shown in Figure 5.11 and
the other from rough bed depicted in Figure 5.14, it can be noticed that the mobility numbers for
the same KC numbers in the case of rough bed are higher than those estimated in smooth bed
condition. This is explained by the fact that the bags placed in a rough bed have bigger stabilizing
56
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:65==
forces than those laid in a smooth bed. As the stabilizing force comes from the product of the
normal forces and the friction factor, indeed the latter is higher in the rough bed case.
5.2.3
Currents only - smooth bed
Different tests considering current only are run and the details of each of them are shown in
Appendix B.3.2. The purpose of these tests is to find at which velocity (incipient velocity) the bags
begin to move. Therefore, the rock bags are placed in the bottom of the flume and the current is
slowly increased until the elements begin the motion.
Similar to the case of waves only, the tests are performed in two scenarios: smooth and rough
bed. In this subsection the first scenario is processed and analysed.
Once the rock bags are placed at the bottom of the smooth bed of the flume, the discharge is
increased and the behavior of the bags are observed. When the bags start to move, they slide in the
direction of the flow due to its driving forces, as sketched in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Sliding effect in current only scenario, smooth bed.
The results of the tests are shown in Figure 5.17, and it can be seen that all the bags start to
move at approximately the same mobility number Mob=0.55.
102
103
10-2
10-1
100
101
Figure 5.17: Mob vs Re, current only case, smooth bed.
5.2.4
Currents only - rough bed
The same tests considering current only are performed, but now over the rough bed. When the
bags start to move, they roll in the same direction of the flow, because the stabilizing forces are
not strong enough to keep them on their initial position.
The mobility diagram of these tests are depicted in Figure 5.19, which shows that the mobility
number at incipient motion condition for all the bags are similar and in average Mob=1.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
57
==PAGE:66==
The comparison between the two mobility diagrams of current only case (smooth bed shown
in Figure 5.17 and rough bed depicted in Figure 5.19) highlights that for the same Re numbers,
the mobility numbers in the case of rough bed are higher than the ones estimated in smooth bed
condition. This is explained by the fact the rock bags placed in a rough bed begin to move later
than in the smooth bed scenario.
Figure 5.18: Overturning effect in current only scenario, rough bed.
1000
2000
3000
4000
10-1
100
Figure 5.19: Mob vs Re, current only case, rough bed.
5.2.5
Equation of the incipient motion condition
The mobility diagrams for regular waves and steady current scenarios are then combined in
order to get two different graphs, for both smooth and rough bed conditions, as the sketches in
Appendix section D.3 shows, in which KC = ∞for the case of current only, and thereby such
combinations have a constant Mob detailed in the same appendix.
58
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:67==
0
20
40
60
80
100
10-2
10-1
100
Mob=0.55
Lab data
Estimated equation
Threshold KC=
Figure 5.20: Sketch of mobility diagram, smooth bed.
0
20
40
60
80
100
10-1
100
Mob=1
Lab data
Estimated equation
Threshold KC=
Figure 5.21: Sketch of mobility diagram, rough bed.
The best fit for the incipient motion condition explained in section D.3 is found. For the smooth
bed case, such equation from KC = 1 until KC = 10 is presented in Equation 5.1. If this equation
is projected, it intercepts the constant value of Mob = 0.55 (from current only case, KC = ∞),
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
59
==PAGE:68==
at KC = 12.29, as depicted in Figure 5.20.
y = 0.0483 exp(0.1979KC)
(5.1)
Similarly, the rough bed scenario is evaluated and the equation of the best fit from KC = 2
until KC = 12 is shown in Equation 5.2. Hence, it intercepts the constant value of Mob = 1
(from current only case, KC = ∞), at KC = 18.22, as illustrated in Figure 5.21.
y = 0.0888 exp(0.1329KC)
(5.2)
5.2.6
Application in a real-life project
The diagrams in Figures 5.20 and 5.21 can be applied in real life projects to determine if certain
rock bag proposed in the engineering design will protect or not a specific offshore structure from
scour phenomena. The scenario of the smooth bed can resemble a seabed made of sand, while the
rough case from this investigation can be considered similar to a rocky seabed.
The Preliminary Environmental Information Report: Annex 1 - Marine Processes Technical
Annex Energy (2017), from the Hornsea 3 Offshore wind farm project is analysed. As an example,
according to the extreme wave conditions shown in Figure 5.22, the significant wave height for 50
years of return period is Hs =7.2 m and the zero crossing period is Tz =9.8 s.
Figure 5.22: Extreme wave conditions in Hornsea 3 Offshore Wind Farm, table B.1 Energy (2017).
Also, the minimum water depth in that project is h =26.6 m. Therefore, the near bed orbital
velocity is calculated using the following equation, and the estimation is Um =1.08 m/s.
Um = Hs
2
√
2
√g
h exp
(
−
(3.65
Tz
√
h
g
)2.1)
(5.3)
Then, applying the Equation 2.28, and considering a filter unit of 4ton from LTD (2014) de-
picted in Figure 5.23, the mobility number is found to be Mob =2.95 × 10−5 and KC =4.41.
Figure 5.23: Characteristics of the filter units from LTD (2014).
60
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:69==
Finally, considering the seabed of the Hornsea 3 offshore Wind Farm as smooth bed, the Mob
and KC of the 4 ton filter unit is inserted in the smooth bed mobility diagram, Figure 5.20, and
shown in Figure 5.24. Where, it can be seen the 4 ton filter unit is really far from the incipient
motion condition, and that means it is stable for the given metocean conditions.
0
20
40
60
80
100
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Incipient motion
Filter unit 4ton, Hs=7.2m, Tz=9.8s
Figure 5.24: 4 ton filter unit from LTD (2014) inserted in a smooth bed mobility diagram.
5.3
Velocity profile analysis - Steady current
The aim of this section is to present the result from velocity profile analysis and to give an
estimation of the distribution of the velocity in the case of the stationary flow.
This analysis was carried out by the use of a propeller, from which the velocity at different heights
(from the bottom to the top) is obtained (propeller description in subsection 3.4.1). The tables
illustrating the tested parameters (distances from the bottom, discharges, time) and the resulting
velocities at each point, for both smooth and rough bed are shown in subsection B.3.3.
The velocity profiles (and as a consequence the boundary layers) are estimated for both smooth
and rough bed conditions. The water regime in which the experiments are carried out is found to
be turbulent from the dimensionless Reynolds number for a wide open channel, from Equation 2.3.
In fact, applying this equation leads to Re = 71710 for the rough bed case, and Re = 70513 for
the smooth bed case, which, according to the critical Reynolds number definition (Re = 4000,
illustrated in section 2.4) are very large, which leads to the conclusion that the flow regime is tur-
bulent.
In this analysis test 2 (Q = 110 l/s) from the velocity profile test measurements (illustrated
in Table B.12 and Table B.17 respectively for smooth and rough bed) is chosen because at flow
rates lower than 110 l/s, the propeller did not show entirely reliable results, especially regarding the
speed of the flow, as can be observed in the results reported in test 1 for Q = 80 l/s ( in Table B.16
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
61
==PAGE:70==
and Table B.11) 2.
However, the analysis is carried out for the bags shown in Table 3.4, and the values of veloci-
ties at the half of the height of the bags, which is the stagnation point (for detailed explanation see
subsection 3.6.2) are found for a flow rate Q = 110 l/s.
5.3.1
Smooth bed
The procedure adopted for the smooth bed case is illustrated theoretically in subsection 2.4.1.
In this case, the viscous boundary sub-layer thickness δv = 3.008x10−4 m is calculated, according
to Equation 2.43 and illustrated in Figure 5.25. The estimated value is very small, which means
that the stagnation point considered at the half of the height of the rock bag (according to subsec-
tion 3.6.2) in the case of the ND03 bag is at hs/2 = 1.1 cm, which is already inside the logarithmic
layer and outside the viscous sub-layer.
The total boundary layer thickness is calculated applying the relation Equation 2.38, δ = 0.24
m (approximately half of the water depth, h = 0.50 m), and its position is illustrated in Figure 5.26.
Therefore, the friction velocity is estimated applying Equation 2.45 thereby finding the best
fit of this equation and the velocity profile measured in the laboratory. The obtained value is
Uf=0.02 m/s.
The best fit and the resulting profiles are illustrated in Figures 5.27, 5.28 and 5.29.
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
velocity [m/s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
y [m]
10-4
velocity profile
viscous sub-layer
Figure 5.25: Viscous sublayer thickness (red line)
2In the case of test 1, for Q = 80 l/s, see the difference between the speed recorded on the surface and the speed
recorded by the propeller at point 11, the closest to the surface
62
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:71==
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
velocity [m/s]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
y [m]
velocity profile
Boundary layer thickness
Figure 5.26: Estimated boundary layer thickness (red line)
Figures 5.27 and 5.28 illustrate the development of the velocity profile in proximity of rock
bag ND03, from the bottom of the flume to the water surface in linear and semi-logarithmic scales
respectively. Figure 5.29 shows a close up view of Figure 5.27, and in this case it is possible to
see how the two lines reach almost the same value of the speed in point 1 ( y = 0.015 cm).
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 5.27: Linear scale plot.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
63
==PAGE:72==
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
10-3
10-2
10-1
Figure 5.28: Semi-logarithmic scale plot.
The black points represent the values of y (distance from the bottom) at which the velocity is
measured experimentally using the propeller; while, the blue points represent the empirical solution
obtained by plotting the velocity of the flow for some hypothetical values of y and Uf =0.02 m/s,
(from 0 to 0.025 m) and by applying to all these points the logarithmic law in Equation 2.45, which
takes into account the presence of the viscous sub-layer.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Figure 5.29: Close up view of the linear scale plot.
As a general conclusion, the velocity profiles (blue and black dots) look quite similar. There-
fore, considering the accuracy of the propeller and the current generator the results obtained through
64
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:73==
the experiments are reasonable. The value of the velocities at the half of the height of the stone
bags v1 (i.e. stagnation point) for the case of smooth bed are depicted in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Velocities at the streamline of the stagnation point position for smooth bed scenario.
Bag
v1 [m/s]
LD03
0.281
MD03
0.277
MD06
0.283
ND03
0.271
Table 5.5: Comparison of the friction velocity Uf from theoretical and and practical formulations,
smooth bed.
Theoretical formulation
Velocity profile
Test
Type of bag
Q [l/s]
V [m/s]
Uf [m/s]
Q [l/s]
V [m/s]
Uf [m/s]
13
LD
105
0.35
0.016
110
0.40
0.020
2
LDbig
105
0.36
0.017
3
MD
116
0.40
0.019
3
MDnew
112
0.37
0.018
2
ND
111
0.38
0.018
Table 5.5 shows the comparison of the friction velocities Uf, obtained using different test bags
and similar discharges, applying the theoretical formulation depicted in Equation 2.6, and the one
estimated from the best fit of the velocity profile using Equation 2.45. The difference is clearly
really small, and both values of velocities are quite similar.
5.3.2
Rough bed
The procedure to estimate the velocity profile for the rough bed is very similar to the smooth
bed. The main difference is that in this case the viscous sub-layer is neglected, due to the pres-
ence of the roughness element, as explained in chapter 2. Therefore, the turbulent boundary layer
thickness is calculated according to Equation 2.38, δ = 0.5404 m, while the the friction velocity
is Uf = 0.0301 m/s through Equation 2.6, as illustrated in subsection 2.4.1.
The boundary layer thickness is firstly plotted against the resulting velocity profile illustrated
in Figure 5.30, which shows the comparison between the boundary layer thickness (red straight
line) and the actual velocity profile (blue line). In this case, δ = 0.5404, while the actual water
depth is equal to approximately 0.47 m which takes into account the 0.03 m layer of rocks (for a
total value of 0.50 m), this means that all the flow is located within the boundary layer.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
65
==PAGE:74==
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
velocity [m/s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
y [m]
velocity profile
Turbulent Boundary Layer thickness
Figure 5.30: Turbulent boundary layer thickness compared to the velocity profile, in the case of
rough bed.
Then, the velocity profile is calculated through the velocity values resulting from the experi-
ments using a propeller, for a distance from the wall y between 0.015 m and 0.47 m, as illustrated
in Table B.17. The resulting distribution of velocities along the water depth is compared to the
estimated best fit from Equation 2.35, and illustrated in Figures 5.31, 5.32 and 5.33.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Figure 5.31: Linear scale plot.
From Figure 5.31, Figure 5.32 and Figure 5.33, the blue points represents the velocity profile
66
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:75==
considering the best fit for the Equation 2.35, while the black points, the actual velocity profile
measured experimentally. As explained in the previous case, Figures 5.31 and 5.32 illustrate the
development of the velocity profile in proximity of rock bag ND03, from the bottom of the flume
to the water surface, respectively in linear and semi-logarithmic scales.
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
10-3
10-2
10-1
Figure 5.32: Semi-logarithmic scale plot.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Figure 5.33: Close up view of the linear scale plot.
Figure 5.33 is a close up view of Figure 5.31 and it shows that the two lines reach almost the
same value of the speed, in proximity of points 1 ( y = 1.5 cm) and 2 ( y = 2.5 cm). Therefore,
taking into account the margin of error given by the results obtained through the use of the propeller,
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
67
==PAGE:76==
the velocity profiles appear very similar, for this reason the experimental results are reasonable.
The values of the velocity v1 at the half of the height of the stone bags are presented in Table 5.6.
Table 5.6: Velocities at the streamline of the stagnation point position for rough bed scenario.
Bag
Velocity v1 [m/s]
LD03
0.248
MD03
0.243
MD06
0.250
ND03
0.233
Table 5.7: Comparison of the friction velocity Uf from theoretical and and practical formulations,
rough bed.
Theoretical formulation
Velocity profile
Test
Type of bag
Q [l/s]
V [m/s]
Uf [m/s]
Q
V [m/s]
Uf [m/s]
3
LD
108
0.42
0.033
110
0.43
0.029
10
LD
112
0.45
0.034
8
LDbig
110
0.38
0.029
8
MD
113
0.39
0.030
7
MDnew
109
0.38
0.029
9
ND
110
0.39
0.030
Table 5.7 shows the comparison of the friction velocities Uf, obtained using different test bags
and similar discharges, applying the theoretical formulation depicted in Equation 2.6, and the one
estimated from the best fit of the velocity profile using Equation 2.35. It is clear that the difference
is really small, and both values of velocities are enough similar.
5.4
Forces Analysis
In both cases of steady current and regular waves the forces are divided in in-line forces (along
the x-axis) and stabilizing forces (cross flow, y-axis), as exposed in section 2.5. The purpose of
the force analysis is to understand how the forces generated by the flow affecting the rock bags
varies depending on the forces coefficients, which are unknowns. The cases of steady current and
regular waves as well as smooth and rough bed, are independently investigated within the current
section. Therefore, the correct combination of coefficients which reflect the behavior of the bags
(rocking, moving, not moving) are found through an estimation analysis.
5.4.1
Oscillatory flow - Regular waves
The in-line (drag and inertia) and stabilizing (friction, lift, buoyancy and submerged weight)
forces are calculated according to the relations explained in subsection 2.5.2. Therefore, in order to
understand how these forces cause the moving/not moving/rocking behavior of the different bags,
the following conditions are selected: two different tests conditions, test 23 for smooth bed and test
15 for rough bed (see the specifications in Table B.3 and Table B.4 respectively) are considered
for three different rock bags ND03, LD03, MD03 (see characteristics in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2).
These two tests are considered because the three rock bags show different conditions, in fact LD03
is moving, MD03 is rocking and ND03 is not moving.
The main difference between the smooth and rough bed is associated to the friction coefficient
between the bed of the flume and the rock bags which has a directly proportional relation with the
stabilizing forces.
68
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:77==
Smooth bed
In the case of the smooth bed the friction coefficients are only function of the glass surface
(bed of the flume) in contact with the rock bag, which varies depending on the condition of the bag
(moving , not moving, rocking). In fact, when the bag is moving, the kinetic friction coefficient µk
is used, because as a general definition, when an object is set to move the kinetic friction force is
the stabilizing force which resists to the motion caused by the in-line forces. While, in the rocking
or not moving conditions, the static friction coefficient µs, is considered since the static friction
force is the stabilizing force which resists the motion (threshold of the motion), and it is bigger or
equal to the in-line forces which affect the rock bag.
Figure 5.34: Graphs used to estimate the Force coefficients from B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)
Regarding the forces coefficients, the KC numbers for each rock bag under analysis is consid-
ered and the forces coefficients are estimated according to Figure 5.34. In this figure, the forces
coefficients are defined as functions of the KC number and the dimensionless roughness of the
rock bags surface: k/D, where k is the characteristic roughness of the particles equal to d50, and
D is the diameter of the rock bags. The results are depicted in Table 5.8 and for deeper explanation
review appendix section D.4.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
69
==PAGE:78==
The resulting coefficient and the respective KC numbers are illustrated in Table 5.9. The lat-
ter illustrates also the values of the maximum orbital velocity of the flow Um (estimated through
Equation 2.22), the acceleration of the flow dUm/dt (estimated by the derivation in time of Equa-
tion 2.22), the estimated total volume and the frontal area of the rock bags (estimated through
Equations 2.61 and 2.52).
Since all the values of KC are quite similar to each other and all included in the range between
0 and 10, the red line in Figure 5.34 gives an approximate representation of the position of the
forces coefficients within the graphs for all the selected rock bags.
With respect to the lift and inertia coefficients, they can be approximated to the same values
for all the stone bags, since the curves representing the different surface roughness are overlapping
each other. However, since the value of the dimensionless surface roughness varies depending
on the material of the rock bag, as well as their diameter, in some cases, the drag coefficients
will varies as well, as illustrated in Table 5.9. When the object surface is rough, the roughness
will affect various aspects of the flow, because it increases the object diameter and its projected
area. Regarding the drag coefficient CD, it will increase with increasing roughness (B. Mutlu
Sumer (2006)).
Table 5.8: Estimated surface roughness of the materials k = d50 and surface roughness ratio k/D.
Bag
k
k/D
LD03
0.002
0.025
MD03/06
0.0025
0.033
ND03
0.005
0.0714
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
0
0.2
0.4
FD,FL
FD
FL
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.2
0
0.2
Fi
Fi
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Fstab,Fin
Fstab
Fin
Figure 5.35: Time series of the forces estimated for LD03, in test 23 conditions.
70
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:79==
Table 5.9: Estimated KC number, maximum flow velocity, maximum acceleration, force coeffi-
cients, total volume and frontal area of the rock bags
Bag
Um (m/s)
dUm/dt (m/s2)
KC
CM
CL
CD
Vs (m3)
As,front (m2)
Condition
LD03
0.2020
0.5656
5.704
3.2
4.5
1.19
9.05e(-5)
0.0017
Moving
MD03
0.2016
0.5655
6.08
3.2
4.5
1.70
7.36e(-5)
0.0015
Rocking
ND03
0.2055
0.577
6.65
3.2
4.5
2.2
5.64e(-5)
0.0012
Not moving
The first case under analysis is LD03, which in the case of test 23, is moving under the effect
of the flow. As rough estimation the kinetic friction coefficient considered is equal to µk = 0.4.
Therefore, the in-line and the stabilizing forces are calculated according to Equations 2.55 and 2.62,
while the drag, the inertia and the lift forces respectively are calculated from Equations 2.56, 2.58
and 2.53. The resulting values are plotted against each other as illustrated in Figure 5.35.
From this analysis the first relevant information is the regime of the flow. Since the value of
KC is below 20 the flow regime is inertia dominated 3. This theory is also confirmed looking at
the first two plots in Figure 5.35, which illustrate a comparison between the lift and drag forces and
the inertia force respectively. Furthermore, the resulting maximum values of the forces illustrated
in Table 5.10 show that the inertia force is almost three times bigger than the drag force.
The second important result is given by the third plot in Figure 5.35 (from the top), which
illustrates how the in-line force is bigger than the stabilizing force confirming that the bag is moving
and therefore, as a general conclusion, the force coefficients estimated are considered reasonable.
The same analysis is carried for both ND03 and MD03. In this cases, the rock bags are not
moving and rocking respectively, which means that the static friction coefficient used for calcu-
lating the stabilizing forces, is again roughly estimated to be µs = 0.5. The resulting forces are
illustrated graphically in Figure 5.36 and Figure 5.37, and their maximum values in Table 5.10.
About Figure 5.36, from the third plot (from the top), it is clear that the stabilizing force (red
line) is very big compared to the in-line force (blue line). This is also confirmed by the maximum
values of those forces illustrated in Table 5.10.
3The inertia dominated regime occurs for 0 < KC << 20 −30, otherwise, for KC > 30 −20 the flow regime is
drag dominated B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
71
==PAGE:80==
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t
0
0.2
0.4
FD,FL
FD
FL
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t
-0.1
0
0.1
Fi
Fi
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Fstab,Fin
Fstab
Fin
Figure 5.36: Time series of the forces estimated for ND03, in test 23 conditions
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
0
0.2
0.4
FD,FL
FD
FL
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.1
0
0.1
Fi
Fi
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
0
0.1
0.2
Fstab,Fin
Fstab
Fin
Figure 5.37: Time series of the forces estimated for MD03, in test 23 conditions
72
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:81==
The third plot (from the top) in Figure 5.37 shows exactly what is defined as rocking phe-
nomenon. In fact, two situations occur alternately: when the stabilizing force (red line) is higher
than the in-line force, the bag is stable and does not oscillate; while, the second case occurs when
the stabilizing force is almost equal to the in-line force (they almost overlap each other), which
means that MD03 is unstable and oscillates without moving from its current position.
Moreover, in both cases, the flow regime is (again) clearly inertia dominated since the inertia force
is approximately two times larger than the drag force, as illustrated in Table 5.10, and KC = 6.65
for ND03 and KC = 6.08 for MD03.
Table 5.10: Parameters resulting from the force analysis carried out in the case of regular waves.
Bag
FD,max (N)
FM,max (N)
FL,max (N)
Bmax (N)
Wmax (N)
Fst,max (N)
Fin,max (N)
LD03
0.0411
0.1638
0.4601
0.5148
0.8407
0.1304
0.1638
MD03
0.0509
0.1332
0.4039
0.0356
0.8407
0.1600
0.1332
ND03
0.0408
0.1042
0.3655
0.0562
0.8407
0.2487
0.1048
Rough bed
Exactly the same procedure as far the smooth bed is applied in the case of rough bed, with the
difference that the friction coefficients are now functions of the interaction between the rough bed
(3 cm layer of ND rocks) and the rock bags.
Figure 5.38: Graphs used to estimate the Force coefficients from Fredsøe (2008).
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
73
==PAGE:82==
In the case of LD03 the kinetic friction coefficient considered for the force analysis is µk = 0.5,
because the bag is moving. While, in the cases of MD03 (rocking) and ND03 (moving) the static
friction coefficient µs = 0.6 is applied.
The KC numbers estimated for each rock bag under analysis are higher compared to the values
estimated in the smooth bed case. This is due to the high friction forces generated by the rough bed,
in fact the moving condition of the bag occurs for greater Um. The forces coefficient are estimated
according to Figure 5.38, in which the red line give an approximate position of the values of the
KC numbers (illustrated in Table 5.11). Therefore, since KC << 20 the flow regime is again
inertia dominated.
Table 5.11: Estimated KC number, maximum flow velocity, maximum acceleration, force coeffi-
cients, total volume and frontal area of the rock bags
Bag
KC
CM
CL
CD
Vs (m3)
As,front (m2)
Um (m/s)
dUm/dt (m/s2)
Condition
LD03
7.36
3.1
4.3
1.2
9.05e(-5)
0.0017
0.2711
0.8539
Moving
MD03
7.32
3.1
4.3
1.2
7.36e(-5)
0.0015
0.2732
0.8603
Rocking
ND03
7.36
3.1
4.3
2.59
5.64e(-5)
0.0012
0.2573
0.8083
Not moving
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
0
0.5
1
FD,FL
FD
FL
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.2
0
0.2
Fi
Fi
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.2
0
0.2
Fstab,Fin
Fstab
Fin
Figure 5.39: Time series of the forces estimated for LD03, in test 15 conditions
74
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:83==
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
FD,FL
FD
FL
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.2
0
0.2
Fi
Fi
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t
-0.2
0
0.2
Fstab,Fin
Fstab
Fin
Figure 5.40: Time series of the forces estimated for MD03, in test 15 conditions
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t
0
0.2
0.4
FD,FL
FD
FL
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t
-0.2
0
0.2
Fi
Fi
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t
0
0.1
0.2
Fstab,Fin
Fstab
Fin
Figure 5.41: Time series of the forces estimated for ND03, in test 15 conditions
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
75
==PAGE:84==
The time series of the forces estimated during the implementation of this analysis are illustrated
in Figures 5.39, 5.40 and 5.41. These figures demonstrate that the results obtained through the
experimental test (in this case test 15) can also be empirically verified through an analysis of the
forces and the estimation of the forces coefficients. In fact, for example Figure 5.39 shows how
the in-line force are higher than the stabilizing force, which perfectly reflect the condition of the
bag which is moving. This is also confirmed by the maximum values of the forces extrapolated
from the time series and illustrated in Table 5.12.
The same considerations can be done in the cases of MD03 and ND03, which are rocking and not
moving respectively, as Table 5.12 shows.
Table 5.12: Parameters resulting from the force analysis carried in the case of regular waves.
Bag
FD,max (N)
FM,max (N)
FL,max (N)
Bmax (N)
Wmax (N)
Fstab,max (N)
Finline,max (N)
LD03
0.0664
0.2346
0.794
0.5148
0.8407
0.1629
0.2346
MD03
0.0637
0.1918
0.7088
0.4406
0.8407
0.2401
0.1918
ND03
0.1021
0.1404
0.5477
0.3433
0.8407
0.2984
0.1493
5.4.2
Stationary flow - Steady current
In this section the forces generated by the stationary flow are analysed. As illustrated in chap-
ter 2, subsection 2.5.1, the flow around the rock bags generates a resultant force called mean drag
FD (x direction) calculated from Equation 2.51, which is the result of the contribution of the pres-
sure (form or pressure drag, see Equation 2.49) and the friction (friction drag, see Equation 2.50),
which affect the surface of the rock bag. On the other hand, the stabilizing force is generated by
the friction force generated by the combination of the submerged weight of the bag, the buoyancy
and the mean lift force FL (y direction) estimated from Equation 2.53.
Table 5.13: Estimated surface roughness of the materials ks = 2.5d50 and surface roughness ratio
ks/D, current only case.
Bag
ks
ks/D
LD03
0.002
0.005
MD03/06
0.0025
0.006
ND03
0.005
0.013
The speed of the flow considered in the calculation of the forces is the velocity at the center of
the rock bag calculated from the velocity profile (see Tables 5.4 and 5.6).
However, the forces coefficients are unknown, and for this reason the following graphs are taken
into account to roughly estimate them, as best approximation.
76
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.42: Drag coefficients for a cylinder near a plane wall. B. Mutlu Sumer (2006)
Figure 5.43: Lift force coefficient on a cylinder sitting on a wall. (B. Mutlu Sumer (2006))
Figure 5.42 shows the mean drag as function of the Reynolds number and the effect of surface
roughness of the rock bag shown in Table 5.13 (the drag coefficient increase with the increasing
roughness). The latter is defined as ks/D (ratio between the roughness of the material and the
diameter of the object) for the different rock bags under analysis, as illustrated in Table 5.8. Since
all the values are quite similar to ks/D = 3e(4) highlighted in Figure 5.42, the corresponding drag
coefficients are found between the range covered by this curve.
Figure 5.43 shows the mean lift coefficients for a cylinder placed in proximity of a wall, as
function of different Re number and of the gap ratio e/D (distance from the bottom). In this
analysis, the gap ratio is always zero, since the bags are sitting on the bottom of the flume, this
means that the lift coefficient is guessed as function of the Re, which for all the tests is of the order
of 104 in both the case of smooth and rough bed.
The parameters selected for this analysis are illustrated in Table 5.14 and Table 5.16.
Also in this case the main difference between the conditions of smooth and rough bed is correlated
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
77
==PAGE:86==
to the friction coefficient, between the bed of the flume and the rock bags.
Smooth bed
Regarding the smooth bed case, the bags taken into account are LD03, MD03 and ND03, and
for each of them different test cases are considered depending on the condition of the bag: mov-
ing, rocking and not moving (see Table 5.14). Moreover, for each rock bag, the safety factor
SF = Fstab/FD is calculated according to Equation 2.64, illustrated in section 3.6, about the fail-
ure modes.
Hence, when SF ≈1 it means that the rock bag is rocking (equilibrium condition); however, if
SF > 1 the rock bag is not moving, otherwise, if SF < 1 the rock bag is moving.
Since LD03 is moving, the kinematic friction coefficient is considered for the case of smooth
bed µk = 0.4; while, for MD03 and ND03 the static friction coefficient µs = 0.5 is considered,
because the bags are not changing theirs positions along the plate.
Table 5.14: Tests conditions (from Tables B.6, B.8 and B.10) and forces coefficients applied in the
case of steady current
Bag
Test name
Q (l/s)
Re
CD
CL
LD03
Test 13
104
6.50e(4)
1.15
1.56
MD03
Test 4
120
7.69e(4)
1.19
1.56
ND03
Test 2
111
7.05e(4)
1.20
1.56
Table 5.14 shows that the drag coefficient increase with the increasing roughness of the rock
bag, while the lift coefficient remains constant. The resulting values of the mean drag force and
the stabilizing forces are illustrated in Table 5.15.
Table 5.15: Forces analysis results, oscillatory flow conditions
Bag
FD (N)
FL (N)
B (N)
W (N)
Fstab (N)
SF
Condition
LD03
0.077
0.307
0.515
0.841
0.0074
0.09
moving
MD03
0.067
0.264
0.441
0.841
0.068
1.01
Rocking
ND03
0.053
0.219
0.343
0.841
0.139
2.63
Not moving
From the analysis of the forces affecting LD03, the the safety factor is very small due to the
stabilizing force being low compared to the drag force, which means that the bag is moving. On
the other hand, the analysis carried for ND03 confirmed that the design rock bag is not moving
under the effect of the steady current, because the stabilizing force is very large compared to the
drag force and therefore the safety factor is bigger than 1.
The force analysis carried out for MD03 highlights that the bag is not changing its position
(rocking), hence the equilibrium conditions FD = Fstab is verified and its safety factor is equal to
1.
Therefore, the assumptions made for the forces coefficients led this analysis to the conclusion that
the conditions of the bags observed during the experiments can be confirmed by calculating the
forces affecting them.
Rough bed
Considering now the case of the rough bed, the rock bags under analysis are in this case LD03,
MD06 and ND03 and the condition analysed are the same as in the case of the smooth bed: moving,
rocking and not moving. The force analysis is conducted in the same way as before, the main
difference is the friction coefficients between the rock bags and the 3 cm layer of ND rock placed
78
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:87==
in the bottom of the flume, which increment the roughness between the rock bags and the bed. In
fact, in this case the kinematic friction coefficient for LD03 is assumed slightly higher µk = 0.5,
compared to the smooth bed condition, as well as the static friction coefficient for MD06 and ND03,
µs = 0.6. The forces coefficients assumed and the test condition are illustrated in Table 5.16.
Table 5.16: Tests conditions (from Tables B.6, B.8 and B.10), and forces coefficients applied in
the case of steady current
Bag
Test name
Q (l/s)
Re
CD
CL
LD03
Test 11
122
7.72e(4)
1.15
2
MD06
Test 3
123
8.425e(4)
1.19
2
ND03
Test 9
110
7.09e(4)
1.20
2
Also in this case the effect of the roughness influence the drag coefficients, while the lift co-
efficients are all the same, but higher than in the smooth bed case, due to the effect of the bottom.
The resulting forces are illustrated in Table 5.17.
Table 5.17: Forces analysis results, stationary flow conditions
Bag
FD (N)
FL (N)
B (N)
W (N)
Fstab (N)
SF
Condition
LD03
0.0610
0.314
0.515
0.841
0.005
0.09
Moving
MD06
0.0593
0.258
0.476
0.841
0.064
1.07
Rocking
ND03
0.0384
0.204
0.343
0.841
0.176
4.59
Not moving
Therefore, Table 5.17 shows that LD03 is moving since the stabilizing force is smaller than
the drag force and SF is smaller than 1. On the other hand, ND03 is not moving, because the
stabilizing force is clearly bigger than the drag force and SF is bigger than 1. Lastly, MD06 is in
equilibrium condition, since the stabilizing force and the drag force are very similar to each other,
and also the resulting SF can be approximated to 1.
The forces analysis highlights again that the calculation of the forces and the assumptions made
regarding the forces coefficients reflect the experimental results, which therefore are confirmed to
be reliable.
5.5
Hydraulic failure analysis
The purpose of the hydraulic failure analysis is to deeply investigate the reason why the rock
bags are moving/rocking. In fact, the ”hydraulic failure” is due to the forces generated by the in-
teraction between the rock bag and the flow, specifically, this phenomenon occurs when the safe
conditions of the object are compromised, therefore the bag loses its stability and begins to move.
Within this section the results from the hydraulic failure analysis are illustrated, hence the
relations described in sections 2.6 and 3.6 are applied.
5.5.1
Current only
When a steady current is applied, the forces occurring are the drag (in-line) force, parallel to
the flow, and the stabilizing forces, perpendicular to the flow. The stabilizing force is also function
of two more forces, the uplift force on the fore side of the rock bag, and the wake force, on the
rare side of the latter, calculated according to Equations 3.7 and ??. Therefore, for the sake of this
analysis, the same test cases considered in the previous section 5.4 for the force analysis (for the
smooth and rough bed conditions) are considered.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
79
==PAGE:88==
Smooth bed
In the case of the smooth bed, the hydraulic failure mode consisted in the sliding phenomenon
of the rock bag along the bed of the flume. The test conditions considered are again test 13, test 4
and test 2, respectively for bags LD03, MD03 and ND03. Therefore, the magnitude of the forces
affecting these rock bags calculated. The resulting values are presented in Table 5.18.
Table 5.18: Hydraulic failure results, current only condition in a smooth bed
Bag
FD (N)
FL (N)
FU (N)
FW (N)
Fstab−hydr (N)
SF
Condition
LD03
0.077
0.307
0.097
0.0004
-0.031
-0.41
moving-sliding
MD03
0.067
0.264
0.081
0.0008
0.0587
0.87
Rocking-about to slide
ND03
0.053
0.219
0.0695
0.0003
0.1047
1.98
Not moving
As illustrated in this table, the magnitude of the forces analytically calculated agree with the
expected conditions conditions of the rock bags observed during the experiments campaigns. In
fact, considering for example LD03, this rock bag is clearly moving. This behavior was observed
experimentally and it is confirmed by the safety factor SF = −0.41 < 1, and the difference
between the magnitudes of the drag (in-line) force and of the stabilizing force: FD > Fstab−hydr.
This means that the rock bag is completely unstable and it is moving under the effect of the steady
current.
Rough bed
In rough bed conditions, the hydraulic failure mode observed is the overturning phenomenon,
caused by the momentum generated by the forces affecting the rock bags.
The test considered are again test 11, test 9 and test 9, respectively for bags LD03, MD06 and
ND03. The magnitude of the momentum forces affecting these rock bags are calculated through
Equations 3.10, 3.12, 3.11 3.16 and 3.20. The results are presented in Tables 5.19 and 5.20.
Table 5.19: Hydraulic failure results, current only condition in a rough bed
Bag
MFD (Nm)
MFL (Nm)
MWs (Nm)
MFU (Nm)
MFW (Nm)
LD03
0.0008
0.0118
0.0122
0.0023
0.00001
MD06
0.0007
0.0077
0.0126
0.0018
0.000006
ND03
0.0004
0.0067
0.0164
0.0014
0.000005
Table 5.20: Hydraulic failure results, current only condition in a rough bed
Bag
MWs (Nm)
Min (Nm)
SF
Condition
LD03
0.0122
0.0149
0.82
Moving-overturning
MD06
0.0126
0.0103
1.23
Rocking
ND03
0.0164
0.0085
1.92
Not moving
Also in this case, the experimental results observed during the several campaigns are confirmed
through this analysis. For example, LD03 is seen moving-overturning during the experiments and,
as presented in Table 5.20, the same is observed through this analysis, since the safety factor is
below 1: SF = 0.82.
80
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:89==
5.5.2
Montecarlo Simulation
From Table 5.20 it can be seen that the safety factor SF for the condition of rocking is slightly
above 1. Thus, the parameters involved in the calculation of the latter are analysed in order to detect
which variable has more probability of different outcomes. The outcome of this analysis shows
that the velocity at the half height of the bag v1 (estimated from the velocity profiles measurements)
is one of the variables which affected most the safety factor. the reason is that in Equations 2.53,
2.51, 3.7, and 3.9, this variable is squared and this represents an impact of 20% higher in-line forces
acting on the rock bag.
Therefore, the probability of failure (i.e. overturning) of the rock bag in terms of safety factor
SF is investigated applying MonteCarlo simulation, which is a level 3 of reliability method. Based
on Equation 2.65, the safety factor SF is written as function of v1 parameter and depicted in
Equations 5.4 and 5.5.
SF =
MWs
MFinline + MFL + MFU + MFW
(5.4)
SF =
MWs
aFLCLv2
1
1
2ρAt + aFDCDv2
1
1
2ρAf + aFU 1
2
1
2ρv2
1Ac + aFW 1
2
1
2
1
2ρv2
1Ac
(5.5)
It is assumed that the parameters v1 follow the normal distribution and their standard deviations
are presented in Table 5.21.
Parameter
Distribution
Standard deviation (%)
Momentum from the weight MWs
None
-
Momentum lift force MFL
Normal
5, 10, 20
Momentum drag force MFD
Normal
5, 10, 20
Momentum uplift force MFU
Normal
5, 10, 20
Momentum force in the wake MFW
Normal
5, 10, 20
Table 5.21: Distribution and standard deviation of the parameters.
A sensitivity analysis is made for 6 distinct simulated points n, taking into account 3 different
standard deviations on the velocity at the half height of the rock bag v1. The results in the Figure
5.44 highlight that for high value of the simulated points the curve of probability of exceeding
versus safety factor SF appears more accurate and smooth. Also, higher standard deviation, ends
up in higher probability of exceeding.
From Figure 5.44, the chosen value of simulated points is n = 10000. Therefore, the Monte
Carlo simulation is plotted and shown in Figure 5.45, which represents the probability of exceeding
as function of the safety factor SF.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
81
==PAGE:90==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(a) Comparison of the n points for 5% standard deviation.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(b) Comparison of the n points for 10% standard deviation.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(c) Comparison of the n points for 20% standard deviation.
Figure 5.44: Sensitivity analysis for standard deviation of 5%, 10% and 20%
.
82
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:91==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Standard deviation 5%
Standard deviation 10%
Standard deviation 20%
Figure 5.45: Monte Carlo simulation for n = 10000 and 3 different standard deviations on the v1.
Table 5.22: Probability exceeding for different damage factor and standard deviation.
Safety factor, SF
Std=5%
Std=10%
Std=20%
Condition
0.75
0.99
0.94
0.79
Not moving
1
0.94
0.48
0.51
Rocking
1.25
0.01
0.13
0.30
Moving
1.5
0
0.03
0.18
Moving
Finally, the probability of exceeding for safety factors of SF = 0.75, 1, 1.25 and 1.5 are found
from the plots depicted in Figure 5.46 and presented in Table 5.22.And from this table it is noticed
that an increment of the safety factor SF, means a reduction of the probability of exceeding. It can
be also observed that for SF = 1, the probability exceeding is found for all the cases lower than
1 which is the maximum acceptable exceeding probability and it determines the incipient motion
condition for the rock bags.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
83
==PAGE:92==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(a) 5% standard deviation on velocity v1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(b) 10% standard deviation on on velocity v1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(c) 20% standard deviation on on velocity v1.
Figure 5.46: Probability of exceeding for safety factor SF = 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5
.
84
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:93==
6
Conclusions
The quantitative analysis of internal pressure analysis shows the outer flow velocity is ex-
tremely large compared to the internal flow velocity running inside the rock bags. Which means
that during the experiments in the lab, the pores of the rock bags are filled with water, and they
become part of the rock bag. In conclusion, the water inside the voids and the particles (i.e. solid
material), work as whole. In other words, solids plus liquids either rock, move or not move. And
this result is supported by the qualitative dye tests executed in order to find a solid prove that, the
flow due to the action of both waves and current run over the rock bags and not through them.
According to the mobility diagrams, the roughness of the bed is directly proportional to the
stabilizing forces of the rock bags. Therefore, an increment in friction coefficient ends up in an
increment of the retaining forces. And as a result of a raise in the roughness of the bed, the rock
bags start moving later for the same metocean conditions for both waves and current only cases.
The estimation of the friction velocity using the grain size of the bed and applying the Colebrooke-
White equation for both rough and smooth bed scenarios in the case of current only, is very similar
to the one obtained from the measurements of the velocity profile. That means, the theoretical
formulation provides accurate results in terms of friction velocities for the tests performed in the
present investigation.
In conclusion, the force analysis highlighted that the conditions of the bags observed during
the experiments can be analytically evaluated and demonstrated. In fact, thanks to the hypotheses
considered, it was possible to calculate the forces which affect some of the rock bags, under the
effect of a certain mass of fluid for different metocean conditions.
In the presence of a regular waves, it is evident that the motion and/or static conditions of the
rock bags depend entirely on the forces acting on them, and how these forces in turn are affected
by the surface roughness of the filter units and from the KC number. Furthermore, this analysis
showed that in each case (smooth and rough bed) the fluid regime is inertia dominated.
Similarly, when a constant current is applied the equilibrium conditions of the rock bags are
entirely influenced by the effect of the forces generated by the current. In this case, these forces
acting on the rock bags no longer depend on the KC number but on the Reynolds number Re.
However, the dependence on the surface roughness of these rock bags remains, particularly re-
garding the estimation of drag force coefficients, and as a consequence of the drag force itself.
The hydraulic failure analysis support the outcomes of the forces analysis. Even thought in
this study two more forces are considered, uplift force and the force in the wake region of the rock
bag, the final results are approximately the same.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
85
==PAGE:94==
6.1
Future studies
• In order to get more precise results in the estimation of total volume (i.e. volume of grains
plus voids), frontal and top view area of the rock bags, an attempt of image analysis is
performed, which is well explained in the Appendix A. However, due to the lack of time,
this methodology did not succeed for the 15 models of rock bags. Therefore, a simple model
consisting in a geometrical evaluation of the dimensions of the stone bags, as shown in
Equation 2.52, Equation 2.54 and Equation 2.61, is utilized in the force analysis to calculate
the in-line and stabilizing forces. And it is recommended to do use image analysis or other
method to estimate with more accuracy the total volume, frontal and top view area of the
rock bags.
• Machine Learning tools can be utilised to improve the classification results of not moving,
rocking and moving. And the same method can be used to predict the incipient motion
condition for bigger KC numbers. An attempt of prediction is showed in section D.3, which
illustrates the correlation matrices of the attributes extrapolated through the analysis of the
experiments (for smooth and rough bed), in order to predict the critical mobility number.
• Experiments which considers bigger KC numbers and higher metocean conditions must be
conducted, in order to generate more results and fill the gap of the mobility diagrams.
• Due to lack of time, only regular waves and steady currents experiments were performed.
However, additional experiments with the combination of wave and currents can be per-
formed. As well as experiments with the implementation of irregular waves, in order to
obtain more information regarding the behavior of the rock bags.
• Moreover, further investigation can be carried out considering a group of filter units around
a monopile structure on a rough bed, in order to replicate a real case of scour protection.
• The forces analysis procedure applied in this thesis report is based on a theoretical study,
which means that the forces coefficients are estimated through a series of guess only based
on the results of the experiments. Therefore, a further investigation of the forces affecting
the rock bags can be carried experimentally with the implementation of a device placed in
proximity of the bed of the flume, which will measure the magnitude of the forces, and from
the detected parameters would be possible to calculate the corresponding forces coefficients.
In this way, the comparison between the theoretical study and the experiments would give
as a result more accurate (and realistic) values for these coefficients.
86
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
LTD, KYOWA CO. (2014). “What Is Filter Unit?” In: URL: https://www.kyowa-inc.co.jp/en/
feature.html#feature.
Freespan Correction - PRP Units (n.d.). URL: https://pipeshield.com/solutions/freespan-
correction-subsea-grouting-services/.
Spa, Officine Maccaferri (2022). Gabbioni. URL: https://www.maccaferri.com/it/prodotti/
gabbioni/.
Marine, Ridgeway (2017). “Kyowa’s filter unit, For Offshore Wind Farm, Oil Gas market, Japanese
Technology”. In: URL: https://rockbags.com/how-do-they-work//.
J. Fredsøe, R. Deigaard (1992). Mechanics of Coastal Sediment Transport. World Scientific.
Fredsøe, Jørgen (2008). Hydrodynamics. Danish Technical University.
Sumer, B Mutlu and David R Fuhrman (2020). Turbulence in Coastal and Civil Engineering.
WORLD SCIENTIFIC.
Méhauté, B. Le (2013). An Introduction to Hydrodynamics and Water Waves = ”Springer Science-
Business Media.
Niels G. Jacobsen David R. Fuhrman, Jørgen Fredsøe (2012). “A wave generation toolbox for
open-source CFD library: OpenFoam”. In.
B. Mutlu Sumer, Jørgen Fredsøe (2006). Hdrodynamics around cylindrical structures. World Sci-
entific.
Bjarne Jensen Niels Gjøl Jacobsen, Erik Damgaard Christensen (2013). “Coastal Engineering -
Investigations on the porous media equations and resistance coefficients for coastal structures”.
In: URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.coastaleng.2013.11.004.
Seung-Jae Lee Jun-Hyeok Lee, Jung-Chun Suh (2014). “Computation of Pressure Fields around a
Two-Dimensional Circular Cylinder Using the Vortex-In-Cell and Penalization Methods.” In.
Energy, Dong (2017). “Preliminary Environmental Information Report: Annex 1 - Marine Pro-
cesses Technical Annex”. In: URL: http://https://orstedcdn.azureedge.net/- /media/
www / docs / corp / uk / hornsea - project - three / how03peirvolume - 5 - annex - 11marine -
processes - technical - report . ashx ? la = en & rev = efb61cba9a8d4d77b9742ebbcbdab8cb &
hash=8188186242d2bcd3cd08ba04e9ca0234.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
87
==PAGE:96==
A
Appendix
A.1
Ursell dependency analysis
The purpose of the dimensional analysis is to find the dependency of in-line force Finline with
respect to the parameters shown in ??.
Finline = f(Um, T, H, h, D, L, ρ, ν)
(A.1)
where Um is the maximum near bed orbital velocity, T is the wave period, H is the wave height,
h is the water depth, D is diameter of the rock bag, L is the wave length, ρ is the water density,
and ν is the water kinematic viscosity. From Equation A.1, the number of variables are n = 9. The
chosen independent variables are m = 3, and they are time T, mass m and length L. Therefore,
each parameter is written in terms of those independent variables as depicted in Table A.1.
Table A.1: Parameters in terms of independent dimensions M, L and T.
Parameter
SI unit
Independent dimensions
Finline
kgm/s2
MLT −2
Um
m/s
LT−1
T
s
T
H
m
L
h
m
L
D
m
L
L
m
L
ρ
kg/m3
ML−3
ν
m2/s
L2T −1
Then, applying the Buckingham π theorem, the obtained number of non-dimensional π groups
is n −m = 6, and these are based on the 3 independent variables: time T, mass M and length L,
and illustrated in the following equations.
π1 = TUm/D
(A.2)
π2 = Finline
ρU 2mD2
(A.3)
π3 =
ν
UmD
(A.4)
π4 = h/D
(A.5)
π5 = L/D
(A.6)
π6 = H/D
(A.7)
88
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:97==
From the equations shown above, π1 represents the Keulegan-Carpenter number KC. π2 is
the non-dimensional in-line force. Then, pi3 is the reciprocal Reynolds number Re. After the
combination of π4, π5 and π6, it gives the Ursell parameter. And, the waves steepness H/L is found
from the merge of π5 and π6. So, the Equation A.1 now becomes a function of those parameters
as depicted in Equation A.8
Finline
ρU 2mD2 = f
(
KC, Re, Ur = HL2
h3 , H
L
)
(A.8)
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:99==
B
Appendix
B.1
Flumes sketches
Wave
generator
0.6 m
25 m
Absorption
system
Wave
direction
Wave
generator
0.8 m
25 m
Absorption
system
(ramp)
Wave
direction
TOP VIEW
SIDE VIEW
FLUME 1
Figure B.1: Sketch of flume 1.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
91
==PAGE:100==
Wave
generator
0.6 m
28 m
Absorption
system
Wave
direction
Wave
generator
0.8 m
28 m
Absorption
system
(ramp)
Wave
direction
TOP VIEW
SIDE VIEW
FLUME 3
Figure B.2: Sketch of flume 3.
92
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:101==
B.2
Calibration procedure
B.2.1
Waves
The values of the voltage utilized by the five wave gauges (WG1, WG2, WG3, WG4 and WG5)
are registered at two positions and constant water depth. The first position is called ”calibration
low” and after 2 min the signals from the gauges are recorded.
Then, the wave gauges are raised uniformly 0.05 m utilizing a 3D cube shown in Figure B.3,
and the signals from them are registered again and called ”calibration high”.
Figure B.3: 3D cube of 0.05 m used to raised the wave gauges.
The mean values of each wave gauge for the two calibrations (i.e. ”calibration low” and ”cal-
ibration high”) is calculated. In order to determine the calibration factor α per each rod, which is
the theoretical offset of the two measured calibrations, the number 0.05 m is divided by the differ-
ence between the mean values of wave rods, as presented in Equation B.1, where n represents the
number of wave gauge.
αn = 0.05/(WGmeanhighn −WGmeanlown)
(B.1)
Once the value of α is found, the measurements for the different tests can be performed. To
do so, the wave rods are set in the middle of the two calibrations using a 3D cube of 0.025 m as
illustrated in Figure B.4.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure B.4: 3D cube of 0.025 m used to take measurements of the tests.
Finally, after every test the differences between the voltages are multiplied by the term α previ-
ously estimated, as shown in Equation B.2. With this procedure, the wave gauges signals in voltage
are transformed to surface elevations in meters.
ηn = αn(WGn −WGmeann)
(B.2)
B.2.2
Current
A section of 7 m length between control points A and B is chosen to calibrate the control panel
which generates current in flume 3, as depicted in Figure B.5. Afterwards, the flume is filled with
water until 0.50 m water depth.
Figure B.5: 7 m of flume 3 to perform the calibration of the current.
Then, a square piece of paper of 0.10 mx0.10 m and 0.4 g weight is used to measure the ve-
94
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:103==
locity at the surface. Therefore, the time the piece of paper takes to travel from point A to B is
measured with a stopwatch, and the estimated velocity U2 is the division between distance, in this
case 7 m and the time. This velocity is compared with the depth average velocity calculated from
the discharge shown in the control panel U1, which is the discharge over the area the flow is passing
through.
If those two velocities are similar, especially if U2 is higher than U1, means that the control
panel is displaying correctly the discharge. The results of 10 measurements are depicted in Ta-
ble B.1.
Table B.1: Calibration of control panel for current in flume 3.
Tests
Q (l/s)
A (m2)
U1 (m/s)
S (m)
T (s)
U2 (m/s)
1
152
0.285
0.533
7
12.30
0,569
2
152
0.285
0.533
7
12.18
0.575
3
152
0,285
0.533
7
12.20
0.574
4
152
0.285
0.533
7
12.04
0.581
5
152
0.285
0.533
7
12.05
0.581
6
180
0.330
0.545
7
12.70
0.551
7
180
0.330
0.545
7
11.29
0.620
8
180
0.330
0.545
7
12.09
0.579
9
180
0.330
0.545
7
12.35
0.567
10
180
0.330
0.545
7
12.32
0.568
From the table above, it can be seen that the discharge shown in the control panel gives a
velocity U1 lower than U2, and that is because the first one is the average water depth velocity, and
the second is the velocity estimated at the surface.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
95
==PAGE:104==
B.3
Test Tables
B.3.1
Regular waves
Smooth bed
Table B.2: Tests carried for each deign stone bag type, during the First campaign of experiments.
Smooth bed.
Test name
Wave height
Period
Depth
Test1
0.050
1.000
0.500
Test2
0.050
1.250
0.500
Test3
0.050
1.500
0.500
Test4
0.050
1.750
0.500
Test5
0.050
2.000
0.500
Test6
0.100
1.000
0.500
Test7
0.100
1.250
0.500
Test8
0.100
1.500
0.500
Test9
0.100
1.750
0.500
Test10
0.100
2.000
0.500
Test11
0.150
1.000
0.500
Test12
0.150
1.250
0.500
Test13
0.150
1.500
0.500
Test14
0.150
1.750
0.500
Test15
0.150
2.000
0.500
Test16
0.125
1.000
0.500
Test17
0.125
1.250
0.500
Test18
0.125
1.500
0.500
Test19
0.125
1.750
0.500
Test20
0.125
2.000
0.500
96
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:105==
Table B.3: Tests carried for each deign stone bag type, during the Second campaign of experiments.
Smooth bed.
Test name
Wave height (m)
Period (s)
Depth (m)
Test21
0.100
2.250
0.500
Test22
0.100
2.500
0.500
Test23
0.125
2.250
0.500
Test24
0.125
2.500
0.500
Test25
0.150
2.250
0.500
Test26
0.150
2.500
0.500
Test27
0.100
1.000
0.400
Test28
0.100
1.500
0.400
Test29
0.100
2.000
0.400
Test30
0.100
2.250
0.400
Test31
0.100
2.500
0.400
Test32
0.125
1.000
0.400
Test33
0.125
1.500
0.400
Test34
0.125
2.000
0.400
Test35
0.125
2.250
0.400
Test36
0.125
2.500
0.400
Test37
0.150
1.000
0.400
Test38
0.150
1.500
0.400
Test39
0.150
2.000
0.400
Test40
0.150
2.250
0.400
Test41
0.150
2.500
0.400
Test42
0.100
1.000
0.300
Test43
0.100
1.500
0.300
Test44
0.100
2.000
0.300
Test45
0.100
2.250
0.300
Test46
0.100
2.500
0.300
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
97
==PAGE:106==
Rough bed
The first five experiments are not implemented. Because, after an accurate analysis of the
smooth-bed case (in which the rock bags are not moving at all) it was assumed that these exper-
iments were not worthy to be done, hence focusing the attention on something more interesting
such as the analysis of the cases in which the bags were rocking (analysis of the incipient motion)
or moving.
In the case of the rough bed, the water depth h is corrected by the 3 cm layers of ND stones.
Table B.4: Tests carried for each deign stone bag type, during the first campaign of experiments.
Rough bed.
Test name
Wave height (m)
Period (s)
Depth (m)
Test1
0.05
1
0.47
Test2
0.05
1.25
0.47
Test3
0.05
1.5
0.47
Test4
0.05
1.75
0.47
Test5
0.05
2
0.47
Test6
0.1
1
0.47
Test7
0.1
1.25
0.47
Test8
0.1
1.5
0.47
Test9
0.1
1.75
0.47
Test10
0.1
2
0.47
Test11
0.15
1
0.47
Test12
0.15
1.25
0.47
Test13
0.15
1.5
0.47
Test14
0.15
1.75
0.47
Test15
0.15
2
0.47
Test16
0.125
1
0.47
Test17
0.125
1.25
0.47
Test18
0.125
1.5
0.47
Test19
0.125
1.75
0.47
Test20
0.125
2
0.47
98
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:107==
Table B.5: Tests carried for each deign stone bag type, during the Second campaign of experiments.
Rough bed.
Test name
Wave height (m)
Period (s)
Depth (m)
Test21
0.1
2.25
0.47
Test22
0.1
2.5
0.47
Test23
0.125
2.25
0.47
Test24
0.125
2.5
0.47
Test25
0.15
2.25
0.47
Test26
0.15
2.5
0.47
Test27
0.1
1
0.37
Test28
0.1
1.5
0.37
Test29
0.1
2
0.37
Test30
0.1
2.25
0.37
Test31
0.1
2.5
0.37
Test32
0.125
1
0.37
Test33
0.125
1.5
0.37
Test34
0.125
2
0.37
Test35
0.125
2.25
0.37
Test36
0.125
2.5
0.37
Test37
0.15
1
0.37
Test38
0.15
1.5
0.37
Test39
0.15
2
0.37
Test40
0.15
2.25
0.37
Test41
0.15
2.5
0.37
Test42
0.1
1
0.27
Test43
0.1
1.5
0.27
Test44
0.1
2
0.27
Test45
0.1
2.25
0.27
Test46
0.1
2.5
0.27
B.3.2
Steady current
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
99
==PAGE:108==
Table B.6: List of Tests carried out for LD rock bags - Steady current
Smooth bed
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
1
0.50
0.60
0.30
16.00
0.02
0.05
2
0.50
0.60
0.30
30.00
0.03
0.10
3
0.50
0.60
0.30
45.00
0.05
0.15
4
0.50
0.60
0.30
60.00
0.06
0.20
5
0.50
0.60
0.30
75.00
0.08
0.25
6
0.50
0.60
0.30
90.00
0.09
0.30
7
0.50
0.60
0.30
121.00
0.12
0.40
8
0.50
0.60
0.30
151.00
0.15
0.50
9
0.50
0.60
0.30
181.00
0.18
0.60
10
0.47
0.60
0.28
49.00
0.05
0.17
11
0.47
0.60
0.28
80.00
0.08
0.28
12
0.48
0.60
0.29
85.00
0.09
0.30
13
0.50
0.60
0.30
104.00
0.10
0.35
Rough bed (3 cm)
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
Old batch
1
0.42
0.60
0.25
66.00
0.07
0.26
2
0.43
0.60
0.26
88.00
0.09
0.34
3
0.43
0.60
0.26
108.00
0.11
0.42
4
0.43
0.60
0.26
130.00
0.13
0.50
5
0.44
0.60
0.26
147.00
0.15
0.56
New batch
6
0.470
0.60
0.28
56.00
0.06
0.20
7
0.475
0.60
0.29
65.00
0.07
0.23
8
0.475
0.60
0.29
90.00
0.09
0.32
9
0.480
0.60
0.29
101.00
0.10
0.35
10
0.480
0.60
0.29
112.00
0.11
0.39
100
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:109==
Table B.6 continued from previous page
11
0.490
0.60
0.29
122.00
0.12
0.41
12
0.490
0.60
0.29
131.00
0.13
0.45
13
0.495
0.60
0.30
142.00
0.14
0.48
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
101
==PAGE:110==
Table B.7: List of Tests carried out for LD big rock bags - Steady current
Smooth bed
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
1
0.47
0.60
0.28
81.00
0.08
0.29
2
0.49
0.60
0.29
105.00
0.11
0.36
3
0.50
0.60
0.30
122.00
0.12
0.41
4
0.50
0.60
0.30
127.00
0.13
0.42
Rough bed (3 cm)
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
Old Batch
1
0.42
0.60
0.25
101.00
0.10
0.40
2
0.43
0.60
0.26
120.00
0.12
0.47
3
0.43
0.60
0.26
124.00
0.12
0.48
New batch
4
0.470
0.60
0.28
52.00
0.05
0.18
5
0.470
0.60
0.28
68.00
0.07
0.24
6
0.475
0.60
0.29
89.00
0.09
0.31
7
0.475
0.60
0.29
101.00
0.10
0.35
8
0.480
0.60
0.29
110.00
0.11
0.38
9
0.485
0.60
0.29
119.00
0.12
0.41
10
0.490
0.60
0.29
132.00
0.13
0.45
11
0.495
0.60
0.30
155.00
0.16
0.52
102
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:111==
Table B.8: List of Tests carried out for MD rock bags - Steady current
Smooth bed
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
1
0.47
0.60
0.28
79.00
0.08
0.28
2
0.47
0.60
0.28
96.00
0.10
0.34
3
0.48
0.60
0.29
116.00
0.12
0.40
4
0.48
0.60
0.29
120.00
0.12
0.42
Rough bed (3 cm)
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
Old Batch
1
0.42
0.60
0.25
90.00
0.09
0.36
2
0.42
0.60
0.25
99.00
0.10
0.39
3
0.43
0.60
0.26
124.00
0.12
0.48
4
0.43
0.60
0.26
142.00
0.14
0.55
New batch
5
0.470
0.60
0.28
62.00
0.06
0.22
6
0.470
0.60
0.28
79.00
0.08
0.28
7
0.470
0.60
0.28
94.00
0.09
0.33
8
0.480
0.60
0.29
113.00
0.11
0.39
9
0.480
0.60
0.29
121.00
0.12
0.42
10
0.485
0.60
0.29
135.00
0.14
0.46
11
0.485
0.60
0.29
147.00
0.15
0.51
12
0.490
0.60
0.29
160.00
0.16
0.54
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
103
==PAGE:112==
Table B.9: List of Tests carried out for MD new rock bags - Steady current
Smooth bed
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
1
0.490
0.60
0.294
90
0.09
0.31
2
0.490
0.60
0.294
99
0.099
0.34
3
0.500
0.60
0.3
112
0.112
0.37
Rough bed (3 cm)
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
Old Batch
1
0.42
0.6
0.252
94
0.094
0.37
2
0.42
0.6
0.252
104
0.104
0.41
3
0.43
0.6
0.258
123
0.123
0.48
New batch
4
0.470
0.60
0.282
63
0.063
0.22
5
0.470
0.60
0.282
78
0.078
0.28
6
0.470
0.60
0.282
93
0.093
0.33
7
0.475
0.60
0.285
109
0.109
0.38
8
0.475
0.60
0.285
117
0.117
0.41
9
0.480
0.60
0.288
129
0.129
0.45
10
0.485
0.60
0.291
144
0.144
0.49
11
0.490
0.60
0.294
158
0.158
0.54
12
0.498
0.60
0.2988
177
0.177
0.59
104
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:113==
Table B.10: List of Tests carried out for ND rock bags - Steady current
Smooth bed
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
1
0.48
0.60
0.29
80.00
0.08
0.28
2
0.48
0.60
0.29
111.00
0.11
0.39
3
0.53
0.60
0.32
155.00
0.16
0.49
4
0.53
0.60
0.32
190.00
0.19
0.60
5
0.52
0.60
0.31
148.00
0.15
0.47
6
0.53
0.60
0.32
165.00
0.17
0.52
7
0.55
0.60
0.33
198.00
0.20
0.60
Rough bed (3 cm)
Test
water depth h (m)
Width of the flume (m)
section area A (m2)
Discharge Q (l/s)
Discharge Q(m3/s)
Water depth average velocity U (m/s)
Old Batch
1
0.42
0.60
0.25
90.00
0.09
0.36
2
0.42
0.60
0.25
115.00
0.12
0.46
3
0.43
0.60
0.26
144.00
0.14
0.56
4
0.45
0.60
0.27
172.00
0.17
0.64
5
0.45
0.60
0.27
180.00
0.18
0.67
New batch
6
0.470
0.60
0.28
62.00
0.06
0.22
7
0.470
0.60
0.28
79.00
0.08
0.28
8
0.470
0.60
0.28
90.00
0.09
0.32
9
0.475
0.60
0.29
110.00
0.11
0.39
10
0.475
0.60
0.29
129.00
0.13
0.45
11
0.485
0.60
0.29
143.00
0.14
0.49
12
0.485
0.60
0.29
159.00
0.16
0.55
13
0.498
0.60
0.30
177.00
0.18
0.59
14
0.498
0.60
0.30
181.00
0.18
0.61
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
105
==PAGE:114==
B.3.3
Steady current - velocity profile tests tables
Smooth bed
Table B.11: Test 1, smooth bed: Q = 81 l/s, h = 0.49 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
12.6
3.9683
0.2528
2
0.025
50
11.8
4.2373
0.2680
3
0.05
50
11.5
4.3478
0.2742
4
0.075
50
11
4.5455
0.2854
5
0.1
50
10.7
4.6729
0.2926
6
0.15
50
10.5
4.7619
0.2976
7
0.2
50
10.7
4.6729
0.2926
8
0.27
50
11.1
4.5045
0.2831
9
0.34
50
11.4
4.3860
0.2764
10
0.4
50
11.2
4.4643
0.2808
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.49
7
24
0.2917
Table B.12: Test 2, smooth bed: Q = 110 l/s, h = 0.495 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
10.8
4.6296
0.2901
2
0.025
50
9.4
5.3191
0.3290
3
0.05
50
8.6
5.8140
0.3569
4
0.075
50
8.4
5.9524
0.3647
5
0.1
50
7.9
6.3291
0.3860
6
0.15
50
8
6.2500
0.3815
7
0.2
50
7.5
6.6667
0.4050
8
0.27
50
7.5
6.6667
0.4050
9
0.34
50
7.5
6.6667
0.4050
10
0.4
50
7.6
6.5789
0.4001
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.495
7
18.61
0.3761
106
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:115==
Table B.13: Test 3, smooth bed: Q = 129 l/s, h = 0.498 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
9.5
5.2632
0.3258
2
0.025
50
8.5
5.8824
0.3608
3
0.05
50
7.9
6.3291
0.3860
4
0.075
50
7.3
6.8493
0.4153
5
0.1
50
7
7.1429
0.4319
6
0.15
50
7.1
7.0423
0.4262
7
0.2
50
6.9
7.2464
0.4377
8
0.27
50
6.8
7.3529
0.4437
9
0.34
50
6.5
7.6923
0.4628
10
0.4
50
6.4
7.8125
0.4696
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.498
7
15.755
0.4443
Table B.14: Test 4, smooth bed: Q = 151 l/s, h = 0.505 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
7.3
6.8493
0.4153
2
0.025
50
7.2
6.9444
0.4207
3
0.05
50
6.7
7.4627
0.4499
4
0.075
50
6.3
7.9365
0.4766
5
0.1
50
6.3
7.9365
0.4766
6
0.15
50
5.9
8.4746
0.5070
7
0.2
50
5.8
8.6207
0.5152
8
0.27
50
5.2
9.6154
0.5713
9
0.34
50
5.2
9.6154
0.5713
10
0.4
50
5.3
9.4340
0.5611
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.505
7
12.44
0.5627
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
107
==PAGE:116==
Table B.15: Test 5, smooth bed: Q = 180 l/s, h = 0.51 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
6.2
8.0645
0.4838
2
0.025
50
5.6
8.9286
0.5326
3
0.05
50
5.3
9.4340
0.5611
4
0.075
50
5.1
9.8039
0.5819
5
0.1
50
5
10.0000
0.5930
6
0.15
50
4.9
10.2041
0.6045
7
0.2
50
4.7
10.6383
0.6290
8
0.27
50
4.6
10.8696
0.6420
9
0.34
50
4.5
11.1111
0.6557
10
0.4
50
4.5
11.1111
0.6557
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.505
7
10.99
0.6369
Rough bed
Table B.16: Test 1, rough bed: Q = 82 l/s, h = 0.47
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
14.5
3.4483
0.2235
2
0.025
50
12.1
4.1322
0.2621
3
0.050
50
11.5
4.3478
0.2742
4
0.075
50
10.5
4.7619
0.2976
5
0.100
50
9.5
5.2632
0.3258
6
0.150
50
9.7
5.1546
0.3197
7
0.200
50
9.6
5.2083
0.3228
8
0.270
50
10.0
5.0000
0.3110
9
0.340
50
10.1
4.9505
0.3082
10
0.400
50
10.2
4.9020
0.3055
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.470
7
23.75
0.2947
108
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:117==
Table B.17: Test 2, rough bed: Q = 110 l/s, h = 0.47
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
11
4.5455
0.2854
2
0.025
50
10.7
4.6729
0.2926
3
0.050
50
9.8
5.1020
0.3168
4
0.075
50
8.2
6.0976
0.3729
5
0.100
50
7.8
6.4103
0.3905
6
0.150
50
7.2
6.9444
0.4207
7
0.200
50
7.2
6.9444
0.4207
8
0.270
50
7.0
7.1429
0.4319
9
0.340
50
7.1
7.0423
0.4262
10
0.400
50
7.1
7.0423
0.4262
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.470
7
17.5
0.4000
Table B.18: Test 3, rough bed: Q = 130 l/s, h = 0.468
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
11.1
4.5045
0.2831
2
0.025
50
9.8
5.1020
0.3168
3
0.050
50
7.2
6.9444
0.4207
4
0.075
50
6.6
7.5758
0.4563
5
0.100
50
6.4
7.8125
0.4696
6
0.150
50
6.2
8.0645
0.4838
7
0.200
50
6.1
8.1967
0.4913
8
0.270
50
5.9
8.4746
0.5070
9
0.340
50
5.9
8.4746
0.5070
10
0.400
50
6.0
8.3333
0.4990
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.468
7
15
0.4667
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
109
==PAGE:118==
Table B.19: Test 4, rough bed: Q = 150 l/s, h = 0.475 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
9.3
5.3763
0.3322
2
0.025
50
8
6.2500
0.3815
3
0.050
50
6.8
7.3529
0.4437
4
0.075
50
5.6
8.9286
0.5326
5
0.100
50
5.5
9.0909
0.5417
6
0.150
50
5.3
9.4340
0.5611
7
0.200
50
5.1
9.8039
0.5819
8
0.270
50
4.9
10.2041
0.6045
9
0.340
50
5.0
10.0000
0.5930
10
0.400
50
5.0
10.0000
0.5930
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.475
7
13.15
0.5323
Table B.20: Test 5, rough bed: Q = 181 l/s, h = 0.48 m
Point
y (m)
r (rps)
t (s)
n (1/s)
v (m/s)
1
0.015
50
7.0
7.1429
0.4319
2
0.025
50
6.1
8.1967
0.4913
3
0.050
50
5.4
9.2593
0.5512
4
0.075
50
4.7
10.6383
0.6290
5
0.100
50
4.4
11.3636
0.6699
6
0.150
50
4.4
11.3636
0.6699
7
0.200
50
4.2
11.9048
0.7004
8
0.270
50
4.1
12.1951
0.7168
9
0.340
50
4.1
12.1951
0.7168
10
0.400
50
4.0
12.5000
0.7340
On the surface
y (m)
L (m)
t (s)
v(m/s)
11
0.480
7
11
0.6364
110
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:119==
C
Appendix
C.1
Model Scaling of the rock bags
The design of the rock bags is carried out considering the proportion 1:36, which is based on
the Froude scaling theory (see Figure C.1). Therefore, considering for example the 4 tons (= 4000
kg) full-scale model filter units, according to KYOWA, the corresponding design rock bag weight
is calculated as: 4000/363 kg 0.0857 kg.
Figure C.1: Froude scaling conversion factors. Islam
The scaling factor is an approximation based on the assumed wave heights generated in the
flume, in which the experiments are carried out. However, during the implementation of this
project the facilities were changed due to the laboratory’s technical issues, and not related to the
project itself. However, the scaling factor considered for this study was not changed.
C.2
Rock bags parameters
In order to estimate the characteristics of rock bags, several experiments are carried out. The
procedure is here illustrated step by step. The first step involved the use of a test tube with capacity
equal to 100 ml, which is considered as the reference total volume. Then, this test tube is placed on
a scale, which is subsequently calibrated to zero (in such a way as to neglect the weight of the test
tube in subsequent measurements). Then, the tube is filled with the test material (ND, LD, MD,
MD new) up to its maximum capacity (Vtot = 100 ml). At this point, the result will be the ”dry”
mass of the material mr.
Once again, the scale is calibrated to zero and by means of a syringe, water is added to cover
the material inside the test tube. The result is the mass of water mw (equal to the volume Vw)
capable of filling the voids between the particles of the material being analyzed. The sum of this
mass and the ”dry” mass results in the ”wet” mass of the material mr+w.
At this point, knowing the total volume of the container (Vtot = 100 ml), it is possible to
calculate the bulk density ρb and the porosity n (see Equations 2.68 and 2.66) of each material.
Through the porosity the ”dry” density of the material (rocks) ρr is calculated as illustrated in
Equation 2.67.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
111
==PAGE:120==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure C.2: Test tube. (a) Set-up of the empty test tube over the scale. (b) Test tube filled with the
material until its maximum capacity ( 100 ml). (c) By means of a syringe, water is added in order
to cover the material inside the test tube.
112
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:121==
For the sake of accuracy, this procedure is carried out ten times for each type of material. The
resulting parameters are illustrated in Tables C.1, C.2, C.3 and C.4.
Table C.1: Final/Applied values used to calculate the bulk density of each materials, which was
used during the lab tests (LD rock bags)
LD
mr[g]
mw [g]
Vw
Vt[ml]
n = Vv/Vt
D [g/cm3]
B [g/cm3]
1
79.65
41.62
41.62
100
0.42
1.36
1.213
2
81.10
40.72
40.72
100
0.41
1.37
1.218
3
79.06
40.94
40.94
100
0.41
1.34
1.200
4
78.39
43.03
43.03
100
0.43
1.38
1.214
5
78.36
42.48
42.48
100
0.42
1.36
1.208
6
79.46
41.24
41.24
100
0.41
1.35
1.207
7
78.60
41.78
41.78
100
0.42
1.35
1.204
8
79.03
41.41
41.41
100
0.41
1.35
1.204
9
77.89
42.54
42.54
100
0.43
1.36
1.204
10
80.23
40.46
40.46
100
0.40
1.35
1.207
Table C.2: Final/Applied values used to calculate the bulk density of each materials, which was
used during the lab tests (MD rock bags)
MD
mr[g]
mw [g]
Vw
Vt[ml]
n = Vv/Vt
D [g/cm3]
B [g/cm3]
1
103.53
39.21
39.21
100
0.39
1.70
1.43
2
105.24
38.60
38.60
100
0.39
1.71
1.44
3
108.37
38.24
38.24
100
0.38
1.75
1.47
4
105.28
38.46
38.46
100
0.38
1.71
1.44
5
107.35
38.04
38.04
100
0.38
1.73
1.45
6
106.15
37.34
37.34
100
0.37
1.69
1.43
7
105.33
38.20
38.20
100
0.38
1.70
1.44
8
106.41
37.89
37.89
100
0.38
1.71
1.44
9
104.60
40.77
40.77
100
0.41
1.77
1.45
10
105.24
39.82
39.82
100
0.40
1.75
1.45
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
113
==PAGE:122==
Table C.3: Final/Applied values used to calculate the bulk density of each materials, which was
used during the lab tests (MD new rock bags)
MD new
mr[g]
mw [g]
Vw
Vt[ml]
n = Vv/Vt
D [g/cm3]
B [g/cm3]
1
94.55
35.81
35.81
100
0.36
1.47
1.30
2
92.71
37.75
37.75
100
0.38
1.49
1.30
3
93.91
37.13
37.13
100
0.37
1.49
1.31
4
93.70
38.13
38.13
100
0.38
1.51
1.32
5
92.73
38.11
38.11
100
0.38
1.50
1.31
6
95.74
36.06
36.06
100
0.36
1.50
1.32
7
92.75
37.59
37.59
100
0.38
1.49
1.30
8
94.64
36.38
36.38
100
0.36
1.49
1.31
9
93.97
38.74
38.74
100
0.39
1.53
1.33
10
93.57
37.27
37.27
100
0.37
1.49
1.31
Table C.4: Final/Applied values used to calculate the bulk density of each materials, which was
used during the lab tests (ND rock bags).
ND
mr[g]
mw [g]
Vw
Vt[ml]
n = Vv/Vt
D [g/cm3]
B [g/cm3]
1
147,17
41,80
41,80
100
0,42
2,53
1,89
2
154,07
33,18
33,18
100
0,33
2,31
1,87
3
156,51
38,33
38,33
100
0,38
2,54
1,95
4
155,18
37,59
37,59
100
0,38
2,49
1,93
5
149,00
37,49
37,49
100
0,37
2,38
1,86
6
145,25
40,93
40,93
100
0,41
2,46
1,86
7
145,61
40,62
40,62
100
0,41
2,45
1,86
8
151,83
37,70
37,70
100
0,38
2,44
1,90
9
149,74
40,25
40,25
100
0,40
2,51
1,90
10
150,10
38,81
38,81
100
0,39
2,45
1,89
C.3
Contact area
The procedure applied to calculate the contact area of bags ND03, LD03, MD03 and MD06,
step by step is illustrated below through the following pictures. The detailed procedure is illustrated
in subsection 3.6.1.
114
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:123==
Figure C.3: Step 1. The dye is placed within a plate.
Figure C.4: Step 2. The rock bag is placed on top of the dye.
Figure C.5: Step 3. The rock bag is placed on a white paper to leave a stain.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
115
==PAGE:124==
Figure C.6: Step 4. The stain is dried and the contact area can be measured, through the diameter
of the stain measured using a ruler.
C.4
Image analysis for total volume of the rock bags
In order to obtain a more accurate result of the total volume, frontal and top view area of the
rock bags, an image analysis is conducted. The first step is to place the rock bag in a chess board
of 0.02 mx0.02 m squares as illustrated in Figure C.7.
Figure C.7: LD03 bag placed over a chess board.
The second step is to prepare the a proper set of illumination around the rock bag before taking
pictures of it, as depicted in Figure C.8.
116
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:125==
Figure C.8: Illumination around LD03 rock bag.
As third step, high quality of pictures are taken from different angles of the rock bag, and then
these pictures are uploaded to MeshRoom software in order to compile the images and create a 3D
model. After that, using MeshLab20022.02, the 3D model can be visualised and repaired in case
there are some missing points in the surface of the element or outliers as depicted in Figure C.9.
(a)
(b)
Figure C.9: Visualization of LD03 rock bag(a) top view. (b)lateral view.
Once all the points which do not belong to the rock bag are eliminated, the coordinates of the
element are saved as x, y, z coordinates, so that they can be read in Matlab and be processed.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
117
==PAGE:126==
D
Appendix
D.1
Pressure gradient analysis - Reduced momentum equation
In order to calculate the inner speed of the fluid, the resistance of the fluid within the voids
(Fi, in Equation D.1) of the rock bags is estimated via the extended Darcy-Forcheimer equation,
as explained in section 2.8.
Fi = aρ( ¯ui) + bρ
√
( ¯uj)( ¯uj)( ¯ui)
(D.1)
Therefore, the inner speed of the fluid within the porous media is estimated through the re-
duced momentum equation (see Equation 2.69), which is obtained from the Reynolds averaged
momentum relation illustrated in Equation D.2, from Bjarne Jensen (2013).
∂ρ ¯ui
∂t
+ ∂ρ ¯
uiuj
∂xj
= −∂¯p
∂xi
+ gjxj
∂ρ
∂xi
+
∂
∂xj
µ
(
∂¯ui
∂xj
+ ∂¯uj
∂xi
)
(D.2)
´ In these equations ¯p is the average excess of pressure, gj is the jth component of the gravitational
vector, ρ the density of the fluid and µ = ρν the dynamic viscosity.
Furthermore, for what concern the reduced momentum equation in Equation 2.69, the first term
represents inertia, which is part of the derivative with respect to time through the hydrodynamic
mass coefficient Cm:
Cm = γp
1 −n
n
(D.3)
In which n is the porosity and γp = 0.34 is an empirical coefficient from Bjarne Jensen (2013).
The turbulent fluctuation of the flow in the porous media corresponds the last term on the left
side of Equation 2.69. While, the resistance of the porous media is presented by the last term on
the right hand side of the Equation 2.69, which describes the turbulent fluctuation in terms of ad-
ditional resistance (Bjarne Jensen (2013)).
In Equation 2.69 i and j represent the direction of propagation of the flow, however within this
analysis, the propagation of the flow occurs only in the horizontal direction i. Therefore, several
terms are simplified, such as the turbulent fluctuation term previously mentioned, all the derivative
respect to the vertical direction of the flow (∂/∂xj), as well as the partial derivative of the density
of the material, because it is constant (since inside the rock bag there is just one type of material).
This procedure leads to Equation 2.70.
118
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:127==
D.2
Comparison between the speed of the flow inside and outside
the rock bags
D.2.1
Smooth bed
Test 6
30
32
34
36
38
40
t (s)
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.1: Smooth bed test 6, bag LD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.2: Smooth bed test 6, bag MD03.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
119
==PAGE:128==
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.3: Smooth bed test 6, bag MD06.
40
50
60
70
80
90
t (s)
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.4: Rough bed test 6, bag ND03.
Test 24
30
32
34
36
38
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.5: Smooth bed test 24, bag LD03.
120
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:129==
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.6: Smooth bed test 24, bag MD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.7: Smooth bed test 24, bag MD06.
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.8: Rough bed test 24, bag ND03.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
121
==PAGE:130==
Test 38
30
32
34
36
38
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.9: Smooth bed test 38, bag LD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.10: Smooth bed test 38, bag MD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.11: Smooth bed test 38, bag MD06.
122
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:131==
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.12: Rough bed test 38, bag ND03.
D.2.2
Rough bed
Test 6
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.13: Rough bed test 6, bag LD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.14: Rough bed test 6, bag MD03.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
123
==PAGE:132==
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.15: Rough bed test 6, bag MD06.
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.16: Rough bed test 6, bag ND03.
Test 14
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.17: Rough bed test 14, bag LD03.
124
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:133==
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.18: Rough bed test 14, bag MD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.19: Rough bed test 14, bag MD06.
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.20: Rough bed test 14, bag ND03.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
125
==PAGE:134==
Test 38
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.21: Rough bed test 38, bag LD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.22: Rough bed test 38, bag MD03.
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.23: Rough bed test 38, bag MD06.
126
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:135==
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
t (s)
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
U (m/s)
Um: outer orbital velocity
Ut: internal stone bag velocity
Figure D.24: Rough bed test 38, bag ND03.
D.3
Estimation of the incipient motion condition
As illustrated in Figure 5.17 and Figure 5.19, the Mob from approximately KC=1 to KC=10
has either exponential or logarithmic function paths.
Figure D.25: Sketch of mobility diagram, smooth bed.
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
127
==PAGE:136==
Figure D.26: Sketch of mobility diagram, rough bed.
Then, the results of the incipient motion condition (i.e. rocking effect) are filtered from the
lab test results and plotted in a scatter graph for both waves and current only, and the scenarios of
smooth and rough bed. After that, logarithmic and exponential equations are found, and the best
fit is chosen.
Figure D.27: Equation for waves only case, smooth bed.
Figure D.27 shows logarithmic and exponential equations of the trend lines of the scatter plot
in the case of waves only and smooth bed. It can be noticed that the best fit is the exponential
equation. Furthermore, an attempt to predict the mobility number is illustrated in Figure D.28,
which shows the correlation matrix between all the parameters used to calculate it.
128
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:137==
Figure D.28: Correlation matrix, smooth bed.
Figure D.28 shows how all the main parameters estimated during this analysis are correlated
to each other, however, at the end of the day, this matrix was not used to find a prediction of the
mobility number.
Figure D.29: Equation for current only case, smooth bed.
Continuing analyzing the smooth bed condition, the equation of the trend line of case of current
only is plotted and illustrated in Figure D.29, which shows a constant value at Mob = 0.55.
Then, the rough bed condition is analyzed and the trend lines of the waves only scenario is
depicted in Figure D.30. Similar to the smooth bed case, the best fit is the logarithmic one. Also
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
129
==PAGE:138==
in this case, the correlation matrix between all the main parameters estimated during this analysis
is illustrated below in Figure D.31, as an attempt to predict the mobility number.
Figure D.30: Equation for waves only case, rough bed.
Figure D.31: Correlation matrix, rough bed.
Finally, the current only case is evaluated and the trend line depicted in Figure D.32 shows also
130
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:139==
a constant value Mob = 1.
Figure D.32: Equation for current only case, rough bed.
D.4
Estimation of the roughness of the bag surface
The rock bags elaborated in the lab are made of different materials. The normal density rock
bags (ND) are made of gravel of average grain size of d50=5 mm. The low density ones (LD) of
d50=2 mm, and the medium density (MD) of d50=2.5 mm approximately.
Then, the different type of material are covered and tightened by a nylon net of around 1 mmx1 mm,
as depicted in Figure D.33.
Figure D.33: Nylon net used in the elaboration of the rock bags.
Therefore, to find the roughness of the surface of the rock bags, for the sake of simplicity in
this investigation, the roughness of the nylon net is neglected, because as shown in Figure D.33 the
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
131
==PAGE:140==
thickness of the mesh is really thin and can be not considered. Having said that, when the rock bag
is placed in the bottom of the flume, the voids of the bags are filled with water and they become
part of the rock bag. After, a flow approaches the bag and passing thought the nylon net, it feels
the roughness of the surface of the material. Hence, the as a first approximation, the roughness of
the stone bags k are equal to the average diameter d50 of the material they are made of, and the
results are depicted in Table 5.8.
132
Stability of rock bags for scour protection
==PAGE:141==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
