==PAGE:1==
Remote Attestation in Energy
Harvesting IoT Devices
Mariya Tacheva
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Remote attestation (RA) is a security protocol that detects the presence of
malicious software on a remote untrusted device and is used to bring security
to IoT as an ever-growing number of resource-constrained embedded devices
come online. Energy harvesting technologies are leveraged in IoT to address
the maintenance costs and sustainability issues associated with the reliance of
IoT devices on single-use batteries. Energy harvesting devices are autonomous
and self-powered and because of their reliance on ambient energy sources can-
not guarantee continuous function for the duration of the remote attestation
protocol.
The goal of this project is to investigate how the remote attestation protocol
can be adapted to work on an energy harvesting device that only functions
intermittently.
Based on recent works in the field of IoT regarding remote
attestation and the intermittent execution model a proposed protocol is outlined,
which leverages the use of checkpointing and memory isolation to guarantee the
desired security requirements. A proof-of-concept design and implementation
are created on a TrustZone-enabled microcontroller in order to evaluate whether
the proposed protocol is feasible with regard to its requirements.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Remote attestation (RA) er en sikkerhedsprotokol, der registrerer tilstedeværel-
sen af ondsindet software på en ekstern enhed, der ikke er tillid til, og bruges til
at bringe sikkerhed til IoT, efterhånden som et stadigt voksende antal ressource-
begrænsede indlejrede enheder kommer online. Energihøstende teknologier be-
nyttes i IoT til at løse udfordringerne omkring vedligeholdelsesomkostninger og
bæredygtighedsproblemer forbundet med afhængigheden af engangsbatterier i
IoT-enheder. Energihøstende enheder er autonome og selvdrevne og på grund
af deres afhængighed af omgivende energikilder kan der ikke garanteres konti-
nuerlig funktion under varigheden af Remote attestation protokollen.
Målet med dette projekt er at undersøge, hvordan Remote attestation protokol-
len kan tilpasses til at arbejde på en energihøstende enhed, der kun fungerer
periodisk. Baseret på nyere forskning inden for IoT vedrørende Remote attesta-
tion og den intermitterende eksekveringsmodel er en mulig protokol skitseret,
som udnytter brugen af checkpointing og hukommelsesisolering for at garantere
de ønskede sikkerhedskrav. Et proof-of-concept design og implementering opret-
tes på en TrustZone-aktiveret mikrocontroller for at vurdere, om den foreslåede
protokol er gennemførlig med hensyn til dens krav.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, DTU in fulfilment of the
requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Computer Science and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of computer
architecture and cybersecurity.
Lyngby, 15-November-2022
Mariya Tacheva
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Edlira Dushku, Postdoctoral Researcher
at DTU Compute, and Nicola Dragoni, Professor at DTU Compute, for giving
me the opportunity to do this Master’s thesis.
Their guidance and support
throughout this period have provided me with valuable feedback and advice.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement and research objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
Memory model in IoT devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Remote attestation in IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Overview of Remote attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Adversarial model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Root of trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.4
Integrity measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Energy harvesting IoT devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
TrustZone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Related Work
23
3.1
Intermittent execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2
Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3
Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.4
Intermittence and timekeeping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.1.5
Securing checkpointed data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Remote attestation in intermittent execution
. . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Proposed Solution
41
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Overview of the proposal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Adversary model and Security requirements . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.1
Adversary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.2
Security requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Discussion of the proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Implementation
55
5.1
Prover: hardware design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.1.1
Microcontroller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.2
Solar power harvesting module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Prover: software design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Proof-of-concept implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3.1
TrustZone configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3.2
Non-secure project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3.3
Secure project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Conclusion
67
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
IoT stands for the Internet-of-Things, a term used to denote a large variety of
physical devices connected in a network, enabling them to exchange information
seamlessly. IoT devices differ from general-purpose computers as they are gener-
ally highly specialized regarding their function, be it sensors, controllers, RFID
tags, intelligent door locks, and many more. The general idea of the Internet-of-
Things is that it allows for integration between people, systems, and processes
at a much grander scale than ever before. Depending on the use case, most IoT
devices are connected to the Internet directly or through another specialized
gateway device in their network.
IoT devices tend to be cheap and fast due to their purpose-built hardware and
software. Furthermore, technological advancements have lowered the prices of
the design and manufacturing of cyber-physical systems reliant on IoT devices,
bringing on the era of digitalization in many industries, even those traditionally
needing manual intervention (for example farming). Despite the ongoing chip
shortage slowing down growth, there was an 8% increase in active IoT endpoints
in 2021, reaching a total of 12.2 billion [Ana22]. It is projected that by 2030 75%
of all devices will be IoT. This aligns with the prediction made in 1990 by [Wei99]
- IoT brings on the era of ubiquitous computing, and with it a promise that
embedded computers will become as omnipresent in human society as writing.
When designing and deploying IoT systems the use of wireless devices offers
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
more flexibility compared to wired solutions, making them easier to implement.
The lack of a tethered power connection however means that the devices need to
use batteries, which require scheduled maintenance. [EnO18] gives an example
of how a large office system with 10 000 wireless nodes, each with 2 batteries,
where each battery has a lifetime of 2 years, requires 30 battery changes each
day. Planning on when to change batteries is even more complicated because not
all devices are empty at the same time - the rate of discharge varies a lot both
dependent on the type of device and environmental factors like temperature. For
large-scale systems, this is a huge cost, which can end up making the adoption
of IoT itself not worth it. Cost is not the only concern with regard to battery-
powered IoT systems. Environmental issues involved in the manufacture and
disposal of single-use batteries are another major drawback. EnABLES [EnA22],
an EU-funded project focused on sustainability in IoT, estimates the typical
battery life of a wireless node is around two years and that as a result of this
by 2025 78 million batteries from IoT devices will be disposed of daily.
The rising demand for autonomous IoT combined with the increased effort to-
ward sustainability has led to more focus being paid on the possibility of lever-
aging energy harvesting technologies to create self-powered IoT systems [Pat22].
An energy-harvesting IoT device relies on drawing and converting energy from
its ambient environment in order to power its operations. This reduces the re-
quired maintenance, as there is no need to change batteries, which in turn both
lowers costs and makes it more sustainable. Such devices often have low-power
constraints so that they can fit their operations into the amount of energy they
can harvest. Even so, if the source of energy is only intermittently available,
as is solar power, for example, an energy harvesting device cannot guarantee
continuous operation, and will instead turn off and on intermittently as power
becomes available.
With the increase in the number of IoT devices comes an increase in atten-
tion from potential adversaries. As embedded systems become more prevalent,
they take over different safety-critical functions, which can prove of high inter-
est for different types of exploits. Vulnerabilities on less critical devices, such
as wearable sensor devices like smartwatches, can also be of interest to an at-
tacker because of their large volume and the access to many people’s personal
data.
The lack of common technical standards and regulations has resulted
in a heterogeneous environment in terms of hardware and software, making it
challenging to distribute security patches to already deployed devices.
In their investigation into the nature of the cyberworm Stuxnet, which affected
a nuclear facility in Iran, [FR11] argue that industrial cyber-crime is on the rise,
and we are facing a future in which cyberwarfare might be just as effective, if
not more so, as traditional warfare. A classic example of an attack targeting
vulnerable IoT devices is the Mirai botnet [AAB+17], which used infected de-
==PAGE:15==
3
vices to perform organized DDOS attacks on a large scale. In order to gain
control over an IoT device, the malware exploited the use of default passwords
in specific IoT devices (mainly routers, DVRs, and cameras) by rapidly scan-
ning and then brute-forcing access using a preconfigured list of 62 credentials;
it then used successful logins to access the compromised devices and download
architecture-specific malware, finally deleting its binary to conceal itself. Using
a simple dictionary attack, it infected roughly 65,000 IoT devices within the first
20 hours, and a total of 300 000 devices over its lifetime. [AAB+17] predicts
that due to inherent security flaws, attacks targeting IoT devices will only be-
come more sophisticated, drawing a parallel to the early days of general purpose
computers on the Internet. This and other attacks, leveraging both remote and
local exploits on IoT devices, raise a red flag about the lack of attention paid to
security in the IoT sector.
Security has often been overlooked in the context of resource-constrained IoT
devices, which are limited in computational capacity and size. [DGM18] brings
to light that in a survey conducted in 2015, only 10% of executives in the
medical devices industry believed that their devices are not easy to compromise
by cybercriminals. [Fea17] argues that not enough has been done to incentivize
companies to consider the security of IoT devices upfront. [DGM18] lists, among
others, examples with unencrypted messages controlling an insulin pump as
well as configurations using hardcoded default passwords. As more awareness is
being raised around the problem, the IoT security market is projected to grow
by an estimated 27.9% in 2022 [KBV16].
Remote attestation (RA) can be used to detect compromised IoT devices in
combination with other security techniques. In RA, a trusted device (commonly
referred to as Verifier) can verify an untrusted device (commonly referred to as
Prover) over a network by detecting changes to its software [CGL+11]. It is a
key concept of Trusted Computing [PC11] as coined by the Trusted Computing
Group [Rot11] and has been widely adopted in general-purpose computers. In
the classic RA scheme for the changes to be detected the untrusted device gath-
ers and transmits evidence derived from the contents of its memory. This is a
computationally expensive operation for devices that rely on energy harvesting.
Such devices could only be operational for short periods of time and can there-
fore not guarantee that attestation will be complete. To deal with this, this
project proposes integrating attestation as a part of the intermittent execution
model in order to provide some guarantee that the state of an energy harvesting
device will be attested.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement and research objectives
Traditionally little focus has been paid to security in IoT because of the overhead
incurred by introducing cryptographic primitives to resource-constrained devices
with a small amount of power and space.
The wide adoption of IoT across
different sectors has exposed a large attack surface for potential exploits, focused
on extracting confidential information or taking control of remote devices. Best
efforts must be made to minimize vulnerabilities in order to reduce the possibility
of a malicious attacker compromising a device. Because no system is perfectly
secure it is important, as the second line of defense, to also be able to detect
if a device is compromised in order to discover and patch exploits in the wild.
Because of this, a lot of recent works are focused on how to best adapt remote
attestation protocols from computationally powerful general-purpose computers
to IoT systems made up of resource-constrained devices.
With the advent of self-powered IoT devices, it is necessary to consider how re-
mote attestation can be adapted for a device that is only intermittently powered
on. Because of its reliance on harvested ambient energy, an intermittent Prover
cannot guarantee to have enough in its energy budget to complete attestation.
The associated low-power constraints also mean that special care needs to be
paid to how and when attestation is performed so as to not interfere with the
regular operations of the device. The goal of this project is to investigate how
remote attestation can be applied to an intermittent IoT device.
The main research objectives are as follows:
• Investigate the state-of-the-art with regards to remote attestation in IoT.
• Investigate the state-of-the-art with regards to intermittent execution in
IoT and analyze how it can be leveraged to support remote attestation.
• Propose a remote attestation protocol that can detect malware on an
intermittent device and provides at least the same security guarantees as
existing RA schemes.
• Design and implement the proposed protocol on an intermittent IoT device
in order to evaluate it.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Contributions
5
1.2
Contributions
This project investigates how the intermittent execution model can be leveraged
to bring the security guarantees of remote attestation to an energy harvesting
device. The project’s contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A literature review of recent work focused on intermittent IoT devices,
intersected with recent work focused on remote attestation in IoT.
• The design of a remote attestation protocol that attests the state of an
intermittent IoT device with an analysis of how it fulfills the security
requirements.
• A proof-of-concept design and implementation of an energy harvesting
device, which executes the remote attestation protocol.
1.3
Outline
The rest of this project is structured as follows. Chapter 2 contains informa-
tion considered relevant to establish the necessary foundation of knowledge for
the following chapters. Chapter 3 starts off by presenting a survey of literature
within the field of intermittent execution in IoT to form an understanding of
the current state of research in the field. It then goes on to present the inter-
section between works focusing on intermittence in IoT and those focusing on
RA in IoT in order to create a basis for a solution. Chapter 4 proposes and
discusses an RA protocol adapted to an intermittent execution model, along
with its adversarial model and security properties. Chapter 5 presents a hard-
ware and software design, which demonstrates the protocol in proof-of-concept
implementation. Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the goals and findings of the
project, with emphasis on how well the proposed solution addresses the central
problem.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter introduces some necessary technical concepts, which should provide
a foundation for the rest of the project. It starts off by giving a brief overview of
the general memory model of an IoT device to give context to where malicious
software can hide and how it can be detected. It presents a survey of works in
the field of RA in IoT to form an idea of what the state-of-the-art is, with a
focus on the adversarial model and the guarantees attestation brings. Energy
harvesting devices are presented with regard to why they use an intermittent
execution model. Finally, ARM’s TrustZone is explained in detail because it’s
used to deliver the security guarantees of the proposed solution.
2.1
Memory model in IoT devices
As IoT devices are generally made to fulfill one main function they don’t require
the same computational capabilities as general-purpose computers do. With
microcontrollers, the focus is on reducing the power and size footprint through
optimization in order to keep costs down, with the added benefit of reduced
complexity and deterministic behavior.
In general two types of memory are available to the processor - volatile mem-
==PAGE:20==
8
Background
ory (some type of RAM), which gets erased when the processor loses power,
and non-volatile memory (for example Flash), which maintains its state across
power loss. Unlike general-purpose computers, microcontrollers like the ARM
Cortex-M33 [ARM22] most often execute code directly from non-volatile mem-
ory, eliminating the need to load instructions into RAM beforehand.
Different types of non-volatile memory (NVM) exist and based on the technolo-
gies used they have different properties which require them to be addressed in
different ways. As an example, writing changes to Flash memory requires that
data is erased in blocks, while when writing changes to EEPROM data can be
erased at the byte level. When using NVM to persist data it’s also important
to consider the lifetime read/write cycles of the technology with regard to the
use case. For example, with Flash and EEPROM, a sector of memory will not
be able to store data anymore after 100 000 read/writes. For FRAM that value
raises to over 10 billion. When a program is executing, the processor looks at
Figure 2.1: Example of a buffer overflow attack
the next value in the program counter (PC) in order to read the line of code
stored at that memory address and execute it. It uses the stack, a part of the
memory used as a LIFO storage buffer, to temporarily store register values as
instructed by the program’s code. In ARM processors the stack is located in the
SRAM, in between global variables and the heap [Yiu20]. To illustrate how ma-
licious software (malware) can exploit software vulnerabilities in order to gain
control of a device an example of a buffer overflow attack is shown in Figure
2.1. In it, the argument passed is larger than the allocated size of the buffer,
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Remote attestation in IoT
9
and no validation on the size of argv[1] is performed, which results in strcpy()
overwriting the return address, allowing malware to take control over execution
flow.
2.2
Remote attestation in IoT
2.2.1
Overview of Remote attestation
Remote attestation (RA) is a security protocol performed between a trusted
party (Verifier) and a remote untrusted party (Prover).
The goal of RA is
that on its completion the Verifier can reason with a degree of certainty about
the integrity of the Prover. In its classic form shown in 2.2 remote attestation
takes place as a challenge-response protocol, initiated when a trusted device
sends a challenge to an untrusted device, placed in a remote location.
The
remote device then answers the challenge by collecting evidence (proof) about
its current state and transmitting it back to the trusted device. The trusted
device then based on that evidence and some preexisting knowledge about the
expected state of the untrusted device makes a decision about whether the
remote device has been compromised.
RA first emerged as a technique for
verifying the integrity of general-purpose computers. The focus of this project
is the use of remote attestation on IoT devices and the application of certain
constraints and limitations with regard to performance and energy which need
to be addressed.
The protocol begins with the Verifier sending a challenge to the Prover. This
challenge contains fresh information (for example a nonce) in order to assure that
an adversary will not be able to replay it. The challenge also needs to guarantee
authenticity (for example using a shared key, known only to the Verifier and the
Prover) and unpredictability. Receiving the challenge triggers the execution of
the attestation routine ATTEST on the Prover. During ATTEST the Prover
collects evidence of its current state by computing a hash using the shared key
of the contents of selected parts or all of the device’s memory. The gathered
evidence is combined with the challenge, which initiated the attestation routine.
It is then transmitted to the Verifier, who is awaiting it. The Verifier has prior
knowledge of the contents of a response for the specific challenge and the time it
should take the Prover to compute and reply with the said response - this means
that a compromised Prover will be detected through an unexpected challenge
response. Often, there is also an associated time constraint - if the Prover does
not respond within a predetermined amount of time, the Verifier determines the
Prover to be unreliable.
==PAGE:22==
10
Background
Figure 2.2: Challenge-response remote attestation protocol
1
2.2.2
Adversarial model
In the context of remote attestation in IoT, an attacker’s objective is to compro-
mise a device while remaining undetected, thus overcoming attestation. [AAD+16b]
defines a general adversarial model, which outlines five types of attackers, based
on their level of access to the device they compromise:
• Remote Adversary can remotely inject and run malicious code on a device
over the Internet.
• Local Adversary can snoop and interfere with communication due to being
on the same local network as the device.
• Physical Non-Intrusive Adversary is close enough to the device to exploit
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Remote attestation in IoT
11
side-channel attacks without being able to capture it.
• Stealthy Physical Intrusive Adversary has control over the device and can
extract information from it but cannot power it off in order to tamper
with its hardware.
• Physical Intrusive Adversary has captured the device and can power it off
in order to tamper with its state and hardware.
Building on this model, [JGP21] argues that the Physical Non-Intrusive Adver-
sary can also extract secret information from the device by exploiting side-
channel attacks, as demonstrated by [BMW+18] and [MSEH19].
Thus the
Stealthy Physical Intrusive Adversary can be excluded from the model. [AAD+16b]
goes on to state that current RA research focuses on mitigating the Remote Ad-
versary, due to its prominence, large scale of affected devices (compared to
a local/physical adversary), and lower cost in terms of defense (compared to
adding dedicated hardware). It is important to note that this adversary is also
mobile - meaning they can hide during attestation, either by moving around
(self-relocating) or erasing (transient) the malware.
The purpose of establishing a list of common attacks against IoT devices is to
use them later to analyze the security of the proposed solution. In line with
[FNRT14] the scope of possible attacks is limited to those which can overcome
attestation, meaning how a compromised Prover can pretend to be uncompro-
mised. Therefore attacks that can compromise a node are not considered. The
literature examined [[ADD21], [JGP21], [FNRT14]] outlines the following po-
tential attacks, which the Remote Adversary can perform on a compromised
node in order to avoid detection:
• Precomputation: The Adversary can precompute part or all of the attes-
tation routine for a compromised Prover, giving the attacker time to do
something else during the actual attestation. When examining VIPER
[LMP11], [FNRT14] point out that even though the challenge includes a
nonce, the checksum code is independent of said nonce.
• Replay: The Adversary can record a valid attestation response from an
uncompromised node on its local network and transmit it back to the
Verifier in order to remain undetected. This can only work if the challenge
transmitted from the Verifier is the same for both the uncompromised and
compromised nodes.
• Forgery: The Adversary can create a valid response, despite having changed
the state of the Prover.
==PAGE:24==
12
Background
• Memory Copy: The Adversary can use free space in memory to store the
original memory contents before compromising them. The Prover will use
that original memory during attestation, and the Adversary remains un-
detected. Furthermore, if the Adversary can predict the memory traversal
strategy, it can also move the compromised code to a different sector before
attestation takes place.
• Data substitution: The Adversary can use free space in the memory to
store the original data before compromising it and redirect the attesta-
tion routine to use those new addresses. Compared to the Memory Copy
attack, less space is required as only a part of memory contents are stored.
• Compression: The Adversary can compress the original memory contents
to free up space for malicious data. When the attestation routine is run,
the Adversary can then decompress the memory contents on the fly, re-
maining undetected. Depending on the memory traversal strategy, the
Adversary might hide in an unchecked memory sector.
• Impersonation: The Adversary can impersonate other nodes. It can pre-
tend to be an uncompromised node during attestation, thus falsely mark-
ing a genuine node as compromised. It can also impersonate the Verifier,
forwarding challenges to a genuine node in order to remain undetected.
• Proxy: The Adversary can forward a challenge to a proxy, a more powerful
malicious server. The proxy keeps a copy of the original memory contents
of the compromised node and has access to more resources and is, there-
fore, able to forge a response (or a part of it) faster than the Prover would
be able to.
• Return-Oriented Programming: The Adversary can use existing code to
take over control flow and perform malicious operations by modifying
the stack.
This means that no need for modification/insertion of code
is needed to exploit the Prover.
• Data-Oriented Programming: The Adversary can manipulate non-control
data (variables/pointers that do not contain a return address) to trigger
an incorrect but valid control flow [CAL+21].
A malicious Verifier can launch a Denial-Of-Service (DOS) attack on a Prover
by launching RA requests at will, thus forcing a Prover to continuously. Overall,
the literature examined considers DOS attacks out of scope – as the main focus
of the adversarial model is to compromise the Prover. As mentioned by [SL16],
there are more effective ways for an attacker to make remote devices unavailable
- an example being signal jamming. Similarly, hardware side-channel attacks
are also omitted as the focus is on the Remote Adversary.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Remote attestation in IoT
13
2.2.3
Root of trust
[SL16] states that classifying RA schemes only based on root of trust is insuf-
ficient when comparing the security properties achieved by each scheme – and
proposes a classification system that includes eight characteristics important for
comparing and evaluating trade-offs. It is essential to be able to compare RA
approaches based on how well they stack against each other with regard to ful-
filling their objective, considering the assumptions employed. This notion is also
confirmed by [JGP21], who also notes that the characteristics defined by [SL16]
focus predominantly on software- and hybrid-based schemes due to the WSN
emphasis. The goal is to achieve a direct comparison and understand how the
different design choices affect each other. [SL16] give an example of a scheme,
which even with the use of a Trusted Protection Module (TPM), which provides
enhanced security is susceptible to ROP attacks because it does nothing to at-
test the dynamic memory on the Prover [THJ15]. To narrow down the scope,
the focus here is on two design choices - root of trust and integrity measurement,
while leaving out the ones related to how an RA scheme can scale.
The root of trust is a highly reliable component, which performs critical security
functions, and must be secure by design, as it provides inherent trust in a system
[RVPRWB21]. In the context of an attestation routine, the root of trust is the
component of the Prover, which is responsible for gathering evidence and is
inherently trusted by the Verifier (Invited). If that root of trust is compromised,
a Prover could forge evidence or give evidence generated by a different entity
while remaining undetected by the Verifier. RA schemes are split into three
main categories, based on whether establishing their root of trust on the Prover
relies purely on software, purely on hardware, or a combination of software and
hardware (hybrid).
2.2.3.1
Software-based root of trust
Software-based RA schemes do not rely on additional hardware [FNRT14]. They
are therefore cheaper to implement, making them a great fit for IoT devices,
which are generally resource-constrained and low-cost. One of the first exam-
ples of software-based attestation is presented by [Spi00], where the Verifier
requests that the Prover compute a cryptographic hash for each of two over-
lapping dynamically-specified memory regions of its MP , covering the entire
program memory. The Verifier can then compare this to its own cryptographic
hashes based on its knowledge of the Prover’s MP . Because of the lack of ded-
icated hardware, if a Prover is compromised, the Adversary has gained access
and control of all areas of the device, including its cryptographic secrets, and
==PAGE:26==
14
Background
is, therefore, able to remain undetected by RA. Three main techniques to give
a certain guarantee that the result of ATTEST can be trusted are outlined in
the literature examined ([ADD21], [FNRT14], [JGP21], [CFPS09]) - time-based
RA schemes, hypervisor-based RA schemes and the use of memory filling.
Time-based RA schemes are related to strict timing constraints. The general
assumption is that the Verifier knows with precision the time required to com-
pute the results r and the round trip network delay. During the execution of
ATTEST, an overhead timing means that some form of cheating is taking place
- if a Prover takes too short or too long to respond, it is considered compro-
mised. Pioneer [SLS+05] is an example of a timing-based root of trust, where
a checksum function is used first to verify the attestation routine, and then the
attestation routine computes a hash of the actual program. The checksum func-
tion is time-optimal and small enough to have a deterministic execution time
so that if the Adversary manipulates it, its computation time will noticeably
increase, which will be noticed by the Verifier.
Time-based approaches have an obvious limitation regarding scaling. Network
timing issues in multi-hop networks can affect RA schemes with strict timing
constraints because of the possibility of a round-trip delay. [FNRT14] states that
software-only solutions only apply to direct communication between Verifier and
Prover. It’s important to note that this limitation has already been overcome
in other ways - for example, Fog Computing can enable single-hop attestation
between a Prover and a connected fog node in multi-hop networks [ODD21].
Furthermore, [SL16] mentions the possibility to leverage known network delays
such as in [YHY+15] and [vHNKH04].
Another drawback of time-based approaches is that the execution of the attes-
tation procedure can collide with the execution of time-critical operations in
real-time safety-critical systems, resulting in a false positive about a compro-
mised Prover [ADD21].
Hypervisor-based RA schemes rely on a memory isolation technique, which pro-
vides domain separation through virtualization [CGL+11]. A secure hypervisor
running on the Prover monitors the virtualized program, ensuring it is not
compromised. This approach has been widely adopted in general-purpose com-
puters and incurs additional latency and computation costs, which can prove
too expensive for resource-constrained IoT devices. Two examples leveraging
this approach are SIMPLE [ACT20] and XEBRA [AP16]. The former creates
a software-based Trusted Computing Module (TCM) by reserving part of the
memory before deployment. Similarly, the latter uses the Xen hypervisor to
implement two separate virtual machines, one for the control domain and one
for the application domain.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Remote attestation in IoT
15
Software-based TCMs are less secure compared to hardware-based ones - as
the part of memory where the hypervisor can be accessed by a physical adver-
sary [ACT20]. Furthermore, an approach like XEBRA [AP16] requires that the
Prover is capable of hardware virtualization, incurring additional costs. [JGP21]
notes that virtualization is usually recommended to use in combination with a
hardware-based Trusted Execution Environment (TEE).
Memory-filling in the context of software-based RA schemes refers to the tech-
nique of filling unused memory with uncompressed random data (noise) [FNRT14].
The goal is that no space is left on the Prover to store malicious code in. The
assumption here is that to compromise the device, an Adversary needs to either
modify the original program or upload a new one. Evidence of compromise can
be detected by the Verifier, who knows how to recreate the noise stored on the
device. To avoid the possibility of the Adversary compressing program code
and to free up extra space, the memory on the Prover should be optimally com-
pressed. An example of this technique is used by Proactive [CKN07], which uses
it to relax the strict timing requirements of SWATT. The Prover uses the seed
sent by the Verifier to generate random noise to fill the empty memory. Both
MP and MD are then used to compute the attestation response checksum. Due
to the restriction in available memory, the timing constraints can be relaxed -
as an attacker will take longer to compute the attestation result because of the
way the random noise is generated.
A drawback of memory-based approaches is it relies on compression of the ex-
isting program memory, meaning that it is susceptible to the use of non-optimal
compression algorithms. Furthermore, it works best with devices with limited
operations, as runtime would become prohibitive on devices with more signifi-
cant memories.
2.2.3.2
Hardware-based root of trust
Hardware-based RA schemes take advantage of specialized secure hardware in
order to establish root of trust [FNRT14]. They usually use a tamper-resistant
hardware module, implemented either in the motherboard or the CPU of a
Prover device. When the ATTEST routine is in a protected sector, it can pro-
vide the atomicity and the uninterruptability required to trust the evidence
gathered.
Due to the isolation provided, it is more difficult for an Adver-
sary to extract secrets from a compromised Prover with a hardware-based root
of trust.
However, the additional hardware comes with an added cost and
makes these protocols difficult to retrofit on existing devices. Overall, the hard-
ware can be classified under three main mechanisms, used either individually
or in combination - Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs), Memory Protection
==PAGE:28==
16
Background
Units (MPUs), and Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs) ([[JGP21], [SL16],
[CER+18]]. [JGP21] notes that many of the specially-made hardware proposed
in research will never be commercially available, drastically reducing applicabil-
ity in real-world scenarios.
An early example mentioned in literature [[FNRT14], [SL16], [MGdC+18]] is
Secure Boot [AFS97], in which a bootloader and a signed hash stored in Read-
only Memory (ROM) are used as the root of trust. At boot time, the bootloader
hashes the memory and compares it to the one stored in the ROM, thus able
to tell if any modifications took place. A widespread commercial extension of
this technology is the TPM[THJ15], which is a co-processor using a special set
of registers (PCRs) to store hashed evidence about the system’s state at boot
time [AC15] It is important to note that attesting memory at boot time does
not detect any exploits which happen after boot, that is during the runtime of
a Prover.
[MGdC+18] gives Intel Trusted Execution Environment (Intel TXT) as an ex-
ample of how TPM can be extended to achieve dynamic attestation after boot.
Intel TXT provides a virtualized environment side-by-side with the software
stack, resetting the PCRs when a switch from non-TXT to TXT is made. This
type of tamper-resistant hardware-based isolation is an example of a Trusted
Execution Environment (TEE), as it creates a secure area of the MCU, which
provides domain separation, integrity, and confidentiality [TEE11]. MPUs are
used to configure specific regions of memory to only allow for specific access, as-
suring that the evidence stored there cannot be tampered with. PUFs generate
a unique hardware-specific response to an input [[AAD+16b]]. This guarantees
that the result of an attestation routine has been created by that specific Prover
and can, for example, be used in the place of secret keys in memory-protected
areas. A popular example of a commercially available TEE with MPU is the
ARM TrustZone, available in ARM MCUs [arm16]. It provides two states of ex-
ecution, a secure and non-secure one, the separation between which is achieved
through hardware.
Compared to software-based approaches, hardware-based roots of trust are iso-
lated and difficult (if not impossible) to modify, providing immutability and
atomicity to the ATTEST routine. Furthermore, some can act as a local Ver-
ifier [JGP21]. However, apart from the higher cost, they also introduce addi-
tional system complexity because they need to include additional drivers and
libraries. It is difficult to update a hardware-based root of trust because it is
built into a device. If a defect is exposed or technological advancements make
cryptographic primitives unsecure, the device is rendered obsolete and has to be
replaced. Furthermore, [SL16] states that the assumption that tamper-resistant
hardware is enough is dangerous, as it can still be exploited, for example, with
side-channel attacks [GMO01]. Depending on which type of memory is attested,
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Remote attestation in IoT
17
a hardware-based RA scheme can still be susceptible to ROP attacks. Another
thing to consider is the adversarial model - as physical attacks are not that
common (due to the high cost), the introduction of specialized tamper-resistant
hardware which protects against them does not bring a lot of benefits.
2.2.3.3
Hybrid root of trust
Hybrid-based RA schemes use a combination of hardware and software to es-
tablish a root of trust. They leverage the security of hardware-based approaches
while minimizing the need for custom-built changes and are therefore less costly.
Instead of special tamper-resistant hardware, hybrid approaches use pre-existing
hardware features (e.g. ROM and MCU) or commercially available TEEs, mak-
ing them easier to retrofit on existing devices. The assumptions used in hybrid-
based RA schemes are less narrow compared to software-based ones, with the
trade-off of specific hardware requirements. An example of such a scheme is
SMART [EPT12].
In the literature examined it is classified as a hybrid by
[ADD21] and [SL16] and as hardware-based by [JGP21]. It creates a simple
MPU by minimally modifying the existing MCU so that the secrets stored in
the ROM are only accessible by the ATTEST routine, also stored securely in
ROM. SMART is focused on low-end devices. HYDRA [ERT17] is an imple-
mentation of SMART for medium-end devices with a Memory Management
Unit (MMU). It uses a microkernel to enforce access control rules implemented
in software.
The argument is that because the microkernel is formally ver-
ified, it achieves the required process isolation and memory restriction. Both
SMART and HYDRA require that the attestation routine is executed atomically
[MGdC+18]. TyTAN [BEMS+15] focuses on providing real-time guarantees and
uses an execution-aware MPU (EA-MPU), which is dynamically configurable at
runtime. It is built as an extension of the FreeRTOS, with support for the EA-
MPU, so that each task can only access its assigned memory regions and can
only be invoked from a specific place.
Overall, hybrid RA schemes have inherent pros and cons from both software-
and hardware-based approaches. The assumption of pre-existing hardware is
non-trivial and narrows their scope to only specific embedded systems [ADD21].
Implementing the ATTEST routine in a Prover’s ROM requires enough available
space.
The software components are difficult to reuse across heterogeneous
devices produced by different manufacturers, because of the different hardware
architectures. Hybrid-based schemes can leverage more resources, but not at the
level of hardware-based ones. Compared to the hardware-based root of trust,
the software-based part of a hybrid scheme is easier to upgrade if a vulnerability
is discovered. However, an exploit of the hardware-based part would still mean
it needs to be replaced - making it more difficult to maintain compared to purely
==PAGE:30==
18
Background
software-based ones.
2.2.4
Integrity measurement
During ATTEST, the objective of the Prover is to present proof of its un-
compromised state in a timely manner (also referred to as evidence generation
[JGP21]).
The state of the Prover refers to the contents of its memory M,
comprised of program memory MP , data memory MD, registers MR, memory-
mapped input/output MMMIO as well as external memory ME. In theory, all
of these should be a part of the evidence generation process during the ATTEST
routine – but in practice, because of the probabilistic guarantee of attestation,
different protocols focus on different types of memory with varying trade-offs
concerning potential adversarial attacks [SL16].
The approach of how the attestation algorithm gathers the evidence of its un-
compromised state is referred to as integrity measurement. The main difference
here is between using static memory (verifying the integrity of binaries, boot
memory, and hardware components) or dynamic memory (verifying the control
flow at run-time, data memory, caches, registries, and so on). Static evidence
collection would be enough to detect manipulation of MP as well as system
settings. This type of evidence is also fairly easy to collect and verify, as it does
not change during runtime. However, static evidence would not be enough to
detect attacks, which target volatile memory or exploit the control and data
flow to their advantage.
Hardware- and hybrid-based roots of trust are generally able to collect dynamic
evidence due to the elevated access privileges of their secure components and the
domain separation. For example, through its use of protected memory regions,
SMART [EPT12] enables dynamic detection, as it is able to reason about the
state of the Prover during runtime. In theory, evidence about memory can be
collected by any root of trust; however, software-based schemes cannot collect
information about the cache, as hardware-based implementation is required to
make the information available. It is also possible to erase MD at the time of
attestation, removing malware in the process (as well as any meaningful program
data).
Dynamic evidence collected at a specific time has disadvantages - the attacker
might guess the memory traversal strategy or schedule, allowing him to hide
or exploit software vulnerabilities with ROP and DOP attacks [JGP21].
To
address this RA schemes like C-FLAT [AAD+16a] focus on continuously gath-
ering dynamic evidence. C-FLAT, implemented in the secure world in TrustZone
[PS19], traces the execution of runtime software, creating an accumulating hash
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Energy harvesting IoT devices
19
for each control flow statement in the execution flow. This hash is then sent to
the Verifier for comparison. Extensions are made in LO-FAT [DZN+17], which
uses custom-made hardware to reduce the overhead of TrustZone, and LiteHAX
[DAIS18], which extends C-FLAT and LO-FAT by attesting both executed in-
structions and the control-flow via a hardware-based co-processor.
[JGP21]
presents a cost-benefit analysis of dynamic evidence collection and argues that
it is important to pay attention to how the evidence is gathered so that it does
not miss critical details because of its higher complexity.
It is worth mentioning that an alternative to computing a complex attestation
response on a Prover can be achieved through the Fog Computing paradigm.
ERAMO [ODD21] uses memory offloading - transferring the entirety of the
memory contents while trading off the added communication overhead.
2.3
Energy harvesting IoT devices
In the field of IoT energy harvesting devices are devices that can autonomously
power their operations by sourcing energy from their environment. The energy
of ambient sources like light, RF, thermal, and motion (for example vibration)
is harvested and converted into electrical energy. The power output of a typical
harvester is in the range of a few µW to a few mW [KS22], which can be accumu-
lated in an energy buffer until enough power is available to enable operations.
For low-power applications energy harvesting has the potential to completely
replace batteries, enabling the use of batteryless sensing devices.
Through improvements in technology, energy harvesting has the potential to
represent the next big leap in IoT. It makes IoT devices self-powered, driving
maintenance costs down as it eliminates the need to replace batteries. Further-
more, it reduces the large amounts of e-waste produced by the IoT sector in the
form of replaced batteries. The combination of lower costs and higher sustain-
ability brings on the emergence of the so-called Hyperscale IoT - systems made
up of autonomous devices which require little to no maintenance [Eve22].
Depending on the type of ambient source of energy even a low-power energy har-
vesting device cannot guarantee to maintain continuous execution. As a simple
example devices relying on solar power cannot harvest energy at night and will
power off when the energy buffer is depleted [KS22]. Because of the variance in
available ambient energy power failures are considered unavoidable [BASM16],
which means that energy harvesting devices have to be able to maintain their
normal functions in an intermittent manner.
==PAGE:32==
20
Background
2.4
TrustZone
TrustZone [PS19] is a security extension offered by ARM, which provides an
isolated secure execution environment. From a high-level perspective, it works
by splitting the available hardware and software on the device into two worlds: a
secure world and a normal world [NMB+16]. The two worlds share the physical
processor core, each taking ownership of it in a specific instance of time. Secure
world corresponds to a secure processor state and normal world corresponds
to a non-secure processor state.
Secure world resources such as designated
regions of memory, system controls, and state switching cannot be accessed by
normal world directly because of hardware barriers. Vice-versa - secure world
has unrestricted access to normal world. This partitioning provides system-wide
isolation of the worlds, which allows for secure world to be leveraged as a TEE.
SecureBoot
TrustZone is commercially available for both mobile device architectures (Cortex-
A processors) and low-end microcontroller architectures (Cortex-M processors).
The general idea of context-based isolation for each platform is the same, but the
implementation for micro-controllers is optimized for lower power consumption
and latency when switching between worlds.
On TrustZone-enabled Cortex-A processors physical components are extended
with an active-high non-secure (NS) bit to be able to preserve the context re-
striction.
This bit is distributed through the system bus to peripherals and
memory from a secure configuration register (SCR). Depending on the value
in NS, each operation executed by the processor is performed in either secure
or normal world. The processor has an additional mode called monitor mode,
which is responsible for preserving the processor context on a transition between
worlds. Each world has its own banked version of special registers and some sys-
tem registers. The switch from normal world to secure world can be done via a
secure monitor call executed in privileged mode - if the secure monitor deter-
mines that the switch is allowed, it changes the NS bit and switches context.
This means there is only one point of entry into secure world.
On Cortex-M processors the TrustZone implementation is optimized toward
lower latency and energy use when switching states. Instead of having a mon-
itor mode, the isolation between the two worlds is based on a memory map,
which enforces restrictions based on where the address of the instruction cur-
rently executed is placed. Code running from secure memory means that the
processor is in secure world, and code running from non-secure memory means
that the processor is in normal world. Transitions between worlds happen when
execution switches to a memory in another security domain. Directly switching
from non-secure to secure memory is not allowed, but instead, it has to be done
==PAGE:33==
2.4 TrustZone
21
Figure 2.3: Registers on TrustZone-enabled ARM Cortex-M [ARM22]
through a non-secure callable (NSC) memory sub-region, which exposes multi-
ple points of entry, while preventing entries due to accidental matches in binary
data. To reduce switching overhead general purpose registers, except the stack
pointer and some special registers which are banked, are shared between states
as shown in Figure 2.3 which also means that calls to and from can use them
for parameter and return values [Arm19]. Because of the focus on embedded
systems and the associated real-time requirements interrupts from normal world
can trigger state transitions while in secure world - the processor automatically
puts the information onto the secure world stack and empties the shared register
banks. On system startup, the processor always starts in secure world. It then
makes a call to the security attribution unit (SAU), which assigns a specific level
of security to each memory region based on a pre-defined memory map stored
in its configuration. If such a configuration doesn’t exist, only a secure world
will be present. Based on the implementation, secure world can be split into
different nested domains with different levels of access to one another.
It’s important to note that just because TrustZone provides an isolated execution
environment, it does not guarantee an infallible hardware root of trust.
In
a survey summarizing common vulnerabilities in TrustZone and other TEEs,
==PAGE:34==
22
Background
[CSFP20] identify problems with regard to how the technology is implemented,
both in the form of software bugs and misconfiguration or misuse of hardware.
However, TrustZone is a widely adopted platform, so it is fairly well researched
and examined, with a large community behind it [PS19]. It allows for secure
firmware updates, meaning that bugs can be patched when discovered.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Related Work
This chapter’s focus is on examining state-of-the-art literature with regard to
intermittence in IoT in order to create an overview of how the intermittent
execution model can be leveraged to support remote attestation.
To create
a selection of suitable papers for the literature review the term “intermittent
computing” is used.
The results are sorted by the number of citations and
overall quality.
Only peer-reviewed papers written in English and published
in high-quality journals are considered. Furthermore, the papers are evaluated
with regard to the context they provide – papers from before 2015 are only
included if they are referenced by more recent works.
The chapter begins by introducing the topic of intermittent execution and its
challenges and then goes on to describe how the different works address these
challenges. Finally, it examines the intersection of remote attestation and in-
termittent execution in order to form the basis for the protocol proposed in
Chapter 4.
==PAGE:36==
24
Related Work
3.1
Intermittent execution
3.1.1
Introduction
An intermittent device is a device that sporadically turns off when its available
power storage is depleted. When a device powers down all volatile memory is
erased, and as such, all program progress, which is not persisted in non-volatile
memory, is lost. An intermittent device is different from a continuously-powered
device as it cannot guarantee to complete its function before power failure.
The paradigm of intermittent computing deals with how to design a system to
function correctly while accounting for power failures, allowing it to resume its
operations on wake-up once power is available.
3.1.2
Challenges
[LBC+17a] presents an overview of the challenges, associated with intermittent
execution.
• Control flow: After resuming operation, the control flow of the program
picks up from a potentially unpredictable place, not explicitly shown by
the source code; taking into account implicit control flows adds extra com-
plexity to the design and implementation of an intermittent device.
• Forward progress: Guaranteeing forward progress is a problem in energy-
starved environments because if the resumed program cannot advance to
the next state-saving point, it will execute the same span of code again and
again after each wake-up; Important to consider the quantum of energy
available at execution start and whether the platform recharges during
execution
• Data consistency: Volatile memory is erased when the device shuts down,
while non-volatile memory remains the same, which can lead to an incon-
sistent state once the device wakes up again.
• Environmental consistency: Sensor data can be stale because of long pe-
riods of OFF state and atomic sensor access can be split across a power
failure. This is referred to as data freshness by other works ([KYB+20],
[SLJ20]).
• Concurrency: Intermittent execution complicates concurrency control, for
example when multiple sensor peripherals operate concurrently in separate
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Intermittent execution
25
control threads, pushing sensor data into a single intermittent device via
interrupts. Furthermore, if each peripheral has its own federated energy
storage, charging and discharging independently, the software on the main
device must synchronize across multiple intermittent devices.
• Distributed intermittent devices: In order for two separate intermittent
devices to communicate, both need to be on for a long enough period of
time. Therefore a network of intermittent devices must gracefully handle
communication often not completing successfully.
3.1.3
Techniques
Two main software techniques with which intermittence is handled are examined:
task-based program decomposition and checkpoint-based program decomposi-
tion 1. In both cases, on wake-up, the program resumes from where it left off
when the power failure occurred. With checkpoint-based program decomposi-
tion, at certain points in execution, the current state of volatile memory is stored
in non-volatile memory; at wake-up, the program resumes from the last stored
checkpoint. In task-based program decomposition, the program is decomposed
into tasks which execute idempotently, store their state to NVM on task end,
so progress is made at the task level.
3.1.3.1
Checkpoint-based program decomposition
When considering how to handle the challenges of the intermittent execution
model it is important to note that it is not trivial to store program state in non-
volatile memory with regards to energy overhead [RSF11]. Flash is normally
instrumented in segments, and an entire segment needs to be erased at once,
which requires a similar amount of energy as writing data to the entire segment.
Flash writes are slower and consume more energy than RAM writes, and only a
certain amount of Flash is available to store checkpoints in. MementOS [RSF11]
is an early example of energy-aware checkpoint-based program decomposition,
which takes into account the specifics of writing to non-volatile memory. Its
focus is executing long-running tasks on intermittently powered RFID devices
- for example, completing a cryptographic operation before the energy budget
runs out. The compiler inserts trigger points at different places in the program
execution, which using hardware during runtime measure the voltage of the
available energy budget. If that voltage is lower than a predefined threshold,
1To reduce the scope of the survey, works leveraging the use on nonvolatile processors
[SML+17] are not included.
==PAGE:38==
26
Related Work
an in-place checkpoint is created of only the regions of RAM that are currently
in use. It is always assumed that no energy will be harvested before a power
failure, which means that the responsibility lies on the programmer to specify
an optimal checkpoint threshold voltage, so as to allow for the checkpoint to
finish being stored. It is also up to the programmer to define the mode in which
trigger points are inserted, where the energy check could be performed either
for every iteration of a loop, on each function return, or signaled by a scheduled
timer-based interrupt. Because a checkpoint only includes the regions of RAM
currently in use, the size, and energy required to store a checkpoint vary based
on the selected mode and its stack depth. MementOS stores checkpoints head
first and tail last in a circular buffer with one active checkpoint at a time.
This means that if the checkpoint routine is interrupted by a power failure, the
incomplete checkpoint will be detected and marked for deletion.
Instead of using implicit dynamic checkpoints like MementOS, DINO [LR15]
creates checkpoints at static programmer-defined task boundaries by copying
the registers and stack of the current task to non-volatile memory. The dy-
namic checkpointing offered by Memento can result in errors from interrupted
execution accumulating in non-volatile memory, causing consistency violations
(where the NVM is in a state which would have never happened during con-
tinuous execution). To prevent this from happening DINO implements a data
versioning mechanism, which copies non-volatile variables into volatile memory
every time a checkpoint is created. When a task’s execution is interrupted, the
restore from the checkpoint will also restore non-volatile variables to a consis-
tent state, overriding any changes made by the interrupted task. Similarly to
MementOS, DINO checkpoints are double-buffered and their size and energy
requirements depend on the depth of the current stack.
As an alternative to checkpoint heuristics, Hibernus [BWM+15] leverages the
use of FRAM to transfer the entire volatile memory to when an imminent power
failure is detected using a hardware interrupt. The device then enters a hiber-
nating state, sleeping in a low-power mode. When the available energy is over
a certain restore voltage threshold, another hardware interrupt puts the device
in active state, restores the snapshot, and resumes operations. According to the
results presented by Hibernus [BWM+15], this has the potential to noticeably
reduce overhead compared to MementOS, where multiple redundant checkpoints
will be created if the system is hovering around the voltage threshold.
Ratchet [VDWH16] is a compiler, based on LLVM, which provides hardware-
independent automatic checkpointing for ARM-based energy-harvesting devices.
Instead of using hardware to measure the available energy budget like Memen-
tOS and Hibernus or relying on programmer-defined task boundaries like DINO,
Ratchet uses static analysis to identify idempotent sections. These represent se-
quences, which if re-executed, do not result in an inconsistent program state -
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Intermittent execution
27
meaning that they contain no W-A-R dependencies for variables stored in NVM.
This brings a limitation - Ratchet does not support atomic read-modify-write
instructions. The idempotent sections are connected with checkpoints of volatile
state, from which the program is resumed after a power failure. In order to en-
sure forward progress in the case of compiler-defined idempotent sections being
too large, a timer-based interrupt is used to trigger a checkpoint in the case that
no checkpoints have been created since the last interrupt.
As pointed out by MementOS, storing checkpoints in Flash memory is much
more expensive than regular system operations.
The time and energy cost
of checkpointing is reduced when using different types of NVM, as shown by
[BWM+15] and [VDWH16] which target FRAM. However, even in those cases
storing checkpoints amounts to a large part of the overall energy use of an in-
termittent device, because of the large overhead related to the amount of data
written in NVM. DICE [ABA+19] is an add-on to existing checkpointing ap-
proaches, which reduces the amount of information written for every checkpoint
after the first one to only contain the difference between the previous check-
point and the current state of volatile memory. Code instrumentation done by
a precompiler records differentials in an in-memory data structure. These dif-
ferentials contain modifications for variables with a global context, separating
them based on segment (bss, data, heap) to keep the size small. When a check-
point occurs, the in-memory data structure is used to identify which parts of
what’s currently in the NVM need updating, which costs less than previously
mentioned techniques.
A problem with existing approaches identified by [KYB+20] is the use of point-
ers and recursion when porting existing C code to an intermittent execution
model. Dynamic memory manipulations via pointers cannot be determined at
compile time, which means that to guarantee consistency, all memory should
be checkpointed after each pointer manipulation. This can potentially inhibit
forward progress, as larger checkpoints cannot be guaranteed to fit into the
available energy budget.
In order to reduce this overhead TICS records the
original values only of manipulated memory locations in an undo log stored in
NVM. In the event of a power failure, TICS restores the original pointer values
from the undo log, preserving consistency without having to copy the entire
memory. Similarly to Ratchet [VDWH16], TICS [KYB+20] leverages the use
of automatic checkpoints, instrumented at compile time on systems with non-
volatile main memory. During compilation, TICS also segments the stack into
fixed and pre-determined sized blocks, each of which represents a working stack
- the stack that the program is currently manipulating. Only the current stack
segment is included in a checkpoint, reducing the overhead of the operation.
==PAGE:40==
28
Related Work
3.1.3.2
Task-based program decomposition
Chain [CL16] aims to remove the overhead incurred by checkpointing-based
techniques by instead decomposing the program in programmer-defined tasks
with a channel-based memory model. The execution model guarantees progress
preservation by tracking the currently executing task. If a power failure occurs,
control will always resume from the beginning of that task, and will always flow
deterministically as defined by the task sequence. Variables local to a task are
stored in volatile memory. In contrast, communication between tasks is done
over channel-based variables, stored in non-volatile memory, which guarantees
memory consistency and task idempotence, removing the need for checkpointing
between tasks.
Alpaca [MCL17] is an example of a task-based program decomposition scheme,
which focuses on solving the challenges presented by [LBC+17a] and targets
heterogeneous hardware systems. This means that the solution has minimal
hardware requirements - so it works on devices that have both volatile and
non-volatile memory and is energy agnostic. Similar to Chain, Alpaca uses a
static task model, where each task is a user-defined region of code that executes
atomically, and once it’s finished executing transfers control to another explicitly
defined task. If a task’s execution is interrupted by a power failure, the current
program state is discarded; when resuming, the same task gets executed again.
To avoid inconsistent data in variables shared between tasks Alpaca uses a
compiler-generated privatization buffer - each task maintains a private copy of
shared variables with W-A-R dependencies, which gets atomically committed
on task completion. In this way, it differs from Chain, as a separate channel is
not required for each pair of tasks.
When considering low-level embedded devices, there are two approaches when
it comes to how to obtain data from the environment - polling and interrupts.
With polling, the execution flow alternates between polling a sensor for data
and processing collected sensor data. On an intermittent device, this can lead
to a scenario, in which after wake-up the data being processed is not relevant
anymore. With interrupts the current execution is preempted every time new
sensor data is available, thus making sure the device is always processing the
newest data available. Coati [RL19] builds on Alpaca with the focus on extend-
ing the intermittent execution model to handle I//O peripherals, which inter-
rupt the main program flow when sensing certain events in the environment.
In Alpaca[MCL17] if the device runs out of power while executing an inter-
rupt, it can lead to partially updated data, because only variables with W-A-R
are privatized (so an ISR can cause inconsistent data with a write operation).
Coati extends tasks with events, where events are invoked on an interrupt and
run a split-phase interaction, where after the data is received, processing it is
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Intermittent execution
29
postponed until the current executing task finishes.
Splitting a program into tasks requires a good estimate of how much energy
a section of code will use (regardless if it is done by the programmer or the
compiler) and how much energy will be harvested during said execution. This
means that it is difficult to port task-based execution models across devices
with different-sized energy buffers. If a task is too large there is a risk of non-
termination, and tasks that are too small incur higher than necessary overhead.
Coala [MDM+20] addresses the possibility of non-termination by providing a
solution, which adapts the size of tasks dynamically. The solution uses a vir-
tual memory manager to track dependencies when grouping or splitting tasks
based on the energy available at runtime, which it estimates using recent exe-
cution history. Furthermore, if a task fails to complete multiple times, Coala
makes a partial commit of the intermediate state of a task using a timer-based
mechanism.
3.1.4
Intermittence and timekeeping
Applications running on IoT devices often have temporal requirements, for ex-
ample reacting to an event within a certain amount of time or sampling the
environment at a certain rate. In a continuous execution model, where opera-
tions execute one after the other within a small period of time in a predictable
way, keeping track of elapsed time can be done using the system clock, which
can timestamp data with a relative or absolute value. However, in the inter-
mittent execution model, the system clock is turned off when the power fails
[MLH+20], which means it cannot be used to keep track of time elapsed during
a power failure. In order to address this TARDIS [RSH+12] proposes the use of
a remanence timekeeper. On wake-up after a power failure, the software inspects
the decay of a predefined sector of SRAM by measuring the fraction of cells,
which retained their state. This allows for keeping track of elapsed time during
a power failure without the need for special hardware or a power source.
The intermittent execution model brings added complexity to timekeeping, as
it requires the programmer to consider the possibility of timestamps created
by an untrustworthy clock [HSS17], where the timestamp recorded might not
correspond to when the data is recorded if the two operations took place before
and after a power failure. Furthermore, on wake-up, the data restored from the
last checkpoint might not be useful if it is too old. This creates a lot of overhead
for even a simple sensing task - in order to maintain temporal constraints, the
program needs to track when data is generated, when it is expired and when
more data needs to be gathered. To address this [HSS17] propose Mayfly - a
task-based language built on Embedded-C (similar to DINO [LR15]), designed
==PAGE:42==
30
Related Work
to aid the coordination of time-sensitive data. The program is represented as a
task graph, where the edge between two tasks has constraints on how to treat
the data - for example, how long can the data sit on an edge (not being picked
up by a task) before it expires. This automatically takes care of data expiration
and sensitive data collection. During power failure, the Mayfly runtime keeps
track of local time by using either remanence timekeepers or a real-time clock
with dedicated energy storage.
TICS [KYB+20] is a checkpoint-based approach that also addresses the chal-
lenges of time consistency like Mayfly, by providing annotations that the pro-
grammer can use to relate the passage of time to data. Similar to Mayfly, in
order for this to work, the system needs to be able to measure time across power
failure outages.
When considering the timekeeping hardware to use in an intermittent system,
it is important to note that both remanence-based and RTC-based techniques
have their drawbacks. With remanence timekeepers, the size of the capacitor
and resistor control how long of a power outage can be measured (as bigger
capacitors will take longer to discharge).
This comes with a trade-off of re-
quired energy consumption to charge the capacitor at wake-up and means that
the timekeeper needs to be finely tuned to the expected on/off schedule of the
intermittent system, bringing increased complexity. If relying on an RTC for
timekeeping on an intermittent device, it is important to select one with low
resolution and low power consumption. The quiescent current draw requires
some form of power, making the RTC not a feasible solution for batteryless
platforms. Even with an independent power source, a real-time clock might
not provide optimal functioning in an intermittent system, depending on how
long the cold-boot time is compared to the expected operational time. An RTC
designed to function in a system where the operational time is exponentially
longer than the powered-off time might still be in a cold-boot state when an
intermittent device runs out of energy [dWDDY+20]. To address these chal-
lenges, [dWDDY+20], proposes Botoks, which leverages the use of Cascaded
Hierarchical Remanence Timekeeper (CHRT) for hierarchic timekeeping. The
solution combines multiple remanence capacitors in order to minimize cold-boot
time and energy consumption depending on the use case. Similar to Mayfly and
TICS, Botoks exposes a high-level interface, which allows fine-grained tuning
and access to timestamp information for the programmer.
3.1.5
Securing checkpointed data
As described in Section 3.1.3, in order to handle the frequent power failures that
are a part of the intermittent execution model, some form of data is persisted
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Intermittent execution
31
to NVM before a power failure occurs. On wake-up, this data is used to restore
the device’s operation so as to assure the forward progress of the system. If
any sensitive data such as passwords, secret keys, or an intermediate state of a
cryptographic primitive is persisted as part of a checkpoint, it is vulnerable to
an attacker that gains access to NVM. If an attacker gains physical access to
the device, they can easily exploit unencrypted checkpoints via on-chip probing
techniques.
An approach for general-purpose computers involves encrypting the entire non-
volatile memory; however, the overhead involved in that is not suitable for
low-power intermittent IoT devices ([GGK17], [SKS18]). [GGK17] uses cryp-
tography to encrypt checkpoints of the program state, including the program
counter, registry file, and dirty L1 cache lines, before writing them to NVM. In
order to restore the program state on wake-up it then proceeds to decrypt the
checkpoint, as all data stored in NVM is encrypted. This leads to an increase
in energy and latency overhead, which can prove to be heavy for a resource-
constrained intermittent device, and in turn cause more power failures.
To
compensate for this, [GGK17] introduces a scheduler module in the processor
pipeline, which decides when to checkpoint by taking into account the available
energy budget and previous executions in order to find the optimal checkpoint-
ing policy.
[SKS18] explores the vulnerabilities associated with storing checkpoints in NVM,
demonstrating three possible exploits: checkpoint snooping, checkpoint spoofing
and checkpoint replay.
When checkpoints are stored in NVM without being
encrypted first, they are vulnerable to checkpoint snooping. An attacker with
knowledge of the system can easily find and extract any sensitive information,
stored as part of the system state when the checkpoint occurred, resulting in a
loss of confidentiality. A blind attacker, that is one without knowledge of the
system, could also perform checkpoint snooping by analyzing patterns in mem-
ory to locate the sensitive data, stored in checkpoints. Assuming the attacker
can modify NVM, they can use that to perform checkpoint spoofing, and tam-
per with existing checkpoints. If nothing is done on wake-up to verify that a
checkpoint has not been tampered with, the attacker will have gained control
over program execution. Even if checkpoints in NVM are encrypted, an attacker
can still corrupt them, writing random data in memory, causing the program to
restore in an invalid state on wake-up, potentially resulting in system failure.
Finally, an attacker capable of checkpoint snooping can also perform checkpoint
replay - make copies of checkpoints and take control of the execution sequence
by overriding a current checkpoint with a previous one. Similar to the spoof-
ing attack, encrypting the checkpoint does not prevent its replay - the attacker
can simply identify and override the latest encrypted checkpoint with an earlier
one. If the system does not verify the freshness of a checkpoint on wake-up, the
attacker is theoretically able to indefinitely restore the device to a stale state.
==PAGE:44==
32
Related Work
While the encryption offered by [GGK17] provides confidentiality, which pre-
vents snooping, it does nothing to guarantee the authenticity and integrity of
the checkpoints, stored in NVM.
SECCS [VDSDN+18] introduces a custom-built hardware module for secure
context saving, placed between the processor and the NVM, which contains
a key generator, an RNG, a MAC engine, and a stream cipher.
Similar to
Hibernus [BWM+15], a voltage-based hardware interrupt activates the module
so that the data coming out from the CPU is encrypted, signed with a MAC,
and then stored in NVM. On wake-up, another voltage-based hardware interrupt
restores the checkpoint, decrypting the context content and checking the MAC
to verify integrity.
SICP [KSDS19] addresses the same vulnerabilities as described by [SKS18],
mapping them into four specific objectives, which guarantee the security and
availability of the intermittent mechanism. Information security refers to the
objective that checkpointed data needs to be confidential, authentic, and guar-
antee integrity. Freshness means that there needs to be a guarantee that the
system will always be restored from the most recent checkpoint. Continuity
requires that wake-up operations will always resume from where they left off.
Finally, Atomicity assures that the protocol will always leave the system in a
consistent state regardless of power loss.
The adversarial model described in SICP differs from the one presented by
[SKS18] as it’s assumed that the attacker also has control over the power and
can therefore stop and start the execution of the program at will. For exam-
ple, an attacker could maliciously trigger a system shutdown in order to force
an intermediate checkpoint, which exposes sensitive data. As far as hardware
requirements, SICP focuses on the general case by assuming the existence of
tamper-free NVM, but not one large enough to store checkpoint data, as the
space required for checkpoints depends on the program’s execution, rather than
on the device’s characteristics. The size of the tamper-free NVM is kept to a
minimum in order to reduce the associated cost and complexity. Finally, SICP
also assumes the presence of a residual source of power, which cannot be tam-
pered with, which on power failure provides enough energy to complete writing
a 128-bit value to NVM and wipe volatile memory.
SICP uses an Authenticated-Encryption with Associated-Data (AEAD [Rog02])
encryption function when storing and reading checkpoint data to and from the
NVM. Each time the system wakes up after a power failure, a nonce is stored in
the tamper-free NVM. This nonce is included as input for the AEAD in the next
checkpoint together with the checkpoint state and associated data. This pre-
vents replay attacks, assuring that only the most recent checkpoint is restored.
The correct sequence of execution is guaranteed by chaining authentication tags
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Intermittent execution
33
- in every checkpoint a tag is submitted as associated data, which is then used
to compute the next tag. Finally, in order to assure that a saved state is not
corrupted by power failure, two checkpoints are kept in memory, an old and new
one, and new changes are always written to the old one.
SIA [DSKS19] proposes an architecture for securing intermittent devices, pro-
viding a mechanism for both remote attestation and secure communication. In
addition to physical and software adversaries, SIA also considers an attacker,
who is in control of the communication network. The solution requires that
some form of memory protection features are present and configured, in order
to isolate access to protected memory regions inside a software module. Further-
more, the protected memory regions need to be large enough to store both the
checkpointing routine and the checkpointed data. Thanks to the access rules
enforced by the MPU, checkpointed data is secure and can be trusted, thus
removing the overhead involved in encrypting it.
[AWB+20] focuses on comparing the performance of possible ways to secure
checkpointed data stored in NVM in the scope of ARM Cortex M* devices. The
work presented benchmarks the use of cryptographic primitives (software-based
AES and hardware-based AES) against the use of memory isolation (TrustZone)
in order to compare how effective each approach is with regard to low-power
intermittent devices. Similar to the previously mentioned adversarial models,
the attacker has physical access to the device and can snoop (read) or spoof
(tamper with) data, persisted on the NVM. Additionally, for TrustZone-enabled
devices, a software attacker who can run malicious code on the device and read
normal-world memory is also considered.
Using cryptographic primitives can pose a problem for an intermittent device, as
the encryption consumes a large amount of energy, forbidding forward progress.
[KS22] gives an example of a use case where CRC verification is running on
an intermittent device and each power failure creates a checkpoint - in order
for the application to make forward progress, at least a single instruction of
the program code needs to execute on device wake-up. To address this, [KS22]
proposes a multi-level checkpoint security scheme using AEAD, which allows
for a granular selection of which parts of the program state and device state
should be encrypted. The solution has the same adversary as SICP, as well
as the same hardware requirements - there exists tamper-free memory, but not
one large enough to store checkpointed data.
The difference lies in the fact
that a checkpoint can be split into secure and non-secure sections so that only
the sensitive parts of it are encrypted, thus reducing the overhead whenever
possible.
The works discussed until now focus only on a physical adversary, who can
==PAGE:46==
34
Related Work
manipulate checkpoints stored in NVM directly with the assumption that the
program, executing on the device, is safe and error-free. It’s important to also
consider the threat of a remote adversary which can corrupt stored checkpoints
by exploiting runtime without any need for physical access. For example, by
exploiting a buffer overflow one can overwrite memory stored next to the buffer,
which can potentially lead to an inconsistent state when a checkpoint is restored.
Memory isolation-based approaches such as TrustZone or SIA can address this
and reduce encryption overhead as demonstrated by [AWB+20]. However, in
real-world applications, these are prone to vulnerabilities due to misconfigura-
tion and misuse of hardware [CSFP20]. To mitigate these issues MPI [GAYC22]
offers a hypervisor-based approach, which requires no dedicated hardware, and
is made up of a Trusted Computing Module (TCM) and a compiler. TCM is
the hypervisor, serving as a trust anchor, which logically divides the memory
into zones with different privilege levels. The TCM maintains separate check-
points for itself and for the untrusted application software in two different areas
of memory. Checkpoint images are stored in protected memory and can only
be read and restored by TCM. The hypervisor is complemented by a compiler,
which statically replaces any potentially unsafe instructions with hypervisor
calls, which check whether the level of privilege is allowed at runtime.
3.1.6
Discussion
In conclusion, this section discusses the examined literature and presents the
main takeaways from it with regard to what should be considered when applying
remote attestation to the intermittent execution model.
Storing program state to non-volatile memory comes at a relatively high cost
for an energy-harvesting device. Writes to Flash memory are slow and bulky,
and while this can be somewhat helped by the use of other technologies such as
FRAM, a lot of focus is paid in the examined work on the trade-off between how
much forward progress the program can achieve and how much energy is used
on storing checkpoints. Table 3.1 shows a comparison of the literature examined
in this chapter and attempts to categorize it with regard to specific properties,
which relate to the use of remote attestation. Conclusions based on it regarding
the state-of-the-art are drawn below.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Intermittent execution
35
Work
Decomposition
technique
Checkpoint
trigger
Required
hardware
Security
Energy
aware
Time
aware
Chain [CL16],
Alpaca [MCL17],
DINO [LR15],
Coati [RL19],
Coala [MDM+20]
Task-based
Task end
No
No
No
No
MementOS [RSF11]
Checkpoint-based
Energy treshold
No
No
Yes
No
Hibernus [BWM+15]
N/A
Hardware
Custom-built module
No
N/A
N/A
Ratchet [VDWH16]
Checkpoint-based
Compiler-inserted
checkpoints
NVM main memory
No
No
No
TICS [KYB+20]
Checkpoint-based
Compiler-inserted
checkpoints
NVM main memory
RTC/remanence timekeeper
No
No
Yes
Mayfly [HSS17]
Task-based
Task end
RTC/remanence timekeeper
No
No
Yes
MPI [GAYC22]
Checkpoint-based
API call
No hardware required
Hypervisor
No
No
SIA [DSKS19]
Checkpoint-based
Automatic
(on power loss)
MPU
AEAD;
attestation
No
No
OptimalCheckpointing
[GGK17]
Checkpoint-based
Runtime
scheduler
Secure key storage
Encryption
Yes
No
SICP [KSDS19]
Checkpoint-based
Automatic
(on power loss)
Secure checkpoint storage
AEAD
N/A
N/A
SECCS [VDSDN+18]
N/A
Hardware
Custom-built module
PUF
N/A
N/A
Table 3.1: Comparison of related works
==PAGE:48==
36
Related Work
Similar to the works examined in Section 2.2 , proposals for intermittent ex-
ecution in IoT can be categorized as either software-based or hardware-based.
Just like with the RA protocols here it can also be argued that custom-built
hardware solutions like SECCS [VDSDN+18] and Hibernus [BWM+15] are not
feasible for real-world applications, due to their specificity and lack of com-
mercial availability. Some software-based solutions like [RSF11] aim to reduce
the cost of checkpointing by reducing its frequency and only storing checkpoints
when strictly necessary - an example of a software-based energy-aware approach
is provided by [RSF11], while others reduce the amount of data required to re-
store state by requiring the programmer to switch to a task-based decomposition
technique.
Security of the intermittent system has only been considered in a small amount
of the examined papers, and only the work done by [GAYC22] and [DSKS19]
focuses on addressing the remote adversary, as described in Section 2.2.2. Ac-
cording to a classification provided in [KS22], existing solutions for securing
checkpointed data can be split into two groups - those that rely on memory
isolation and those that rely on cryptographic primitives, where encrypting and
decrypting checkpointed data is more expensive with regards to energy. Out
of the works which do address security, only MPI [GAYC22] requires no hard-
ware support, leading to the conclusion that some basic requirement of secured
memory is common in the state-of-the-art.
In the real-world IoT devices are often used for sensing, and when intermittence
is introduced it brings its own unique challenges to which special attention must
be paid. Systems that work with sensor data often have a freshness requirement,
which guarantees that the data being processed is current and not out-of-date.
This requires the existence of a thrust-worthy clock which is not trivial for a
low-power system, as the device needs to somehow keep track of time while
being powered down, adding a need for additional hardware.
3.2
Remote attestation in intermittent execution
The classic remote attestation protocol described in Section 2.2 takes place as a
challenge-response protocol, where the Verifier sends a challenge and expects the
Prover to provide evidence of its state, often with an associated time constraint.
Strict timing requirements can prove challenging for an energy harvesting IoT
device, which cannot promise to have enough energy to return a response when
receiving a challenge (also because based on the type of evidence gathered AT-
TEST itself can require a lot of energy). Techniques exist in the examined work
of providing RA to IoT that aim to alleviate timing constraints where the root of
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Remote attestation in intermittent execution
37
trust on the Prover can be software-based ([ACT20], [CKN07]), hardware-based
([AFS97]) or some combination of the two ([BEMS+15], [EPT12]). However,
these don’t explicitly focus on how the classic remote attestation protocol has to
be adapted to the circumstance that an energy harvesting Prover cannot guar-
antee to be on to receive the challenge in the first place. This section examines
works, which address how the RA protocol can be transformed from on-demand
to using self-measurement and how that can be applied to a device with an
intermittent execution model.
[FNRT14] argue that the atomicity of an attestation routine is a required prop-
erty to achieve a trustworthy attestation result as it prevents the adversary from
taking over control flow to avoid detection. However, there are cases in which it
is impractical to assume that attestation can execute and finish without inter-
ruptions. [CER+18] shows that attesting MP , depending on memory size, might
take a long time, which can substantially impact a Prover’s regular functions.
Consider a situation where the Verifier sends a challenge while the Prover exe-
cutes the software with a safety-critical function and the two possible scenarios.
The first one is that the challenge triggers the attestation routine on the Prover,
which interrupts the safety-critical function, similar to SMART [EPT12]. Due
to the atomic nature of RA, the Prover cannot return to its regular function until
all necessary evidence is gathered, which can result in an unwanted delay. The
second scenario is that in a scheme like TyTAN [BEMS+15], the safety-critical
function can keep preempting the attestation routine, resulting in a false posi-
tive about a compromised Prover. This also applies to intermittent IoT devices
with limited energy budgets that cannot guarantee enough power to execute the
entire attestation routine after receiving a challenge.
The general RA protocol described in Section 2.2 is an on-demand one, meaning
that it is initiated by the Verifier. As shown, this is not a feasible approach
for attesting devices, which cannot guarantee that the attestation routine will
complete.
A solution to this problem is given by ERASMUS [CTR18] who
suggest using self-measurement for RA as shown in Figure 3.1. In this case,
the Prover periodically executes ATTEST, measuring its software state and
storing the result in a buffer. Independently the Verifier periodically requests
and verifies these measurements, establishing a history of the Prover’s state. A
limitation posed by ERASMUS is that measurements can take a non-negligible
amount of time in the case of time-sensitive applications. To combat that, both
the Prover and Verifier should be made aware of when execution is taking place
or given the ability to interrupt measurements (which opens the door to malware
exploiting interrupts).
SeED [ISZ17] employs an approach similar to ERASMUS, the difference being
2The step where each party verifies MAC using k is omitted for clarity
==PAGE:50==
38
Related Work
Figure 3.1: On-demand remote attestation protocol proposed by ERASMUS
2[CTR18]
that the protocol is non-interactive - the Prover is responsible for transmitting
the attestation result. The Verifier expects to receive a result within a fixed
timing schedule which is coordinated with the Prover, and if it doesn’t receive
one it assumes the Prover has been compromised.
ERASMUS and SeED focus on how ATTEST can remain atomic within the
context of a Prover still being able to perform its regular operation. In both
protocols, verification is based on scheduled times, which cannot be guaranteed
to be met by an intermittent Prover. However, the use of non-interactive, self-
measurement RA applies to an energy harvesting device - as the Prover can
decide whether it has enough energy to perform attestation to its completion
and only then initiate ATTEST.
The security architecture proposed in SIA [DSKS19] is focused specifically on
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Remote attestation in intermittent execution
39
bringing the security guarantees of remote attestation to the intermittent exe-
cution model by considering the executing code a single software module, with
its state checkpointed in a protected region within the module. Each module
has a module key derived from its program code and constants, also placed in
protected sections. The module key is unique because a unique serial number,
stored in a constant, is placed in the protected region. This key is then used
as the secret k in MAC and encryption functions for the attestation. The so-
lution offers three levels of attestation, which aim to complement each other
in the trade-off between required energy and guarantee of integrity. With self-
attestation, the module recomputes its key and compares it to the one stored
in the protected region, similar to approaches like [AFS97]. In fast attestation
a module receives a challenge and computes a response based on its module
key and challenge, without having to on-the-fly recompute the module key,
thus shortening the time and energy required for on-demand attestation. With
slow attestation the module receives a challenge and computes the result based
on the challenge, module key, and contents of memory (excluding data mem-
ory), same as the classic RA protocol described in 2.2 . As this operation can
be time-consuming, slow attestation itself needs to be checkpointable. SIA’s
memory-based isolation provides security with its hybrid root of trust, as a slow
attestation would detect an adversary, hiding in non-protected memory.
RESERVE [RDV+21] is a self-attestation RA protocol, which leverages the use
of checkpoints on an intermittent execution model in order to guarantee that
all of the device’s memory will be attested given enough time. In it, the Prover
is an intermittent device that wakes up with enough energy available such as
it is guaranteed to execute its main functionality before powering down again.
To support attestation, the code on the Prover is broken up into multiple mod-
ules each with a unique identifier, which is instrumented to specific checkpoints
stored in non-volatile memory. Each checkpoint stores that module’s PC, SP,
RF, and main memory, and the values are updated every time the module is
executed. When the Prover has leftover energy after completing its main func-
tionality, it executes ATTEST over the data in a single checkpoint, keeping
track of the most recently attested module. The Prover also stores a randomly
chosen line of the module’s code in the checkpoint, that it compares to the line’s
current contents when attesting other modules. Once all modules are attested
or no more energy is left, the Prover sends the output of its regular operation
together with the result of the attestation to the Verifier. This means that in
the worst-case scenario, the Verifier will only receive the result of the regular
operation, and in the best-case scenario, it will receive evidence of all of the
Prover’s memory. RESERVE uses a hybrid-based root of trust to assure the
trustworthiness of ATTEST and the integrity of checkpointed data. Similar to
other self-measurement schemes, the attestation result is timestamped in order
to prevent replay attacks. However the existence of a secure communication
channel is assumed, so the confidentiality and integrity of messages are not
==PAGE:52==
40
Related Work
considered.
The use of self-measurement without strict timing guarantees in RESERVE ad-
dresses the problem of completing attestation on an intermittent Prover and is
used as the basis of this project. However, some details of RESERVE’s pro-
posal are rather vague and still need further clarification. The assumption that
each module’s state can be checkpointed every time the device executes is not
feasible for a power-constrained device - storing the entirety of main memory
for each module assumes that enough write-protected space is available on the
Prover and does not take into account the energy consumption of writing to
NVM. Additionally, even though modules are checkpointed, that stored state is
never used for resuming operation - instead every time the Prover wakes up, it
resets its execution from the beginning, which means that it will never use the
previously written data (as it will be overwritten as the Prover executes). Based
on the performed investigation of the state-of-the-art of intermittent execution
in IoT, Chapter 4 proposes a solution that addresses these limitations in order
to showcase how the intermittent execution model can be leveraged to provide
the security guarantees of remote attestation.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Proposed Solution
This chapter presents the proposed solution which addresses the problem of
remote attestation on an energy-harvesting device. It begins by introducing the
background of the project in order to contextualize its goal and perspective. It
then defines the project’s scope, by outlining what the focus is on and what the
chosen limitations are. The proposed solution is then presented, followed by its
adversarial model and security requirements. Finally, the solution is discussed
with regard to its strengths, weaknesses, and feasibility in how it measures up
to the literature examined for the field of RA in IoT.
4.1
Introduction
IoT devices often get deployed in remote locations or hard-to-reach places inside
machinery, which prohibit the use of tethered power. After deployment, they
are expected to operate autonomously and with minimal maintenance. Even
with more traditional battery-powered IoT devices, which are not deployed in
hard-to-reach places, there is a large cost associated with recharging/swapping
the batteries throughout their lifetime. This, combined with a drive for sustain-
ability, has led to energy-harvesting technology becoming prominent as a move
toward self-powered devices and away from battery-powered ones [SMZF21].
==PAGE:54==
42
Proposed Solution
Energy-harvesting devices gather power from environmental sources like ther-
mal, solar, wind, RF, sound, and movement, among others.
Because of the
unstable nature of these power sources, an energy-harvesting device is expected
to lose power during its operations as a rule rather than as an exception. Even
when a device is optimized towards low power, if there is not enough energy
to harvest it will only at best function intermittently based on environmental
conditions [LBC+17b].
The solution proposed in this chapter considers an IoT device deployed to a
remote location in order to transmit environmental condition readings to a cen-
tral server. The device depends on harvesting energy from its surroundings,
and therefore functions intermittently, powering down when the available en-
ergy budget is below a certain threshold. This intermittent execution model
poses unique challenges with regard to the classic RA protocol. One is that the
device cannot guarantee to be powered on to receive a challenge sent from a Ver-
ifier as done in the classic RA model. Another challenge is that an intermittent
device cannot guarantee to be able to attest its entire memory in the available
energy budget. Because of the frequent power failures, it can end up in a situ-
ation where arriving challenges keep preempting its regular functions; then the
device turns off as it runs out of power before it can complete attestation and no
forward progress is made. A more fine-grained approach to remote attestation is
required, which takes into account how an intermittent IoT device can perform
its regular functionality and provides some guarantee that attestation will be
complete and bring on a certain security guarantee.
This project proposes leveraging the use of checkpoint-based program decom-
position to support the completion of a self-measurement remote attestation
protocol on an intermittent device. It builds off an idea first proposed by RE-
SERVE [RDV+21]. The idea is used as the foundation, but the proposed solution
modifies by adapting it to the findings from works in the field of intermittence
in IoT. The solution proposal tailors the self-measurement RA protocol to take
advantage of the techniques, used to enable intermittent execution in IoT, in
order to assure that both the system’s functionality and the security properties
are guaranteed.
4.2
Project scope
The focus of this project is on how the intermittent IoT device can perform
the role of Prover in a remote attestation protocol without interfering with its
regular operations. More precisely, the proposal targets how an intermittent
Prover can provide security guarantees about the integrity of its operations.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Overview of the proposal
43
The goal is to showcase how the mechanism that an intermittent device uses
to store and restore a state can be leveraged for attestation. Therefore, how
the code on the Prover is instrumented to trigger that mechanism is considered
out-of-scope - and these triggers are manually placed.
To reduce the scope of the project the proposed solution only considers remote
attestation for a single IoT device, where the verification is performed by a
trusted general-purpose computer. No attention is paid to how well this one-to-
one RA protocol will scale. In real-world IoT use cases, systems are made up
of hundreds if not thousands of devices with different responsibilities. For such
a scenario it might be unrealistic that a Verifier holds a record of the expected
contents of the checkpoints on many homogeneous Provers.
In the considered system, both the Prover and the communication channel are
vulnerable to attacks. Because the focus is on securing the Prover, the imple-
mentation of the Verifier is assumed to provide the root of trust in the RA
protocol.
Additionally, only a Prover with a single-core processor system is
considered. This simplifies the attack model as it guarantees a single flow of
execution, which means that an attacker cannot perform parallel operations
during attestation.
4.3
Overview of the proposal
Figure 4.1 shows an overview of the protocol with its main actors and how
they interact. In line with the self-measurement RA protocols from Section 3.2,
the RA sequence is initiated by the Prover. Each execution of the checkpoint
routine creates a one-way hash of the checkpointed data, as well as the program
memory executed since the last trigger point. This is enriched with a timestamp
and a hash-based message authentication code and then transmitted to the
Verifier. When receiving the message, the Verifier uses its own copy of k to
verify the authenticity and integrity of the transmitted message. The Verifier
has enough knowledge of the expected state of the Prover so that it can reason
from transmitted evidence whether a Prover is compromised or not.
Bellow
both the Prover and Verifier are discussed in more detail.
The Prover is an untrusted remote IoT device that is vulnerable to being com-
promised by a malicious adversary. The device relies on harvesting energy from
its environment and cannot guarantee continuous execution of its onboard pro-
gram due to intermittent power failures.
The Prover tolerates these power
failures by using a checkpoint-based intermittent execution model. The code
running on the Prover is instrumented with specific trigger points, in which
==PAGE:56==
44
Proposed Solution
Figure 4.1: Overview of the proposal
the currently available energy budget is evaluated. If it is below a predeter-
mined energy threshold, a power failure is considered imminent and the current
state of the program execution is stored in non-volatile memory.
To secure
the checkpointing routine and data a memory-isolation-based technique is used
similar to the approach employed by MPI [GAYC22] and SIA [DSKS19]. This
means that the solution requires some form of a memory control unit (MCU)
to govern which code can access which specific memory regions of both volatile
and non-volatile memory based on a predetermined configuration. Code origi-
nating from non-secure regions cannot directly access secure memory, assuring
the confidentiality, authenticity, and integrity of stored checkpointed data. The
checkpointed data includes a copy of the local stack, the registry file, the pro-
gram counter, and global variables and is stored using a double buffer and a
two-phase commit. On wake-up, the information from the checkpoint is loaded
into the main memory, and program execution resumes from where it left off.
For a more detailed description of how the proposed protocol integrates into the
execution model of a checkpoint-based intermittent Prover please see Section
5.2.
The Verifier is considered the root of trust as it cannot be compromised by an
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Adversary model and Security requirements
45
adversary. Compared to the Prover, it has a larger computational capacity and
a steady power supply.
Before deployment, both the Prover and the Verifier are instrumented with
a required shared secret k, which is used for encrypting the communication
between the two. The secret on the Prover has to be stored in protected memory.
It should be noted that symmetric cryptography is chosen for its simplicity - as
key management is not the focus of this project, but the shared key can also be
replaced by an asymmetric key pair.
4.4
Adversary model and Security requirements
This section presents the selected attack model and security properties in more
detail. For each property, a discussion is presented on whether it is achieved and
what possible trade-offs exist. The focus of the security model is on a possibly
compromised intermittent Prover. The Verifier is not resource-constrained and
is assumed to not rely on energy harvesting, meaning that unlike Prover it
operates continuously. This leads to the assumption that the Verifier is honest
and can not be compromised by an attacker, which is also common for other
works addressing RA in IoT [SL16].
4.4.1
Adversary model
As mentioned in Section 2.2.2, current works focusing on RA for IoT address
the remote adversary which can compromise a device over the Internet with-
out requiring physical access to either it or its network. This is also referred
to as software adversary by [ADD21], where a sub-type is the mobile software
adversary, which can avoid detection by moving around or disappearing at the
time of attestation. Attacks launched by the remote adversary have a larger
scope and a lower cost when compared to once requiring physical proximity.
The majority of the works examined in Section 2.2 focus on an attacker whose
goal is to compromise the device and change its functionality while remaining
undetected. As an example consider a remote sensor node, which has the job
of sensing and transmitting highly confidential data. A remote adversary can
exploit a vulnerability that lets him install new software on the device which al-
lows him to also transmit said confidential data to himself. The presence of the
adversary does not interfere with the existing functionality of the device, but it
breaks the confidentiality of the system - and without some type of attestation,
the malware might never be detected.
==PAGE:58==
46
Proposed Solution
Most of the works reviewed in Section 3.1.5 focus on a physical adversary, which
has direct access to the device’s memory allowing them to tamper with it while
the device is powered down. This is considered out of scope for this project.
Instead, the focus is again on the remote adversary, which can exploit runtime
vulnerabilities to access and manipulate checkpointed data while the device is
running. The attacks described below are derived by combining the possible
actions of the remote adversary in Sections 2.2.2 and 3.1.5:
• Forgery attack, where the adversary hides its presence on the Prover by
forging a valid attestation result and transmitting it to the Verifier. This
violates the authenticity of the protocol, as the verified evidence does not
reflect the actual state of the Prover.
• Memory copy attack, where the adversary hides itself by either copying
the contents of memory before infecting them in order to use them during
attestation or by copying the malware code to different regions of memory.
This means that the evidence gathered during attestation will not reflect
the presence of the adversary, violating the integrity of the protocol.
• Data substitution attack, where the adversary hides by copying only the
part of memory it will infect before compromising it in order to use the
original copy during attestation. Just like when copying the entire mem-
ory, this attack compromises the integrity of the protocol, as the infected
code will not be detected because the attestation routine is redirected to
use the substituted memory data.
• Compression attack, where the adversary remains undetected by exploit-
ing sub-optimally compressed software. By compressing the code on the
device, the attacker can free up space in which it can evade being detected
by the attestation routine. Depending on the memory traversal strategy,
the adversary can also hide by decompressing memory contents on-the-fly.
This compromises the integrity of the protocol.
• Impersonation attack, where the adversary pretends to be a Prover and
transmits evidence of that Prover being corrupted in order for the Veri-
fier to falsely decide the remote device is compromised. This affects the
availability of the system, as the attacker can de facto disable the Prover
without ever needing to compromise it.
• ROP attacks, where the adversary modifies the stack to jump into a
malware-controlled sector of memory or to just take control of control
flow. This type of attack uses a code-reuse technique, which means that
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Adversary model and Security requirements
47
if attestation is run over only static binaries the adversary will not be de-
tected. By taking over control flow, the adversary can for example hijack
a call to attestation routine so that it moves from program memory to
data memory.
• DOP attack, where the adversary identifies and manipulates variables that
can be used to alter the program’s behavior after a load instruction. Simi-
lar to ROP attacks, changing the value of a pointer can cause an incorrect
control flow. However, the attacker can also affect the system without tak-
ing over control flow - by exploiting vulnerabilities in software that lead
to memory corruption such as buffer overflows an attacker can write over
critical memory locations.
• Checkpointed data attacks, where the adversary similarly can exploit soft-
ware vulnerabilities to affect the execution of an intermittent Prover. For
example, tampering with a stored checkpoint will influence the availability
of the device, and might even leave it in an inconsistent state. An adver-
sary can also take over control flow by continuously copying over the same
checkpointed data so that the Prover never achieves any forward progress.
Snooping checkpointed data can also reveal confidential information such
as secrets, which allows the adversary to further compromise the system.
• Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attack, where the adversary captures and
tampers with the result of an attestation routine after it has been trans-
mitted by the Prover and before it is received by the Verifier. This violates
both the integrity and the confidentiality of the protocol, as the attacker
can both read and change the message in flight.
• Replay attack, a type of MITM attack, where the adversary transmits a
previously captured valid result of an attestation routine from a legitimate
Prover. This allows a Prover, which is currently in a compromised state, to
remain undetected by the Verifier, thus violating the protocol’s integrity.
Because the focus of this project is on the Prover, attacks on the Verifier are
considered out of scope.
Furthermore, because of the self-measurement RA,
denial-of-service attacks on the Prover are not possible.
This also excludes
Precomputation and Proxy attacks from consideration as they have to do with
how the adversary can circumvent the strict timing constraints of classic RA
protocol. With the Proxy attack specifically, the adversary transmitting the
data involved in the attestation routine to another device can be classified as a
Forgery attack.
==PAGE:60==
48
Proposed Solution
4.4.2
Security requirements
To address the chosen attack model, the proposed solution needs to include
both the security required by other solutions which focus on RA for IoT devices
(see Section 3.2) as well as for solutions that focus on intermittent IoT devices
(see Section 3.1.5).
Figure 4.2 shows an overview of the proposed protocol
with the addition of the required security.
The memory of the intermittent
Prover is split into two isolated regions - one responsible for running its regular
operations and one responsible for performing the attestation and storing and
restoring checkpoints. Before the result of the attestation is transmitted the
Prover attaches a timestamp and a MAC to. When receiving the result, the
Verifier uses the timestamp and MAC to verify the integrity, authenticity and
freshness of the transmitted data. This section goes on to describe if and how
each security property is achieved by the procotol from Figure 4.2.
Integrity:
With respect to integrity, it is important that both the integrity of the device
and the integrity of the transmitted data are examined. The attestation routine
should be trustworthy, meaning that a compromised Prover should be detected
by the Verifier using the evidence collected by the Prover. Additionally, the Ver-
ifier should also be able to notice if the message sent by the Prover is intercepted
and tampered with before reaching its destination.
To guarantee the evidence collected reflects the actual state of the Prover the
result of the attestation r must be impossible to forge on a compromised device
[FNRT14]. An adversary can compute r by hashing the contents of memory.
The use of a secret k in the evidence generation algorithm prevents this - as
long as the attacker cannot learn the value of k, they cannot compute a valid r.
The entire attestation routine is stored in and executed from an isolated area
of memory, access to which requires a privilege escalation. This prevents the
attacker who has compromised the non-secure area from being able to reason
about k from its intermediate states. Apart from forging r, the attacker could
also break the integrity of the protocol by evading detection, so that the mal-
ware is not included in the collected evidence. Having the attestation routine
stored in an isolated area of memory prevents malicious modifications to it both
before and during execution, as well as interrupts originating from non-secure
code. This means that the adversary cannot avoid detection by moving through
memory before its previously occupied address is checked.
The assumption is that the existing communication channel between the Prover
and the Verifier is not secure, meaning that an attacker can intercept and tamper
with a message. To counteract this, the message must be signed with a message
authentication code (MAC) by the Prover before being transmitted. This is
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Adversary model and Security requirements
49
Figure 4.2: Securing the proposed solution
done by using the message and a secret as input to an algorithm and then
attaching the output of the algorithm to the message. On receiving the message
the Verifier, which also knows the secret, can use the same algorithm to create
its own MAC and compare it to the received one. If the two differ the Verifier
will conclude that the message has been tampered with and discard it.
Authenticity:
When it comes to authenticity, the attestation result transmitted from the
==PAGE:62==
50
Proposed Solution
Prover must originate from the attestation routine on the Prover.
This is
achieved by using memory isolation, where the non-secure code does not have
access to r. Furthermore, the Verifier must only act on messages which originate
from the Prover and must be able to tell which Prover the message originates
from to prevent impersonation attacks. Using MAC with a symmetric key (the
shared secret) guarantees this, assuming that only the Prover and the Verifier
know the secret. An adversary impersonating a Prover will sign the message
with an incorrect MAC, which the Verifier will be able to detect.
Confidentiality:
Just like with the other security properties, confidentiality needs to be assured
on a compromised Prover as well as for messages transmitted over the inse-
cure communication channel.
No sensitive data stored on the device should
be available to an adversary, which has taken over a Prover. Here again, the
use of memory isolation is leveraged. This includes data in checkpoints - if the
adversary is able to snoop a checkpoint, that checkpoint will not include confi-
dential data (or the confidential data will not be readily available). The message
contains a hash and a timestamp, meaning that no sensitive data transmitted
between the Prover and the Verifier is available to the adversary.
Availability:
When a Prover is compromised, the attacker can exploit software vulnerabilities
in order to tamper with the regions of NVM, in which checkpointed data is
stored. This affects the availability of the Prover as it can lead to the system
restoring in an inconsistent state or never achieving forward progress. To prevent
this, checkpoint data must be stored in a tamper-proof region of memory, which
can only be accessed by the checkpointing and attestation routines. This will
also prevent the possibility of affecting the availability of the Prover by replaying
old checkpoints. Consideration should also be paid to how checkpoints are stored
- a power failure while writing data can also result in corrupting the last valid
checkpoint. Therefore the checkpointing routine must use a double buffer and
a two-phase commit.
Freshness:
With the insecure communication channel, an attacker can capture and trans-
mit a previous message (without having to know the shared secret k), so the
Verifier will never be made aware that a Prover has been captured. In a classic
RA scheme, the challenge would include a nonce, over which the attestation
result will be computed. In the proposed solution, the message sent from the
Prover includes a timestamp, denoting when it was transmitted; this requires
the Verifier to be able to decide when a result is too old - and mark the Prover
as compromised. For the timestamp to be accurate, it needs to be tamper-proof
- the timestamp creation routine and its timer need to be protected from access
from the non-secure world. As the system clock turns off while the device is
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Discussion of the proposal
51
powered down, an independent way to keep track of time must be provided -
either via a guaranteed power supply or remanence-based timekeepers.
4.5
Discussion of the proposal
This section begins by outlining the hardware requirements of the solution and
how they weigh against other works in the field. It then goes on to discuss the
functional requirements with their strengths and weaknesses. It then presents
the main ways the proposal differs from the work it’s based on and why these
choices were made. Finally it finishes off by summarizing how the proposed
protocol satisfies the security requirements.
The energy-harvesting Prover is a low-power IoT device for which any type
of specialized hardware brings an associated increase in both cost and energy
consumption. The presented protocol has two main hardware requirements for
a Prover: there needs to exist a way to isolate memory regions and a way to keep
track of time. Both of these are common requirements in literature focusing on
RA in IoT ([ISZ17], [CTR18]) and intermittence in IoT ([DSKS19], [AWB+20],
[KYB+20]), and are therefore considered realistic. For the Prover, the protected
memory sector in NVM needs to be large enough to store ATTEST, the secret
k, and two separate checkpoints. Apart from having protected sections of NVM,
protected sections in SRAM are also required because during runtime in order
to be considered trustworthy ATTEST needs to be atomic and uninterruptible,
with only a single point of entry. Therefore both the volatile and non-volatile
memory needs to be large enough to accommodate both the code for the regular
functions of the device as well as the proposed protocol.
Another thing to
consider is that the write endurance of the NVM technology needs to be taken
into account - as the main basis of the memory isolation, it is important that the
projected amount of read/write cycles in the Prover’s lifetime does not exceed
it.
The protocol requires that the programmer decides on a specific energy thresh-
old Et such as to ensure that the device will have enough energy left to store a
checkpoint, compute and transmit an attestation result and then power down.
Choosing Et is not a straightforward task because the size of a checkpoint can
vary based on the size of the stack and global variables which means that a one-
size-fits-all threshold can end up creating unnecessary checkpoints. By using
double-buffered checkpoints, some guarantee is given about the availability of
the Prover in case of Et being too low - if the system runs out of power while
writing the data the other checkpoint will still be available to resume from. De-
composing the Prover’s code into a task-based execution model which is energy
==PAGE:64==
52
Proposed Solution
agnostic can address Et being too high at the cost of added complexity. Another
approach is to use some form of onboard energy storage, which when imminent
power loss is detected, can provide just enough power so the Prover can store
the checkpoint and complete the attestation.
To provide freshness to the attestation in order to protect against replay attacks
the result of ATTEST is timestamped. This requires that a trustworthy clock
is available for the time the device is powered down (and the system clock has
turned off). If the chosen implementation uses an RTC with a separate energy
source, special attention needs to be paid to what resolution it provides and how
long it needs to initiate. The cold boot time of the RTC needs to be accounted
for when choosing Et, as the timer needs to be initiated in order to timestamp
the result of the attestation. Depending on the system’s use case the use of a
randomly generated nonce can instead be leveraged for freshness.
As stated in Section 4.1 the proposed solution is based on the work done by
RESERVE [RDV+21], with changes made to better suit the challenges of inter-
mittent execution. In RESERVE the execution of the device’s regular function
is assumed to fit into Et - so in the worst-case scenario the Prover wakes up,
executes its regular function, and then powers down again. As part of the reg-
ular function, a checkpoint for every programmer-defined region of execution
is stored in NVM, meaning that 10 defined regions would be represented by
10 separate checkpoints. Forward progress is not examined - the Prover is as-
sumed to execute its regular function atomically and then power down. This is
altered in the proposed solution - a checkpoint is used for storing and restoring
the state, meaning that a Prover can maintain forward progress across power
failures. The assumption is instead that Et is chosen so that the device has
enough energy left to both store a checkpoint and attest it. Checkpoints are
only created when absolutely necessary, which reduces the amount of energy
used compared to RESERVE. The trade-off here is that if the device never runs
out of energy, attestation will never be performed. This is very much related
to the specific use case - how much energy can the device harvest, how much
energy is used, and how often it should be attested. The protocol proposed in
this chapter is more attuned to a device that will lose power more often than
not. To compensate for this, the self-measurement approach can be combined
with an on-demand RA scheme as done by SIA [DSKS19]. When compared to
RESERVE the proposed solution only attests a part of program memory, the
focus being on reducing the amount of energy and time required to encrypt it.
This brings added complexity to the Verifier’s side - as the expected hash is
different based on which trigger point it uses and how much program memory
is included. Furthermore, there is a larger chance that ATTEST would miss an
adversary who managed to predict the memory traversal strategy.
With regards to the availability of the Prover, the statically inserted checkpoints
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Discussion of the proposal
53
mean that the device should only wake up if it can be sure to have enough
energy to reach the next checkpoint. This is a very rigid approach to execution
decomposition, which can be aided by the introduction of a watchdog-based
checkpoint, where a watchdog timer is used to track whether a checkpoint has
been reached - and if it has not, an intermediate checkpoint is performed.
To fulfill the security guarantees, the proposed solution uses a hybrid root of
trust, requiring the presence of an MCU and a trustworthy clock. The protocol
gathers a combination of dynamic (cache, registers, and global variables stored
in a checkpoint) and static (program binaries) evidence about the state of the
intermittent Prover. The evidence collected is from a single point in time (the
time of execution of ATTEST), and therefore does not provide any information
about the executed control flow, allowing a transient adversary who can predict
the memory traversal strategy to remain undetected.
==PAGE:66==
54
Proposed Solution
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Implementation
This chapter describes the design and implementation of an energy-harvesting
IoT device on which the proposed protocol is implemented.
The goal is to
investigate how the protocol can be applied to a real-life energy harvesting
device in order to explore the feasibility of the proposal. The chapter starts
off by presenting the hardware and software design of the energy harvesting
Prover. It then goes more presents some of the more interesting details of the
implementation. The final section concludes by presenting the findings from the
implementation - what the weaknesses of the implementation are and how they
can be addressed.
5.1
Prover: hardware design
The remote IoT device relies on harvesting solar power. In order to keep the de-
sign simple, there is available onboard energy storage, which helps with graceful
transitions between on and off periods. While the device has power it executes
its sensing task and transmits the sensing data to a central server.
At cer-
tain points in code, it checks how much power is available, and if it is below
a specified threshold, it creates a checkpoint and executes its attestation rou-
tine. A simplified design is chosen with regard to hardware, using commercially
==PAGE:68==
56
Implementation
available premade components. The goal behind this is to investigate the fea-
sibility of remote attestation as part of intermittent execution. The Prover’s
hardware includes a microcontroller, an energy-harvesting module, an onboard
energy storage device (battery), and a sensing module. Figure 5.1 shows the
block diagram for hardware on the Prover.
Figure 5.1: Block-level hardware diagram: Prover
5.1.1
Microcontroller
The Prover application is running on an Arm Cortex-M33, a dual-core proces-
sor developed for embedded applications and optimized for low-cost and energy
efficiency. It provides a TrustZone-enabled TEE, an MPU, an RTC, an RNG,
and a hardware-accelerated cryptography engine.
The processor can run at
up to 150MHz and supports different modes of reducing its power consump-
tion, depending on the required level of power to be supplied to its timers and
other peripherals. In its active mode when clocked at 100 MHz, the main CPU
consumes 3.5 mA. This can be reduced all the way down to 790 nA in deep
power-down mode, with only the RTC and 4kB of RAM still kept operational
[NXP19]. The processor is onboard LPC55S69JBD100, an evaluation kit pro-
duced by NXP, and has 640 kB of on-chip Flash memory and 320 kB of on-chip
SRAM [NXP22].
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Prover: hardware design
57
(a) Solar power manager DFR0559
(b) Solar module S05V5W
Figure 5.2: Components of the solar power harvesting module
5.1.2
Solar power harvesting module
For this project, a premade solar-power harvesting peripheral is chosen, made
up of a solar panel, a compatible power manager circuit with an onboard IC,
and an external board battery. This provides a chance to explore both real-life
intermittence and how much of the state of a peripheral device can be attested
by the proposed solution. The components are shown in Figure 5.2.
For simplicity, a commonly available 3.7V lithium-ion rechargeable battery is
used for energy storage. It has a nominal capacity of 750 mAh when discharging
at a rate of 150 mA [Let22]. The Prover uses a battery in order to ensure power
so far as to complete the operation after the specified threshold is hit. In order
to reduce cost and complexity, a large capacitor can be used as an energy buffer
similar to MementOS [RSF11].
The Solar Power Manager DFR0559 manufactured by DFRobot is a charge
controller, which supports charging a 3.7V lithium-ion battery with an up to
900mAh charging rate [DFR18]. It exposes two interfaces for charging the con-
nected battery - either via a USB or a solar panel (where the USB has a higher
priority), which in turn makes it easy to switch between continuous and inter-
mittent power. It is rated for input voltage between 4.4V and 6V, providing
charge to a 3.7V Li-On battery. The device is a linear regulator, which provides
a 5V 1A USB OUT and supports charging the battery and powering on the
device connected over the USB OUT port at the same time.
The Solar Module S05V5W is a flat, semi-flexible solar panel with solar cells,
laminated in transparent plastic [DFR22]. It uses solar cells made of monocrys-
talline silicon, which generate an electric field by absorbing sunlight energy. It
includes a voltage regulator module and is rated for generating a maximum of
==PAGE:70==
58
Implementation
5w of power (5V at 1A). This means that it would take approximately 50 min-
utes of maximum sun to charge an empty 3.7V battery with a 900mAh capacity.
5.2
Prover: software design
The Prover is a bare-metal embedded device, meaning that the code running on
it is specialized to only fulfill its functional requirements. The focus of the design
is to show how the proposed RA solution can operate on an intermittent device.
For simplicity, the system has no real-time requirements, which means that
there is no need to use a scheduling OS like FreeRTOS. The flow of execution
is visualized in Figure 5.3.
On wake-up, the Prover restores the most recently created checkpoint, if one
exists. The sensing application running on the Prover executes continuously
after wake-up. The application code is unprivileged and is considered to not
contain any confidential information. It has one main responsibility - reading
data from the sensor and transmitting it over UART. To maintain forward
progress it checks if the voltage of the battery is above a certain threshold - if
yes, the application continuously loops. If the voltage falls below the threshold,
a privilege escalation happens, triggering a routine that stores a checkpoint and
performs the attestation.
The Prover obtains a single data reading of the temperature and humidity of
its environment by polling the connected sensor. It then transmits the obtained
sensor data to a remote device. As the last thing in both the polling and the
sending routines a trigger point is hit, which causes the Prover to check the
available energy and decide whether it needs to create a checkpoint in order to
preserve forward progress. The design of the sensing application is trivial as the
purpose of this project is to showcase how checkpoints can work in practice. In a
real-world scenario, a single sensor data read might take less energy than actually
measuring the voltage - so it does not make sense to checkpoint its progress. This
would bring more benefits with a longer-lasting operation. Furthermore, after
executing the sending routine, the Prover does not need to store a checkpoint,
as the next data read does not depend on the outcome of the sending routine.
To showcase that the system maintains forward progress, an in-memory counter
is added, which gets incremented every time the sensor data is transmitted.
It’s important to note that the sensor data is not timestamped, so it is possible
for the Prover to wake up and transmit old and therefore invalid sensor data.
A simple way for this to be mediated is to use the available RTC to timestamp
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Prover: software design
59
Figure 5.3: Execution flow: Prover
==PAGE:72==
60
Implementation
Figure 5.4: Trigger points and checkpoints in memory
the data. Additionally, the message sent by the Prover is neither encrypted nor
signed, however, the same security mechanism used for transmitting the result
of the attestation routine can be used in the sensing application.
When the Prover makes a decision that not enough energy is available to reach
the next trigger point it activates the checkpointing routine, which is responsi-
ble for preserving the current state in NVM and performing RA. This routine
requires escalated privileges in order to guarantee the chosen security properties
as described in Section 4.4.2.
A checkpoint contains the program counter (PC), the register file (RF), the cur-
rently used execution stack, the depth of which is derived from the stack pointer
register (MSP_NS for non-secure world on TrustZone), the global variables, and
the address of the trigger point which initiated it. After the attestation routine
is finished, these values are copied to a predefined region in secure memory as
shown in Figure 5.4. For evidence, the attestation routine uses both the data,
which is passed to be stored in the checkpoint, and the program code between
the current trigger point and the previous one. If both buffers store a reference
to the same PC, the entire non-secure Flash memory is verified. It computes
a keyed-hash MAC(HMAC) over the evidence using the secret k, attaches a
timestamp, and transmits the message to the Verifier.
To preserve the continuity and forward progress of the application, it’s important
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Proof-of-concept implementation
61
that the Prover on wake-up always restores the most recent checkpoint.
In
line with the state-of-the-art checkpoints are double buffered - there exist two
separate equally sized buffers, A and B, in which a checkpoint can be stored.
A single bit is used as a flag to indicate which of the buffers contains the most
recently created checkpoint - it contains a 0 for A and a 1 for B. Based on the
flag, the oldest buffer is always overridden when creating a new checkpoint. For
example, if on the most current wake-up the device is restored from buffer A,
the flag would contain a 0, and the next time a checkpoint is stored, it would
override buffer B. This guarantees that losing power midway through writing a
checkpointing will not result in an unexpected system state. As the final step of
creating a checkpoint, the flag bit is flipped, signifying that this is now the most
recently created checkpoint. On waking, the device boots into secure worlds
and restores the checkpoint for non-secure worlds.
To do this, it copies the
global variables, execution stack, and register file from the buffer to SRAM and
proceeds to switch to executing from non-secure world.
Finally, the device enters deep power-down mode, in which power is supplied
to only the RTC and a nominal amount of SRAM. Once enough energy is
harvested, the Prover wakes up and resumes operation, restoring the non-secure
program’s state by copying over the stack and registers from the most recently
stored checkpoint.
5.3
Proof-of-concept implementation
The implementation is created using an SDK provided by MCUXpresso for
the LPC55S69 board. The sensing application is placed in trustzone_ns, and
the checkpointing routine is placed in trustzone_s.
On wake-up, the device
initiates in secure world and calls BOARD_InitTrustZone() which is responsible
for configuring the TrustZone environment and initiating the SAU. It then reads
the finds the most recent checkpoint and copies over its stack and registers. As
a final step, it loads the PC with the value stored in the checkpoint.
The proof-of-concept implementation does not include two key elements de-
scribed by the design presented in the previous section - storing and restoring
checkpoints to non-volatile memory and putting the device into deep power-
down mode.
==PAGE:74==
62
Implementation
5.3.1
TrustZone configuration
TrustZone provides memory-map-based separation between the non-secure and
secure worlds. With regards to the software abstraction, the code running in
each world exists in a separate project with its own main() function, and each
image is built separately. When building, the toolchain compiles each project
with a flag based on that project’s "TrustZone Project Type" property, start-
ing with the secure one. The non-secure callable functions stored in the veneer
table in the secure project are used to generate an object file with empty defini-
tions, which is linked with the non-secure image, enabling the transition between
worlds. Because the two worlds share the same bank for general-purpose regis-
ters function calls responsible for said transition can use those registers to pass
parameters and return values.
Figure 5.5: Processor memory map for secure and non-secure accesses to de-
vice resources
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Proof-of-concept implementation
63
Figure 5.6: User Memory Regions configuration for the SAU
Figure 5.5 shows a map of the available memory and how it can be split between
the two worlds.
To implement the separation the desired security attribute
configuration for memory, peripherals, and interrupts are programmed onto the
SAU via a set of rules stored in tzm_config.c inside the secure project. The SAU
supports up to 8 different memory regions, defined by each region’s base and
top address and whether they are secure (S), non-secure (NS), or non-secure
callable (NSC). The IDAU can be used to add more granularity through the
use of memory aliasing - depending on what value is in bit 28 of the address,
the system can separate whether we are trying to access a specific resource
through secure or non-secure world. The configuration of the SAU and IDAU
are combined such as for a region to be non-secure it needs to be defined as such
in both.
The MCUXpresso IDE provides a TEE configuration interface that auto-generates
and overrides SAU rules stored in the configuration file. Memory isolation is
enforced at runtime - a check is made for the security attribute of every memory
access, executed by the processor. If code executing from non-secure world at-
tempts to access a resource assigned to secure world a fault exception is thrown
[Arm19]. The configuration used is shown in Figure 5.6, where regions 4 and
5 contain the sensor application code, while regions 1 and 3 contain the secure
code and data. Region 2 contains the veneer table which is set to a NSC-Priv
security level.
With regards to peripherals, access to the RTC is restricted to secure world,
while access to the ADC and UART allow all worlds.
5.3.2
Non-secure project
The non-secure project consists of the sensor application, responsible for reading
and sensor data and measuring the available energy.
The sensor application reads the onboard temperature sensor by mapping it to
==PAGE:76==
64
Implementation
a dedicated input channel of its analog-to-digital converter (ADC). The imple-
mentation is based on the example provided by the MCUXpresso SDK, which
uses an ISR to read out and convert two results stored in the ADC result FIFO,
and uses them to then derive the temperature reading. For the temperature
measurement to work, the onboard ADC needs to be initialized. To port the
example to the TrustZone environment, the UART and ADC peripherals are
configured to be non-secure. When the device powers down, the ADC is turned
off, which means that for every wake-up the ADC has to be reinitialized. To
avoid this, checkpointed data would also need to include the peripheral config-
uration as described by [BDM+17].
5.3.3
Secure project
The secure project consists of the checkpointing application, responsible for
performing attestation and storing a checkpoint, as well as restoring state on
wake-up.
Figure 5.7 presents the sequence of the attestation routine.
The
storeCheckpoint function is called by the non-secure world using the correspond-
ing NCS veneer function, with the program counter, the current stack pointer,
and the link register passed as parameters. The values of the registers are ob-
tained by using in-line assembler. The rest of the registry file and the areas
of memory containing global variables are excluded from the proof-of-concept
implementation. The PC parameter contains the memory location of the code,
which triggered storeCheckpoint() and is used to determine how much of the
Flash memory should be attested. It is different from the PC used for storing
and restoring state - that one contains the address of the return instruction at
the end of attestation. Storing the program counter as the last thing makes sure
that when the program resumes operation it will begin from after the attestation
routine has executed.
The encryption is done using the mbedtls library provided by [Tru22] and uses
a collision-resistant SHA-256 hashing algorithm. Three separate inputs are pro-
vided to the encryption function hashMemory as part of the evidence for AT-
TEST: the value stored in LR, the currently active stack MS and the portion
of Flash memory MF between the two trigger points. The range of memory in
which the currently active stack is stored is derived from the currently active
stack pointer and a hard-coded value representing _vStackBase as assigned by
the linker. This evidence should be further extended to include the entire reg-
istry file and the global variables stored in SRAM, as described in Section 5.2.
After hashing the memory, then uses the RTC to get a timestamp and generates
an HMAC over the attestation result and the timestamp. It then trasmits these
values over UART. The timestamp is considered important for the security of
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Proof-of-concept implementation
65
Figure 5.7: Sequence of ATTEST in the proof-of-concept implementation
the protocol, and therefore is part of secure world. As the UART is also used
by the sensor application, access to it is not restricted to secure world. This
opens it up for potential exploits, as an attacker could compromise it in order
to prevent the attestation result from ever being sent.
Checkpoints are modeled as a struct, where each of the two is given a specific
start address in the secure region of Flash memory. An index bit is also written
to a specific hardcoded location in the Flash, signifying which was the most
recently stored checkpoint.
The implementation for storing and restoring a
checkpoint does not work correctly and is therefore not included in Figure 5.7.
This is probably due to incorrect configuration of the interface which allows
runtime to write to Flash memory directly.
==PAGE:78==
66
Implementation
5.4
Findings
The implementation of the protocol from Chapter 4 on an energy harvesting
device helps illuminate the weak points of the proposal. This section presents
the identified weaknesses and suggests possible ways to mitigate them.
By examining the output from multiple rounds of attestation, triggered after a
sensor reading, it is clear that h changes based on what values are read from
the temperature sensor. This makes sense as the input to h includes a copy of
the stack. The large amount of entropy would make it difficult for the Verifier
to recreate h. This can be helped by attaching the sensor reading itself to the
message sent to the Verifier (as done by [RDV+21]). An issue with the entropy
of the attestation result also emerges based on when storeCheckpoint() is called.
In the proof-of-concept only two trigger points are present, which keeps the
number of possible combinations low - however in some works trigger points are
dynamically inserted by the compiler or during runtime, which would increase
the amount significantly. To prevent this the program address of the trigger
point should also be attached to the message sent to the Verifier.
With regards to the TrustZone configuration, the fact that both the secure ap-
plication and the non-secure application share the UART peripheral opens up
a possible attack vector. To remedy this each world should be configured to
use a different virtual address for the peripheral. Even though general-purpose
registries are shared between worlds it is not possible to leak secrets - in the pro-
posed design the device only makes a single one-way transition from non-secure
world to secure world right before powering down. It is possible that the at-
tacker exploits the transition itself with a buffer overflow attack - to prevent this
functions in the veneer table should use size check on any pointer parameters.
Currently, the encryption procedure is relatively slow - it takes 1.85 ms to hash
over 100 bytes of memory using the default clock of 150MHz.
This can be
greatly improved by using the HASHCRYPT hardware accelerator, available as
a peripheral.
As a next step with the current implementation, it would be of interest to
measure how much energy is harvested over a time period and compare that
to the energy expenditure of the device over the same time period. The two
measurements can then be used to give a rough estimate of how often the device
will run out of power. This can be used to then determine how long the Flash
memory will last. A fully realized proof-of-concept implementation that includes
checkpointing would allow discerning what an appropriate energy threshold Et
is so that the device will with guarantee reach the next trigger point, perform
attestation and store its state.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The Internet-of-Things is a paradigm shift of the digital age, brought on by
improvements in technology that have made microprocessors smaller, cheaper,
and more available than ever. Many aspects of modern life can be improved upon
by the automation and connectivity provided by the adoption of IoT systems.
These benefits combined with the low barriers to entry have resulted in a wide
spectrum of smart devices in use all over the world, which has opened a new
attack vector of potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
The use of devices that are not tethered to a power supply provides flexibility
when designing and deploying an IoT system. By relying on batteries, devices
can be deployed in remote and hard-to-reach places without the need for an
existing power infrastructure upfront. However, battery-powered IoT systems
have a large cost in terms of both maintenance and e-waste as batteries need to
be replaced when they run out. This only becomes a more challenging and time-
consuming process as the scale of the system grows. This problem exists for all
IoT systems which rely on single-use batteries, regardless of their function and
location. It is difficult to plan when maintenance should be performed, because,
depending on the functions performed and various environmental factors, even
two homogeneous devices placed in two different rooms wouldn’t discharge at
exactly the same rate. All that aside, a massive amount of batteries need to be
manufactured and disposed of in order to support the growth of IoT - [EnA22]
warns that by 2025 78 IoT batteries will be discarded daily. The costs of main-
==PAGE:80==
68
Conclusion
tenance combined with the focus on sustainability are behind the drive towards
the use of autonomous self-powered IoT devices. Self-powered IoT devices elim-
inate the need for battery replacements, as they rely on harvesting ambient
energy to power their operations. They do this by capturing small amounts of
energy available in their immediate environment (like sunlight or radio waves)
and converting it to electrical energy. Even though the operations executed by
an energy harvesting device are typically optimized toward low-power consump-
tion, because of the large variance in available energy the device can only turn
on intermittently, when enough energy becomes available.
Traditionally concerns about security have not played a big part in the de-
velopment of embedded devices due to both resource constraints and lack of
regulations. This combined with the large scale of adoption and lack of stan-
dardization makes IoT an easy area for potential exploits. For a relatively low
cost, a hacker can compromise a large amount of devices while remaining unde-
tected. Attacks like the Mirai botnet [AAB+17], which exploited devices in the
wild that were still configured with the factory-default username and password
combinations, show just how easy and inexpensive it is to find vulnerable smart
devices connected to the Internet. Remote attestation is a security protocol used
to detect when a remote device has been compromised by malicious software.
With it, a trusted party (Verifier) can detect malware on a remote untrusted
party (Prover). The classic version of RA requires that the Prover is turned on
for the duration of the attestation, often with strict timing constraints. This is
a problem with regard to low-power IoT devices which rely on harvesting power
from their surroundings to perform their main functions, and therefore power
down intermittently.
The aim of this project is to adapt the classic RA protocol to fit the intermittent
execution model of an energy-harvesting IoT device.
To understand the problem area a survey of related work in the field of inter-
mittent execution in IoT is conducted. This is then intersected with a survey
on works on remote attestation in IoT in order to underline how intermittence
can best be leveraged with regards to remote attestation and what the overlap
between different choices and trade-offs is.
Based on the findings from the survey a self-measurement RA protocol is pro-
posed in which an energy harvesting Prover performs attestation every time
before it powers down. The goal is to detect a remote adversary and deliver
the same security properties as comparable solutions both in remote attestation
and intermittent execution in IoT.
To deliver these guarantees, the proposed protocol leverages a hybrid root of
trust which assumes the existence of a way to provide memory isolation and a
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Future Work
69
way to keep track of time while the device is powered down. Volatile memory
is erased as soon as power disappears, which means that intermittent devices
have to preserve forward progress across power failures by storing their current
state in non-volatile memory (referred to as checkpointing). In the proposed
protocol the attestation is performed as part of checkpointing and uses the
checkpointed state as part of the evidence collected about the Prover. This way
some dynamic evidence (the stack and global variables) about the state of the
Prover is gathered. However, this is done at a discrete point in time (when a
checkpoint occurs), which means that self-relocating transient malware is still a
problem. Furthermore, the solution cannot attest attacks, which exploit control
flow and data variable vulnerabilities.
To reduce the overhead of erasing and writing to non-volatile memory the in-
termittent device only stores a checkpoint when its available energy budget falls
under a predetermined threshold. Because attestation only happens when the
device is about to lose power the proposed protocol is geared towards a device
that runs out of power more often than not. Depending on system requirements
it can be used in combination with classic remote attestation to handle inter-
mittent devices which expect to be continuously powered on for longer periods
of time.
In order to implement the proposed protocol, an energy harvesting device is de-
signed and implemented using commercially available components connected
to an LPC55S69-EVK evaluation board with an ARM Cortex-M processor
[NXP22]. The TrustZone-enabled ARM-based processor [ARM22] provides the
required memory isolation. A trustworthy clock is provided by an onboard RTC
peripheral which is still supplied with powered in deep power-down mode. The
implementation leverages the inbuilt domain separation between the secure and
non-secure execution environments and attempts to examine possible shortcom-
ings and vulnerabilities of the proposed solution.
6.1
Future Work
For future work the proof-of-concept implementation should be extended to also
store and restore state to non-volatile memory. This will allow to determine
the threshold of energy beyond which attestation will be performed which can
be used to tailor the size and capacity of the energy harvesting components
accordingly.
The amount of power used by the device’s operations should be weighed against
the amount of power harvested in order to derive approximately how often the
==PAGE:82==
70
Conclusion
Prover would power down and write to non-volatile memory. This is important
to consider as the lifetime of the device is limited by the amount of write/read
cycles offered by the particular NVM technology.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[AAB+17]
Manos Antonakakis, Tim April, Michael Bailey, Matthew Bern-
hard, Elie Bursztein, Jaime Cochran, Zakir Durumeric, J. Alex
Halderman, Luca Invernizzi, Michalis Kallitsis, Deepak Kumar,
Chaz Lever, Zane Ma, Joshua Mason, Damian Menscher, Chad
Seaman, Nick Sullivan, Kurt Thomas, and Yi Zhou. Understand-
ing the mirai botnet. In Proceedings of the 26th USENIX Con-
ference on Security Symposium, SEC’17, page 1093–1110, USA,
2017. USENIX Association.
[AAD+16a]
Tigist Abera, N. Asokan, Lucas Davi, Jan-Erik Ekberg, Thomas
Nyman,
Andrew Paverd,
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi,
and Gene
Tsudik. C-flat: Control-flow attestation for embedded systems
software, 2016.
[AAD+16b]
Tigist Abera, N. Asokan, Lucas Davi, Farinaz Koushanfar, An-
drew Paverd, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. Invited:
Things, trouble, trust: On building trust in iot systems.
In
2016 53nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference
(DAC), pages 1–6, 2016.
[ABA+19]
Saad Ahmed, Naveed Anwar Bhatti, Muhammad Hamad Alizai,
Junaid Haroon Siddiqui, and Luca Mottola. Efficient intermit-
tent computing with differential checkpointing. In Proceedings of
the 20th ACM SIGPLAN/SIGBED International Conference on
Languages, Compilers, and Tools for Embedded Systems, LCTES
2019, page 70–81, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery.
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[AC15]
Will Arthur and David Challener. A Practical Guide to TPM 2.0:
Using the Trusted Platform Module in the New Age of Security.
Apress, USA, 1st edition, 2015.
[ACT20]
Mahmoud Ammar, Bruno Crispo, and Gene Tsudik. Simple: A
remote attestation approach for resource-constrained iot devices.
In 2020 ACM/IEEE 11th International Conference on Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS), pages 247–258, 2020.
[ADD21]
Sigurd Frej Joel Jørgensen Ankergård, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola
Dragoni. State-of-the-art software-based remote attestation: Op-
portunities and open issues for internet of things. Sensors, 21(5),
2021.
[AFS97]
W.A. Arbaugh, D.J. Farber, and J.M. Smith. A secure and re-
liable bootstrap architecture. In Proceedings. 1997 IEEE Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy (Cat. No.97CB36097), pages
65–71, 1997.
[Ana22]
IoT Analytics. State of iot 2022: Number of connected iot devices
growing 18% to 14.4 billion globally, Jun 2022.
[AP16]
Naman Agarwal and Kolin Paul. Xebra: Xen based remote attes-
tation. In 2016 IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON), pages
2383–2386, 2016.
[arm16]
Iot security market size, share &amp; growth analysis report
2022, 2016.
[Arm19]
Arm Keil. Using TrustZone on Armv8-M, 9 2019.
https://www.keil.com/.
[ARM22]
ARM. Arm Cortex-M33 Devices Generic User Guide r0p4, 10
2022.
https://developer.arm.com/.
[AWB+20]
Hafiz Areeb Asad, Erik Henricus Wouters, Naveed Anwar Bhatti,
Luca Mottola, and Thiemo Voigt. On securing persistent state
in intermittent computing. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Workshop on Energy Harvesting and Energy-Neutral Sens-
ing Systems, ENSsys ’20, page 8–14, New York, NY, USA, 2020.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[BASM16]
Naveed Anwar Bhatti, Muhammad Hamad Alizai, Affan A. Syed,
and Luca Mottola. Energy harvesting and wireless transfer in
sensor network applications: Concepts and experiences. ACM
Trans. Sen. Netw., 12(3), aug 2016.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[BDM+17]
Gautier Berthou, Tristan Delizy, Kevin Marquet, Tanguy Ris-
set, and Guillaume Salagnac.
Peripheral state persistence for
transiently-powered systems. In 2017 Global Internet of Things
Summit (GIoTS), pages 1–6, June 2017.
[BEMS+15]
Ferdinand Brasser, Brahim El Mahjoub, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi,
Christian Wachsmann, and Patrick Koeberl. Tytan: Tiny trust
anchor for tiny devices. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Design
Automation Conference, DAC ’15, New York, NY, USA, 2015.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[BMW+18]
Jo Van Bulck, Marina Minkin, Ofir Weisse, Daniel Genkin, Baris
Kasikci, Frank Piessens, Mark Silberstein, Thomas F. Wenisch,
Yuval Yarom, and Raoul Strackx. Foreshadow: Extracting the
keys to the intel SGX kingdom with transient Out-of-Order exe-
cution. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
18), page 991–1008, Baltimore, MD, August 2018. USENIX As-
sociation.
[BWM+15]
Domenico
Balsamo,
Alex
S.
Weddell,
Geoff
V.
Merrett,
Bashir M. Al-Hashimi, Davide Brunelli, and Luca Benini. Hi-
bernus: Sustaining computation during intermittent supply for
energy-harvesting systems.
IEEE Embedded Systems Letters,
7(1):15–18, 2015.
[CAL+21]
Long Cheng, Salman Ahmed, Hans Liljestrand, Thomas Nyman,
Haipeng Cai, Trent Jaeger, N. Asokan, and Danfeng (Daphne)
Yao. Exploitation techniques for data-oriented attacks with exist-
ing and potential defense approaches. ACM Trans. Priv. Secur.,
24(4), 09 2021.
[CER+18]
Xavier Carpent, Karim Eldefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon,
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. Invited: Reconciling
remote attestation and safety-critical operation on simple iot de-
vices. In 2018 55th ACM/ESDA/IEEE Design Automation Con-
ference (DAC), pages 1–6, 2018.
[CFPS09]
Claude Castelluccia, Aurélien Francillon, Daniele Perito, and
Claudio Soriente. On the difficulty of software-based attestation
of embedded devices. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Confer-
ence on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’09, page
400–409, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[CGL+11]
George Coker, Joshua Guttman, Peter Loscocco, Amy Herzog,
Jonathan Millen, Brian O’Hanlon, John Ramsdell, Ariel Segall,
==PAGE:86==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Justin Sheehy, and Brian Sniffen. Principles of remote attesta-
tion. Int. J. Inf. Sec., 10:63–81, 06 2011.
[CKN07]
Young-Geun Choi, Jeonil Kang, and DaeHun Nyang. Proactive
code verification protocol in wireless sensor network. In Osvaldo
Gervasi and Marina L. Gavrilova, editors, Computational Science
and Its Applications – ICCSA 2007, pages 1085–1096, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[CL16]
Alexei Colin and Brandon Lucia. Chain: Tasks and channels for
reliable intermittent programs. SIGPLAN Not., 51(10):514–530,
oct 2016.
[CSFP20]
David Cerdeira, Nuno Santos, Pedro Fonseca, and Sandro Pinto.
Sok:
Understanding the prevailing security vulnerabilities in
trustzone-assisted tee systems.
In 2020 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), pages 1416–1432, 2020.
[CTR18]
Xavier Carpent, Gene Tsudik, and Norrathep Rattanavipanon.
Erasmus: Efficient remote attestation via self-measurement for
unattended settings. In 2018 Design, Automation I& Test in Eu-
rope Conference I& Exhibition (DATE), pages 1191–1194, 2018.
[DAIS18]
Ghada Dessouky, Tigist Abera, Ahmad Ibrahim, and Ahmad-
Reza Sadeghi. Litehax: Lightweight hardware-assisted attesta-
tion of program execution. In 2018 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), pages 1–8,
2018.
[DFR18]
DFRobot. Sunflower: Solar Power Manager 5V SKU: DFR0559,
6 2018.
https://media.digikey.com.
[DFR22]
DFRobot.
Sunnysolar Semi Flexible Monocrystalline Solar
Panel, 10 2022.
https://www.dfrobot.com/product-1775.html.
[DGM18]
Nicola Dragoni, Alberto Giaretta, and Manuel Mazzara. The in-
ternet of hackable things. In Paolo Ciancarini, Stanislav Litvinov,
Angelo Messina, Alberto Sillitti, and Giancarlo Succi, editors,
Proceedings of 5th International Conference in Software Engi-
neering for Defence Applications, pages 129–140, Cham, 2018.
Springer International Publishing.
[DSKS19]
Daniel Dinu, Archanaa Santhana Krishnan, and Patrick Schau-
mont.
Sia:
Secure intermittent architecture for off-the-shelf
resource-constrained microcontrollers. pages 208–217, 05 2019.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[dWDDY+20] Jasper de Winkel, Carlo Delle Donne, Kasim Sinan Yildirim,
Przemyslaw Pawelczak, and Josiah Hester. Reliable timekeep-
ing for intermittent computing. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-
gramming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’20, page
53–67, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[DZN+17]
Ghada Dessouky, Shaza Zeitouni, Thomas Nyman, Andrew
Paverd, Lucas Davi, Patrick Koeberl, N. Asokan, and Ahmad-
Reza Sadeghi. LO-FAT. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Design
Automation Conference 2017. ACM, jun 2017.
[EnA22]
EnABLES.
Research Infrastructure to Power the Internet of
Things, 09 2022.
https://www.enables-project.eu.
[EnO18]
EnOcean. The True Cost of Batteries, 09 2018.
https://www.enocean.com.
[EPT12]
Karim Eldefrawy, Daniele Perito, and Gene Tsudik. Smart: Se-
cure and minimal architecture for (establishing a dynamic) root
of trust. 01 2012.
[ERT17]
Karim ElDefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Gene Tsudik.
Hydra: Hybrid design for remote attestation (using a formally
verified microkernel), 2017.
[Eve22]
Everactive. Self-Powered Systems to Reach Hyperscale IoT, 11
2022.
https://everactive.com/.
[Fea17]
Nick Feamster. Mitigating the Increasing Risks of an Insecure
Internet of Things. Freedom-to-tinker.com, 2017.
https://freedom-to-tinker.com.
[FNRT14]
Aurélien Francillon, Quan Nguyen, Kasper B. Rasmussen, and
Gene Tsudik. A minimalist approach to remote attestation. In
2014 Design, Automation I& Test in Europe Conference I& Ex-
hibition (DATE), pages 1–6, 2014.
[FR11]
James P. Farwell and Rafal Rohozinski. Stuxnet and the future
of cyber war. Survival, 53(1):23–40, 2011.
[GAYC22]
Michele Grisafi, Mahmoud Ammar, Kasim Sinan Yildirim, and
Bruno Crispo. Mpi: Memory protection for intermittent comput-
ing. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
17:3597–3610, 2022.
==PAGE:88==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[GGK17]
Zahra Ghodsi, Siddharth Garg, and Ramesh Karri.
Optimal
checkpointing for secure intermittently-powered iot devices. In
2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided
Design (ICCAD), pages 376–383, Nov 2017.
[GMO01]
Karine Gandolfi, Christophe Mourtel, and Francis Olivier. Elec-
tromagnetic analysis: Concrete results. In Çetin K. Koç, David
Naccache, and Christof Paar, editors, Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems — CHES 2001, pages 251–261, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2001. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[HSS17]
Josiah Hester, Kevin Storer, and Jacob Sorber. Timely execution
on intermittently powered batteryless sensors. In Proceedings of
the 15th ACM Conference on Embedded Network Sensor Sys-
tems, SenSys ’17, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[ISZ17]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Shaza Zeitouni.
Seed:
<u>se</u>cure
non-interactive
attestation
for
<u>e</u>mbedded <u>d</u>evices.
In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless
and Mobile Networks, WiSec ’17, page 64–74, New York, NY,
USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
[JGP21]
William A. Johnson, Sheikh Ghafoor, and Stacy Prowell. A tax-
onomy and review of remote attestation schemes in embedded
systems. IEEE Access, 9:142390–142410, 2021.
[KBV16]
KBV Research.
IOT security market size, Share $ Growth
Analysis Report 2022, 2016.
https://www.kbvresearch.com/global-iot-security-market/.
[KS22]
Archanaa S. Krishnan and Patrick Schaumont. Benchmarking
and configuring security levels in intermittent computing. ACM
Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst., feb 2022. Just Accepted.
[KSDS19]
Archanaa S. Krishnan, Charles Suslowicz, Daniel Dinu, and
Patrick Schaumont.
Secure intermittent computing protocol:
Protecting state across power loss.
In 2019 Design, Automa-
tion & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pages
734–739, March 2019.
[KYB+20]
Vito Kortbeek, Kasim Sinan Yildirim, Abu Bakar, Jacob Sor-
ber, Josiah Hester, and Przemyslaw Pawelczak. Time-sensitive
intermittent computing meets legacy software. In Proceedings of
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Sup-
port for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASP-
LOS ’20, page 85–99, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[LBC+17a]
Brandon Lucia, Vignesh Balaji, Alexei Colin, Kiwan Maeng, and
Emily Ruppel. Intermittent computing: Challenges and oppor-
tunities. 2nd Summit on Advances in Programming Languages
(SNAPL 2017), 2017.
[LBC+17b]
Brandon Lucia, Vignesh Balaji, Alexei Colin, Kiwan Maeng, and
Emily Ruppel.
Intermittent Computing: Challenges and Op-
portunities. In Benjamin S. Lerner, Rastislav Bodík, and Shri-
ram Krishnamurthi, editors, 2nd Summit on Advances in Pro-
gramming Languages (SNAPL 2017), volume 71 of Leibniz In-
ternational Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 8:1–8:14,
Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
fuer Informatik.
[Let22]
Let-elektronik. LITHIUM-ION POLYMER RECHARGEABLE
BATTERY LIP503048, 10 2022.
http://www.image.micros.com.pl .
[LMP11]
Yanlin Li, Jonathan M. McCune, and Adrian Perrig. Viper: Ver-
ifying the integrity of peripherals’ firmware. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Secu-
rity, CCS ’11, page 3–16, New York, NY, USA, 2011. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[LR15]
Brandon Lucia and Benjamin Ransford. A simpler, safer pro-
gramming and execution model for intermittent systems. SIG-
PLAN Not., 50(6):575–585, jun 2015.
[MCL17]
Kiwan Maeng, Alexei Colin, and Brandon Lucia. Alpaca: In-
termittent execution without checkpoints. Proc. ACM Program.
Lang., 1(OOPSLA), oct 2017.
[MDM+20]
Amjad Yousef Majid, Carlo Delle Donne, Kiwan Maeng, Alexei
Colin, Kasim Sinan Yildirim, Brandon Lucia, and Przemysław
Pawełczak.
Dynamic task-based intermittent execution for
energy-harvesting devices. ACM Trans. Sen. Netw., 16(1), feb
2020.
[MGdC+18]
Pieter Maene, Johannes Götzfried, Ruan de Clercq, Tilo Müller,
Felix C. Freiling, and Ingrid M. R. Verbauwhede.
Hardware-
based trusted computing architectures for isolation and attesta-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 67:361–374, 2018.
==PAGE:90==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[MLH+20]
Dong Ma, Guohao Lan, Mahbub Hassan, Wen Hu, and Sajal K.
Das. Sensing, computing, and communications for energy har-
vesting iots: A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-
rials, 22(2):1222–1250, Secondquarter 2020.
[MSEH19]
Daniel Moghimi, Berk Sunar, Thomas Eisenbarth, and Nadia
Heninger. TPM-FAIL: TPM meets timing and lattice attacks.
CoRR, abs/1911.05673, 2019.
[NMB+16]
Bernard Ngabonziza, Daniel Martin, Anna Bailey, Haehyun Cho,
and Sarah Martin. Trustzone explained: Architectural features
and use cases. In 2016 IEEE 2nd International Conference on
Collaboration and Internet Computing (CIC), pages 445–451,
2016.
[NXP19]
NXP Semiconductors. 32-bit ARM Cortex-M33 microcontroller,
10 2019. Rev. 1.6.
[NXP22]
Lpc55s69-evk, 2022.
https://www.nxp.com.
[ODD21]
Jeppe Hagelskjær Ostergaard, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola Drag-
oni. Eramo: Effective remote attestation through memory of-
floading. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Se-
curity and Resilience (CSR), pages 73–80, 2021.
[Pat22]
Mark Patrick. Energy Harvesting Makes IoT Adoption Easier.
Mouser Electronics, 08 2022.
https://www.electronicsmedia.info.
[PC11]
Stephen M. Papa and William D. Casper. Trusted Computing,
pages 1328–1331. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2011.
[PS19]
Sandro Pinto and Nuno Santos. Demystifying arm trustzone: A
comprehensive survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 51(6), jan 2019.
[RDV+21]
Md Masoom Rabbani, Edlira Dushku, Jo Vliegen, An Braeken,
Nicola Dragoni, and Nele Mentens. Reserve: Remote attesta-
tion of intermittent iot devices. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, SenSys ’21,
page 578–580, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
[RL19]
Emily Ruppel and Brandon Lucia. Transactional concurrency
control for intermittent, energy-harvesting computing systems.
In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Pro-
gramming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2019,
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
page 1085–1100, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[Rog02]
Phillip Rogaway.
Authenticated-encryption with associated-
data. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, CCS ’02, page 98–107, New York,
NY, USA, 2002. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Rot11]
Scott A. Rotondo. Trusted Computing Group, pages 1331–1331.
Springer US, Boston, MA, 2011.
[RSF11]
Benjamin Ransford, Jacob Sorber, and Kevin Fu.
Mementos:
System support for long-running computation on rfid-scale de-
vices. volume 47, pages 159–170, 03 2011.
[RSH+12]
A. Rahmati, Mastooreh Salajegheh, D. Holcomb, J. Sorber,
Wayne Burleson, and K. Fu. Tardis: Time and remanence de-
cay in sram to implement secure protocols on embedded devices
without clocks. 21st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Se-
curity 2012), pages 221–236, 01 2012.
[RVPRWB21] Ronald
S.
Ross,
Gary
Guissanie
Victoria
Pillitteri,
Richard
Graubart
Ryan
Wagner,
and
Deborah
Bodeau.
Enhanced
security
requirements
for
protecting
controlled
unclassified information, 02 2021.
[SKS18]
Archanaa Santhana Krishnan and Patrick Schaumont. Exploit-
ing Security Vulnerabilities in Intermittent Computing: 8th In-
ternational Conference, SPACE 2018, Kanpur, India, December
15-19, 2018, Proceedings, pages 104–124. 12 2018.
[SL16]
Rodrigo Vieira Steiner and Emil Lupu. Attestation in wireless
sensor networks: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 49(3), 09 2016.
[SLJ20]
Milijana Surbatovich, Brandon Lucia, and Limin Jia. Towards a
formal foundation of intermittent computing. Proc. ACM Pro-
gram. Lang., 4(OOPSLA), nov 2020.
[SLS+05]
Arvind Seshadri, Mark Luk, Elaine Shi, Adrian Perrig, Leen-
dert van Doorn, and Pradeep Khosla. Pioneer: Verifying code
integrity and enforcing untampered code execution on legacy sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the Twentieth ACM Symposium on Op-
erating Systems Principles, SOSP ’05, page 1–16, New York, NY,
USA, 2005. Association for Computing Machinery.
[SML+17]
Fang Su, Kaisheng Ma, Xueqing Li, Tongda Wu, Yongpan Liu,
and Vijaykrishnan Narayanan. Nonvolatile processors: Why is it
==PAGE:92==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
trending? In Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference
& Exhibition (DATE), 2017, pages 966–971, 2017.
[SMZF21]
Teodora Sanislav, George Mois, Sherali Zeadally, and Silviu
Folea. Energy harvesting techniques for internet of things (iot).
IEEE Access, PP:1–1, 03 2021.
[Spi00]
Diomidis Spinellis. Reflection as a mechanism for software in-
tegrity verification. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., 3(1):51–62, 2
2000.
[TEE11]
TEE. Tee internal core api specification v1.1.2 - globalplatform,
Dec 2011.
[THJ15]
Hailun Tan, Wen Hu, and Sanjay Jha.
A remote attestation
protocol with trusted platform modules (tpms) in wireless sensor
networks. Security and Communication Networks, 8(13):2171–
2188, 2015.
[Tru22]
Trusted Firmware. Mbed TLS, 11 2022.
https://github.com/Mbed-TLS/mbedtls.
[VDSDN+18] Emanuele Valea, Mathieu Da Silva, Giorgio Di Natale, Marie-
Lise Flottes, Sophie Dupuis, and Bruno Rouzeyre. Si eccs: Secure
context saving for iot devices. In 2018 13th International Confer-
ence on Design & Technology of Integrated Systems In Nanoscale
Era (DTIS), pages 1–2, 2018.
[VDWH16]
Joel Van Der Woude and Matthew Hicks. Intermittent computa-
tion without hardware support or programmer intervention. In
Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Conference on Operating Sys-
tems Design and Implementation, OSDI’16, page 17–32, USA,
2016. USENIX Association.
[vHNKH04]
L.F.W. van Hoesel, T. Nieberg, H.J. Kip, and P.J.M. Havinga.
Advantages of a tdma based, energy-efficient, self-organizing mac
protocol for wsns.
In 2004 IEEE 59th Vehicular Technology
Conference. VTC 2004-Spring (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37514), vol-
ume 3, pages 1598–1602 Vol.3, 2004.
[Wei99]
Mark Weiser. The computer for the 21st century. SIGMOBILE
Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., 3(3):3–11, jul 1999.
[YHY+15]
Xinyu Yang, Xiaofei He, Wei Yu, Jie Lin, Rui Li, Qingyu Yang,
and Houbing Song. Towards a low-cost remote memory attesta-
tion for the smart grid. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 15:20799–
20824, 08 2015.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[Yiu20]
J. Yiu. Definitive Guide to Arm Cortex-M23 and Cortex-M33
Processors. Elsevier Science, 2020.
