==PAGE:1==
Prediction of complexes between
pro-survival proteins and their
BH3-containing proteins
Chongyang Li
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Apoptosis defects can promote cancer. Pro-survival BCL2 proteins involved in the reg-
ulation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway have been found to be overexpressed in a va-
riety of tumors. BH3-only proteins initiate apoptosis by binding pro-survival BCL2 pro-
teins through BH3 motifs, which are short linear motifs (SLiMs). Modeling the three-
dimensional (3D) structure of their complexes is important to design targeted therapeutics
and rationalize the effect of mutations. We are developing a multi-tier approach as a set
of automated pipelines to predict the 3D structure of BCL2-BH3 complexes and other
SLiM-protein complexes in general. This approach first uses the low-cost coarse-grained
model based docking software, CABS-dock, to generate the initial structures of the BCL2-
BH3 complexes. This is followed by using a model scoring pipeline based on six metrics
to filter out high-quality models for subsequent refinement by Rosetta FlexPepDock, re-
sulting in a high-resolution structure of the BCL2-BH3 complex. In this work, we tested
our approach using three different apo structures of the BCL2 protein, that came from
model complexes or free structures. We also tested the effect of using different a priori
information to generate our models (i.e. secondary structure of distance restraints between
protein and peptide). We first performed an exploration of the parameter space, which
shows no major differences in the generated models. Of the used quality measures, identi-
fying peptide orientation, a contact-based and a secondary-structure based score were the
most useful metrics to distinguish model quality. We show that the addition of secondary
structure information and/or residue contact information is helpful to improve the quality
of the generated models. Our approach was able to generate and rank a set of starting
models for successive refinement.
==PAGE:4==
Summary (Danish)
Apoptose defekter kan fremme kræft. Pro-overlevelse BCL2-proteiner involveret i regulerin-
gen af den iboende apoptotiske pathway er blevet fundet til at have overudtrykt en række
forskellige tumorer. BH3-alene-proteiner initierer apoptose ved at binde pro-overlevelse
BCL2-proteiner gennem BH3-motiver, som er korte lineære motiver (SLiM). Modellering
af tredimensionelle (3D) strukturer af deres komplekser er vigtig for at designe målrettede
terapier og rationalisere effekten af mutationer. Vi udvikler en multi-tier tilgang som et
sæt af automatiserede pipelines til at forudsige 3D-strukturen af BCL2-BH3-komplekser
og andre SLiM-proteinkomplekser generelt. Denne tilgang bruger først den lav-pris, grov-
kornet modelbaserede dockingsoftware, CABS-dock, til at generere de initiale strukturer
af BCL2-BH3-komplekserne. Dette efterfølges af brug af en modelscoringspipeline baseret
på seks metricer til at filtrere højkvalitetsmodeller fra til efterfølgende forfining af Roset-
ta FlexPepDock, hvilket resulterer i en højopløsningsstruktur af BCL2-BH3-komplekset. I
dette arbejde testede vi vores tilgang ved at bruge tre forskellige apo-strukturer af BCL2-
proteinet, der kom fra modelkomplekser eller frie strukturer. Vi testede også effekten af at
bruge forskellige a priori-oplysninger til at generere vores modeller (dvs. sekundær struk-
tur af afstandsbegrænsninger mellem protein og peptid). Vi udførte først en udforskning
af parameterrummet, som ikke viser nogen større forskelle i de genererede modeller. Af de
anvendte kvalitetsmålinger var identifikation af peptidorientering, en kontaktbaseret og en
sekundærstrukturbaseret score, de mest nyttige målinger til at skelne mellem modelkvali-
tet. Vi viser, at tilføjelsen af information om sekundær struktur og/eller kontaktoplysninger
om rester er nyttig til at forbedre kvaliteten af de genererede modeller. Vores tilgang var i
stand til at generere og rangere et sæt startmodeller til successiv forfining.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Health Tech in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring
an M.Sc. in Engineering.
BCL2 protein family regulates the intrinsic apoptotic pathway and is an ideal drug tar-
get. Scientists have devoted themselves to the development of pro-survival BCL2 protein
inhibitors, i.e. BH3 mimetics, for many years. BH3 motifs are SLiMs whose 3D structures
are difficult to obtain by both regular measurement methods and computational prediction
methods. In 2016, Venetoclax, the first BH3 mimetic for the treatment of chronic lympho-
cytic leukemia, was approved by FDA, raising hopes for the development of BH3-mimetic
drugs. Venetoclax was obtained by compound screening, which is time-consuming and has
a low success rate. Therefore, it is urgent to develop new approaches to predict the 3D
structures of the pro-survival BCL2 proteins in complexes with its BH3-containing ligands
to guide the design of BH3 mimetic drugs.
In this thesis, we propose a multi-tier approach to predict the 3D structures of protein-
SLiM complexes and validate our approach by using three different apo structures of BCL2
protein, helping the development of new BH3-mimetic drugs.
Lyngby, 30-November-2022
Chongyang Li
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
After two and a half years of study, on the occasion of the completion of the thesis, I
would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors, colleagues, mentor, friends,
students, toys and family members who have guided, helped and accompanied me.
Thanks to my supervisors Elena and Matteo, for the precious and patient academic guid-
ance, and the opportunity to join in this interesting project at Danish Cancer Society
Center (DCRC). Hope to continue working on this project!
Thanks to my colleagues at DCRC, for the hugs and delicious dinners, you all are super
nice and lovely!
Thanks to my mentor, Lama Awang Aryasang, for purifying my mind.
Thanks to my friends, Jingbo Pan, Huijiao Yang and Sven Herting, for taking care of me
in both life and study.
Thanks to my colleagues at Nihao sushi restaurant, for being my family in Denmark.
Thanks to my students, you are so adorable and always make me happy.
Thanks to my toys, the bubble camera, Paperella, Angelina and the whole mouse family,
you all are always on my desk to accompany me.
Thanks to my family, especially my mom and dad, for always loving me and supporting
me.
Thanks to myself, for my daily hard work and my good luck which makes me have the
chance to meet and thank the above people.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Short linear motifs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Properties of SLiMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1.1
SLiMs structural plasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1.2
SLiMs evolutionary plasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1.3
SLiMs binding determinants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Functions of SLiMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Protein-peptide docking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1.1
Template-based docking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1.2
Local and global docking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2
Major challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2.1
Sampling efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2.2
Scoring accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Overview of apoptosis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.1
Morphology of apoptotic cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.2
Mechanisms of apoptosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.2.1
The extrinsic pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.2.2
The intrinsic pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
BCl2 protein family
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Aims
15
3
Materials
16
3.1
CABS model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
CABS-dock protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
SLiM-modeling workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
Peptide orientation identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
The fraction of side-chain based intermolecular contacts (Qsc) cal-
culation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
3.3.3
Secondary structure score calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.4
MutateX calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.4.1
Alanine scanning mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.4.2
Self mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.5
Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Snakemake
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Methods
28
4.1
CABS-dock simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
SLiM-modeling evaluating workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Peptide orientation identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Qsc calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.3
Secondary structure score calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.4
Alanine scanning mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.5
Self mutagenesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.6
RMSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
33
5.1
Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
. . . . .
33
5.1.1
Effect of setting a random seed in CABSdock . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.2
Parameter comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.3
Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3.1
5VAU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3.2
5FCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.3.3
1GJH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Discussion
53
7
Conclusion
55
A Appendix
57
Bibliography
66
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Short linear motifs
The viability of eukaryotic cells is inseparable from the cooperative action of their internal
biomacromolecules. These biomacromolecules control the necessary physiological processes
from cell division to cell death through specific and strict physical interactions with each
other. For proteins, these interactions are mainly mediated by modules in their sequence
and structure that not only have scaffolding, catalytic or regulatory activity, but also can
bind to a variety of ligands. Proteins sense and transmit environmental signals through
these modules, thereby triggering cellular responses[1].
When the first protein structures were discovered, people thought there was only one mod-
ule could mediate protein-protein interactions and that was the folded globular domain[2].
However, as more and more cellular processes were found to be associated with interfaces
lacking a well-defined three-dimensional structure under native conditions, intrinsically
disordered regions (IDRs) and intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) came into view[3].
Different from globular domains, IDPs and IDRs have high conformational freedom, allow-
ing them to undergo rapid conformational transitions[4]. In protein-protein interactions,
they shift from disordered to ordered, reducing the binding strength and thereby carrying
out low-affinity, transient interactions[2]. This property allows IDPs and IDRs to play an
important role in the dynamic regulation of protein networks, especially in the biological
processes of signal transduction, regulation and transcription[5].
The functions of IDPs and IDRs mentioned above are often carried out by short linear mo-
tifs (SLiMs) embedded in them. SLiMs, also known as eukaryotic linear motifs (ELMs) or
linear motifs (LMs), are highly degenerate sequence fragments composed of 3 to 10 residues,
but there are also some helical motifs with 20 or more residues[3, 6, 7, 8]. Since SLiMs
only occupy a small space, one IDR may contain multiple SLiMs, allowing the protein to
play different functional roles[6, 9, 10]. Except for being recognized by various globular
domains to mediate protein-protein interactions, SLiMs can also function by binding to
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Short linear motifs
2
nucleotides and lipids[1, 9].
1.1.1
Properties of SLiMs
This part will overview the properties of SLiMs, focusing on the structure, evolution and
binding determinants of SLiMs.
1.1.1.1
SLiMs structural plasticity
In the unbound state, SLiMs are usually located in IDRs. They lack a stable tertiary
structure and are very flexible. This structural plasticity allows SLiMs to adapt and bind
to different partners[1]. When interacting with the target, SLiMs often achieve a stable
structure upon binding, with an α-helix or β-sheet fold[11]. The structure of complexes
formed by SLiMs and their binding partners can be determined by conventional methods,
such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography[4].
1.1.1.2
SLiMs evolutionary plasticity
Although SLiMs are short, the degree of conservation of residues varies greatly from posi-
tion to position. SLiMs are typically defined by only two to four fixed residues, with no
preference for other positions[12]. These few fixed residues contribute most of the binding
free energy and determine most of the affinity and specificity of the interactions. The high
sequence degeneracy makes SLiMs susceptible to emerge or appear by mutation, enabling
de novo evolution in proteins[13]. Therefore, SLiMs have high evolutionary plasticity and
are far less conserved in the same sequence than globular domains[14].
1.1.1.3
SLiMs binding determinants
The specificity and affinity of SliMs-mediated interactions are determined by intrinsic and
extrinsic determinants. These two types of determinants are encoded at the interface of
SLiMs and depend on the context of SLiMs[1]. They define the natural constraints on the
binding of SLiMs, i.e. specificity, and also determine the affinity of SLiMs binding and
provide detailed information on the mode of action of SLiMs[11].
The intrinsic binding determinants of SliMs are their core conserved residues and the
local context. The core residues are hotspots of SliMs binding which are usually fixed
or a small number of amino acids with similar physicochemical properties or structural
properties[3]. These positions ensure the specificity and affinity of SLiMs binding. The re-
maining residues, on the other hand, provide the context of SliMs. They provide secondary
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Short linear motifs
3
contacts between the flanking regions and the binding partners during SLiMs binding,
which can generally be any amino acid[11]. They can further regulate SLiMs specificity
and affinity. In addition, sometimes there are positions on SLiMs that prohibit a limited
set of amino acids, and such positions can inhibit binding[1].
Extrinsic determinants can influence binding aside from the binding interface itself. Many
proteins do not compete with each other in vivo due to the fact that they cannot meet.
Some SLiMs carry out their function only when they are present in protein sequences at
specific locations (e.g. when they are solvent-accessible). Therefore, the local abundance
of disordered proteins is tightly controlled and constrained by the contexts such as tissue
specificity and cell compartmentalization[1].
1.1.2
Functions of SLiMs
SliMs have a wide range of functions and can be divided into two main categories: those act-
ing as ligands and those acting as post-translational modification (PTM) sites[15]. These
two kinds of SLiMs can also be further divided into different subsets according to the
functions they carry out (Figure 1.1).
Figure 1.1: SLiMs functional classification. (Van Roey K, Uyar B, Weatheritt R J, et al. Short
linear motifs: ubiquitous and functionally diverse protein interaction modules directing cell regula-
tion[J]. Chemical reviews, 2014, 114(13): 6733-6778.)
The first category, the ligand SLiMs, can be divided into three types[1, 15]:
• Enzyme recruitment sites, which contain docking motifs and degron motifs. Dock-
ing motifs recruit enzymes to their substrates by binding to sites different from the
active sites on the enzyme catalytic domain. They can be used to increase the sub-
strate specificity of modifying enzymes. Instead, degron motifs modulate protein
stability by targeting proteins to the ubiquitin ligase complexes for their degrada-
tion. Ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation contributes to cell cycle regulation and
apoptosis.
• Targeting motifs, divided into trafficking motifs and anchoring motifs. Trafficking
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Protein-peptide docking
4
motifs are responsible for facilitating protein translocation to different subcellular
compartments via specific transport pathways, and anchoring motifs are responsible
for holding proteins in specific subcellular locations.
• Ligand binding motifs. Most of the SLiMs found so far belong to this type. As simple
binding modules, they regulate the formation of macromolecular complexes instead
of carrying out specific regulatory functions directly.
The second category consists of post-translational modification motifs, which can also be
divided into three types[1]:
• The addition or removal of a PTM moiety. Post-translational modifications, which
modify natural amino acids side chains, require the catalysis of specific modifying
enzymes to perform its function.
This kind of SLiMs contain specific sequences
that are recognized by the cellular machinery for the addition or removal substrate
specificity of such modifying enzymes.
• Protein hydrolytic cleavage sites recognized by proteases. Protein cleavage is another
type of PTM that plays a key role in cellular regulation.
By protease-catalyzed
hydrolysis of specific peptide bonds, proteins are irreversibly cleaved into smaller
peptides.
• Structural modification sites. Such SLiMs can be recognized by peptidyl-prolyl cis-
trans isomerases, allowing cis-trans isomerization of peptide bonds involving proline
residues, thereby achieving different functions, such as regulating apoptosis and cell
cycle.
In conclusion, SLiM-mediated interactions are involved in a variety of biological processes
including regulation of apoptosis which make SLiMs interesting pharmacological targets.
Due to their features, SLiMs are disordered in solution, whereas they typically achieve a
stable conformation upon binding.
1.2
Protein-peptide docking
As mentioned above, protein-protein interactions have a crucial impact on many cellular
processes, of which about 40 % of the interactions are mediated by SLiMs[16]. This makes
SLiMs become a popular candidate for drug design. However, only a small part of the
protein-SLiM complex structures can be solved experimentally, using methods such as
cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), X-ray, and NMR, due to technical difficulties
and high costs[17, 18]. In this sense, computational prediction of SLiM-protein complexes
is a low cost, effective tool that can be applied high-throughput.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Protein-peptide docking
5
In this section, we will summarize the protein-peptide docking approaches from two aspects:
classification and challenges.
1.2.1
Classification
Protein-peptide docking approaches can be divided into two categories: template-based
docking and template-free docking[19]. Among them, template-free docking can be further
divided into local docking and global docking (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2: Protein-peptide docking classification. (Ciemny M, Kurcinski M, Kamel K, et al.
Protein–peptide docking: opportunities and challenges[J]. Drug discovery today, 2018, 23(8): 1530-
1537.)
1.2.1.1
Template-based docking
Template-based docking uses known structures of protein-peptide complexes as scaffolds for
modeling, such as GalaxyPepDock[20]. When the template quality is good, this approach
can make accurate predictions and is very effective. However, it has limited real-world
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Protein-peptide docking
6
applications, especially for cases for which template structure of protein-peptide complexes
are not available in the protein data bank (PDB), and cases in which the binding mode is
unknown or atypical[18].
1.2.1.2
Local and global docking
Using local docking requires users to provide the approximate binding site of the protein-
peptide complex and then search for the peptide binding site in its vicinity[19]. The more
precise the available binding site information is, the higher the expected docking accuracy.
Softwares that use local docking approach for prediction include DynaDock[21], Rosetta
FlexPepDock[22], HADDOCK[23]. Among them, DynaDock and Rosetta FlexPepDock
require users to provide an initial model of the protein-peptide complex. Furthermore,
local docking can also be used to refine lower quality models[24].
Global docking searches the entire protein surface for binding sites and is the first choice
when structural information of the protein-peptide complexes is not available. Although
the quality of the models obtained by global docking is often lower respect to that obtain-
able with local docking methods, these models can subsequently be refined by local docking
methods mentioned above[25]. Programs that use global docking to predict the structure
of complexes include CABS-dock[26], PIPER-FlexPepDock[27], HPEPDOCK[28], etc. Ex-
cept for CABS-dock, most of these programs consider proteins and peptides as rigid bodies
when searching for binding sites[24]. Fourteen docking programs were evaluated for per-
formance by Weng et al[19]. Among the tested global docking programs, CABS-dock was
the best performing program with a standalone application.
1.2.2
Major challenges
Protein-peptide docking is facing two main challenges: sampling efficiency and scoring
accuracy[29]. Due to the high flexibility of peptides, the protein-peptide binding process
often involves large-scale conformational changes, meaning that the conformational space
that needs to be explored is very large[30]. On the other hand, docking prediction is based
on the assumption that the structure of a complex is the lowest free energy state available
to the system, and identifying the model that actually corresponds to the lowest energy
bound pose is a challenge itself[24].
1.2.2.1
Sampling efficiency
The difficulty of sampling in the docking process depends on the large number of degrees
of freedom of the peptide, as well as the fact that the peptide typically has a large number
of easily accessible conformations. Therefore, both the length of the peptide and its sec-
ondary structure are important. The easiest way to overcome this problem is to ignore the
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Overview of apoptosis
7
flexibility of the protein backbone and perform rigid docking. Rigid docking protocols can
improve the sampling efficiency and reduce the computational cost, but such protocols also
should ensure the flexibility of the side chains in the other modeling steps. Alternatively,
using ensemble docking or using coarse-grained models which allow peptide backbone doing
large-scale rearrangement in the docking process can also be the solutions[16, 24].
1.2.2.2
Scoring accuracy
Identifying the most accurate model from the large number of different docking results
is far from trivial.
Scoring functions for protein-peptide docking can be divided into
four categories: empirical-based; physics-based; knowledge-based, and machine learning
algorithms[31].
Since each type of scoring function has its limitations, hybrid scoring
based on hybrid functions are the most effective methods. Most of the docking programs
rank the models by calculating the binding free energy, while some other programs use
methods such as structural clustering or co-evolutionary information to improve model
selection[24, 32].
1.3
Overview of apoptosis
In 1972, the term "apoptosis" was first named and described as a form of cell death by
Kerr et al[33]. Different from necrosis, apoptosis is a genetically programmed mechanism
of active cellular suicide, or programmed cell death[34]. Apoptosis does not trigger an
inflammatory response and occurs normally during cell development and aging[35, 36].
1.3.1
Morphology of apoptotic cells
Morphological changes can be observed by electron microscopy during apoptosis, including
chromatin condensation, cytoplasmic shrinkage and plasma membrane blebbing. Even-
tually, the cells rupture into membrane-enclosed fragments (apoptotic bodies) that are
removed by phagocytes. Thus, apoptosis eliminates damaged or infected cells and main-
tains the balance of cell populations in the body, while dysregulation of the apoptotic
signaling process often leads to serious consequences, such as neurodegenerative diseases,
autoimmune diseases or cancer[37, 38, 39].
1.3.2
Mechanisms of apoptosis
The initial understanding of apoptotic mechanisms originated from studies of cell death
of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, a relatively simple invertebrate. Since the key
==PAGE:16==
1.3 Overview of apoptosis
8
molecular controls of developmental cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans were shown to
have mammalian homologues, the related apoptotic mechanisms were extended to mam-
malian systems[40].
For mammals, most apoptosis pathways require the direct involvement of caspases, a family
of cystein-dependent aspartate-directed proteases, which mediate apoptosis by being acti-
vated and then cleaving key cellular proteins to transmit death signaling[37]. Caspases are
usually present in the form of inactive precursors, called procaspases, which are cleaved to
produce the active form[41]. Although caspases-independent apoptotic mechanisms also
exist, the morphological features that define the apoptotic process depend on caspases.
Therefore, it can be said that without caspases, there would be no apoptosis[42].
The exploration of the mechanisms of apoptosis is very important to understand the mech-
anism of related diseases caused by apoptosis disorder, and it is helpful to develop drugs
that target some apoptosis genes or pathways. As both the initiator and executor, Cas-
pases are the core of apoptosis mechanisms. There are two major pathways to activate
caspases (Figure 1.3): the extrinsic death receptor pathway and the intrinsic mitochondrial
pathway[43].
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Overview of apoptosis
9
Figure 1.3: Two major pathways of apoptosis. (Wong R S Y. Apoptosis in cancer: from patho-
genesis to treatment[J]. Journal of experimental & clinical cancer research, 2011, 30(1): 1-14.)
==PAGE:18==
1.3 Overview of apoptosis
10
1.3.2.1
The extrinsic pathway
The extrinsic pathway of apoptosis is initiated by the binding of exogenous mediators
(death ligands) to death receptors on the cell surface. This binding event leads to receptor
multimerization, recruiting specific adaptor proteins and activating caspases[40]. All death
receptors are members of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily, and the
best studied receptors are the type 1 TNF receptor (TNFR1) and Fas protein[37].
The intracellular domains of TNFR1 and Fas both have a conserved protein-protein in-
teraction domain, called the death domain.
When binding to their ligands (TNF and
FasL, respectively), TNFR1 and Fas trimerize and recruit the associated death domain
proteins, TRADD and FADD respectively, for interaction, forming the death-inducing sig-
naling complex (DISC). For Fas, its associated FADD contains a death effector domain
(DED)[44]. Pro-caspase 8, which also contains DED, can be recruited into DISC by FADD
and activated into caspase 8. TRADD, associated with TNFR1, recruits pro-caspase 8
through interacting with FADD[38]. Active caspase 8 can then directly cleave caspase 3 or
other executor caspases, leading to apoptosis.
1.3.2.2
The intrinsic pathway
The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis depends on mitochondrial outer membrane permeabi-
lization (MOMP) and the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c. When cells are subjected
to intrinsic triggers such as oxidative stress, hypoxia, high concentrations of cytosolic Ca2+
and genetic damage, mitochondrial permeability increases and pro-apoptotic molecules
such as cytochrome c are released into the cytoplasm[43]. Cytochrome c binds to apopto-
sis protease activating factor-1 (Apaf-1) in the cytoplasm. In the presence of cytochrome c
and ATP, the CARD domain of Apaf-1 binds to the CARD domain of pro-caspase 9, form-
ing the mitochondrial DISC, also known as the apoptosome. Finally, the active caspase 9
activates the downstream executioner caspase 3, causing apoptosis[37, 44].
The release of cytochrome c from mitochondria is controlled by the B cell lymphoma 2
(BCL2) protein family.
Members of pro-apoptotic proteins such as BAX, BAK, BIM,
BID, PUMA promote the release of cytochrome c, while members of anti-apoptotic pro-
teins such as BCL2, BCL-xl, BCL-w, MCL1 prevent the release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria[43, 45, 46]. BAX and BAK are central effectors of apoptosis since they can
form large pores in the outer mitochondrial membrane, leading to MOMP[47].
Exept for cytochrome c, other apoptosis-inducing factors such as second mitochondria-
derived activator of caspase (Smac), direct inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) binding
protein with low pI (DIABLO) and Omi/high temperature requirement protein A (HtrA2)
are also present in mitochondria. They can replace caspase-3 and bind to the IAPs to
allow apoptosis to proceed normally[37, 43, 45].
==PAGE:19==
1.4 BCl2 protein family
11
In addition, apoptosis, as a stochastic process in cell populations, has been attributed to
changes in the concentration of proteins associated with cell death. Recent studies show
that the stochastic nature of apoptosis may be related to the cellular content of mitochon-
dria and the distribution of BCL2 family proteins on the mitochondrial surface[45].
1.4
BCl2 protein family
As mentioned above, the B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) protein family controls the intrinsic
pathway of apoptosis. Based on their effects on apoptosis, the BCL2 protein family can be
divided into three subgroups: BH3 (BCL2 homology 3)-only initiator proteins, pro-survival
cell guardian proteins and pro-apoptotic effector proteins[48].
==PAGE:20==
1.4 BCl2 protein family
12
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.4: The structure of BCL-2 family proteins and their complexes. Panel (a) shows the
structural and sequence homology of BCL2 family proteins. Panel (b) and (c) are structures of
protein BCL2 and its ligand peptide Beclin1.
Panel (d) shows the structure of BCL2-Beclin1
complex and its conserved salt bridge. (Czabotar P E, Lessene G, Strasser A, et al. Control of
apoptosis by the BCL-2 protein family: implications for physiology and therapy[J]. Nature reviews
Molecular cell biology, 2014, 15(1): 49-63.)
Figure 1.4 shows the sequence homology and structure of BCL2 family proteins. Each
member of the BCL2 protein family contains one or more BCL2 homologous (BH) domains,
i.e., BH1-BH4, and all of them contain a BH3 domain.[47, 49]. These domains consist of
nine α-helices, including a C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain, which can target the
mitochondrial outer membrane.[48].
Pro-survival members and pro-apoptotic members
contain all BH domains and present a hydrophobic BH3 domain-binding groove which can
bind to the BH3 structural domains of other family members[50]. Moreover, the complexes
of BCL2 proteins and their ligands BH3-only proteins always have a conserved salt bridge
==PAGE:21==
1.4 BCl2 protein family
13
composed of Arg and Asp.
BH3-only proteins can be subdivided into activators and sensitizers[50]. Figure 1.5 shows
the way in which interactions among three subgroups of BCL2 family proteins regulate
apoptosis.
Figure 1.5:
Interactions among three subgroups of BCL2 family proteins.
(Montero J, Letai
A. Why do BCL-2 inhibitors work and where should we use them in the clinic?[J]. Cell Death &
Differentiation, 2018, 25(1): 56-64.)
The activators carry out their pro-apoptotic function by directly interacting with pro-
apoptotic proteins of BCL2 family. When cells receive an apoptotic stimulus, the BH3
domain of the BH3-only activator protein binds to the BH3 domain-binding groove of the
pro-apoptotic effector proteins BAX and BAK, thereby activating BAX and BAK. BAX
and BAK then aggregate into multimeric pores on the mitochondrial membrane, facilitating
MOMP and releasing cytochrome c into the cytoplasm[51].
In addition, some studies
have shown that activators may have functional differences, with BIM giving priority to
activating BAX and BID giving priority to activating BAK[52].
Instead of activating BAX and BAK directly, the sensitizers exert their pro-apoptotic effect
by competing for binding in the hydrophobic pocket of the pro-survival proteins[50]. The
sensitizers such as PUMA, NOXA inactivate pro-survival proteins through the interaction
of the BH3 domains. This mechanism, on the one hand, allows sufficient activators to
==PAGE:22==
1.4 BCl2 protein family
14
activate the pro-apoptotic proteins, and on the other hand, inhibits the binding of the pro-
survival proteins to the pro-apoptotic proteins, ensuring the occurrence of apoptosis[51].
One of the hallmarks of cancer is the resistance of apoptosis[53]. It has been observed
the overexpression of pro-survival BCL2 proteins in many tumor types[54].
By taking
advantage of the pro-apoptotic properties of BH3-only proteins and targeting the pro-
survival BCL2 proteins, the development of apoptosis-inducing BH3 mimetics of cancer
cells offers new hope for cancer therapy[55].
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Aims
One of the hallmarks of cancer is the resistance of cell death[53]. BCL2 protein family
activates or inhibits the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis by interacting with their subgroup
members, BH3-only proteins. It has been found that the pro-survival BCL2 proteins are
overexpressed in many human tumors[56]. Therefore, developing BH3 mimetics targeting
the pro-survival BCL2 proteins shows the promise for cancer therapy.
BH3-only proteins carry out their functions through BH3 motifs. As SLiMs, they are dis-
ordered in solution and form protein-SLiM complexes regulating apoptosis. It is important
to know the 3D structures of protein-SLiM complexes, as that would allow us to rationalize
the determinants of binding, predict the effect of mutations and help with designing BH3
mimetics. However, only a small number of the complexes have known 3D structures.
It is necessary to develop an effective approach to predict 3D structures of protein-SLiM
complexes.
We are developing a multi-tier approach for predicting 3D structures of protein-SLiM
complexes de novo, which is based on automated pipelines. This protocol starts with using
a coarse-grained modeling method, CABS-dock[57], to generate a set of first guess of initial
models, and then identify promising models using a model evaluation pipeline. Finally, we
will refine the best models using Rosetta FlexPepDock[22] and use our evaluation pipeline
to identify the best models among them.
The aim of this project is to contribute to the development of the approach. In partic-
ular, we focused on the first part of the pipeline - the production initial models through
CABS-dock and their evaluation. We first aim to assess whether CABS-dock runs are re-
producible and if there is any effect on changing the simulation parameters on the collected
models. We also aim to assess the effect of changing starting BCL2 structure, chosen from
different complexes or a free-state experimental structure, as well as estimating the effect
of providing additional information, such as restraint sets or peptide secondary structure,
to model generation.
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Materials
3.1
CABS model
The CABS method uses a coarse-grained model with medium resolution which was used
for studying the dynamics and thermodynamics of globular proteins at first[58]. CABS is
an acronym for C-alpha (CA), C-beta (B) and side group (S). The model is represented
by reduced protein chains. It assumes there are four pseudo-atoms on each residue: C-
alpha, center of the virtual C-alpha–C-alpha bond, C-beta and the center of mass of the
side-group. The backbone of the main chain is represented by the lattice-confined C-alpha,
and the spacing of the underlying cubic lattice is set to 0.61 Å. The positions of C-alpha
pseudo-atoms are dispersed by the lattice. Such dispersion has no significant impact on
the properties of the model, but it speeds up the computation considerably, and allows for
larger scale simulations[59]. In the meanwhile, the positions of the remaining pseudo-atoms
are outside the lattice and move with the main chain. The C-beta position is derived from
the planar angle of three adjacent C-alpha, the identity of amino acid and the statistical
analysis of protein structure database[60].
==PAGE:25==
3.1 CABS model
17
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: Panel (a) shows the lattice-confined C-alpha traces of β-hairpin and α-helix, with the
lattice spacing equivalent to 0.61 Å. Panel (b) illustrates the idea of side chain definition.(Koliński
A. Protein modeling and structure prediction with a reduced representation[J]. Acta Biochimica
Polonica, 2004, 51.)
Conformational sampling of the CABS model is controlled by the asymmetric Metropolis
Monte Carlo method. The Replica Exchange Monte Carlo with simulated annealing is also
employed to enhance the sampling and find the conformation with the minimum global
energy. The force field is knowledge-based potentials with generic protein-like conforma-
tional biases, statistical potentials for the short-range conformational propensities, a model
of the main chain hydrogen bonds and context-dependent statistical potentials describing
the side group interactions[60].
The design of the CABS model takes into account both calculation speed and simula-
tion accuracy. In the area of protein structure prediction, the CABS model showed an
excellent performance in CASP (Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction) ex-
periments. Using the CABS-based approach, the Kolinski–Bujnicki group ranked first or
second, hinging on the different evaluation methods[58, 61].
==PAGE:26==
3.2 CABS-dock protocol
18
3.2
CABS-dock protocol
CABS-dock is a highly efficient modeling tool for protein-peptide docking based on the
CABS model. As one of the global docking approaches, CABS-dock has a bright spot that
distinguish it from other tools. CABS-dock allows flexibility in finding binding sites for
receptors and peptides, without setting the binding location.
CABS-dock has both a web server and a standalone version. The standalone version is an
upgrade to the web server. It is distributed to the users of multiple platforms based on
the Python 2.7 package. The package consists of three main modules[57]:
• The CABS simulation module, which guarantees flexible protein-peptide docking
based on the CABS model engine.
• The scoring module, which filters and selects representative models by energy scoring
and structural clustering.
• The reconstruction module, which reconstructs the selected models from coarse-
grained to all-atom using the MODELLER package[62].
The package mentioned above also allows consumers to control or modify every simula-
tion step easily. Figure 3.2 illustrates the general procedures of CABS-dock with default
settings.
Figure 3.2: CABS-dock pipeline. (Source: https://bitbucket.org/lcbio/cabsdock/wiki/Home)
==PAGE:27==
3.2 CABS-dock protocol
19
For details, the CABS-dock protocol involves the following steps[59, 61, 26]:
1. Initial structure preparation. After inputting the sequence of the peptide and three-
dimensional (3D) structure of the target protein, 10 copies of the protein-peptide
complexes are generated as unique starting conformations of Replica Exchange Monte
Carlo sampling scheme. Each of them contains a random peptide structure placed
in a random position around the target protein, with at least 20 Å distance.
2. Docking simulation. The algorithm of the simulation procedure is Replica Exchange
Monte Carlo with simulated annealing. The above 10 replicas are distributed on 10
different temperatures uniformly with 20 annealing cycles by default. The tempera-
ture of each replica decreases as the simulation proceeds until it reaches an energy
minimum. In addition, it is necessary to impose some restraints on the target protein
in order to prevent unfolding and keep the conformation close to the original during
the docking process. There are two rules for the restraints. First, restraints are only
for pairs of C-alpha atoms at a distance of 5 to 15 Å. Second, sequence gap between
two restrained residues is at least 5. Furthermore, C-alpha trace which fluctuates in
the range of 1 Å is not penalized. Therefore, greater fluctuations of the side chain
positions are also allowed. Backbone fluctuations beyond 1 Å are penalized linearly
and can be allowed by modifying the default constraint scheme. If some residues are
marked as flexible, the slope of the penalty is reduced to half, even to 0. For output,
10 trajectories with 1000 time-stamped snapshots for each are generated. Overall,
10,000 models are collected during the simulation procedure.
3. Model filtration and selection.
All of the unbound structures are not considered
first. The rests are sorted from lowest to highest in terms of binding energy and the
top 100 of each trajectory can be retained normally, unless the number of bound
structures is less than 100. Then, the 1000 collected models are clustered together
by k-medoids algorithm and k is equal to 10. Clustering is executed 100 times with
different initial medoids. RMSD (root-mean-square deviation) is used to measure
the distance between different models based on C-alpha atoms of the peptides after
superimposing target proteins. At last, the 10 medoids of clusters are selected as the
final models. Figure 3.3 illustrates the visualization of the model screening process.
4. Final model reconstruction. The last step is to reconstruct and optimize the final 10
coarse-grained models by MODELLER program[62] with DOPE (Discrete Optimized
Protein Energy) potential[63]. In conclusion, 10 models with minimal energy are
collected and represented as all-atom complexes.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 CABS-dock protocol
20
Figure 3.3: Molecular visualization of CABS-dock protocol. (Kurcinski M, Badaczewska-Dawid
A, Kolinski M, et al. Flexible docking of peptides to proteins using CABS-dock[J]. Protein Science,
2020, 29(1): 211-222.)
In addition, to complete the docking scheme, CABS-dock also allows users to add side chain
contact information by introducing a relatively weak contact energy term. The formula of
the CABS-energy function is[29]:
where d is the distance between the centroids of mass of two restrained side chains, D0
is the cutoff distance and s is the weight of the restraint. The values of D0 and s are
by default 5.0 Å and 1.0, respectively. If the restraint deformation exceeds the defined
threshold D0, the energy penalty increases linearly according to the restraint weight s. On
the contrary, if the measured distance is lower than the cutoff value, the peptide movement
is not affected.
In fact, the addition of side chain contact information also has an impact on the filtering
step before clustering and scoring. Structures that do not satisfy the contact information
provided by the user are filtered out and excluded from the trajectory. It was verified
==PAGE:29==
3.3 SLiM-modeling workflow
21
that the use of contact information in CABS-dock global docking resulted in a significant
improvement in docking accuracy. However, in some benchmark cases, the introduction of
contact information did not produce a significant improvement in the model. This lack of
improvement may be due to the fact that there are few binding sites available in the input
protein structure.
In this project, CABS-dock was used for blind docking and docking with restraints. In
the docking between BCL2 and Beclin1, six different conditions were applied in order to
improve the quality of the final models.
3.3
SLiM-modeling workflow
SLiM-modeling is a workflow for modeling and model evaluation of structural models of
complexes between proteins and peptides harboring short linear motifs. It can be divided
into two main functions: overall model evaluation and alanine or self scanning. Specifically,
the model evaluation function consists of a pipeline evaluated based on six different metrics,
while the alanine or self scanning function contains a snakemake-based pipeline[64] for
peptide alanine and/or self scanning runs with MutateX[65], whose results are used in the
model evaluation pipeline (see below).
In addition, structural descriptors are incorporated, which can also be collected from ex-
periments such as NMR, co-immunoprecipitation, peptide arrays, Isothermal Titration
Calorimetry or mutagenesis studies. These descriptors can be used for pose selection to
achieve experimentally validated pose collections. Furthermore, this is also particularly
important for the rediscovery of new SLiMs, because experimental data can also be used
as a priori definition of the restraint sets for docking simulations.
In this project, SLiM-modeling was used to evaluate the quality of models generated by
CABS-dock. The reference structure played a key role. BCL2-peptide complexes were
selected from among the available structures on PDB. Theoretically, co-crystallized pep-
tides can be any peptide, and different peptides represent different binding modes. The
complexes were selected for extraction and generation of apo structures for the dataset,
while another kind of apo structure which has not bound ligand was also added for com-
parison. The reference structures were used to analyze the rules and determinants of the
combination mode of the studied system.
The protocol can be used to identify the best model that would be therefore subject to
refinement and further evaluation rounds.
==PAGE:30==
3.3 SLiM-modeling workflow
22
3.3.1
Peptide orientation identification
The checking of the orientation of models generated by CABS-dock is based on the measure-
ment of the distance between two pairs of residues. GROMACS[66] is used to calculate the
distance of C-alpha atoms between the residues. GROMACS is a high-throughput molec-
ular dynamics simulation and output analysis software which can automatically handle
wide classes of biomolecules, mainly for proteins, lipids and nucleic acids[67].
With the gmx distance function, GROMACS can calculate the distance between two posi-
tions. The selected residues are used to determine whether the orientation of the peptide
is consistent with the reference structure or not, and poses which do not match will be
excluded. The "unexpected" poses contain the following categories: i) peptide that binds
reversely to the BH3 binding pocket of BCL2; ii) peptide that is partially located outside
the BH3 binding pocket; iii) peptide that binds in another pocket of the protein.
For this metric, the general procedure consists in identifying two pairs of residues for
the N-terminal and C-terminal of the peptide and the protein residues, respectively. The
distance between these two pairs of residues is small when the peptide is in the expected
orientation of the binding pocket, and much larger when this is not the case. This allows
us to distinguish whether the peptide is bound in the pocket with the expected orientation
or not. To calculate the experimental reference values, the same operations are performed
for the experimental structures and residues which structurally align to those used for
the models, and then the maximum values identified in the set of reference structures are
adopted. In order to filter out the expected poses as much as possible and exclude those
that do not, an offset value of 5.5 Å is set for classifying the poses correctly.
3.3.2
The fraction of side-chain based intermolecular contacts (Qsc) cal-
culation
Qsc, as a metric of model quality, reflects the fraction of BCL2 residues which are in
contact with the BH3 peptide in the models and the experimental reference structures.
PyInterph2[68] is used to accomplish this part.
As a software suite, PyInteraph2 can calculate the most relevant non-bonded interactions
between pairs of residues on a structural ensemble, such as hydrogen bonds, salt bridges and
hydrophobic interactions. By hiring a hydrophobic contact function that simply considers
the distance between the centers of mass of the residue side chains to identify a contact,
with a distance cut-off between a pair of centers of mass as the only parameter required,
PyInteraph2 can calculate a contact network between residue side chains[68].
In this project, PyInteraph2 is used to calculate paired intermolecular interactions involving
BCL2 and Beclin-1 residues in CABS-dock models. First, the list of non-redundant residues
which contact peptides in at least one reference structure needs to be identified in the
==PAGE:31==
3.3 SLiM-modeling workflow
23
sequence numbering of the models. Then, identify the number of contacting residues in
each model to be scored. Finally, calculate the Qsc value. The model with the higher
score is considered more accurate. Several steps are used to achieve the above: i) calculate
the side chain intermolecular contacts in each experimentally known reference structure by
PyInteraph2 with a 6 Å distance cut-off, and extract the list of BCL2 residues which in
contact with the BH3 peptide; ii) assign a residue number to the identified contact residues
based on the model’s sequence number using the comparison between model and reference;
iii) generate a final list of residues by considering the residues which appear in at least one
of the contact residue lists calculated from each reference. This list is called the aggregated
fingerprint of the protein residues in contact with the peptide; iv) as done for the reference
structures, calculate the side chain intermolecular contacts by PyInteraph2 and extract
the list of BCL2 residues which are in contact with the BH3 peptide for each model; v)
obtain the intersection between contact list of the model and the aggregated fingerprint
of the protein residues; vi) calculate Qsc, as the ratio between the size of the intersection
and the aggregated fingerprint.
3.3.3
Secondary structure score calculation
When secondary structure is provided by users, CABS-dock uses the DSSP (Define Sec-
ondary Structure of Proteins) program to assign secondary structures[69]. If there is no
secondary structure information, the secondary structure of the peptide is predicted by
PSIPRED method automatically[70]. By calculating a secondary structure (SS) score, we
can assess whether the predicted protein secondary structure is good or bad.
This metric is based on SOV_refine which is used to measure the difference of the sec-
ondary structure between a model and the experimental reference structure[71]. The range
of this value is from 0 to 1, with higher values representing better similarity. The advan-
tage of SOV (segment overlap score) is that it can take into account the size of contiguous
overlapping segments and assign additional margin for longer contiguous overlapping seg-
ments, rather than judging only from the percentage of overlapping individual positions as
in the Q3 score. Compared to the original SOV score, SOV_refine uses a new method of
assigning tolerances that retains all the advantages of the previous SOV score definition
and ensures that the amount of tolerance assigned is incremental as more elements in the
fragment are accurately predicted.
We used the secondary structure calculated by DSSP on 5VAUae as the reference secondary
structure for all models, and the SOV_refine values were calculated later. In fact, this
metric was not given priority when selecting the best pose. Instead, it was used in the
later filtering stage. It is interesting to note how the SOV score varies according to the
constraints used, thus providing an ordered index of the peptides once docked compared
to their reference structure (if available).
==PAGE:32==
3.3 SLiM-modeling workflow
24
3.3.4
MutateX calculation
MutateX is a software designed to automatically predict the changes of folding or binding
free energy upon mutation (∆∆Gs) associated with systematic mutations from each avail-
able residue to all other possible residue types in a protein or protein complex by using
the FoldX[72] energy function[65]. Linear combination of the following empirical terms is
used to calculate the free energy (in kcal mol−1).
Figure 3.4: FoldX free energy equation, with (a...l) as the relative weights of different energy
terms. (Schymkowitz J, Borg J, Stricher F, et al. The FoldX web server: an online force field[J].
Nucleic acids research, 2005, 33(suppl_2): W382-W388.)
Mutations resulting from amino acid substitutions affect the stability of proteins and inter-
actions with other biomolecules. Therefore, accurate and systematic prediction of changes
in the stability and binding of mutations is essential for understanding protein variation
at the molecular level. The availability of empirical free energy functions allows for rapid
estimation of free energy changes upon mutation (∆∆G) and can be used for systematic
screening of proteins and protein complexes[65]. In particular, for protein complexes, for
instance, a complex AB, the binding energy equation is:
∆Gbinding = ∆GAB −(∆GA + ∆GB)
In this work, using MutateX with FoldX5 as a core, alanine scanning and self mutation
are performed on the experimental reference structures and CABS-dock generated models,
respectively.
3.3.4.1
Alanine scanning mutagenesis
Alanine scanning mutagenesis is used to discover hotspots of protein-protein binding. Ala-
nine is chosen as the substitute residue because it eliminates the functional groups from
the side chain, but does not change the conformation of the main chain, nor does it im-
pose extreme electrostatic or steric effects.
In addition, alanine is the most abundant
amino acid, which is often found in burial and exposure positions and in various secondary
structures[73]. The substitution of key binding positions may lead to significant changes
in free energy (∆∆Gala), thus identifying hotspots of binding.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 SLiM-modeling workflow
25
For this metric, a score (ddG_ala_scan) is calculated to measure the similarity of the
effect of alanine mutations on the experimental reference structures to the models. Re-
sults from MutateX scanning of experimental reference structures are used to construct a
fingerprint of binding hotspots. For each position, the effect of mutation is classified as sta-
bilizing (∆∆Gala ≤-0.8 kcal/mol), neutral (-0.8 kcal/mol < ∆∆Gala < 0.8 kcal/mol) and
destabilizing (∆∆Gala ≥0.8 kcal/mol). In addition, considering the sequence alignment
of the experimental reference structures and models, if some residues are aligned to the
gap, their classification will be "none". The final fingerprint is constructed by calculating
the consensus of the set of reference structures for each position. The number of residues
in each category is determined by defining a reference consensus threshold. Changing the
threshold can adjust the strictness of the fingerprint generation, that is, to change the
amount of evidence required to assign a residue to a category in the final fingerprint.
The same steps are applied to the models. After alanine scanning mutagenesis and mu-
tation position classification, the number of positions in which the category of the corre-
sponding residues is consistent with that in the fingerprint is calculated and divided by
the total number of residues. The value obtained is the final score, which ranges from 0
(no consensus) to 1 (perfect agreement). A good model should be able to recapture part
of the fingerprint.
3.3.4.2
Self mutagenesis
Self scanning mutagenesis, i.e., the replacement of a residue with itself, is a metric of model
quality control. Both the experimental reference structures and the models are subjected
to self scanning mutagenesis. For high quality models, the calculated binding free energy
change (∆∆Gself) for each position should be close to zero. In contrast, a positive value
(∆∆Gself ≥0.8 kcal/mol) indicates a suboptimal side chain orientation and a negative
value of (∆∆Gself ≤-0.8 kcal/mol) indicates that the side chain orientation in the model
is unexpected. This is because we expect that mutating a peptide residue in the original
structure to itself would not result in a change in the binding ∆∆Gself unless it is modeled
in an orientation that provides clashes.
3.3.5
Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD)
As the last metric of model evaluation, RMSD is used to calculate the distance between
conformations. Each pair of the model and the corresponding reference is overlapped based
on the α carbons of the four helical domains of BCL2. The specific residues for overlap
are different in different reference structures and determined by structural comparisons
between the reference structures and the specific apo structures used for modeling. The
mass-weighted RMSD on different atomic subsets is calculated as far as possible: protein
backbone alone, separate side chains of residues, and complete residues that bind to the
hydrophobic pockets (HP1 to HP4) on the surface of BCL2. In addition, the conserved salt
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Snakemake
26
bridge formed between BCL2 and Beclin-1 is also taken into account. A custom Python
script based on the MDAnalysis Python package[74] is used to calculate the RMSD value.
However, this metric is only applicable for benchmarking, not to new predictions.
3.4
Snakemake
Snakemake[64] is a workflow management system that automates data analysis and ensures
its reproducibility. It is based on Python, so it is readable and completely portable.
Snackmake works through invoking with a Snackfile, that consists of rules that obtain an
output file from an input file. The planned execution of a rule is called a job. Snakemake
supports multiple named wildcards in rules, therefore one rule may contain more than
one job. A job may share some input files with other jobs, which results in a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) representing the execution plan. Two unrelated paths in DAG can
be executed independently of each other, i.e., in parallel. In addition, Snakefile can scale
from single-core workstations to multi-core servers without modifying the workflow by
optimizing job scheduling based on a given available core threshold, while taking into
account job internal parallelism[75].
In this project, Snakemake is used to construct reproducible and scalable pipelines for data
analyses. Therefore, it is useful for maintaining high levels of reproducibility, adaptability
and transparency of the work.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Snakemake
27
Figure 3.5: Snakemake workflow. (Mölder F, Jablonski K P, Letcher B, et al. Sustainable data
analysis with Snakemake[J]. F1000Research, 2021, 10.)
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4
Methods
4.1
CABS-dock simulation
In the previous study, my colleagues collected experimental structures of the BCL2-Beclin1
complex and used MODELLER to reconstruct the missing coordinates. Then, Beclin1108−128
(108-TMENLSRRLKVTGDLFDIMSG-128) was modelled into three different apo struc-
tures. In apo structure selection, we use A chain of 5VAU complex from the PDB entry
(5VAUa) as a reference structure to test the re-dock capability of CABS-dock on the confor-
mation induced by BCL2. This provides a baseline of the approach accuracy. In addition,
we also use A chain of 5FCG complex (5FCGa) and 1GJH from the PDB entry (1GJHa)
to mimic the real application. This is because 5FCG is the only available structure which
is a complex of BCL2 protein and the hepatitis B virus protein (HBx) which contains a
BH3-like motif[76]. For 1GJH, it is a structure of BCL2 unbound state and may have
different binding conformations from 5VAU and 5FCG. Table 4.1 shows an overview of
these three apo structures.
PDB entry
Protein name
SLiM name
Method
Resolution
5VAU
BCL2
Beclin1
X-ray
1.75 Å
5FCG
BCL2
HBx
X-ray
2.10 Å
1GJH
BCL2
NMR
Table 4.1: Apo structures used for docking.
After determining the apo structure to be used, 5VAUa was used to test the reproducibility
of the model generation. The initial seed was set to 937162211. Three sets of models were
collected by different users and different servers under three docking restraints (Table 4.2).
Then we compared the models of different sets by calculating the main chain RMSD and
side chain RMSD with GROMACS.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 CABS-dock simulation
29
Restraint set
Secondary structure
Residue restraint information
blind
Not provided
Not provided
blind_2D
Provided
Not provided
D-R
Provided
D121(Beclin1)-R146(BCL2)
Table 4.2: Restraint table for seed test.
We also set different parameter combinations to explore the influence of different Monte
Carlo cycles and clustering iterations on the model structures. The specific values are
shown in Table 4.3.
Monte Carlo cycles
k-medoids
Clustering iterations
200
20
200
200
20
300
200
20
400
300
20
200
400
20
200
Table 4.3: Table of parameter combinations.
In addition, we designed six sets of restraints to see if the docking accuracy could be
improved by providing more information about secondary structure and residue contact
distance. Table 4.4 shows the detail of the restraints. The numbers in the table represent
residue positions in the sequence. We tested these restraints under the above parameter
combinations.
Restraint set
Secondary structure
Residue restraint information
blind
Not provided
Not provided
blind_2D
Provided
Not provided
D-R
Provided
D121(Beclin1)-R146(BCL2)
D-R_D-N
Provided
D121(Beclin1)-R146(BCL2)
D121(Beclin1)-N143(BCL2)
D-R_D-N_D2N
Provided
D121(Beclin1)-R146(BCL2)
D121(Beclin1)-N143(BCL2)
D124(Beclin1)-N143(BCL2)
D-R_D-N_no2D
Not provided
D121(Beclin1)-R146(BCL2)
D121(Beclin1)-N143(BCL2)
Table 4.4: Table of restraint sets.
==PAGE:38==
4.2 SLiM-modeling evaluating workflow
30
4.2
SLiM-modeling evaluating workflow
4.2.1
Peptide orientation identification
We judge whether the orientation of the peptide in the models is consistent with the
experimental reference structures by calculating the distance between two pairs of residues
located at the N-terminal and C-terminal of the protein and peptide, respectively.
The information of the reference structure is shown in Table 4.5. The two sets of residue
pairs are residue arginine on position 85 of BCL2 and the second residue methionine (serial
number 164) on Beclin1, residue leucine on position 157 of BCL2 and residue aspartate
(serial number 179) on position 17 of Beclin1. In addition, the position number of the
localization residues on the reference structure 5FCG was adjusted relative to the reference
structure 5VAU due to the different length of the peptide chain.
Reference name
Orientation residue pair 1
Orientation residue pair 2
5vau_AE_mod2
85, 164
157, 179
5vau_BF_mod9
85, 164
157, 179
5vau_CG_mod6
85, 164
157, 179
5vau_DH_mod8
85, 164
157, 179
5fcg_AC_mod6
85, 173
157, 187
Table 4.5: Reference structure.
The calculated distances are smaller when the binding direction of the peptide is as ex-
pected. In order to filter out all conforming poses as much as possible, we used the maxi-
mum distance between residues calculated among the reference structures (0.787 nm, 0.952
nm, respectively) as a benchmark and set a distance buffer of 5.5 Å. If both distances in
the models are lower than the reference value, the orientation of the peptide in the models
is considered to be as expected.
4.2.2
Qsc calculation
The Qsc score is used to assess the quality of the model side chains. Since CABS-dock uses
a coarse-grained model in the modeling process, we set a distance cutoff of 6 Å to retain
the model with intermolecular interactions in the side chains. We first aggregated the side
chain contact lists of all the reference structure residues and calculated the Qsc scores, and
then identified the residues with side-chain based intermolecular interactions in the same
way for each model and calculated their Qsc scores. The Qsc scores of the experimental
reference structures can be used as reference values for evaluating models with high quality
==PAGE:39==
4.2 SLiM-modeling evaluating workflow
31
side chains.
4.2.3
Secondary structure score calculation
We assigned the secondary structure of the models and the reference structure by DSSP
program. The secondary structure of E chain in 5VAU complex (CCHHHHHHHHHHHH-
HHHHHHC) was used as the reference for evaluating the secondary structure of the models,
and SOV_refine score was calculated to measure the difference in secondary structure be-
tween the models and the reference structure. SOV_refine score ensures that when the
overlapping segments of the models and the reference structure are longer, it will increase
accordingly.
4.2.4
Alanine scanning mutagenesis
We first did alanine scanning mutagenesis of the experimental reference structures by
MutateX. After mutating each residue on the peptide into alanine, we collected the binding
hotspots of the reference structures and classified them into three categories based on the
change of free energy: stabilizing, neutral, and destabilizing. ±0.8 kcal/mol was taken
as the threshold since it was the general error of MutateX’s core, FoldX. After deriving
the lists of residues consisting of hotspots common to the reference structures, we did
the alanine scanning of the models and classified their hotspots in the same way so as
to calculate the fraction of the number of the hotspot residues in the models which are
completely consistent with the reference structures to the total number of hotspot residues.
The obtained results can be used for additional filtering of the models.
4.2.5
Self mutagenesis
Similar to alanine scanning mutagenesis, we did self mutagenesis by MutateX for the
experimental reference structures and the models separately, i.e. mutating each residue
on the peptide to itself. In addition, we also used the same thresholds to classify each
position. The results of self mutagenesis can reflect the stability of the model poses. The
free energy change of a high quality model should be close to zero.
4.2.6
RMSD
As an additional parameter, RMSD is limited to the benchmark calculation of known
complexes to evaluate the quality of the generated models. We overlapped the models with
the experimental reference structures based on the C-alpha of the four helical structural
domains of BCL2. In order to better check the quality of the model, we calculated the
==PAGE:40==
4.2 SLiM-modeling evaluating workflow
32
RMSD of different atomic subsets of the BH3 motif as far as possible, including:i) the
α-helix domain of BCL2 protein; ii) the backbone of the BH3 motif; iii) the side chain of
the BH3 motif; iv) the four residues of the BH3 motif (L112, L116, T119, F123) interacting
with the four hydrophobic pockets of BCL2 protein (HP1 to Hp4); and v) the conserved
salt bridge between BH3 motif and BCL2 protein (D121 and R102). For the reference
structure 5FCG, since its ligand is HBx, which is different from the sequence of Beclin1,
we only calculated its -helical domain of BCL2 protein, part of the BH3 backbone in order
to align with the models better, and residue L121 which interacts with HP1 of BCL2.
In addition, we also added a consistency check option. It was set to false in this project,
indicating that it did not check whether the residues and the numbering aligned in the
models and reference structures were consistent. It is only necessary to set the consistency
check to true when benchmarking identical complex structures.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1
complexes
5.1.1
Effect of setting a random seed in CABSdock
In order to whether CABS-dock runs were fully reproducible, we used the same input files
with the same initial seed number to verify three sets of restraints (blind, blind_2D, D-R)
of 5VAUa structure, each set of restraints generating 20 models (model_0 to model_19).
Run 1 and Run 2 were executed by different users on the same server, while Run 1 and
Run 3 were executed by the same user on different servers. Subsequently, we obtained
the desired results by calculating the RMSD values between the models obtained from the
three groups of runs.
As can be seen in Figure 5.1, both the main chain RMSD and side chain RMSD between
each group of the same numbered models are 0, indicating that they are exactly identical.
Thus, this result proves that we can reproduce the models by setting a specific initial seed,
regardless of the server.
==PAGE:42==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
34
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Panel (a) and Panel (b) show the comparison of C-alpha RMSD and side chain
RMSD respectively.
5.1.2
Parameter comparison
After confirming the models that can be reproduced, we set different Monte Carlo cycles
(200, 300, 400) and clustering iterations (200, 300, 400) to see the effect of the parameters
on model generation. For each set of parameters, we ran six sets of restraints of the three
apo structures respectively.
Figure 5.2 illustrates the SOV_refine score of the models generated with the apo structure
1GJHa under different parameter combinations. After analyzing each group of models by
our model evaluation pipeline, we found that changing the above parameters did not have
a significant effect on the structure of the generated models. There was no big difference
among each group of the models, either in terms of the number of correctly oriented models
obtained, or in terms of the Qsc, SOV_refine or alanine scanning values of the models (see
Appendix). Only when the number of Monte Carlo cycles was increased, a small increase
in SOV_refine values could be observed for all the three apo structures in D-R restraint
(Figure 5.2). This preliminary analysis also suggests that other factors such as the use of
restraints have a larger effect in influencing the final scores. Considering the computational
and time costs incurred by increasing the number of Monte Carlo cycles, we finally decided
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
35
to use the set of parameters with 200 Monte Carlo cycles, 20 k-medoids, and 200 clustering
iterations for subsequent testing and analysis.
Figure 5.2: Comparison of 1GJH SOV_refine score under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:44==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
36
5.1.3
Model evaluation
5.1.3.1
5VAU
Peptide orientation identification
For the models generated with 5VAUa as the apo structure, the residue pairs needed to
check the orientation of the ligand are the same as the reference structure 5VAU.
Restraint set
Expected poses
Unexpected poses
Reversed
Partially out
Totally out
blind
6
14
12
2
0
blind_2D
12
8
8
0
0
D-R
12
8
8
0
0
D-R_D-N
15
5
5
0
0
D-R_D-N_D2N
20
0
0
0
0
D-R_D-N_no2D
18
2
1
1
0
Table 5.1: The number of expected and unexpected models with different restraint sets.
The results are shown in Table 5.1. Since the complex 5VAU is a known structure that we
used to validate the pipeline, there are 6 poses with correct peptide orientation even for
blind docking. After only adding the secondary structure information, it was not difficult
to find a significant decrease in the number of models that do not meet the expectation. On
this basis, setting a single residue pair contact restraint (D-R) made no difference in terms
of number of expected or unexpected poses. However, when continuing to add residue
contact restraints, we found that fewer and fewer models were unexpected as the restraints
increased.
Even the restraint set with three pairs of residue contacts added produced
models whose orientation was consistent with the reference structures. Comparing the
results of the D-R_D-N set with those of D-R_D-N_no2D set, it is found that only
setting the residue contact restraints without the secondary structure restriction is helpful
to generate more expected models.
In addition, to verify the accuracy of the pipeline, we also double checked the models by
PyMOL[77] and classified the unexpected models into three categories: reversed, partially
out, and totally out of the binding pocket (Table 5.1). After checking, we found that most
of the expected poses have been filtered out through our automated pipeline. Only the
model_17 under the D-R_D-N_no2D restraint set, although it was shown as expected
in the pipeline, was considered by us to be partially out of the pocket.
However, the
orientation identification of the peptide is only the first metric in our model evaluation
pipeline and this model will be eliminated by us in the subsequent filter as the secondary
structure of its ligand is not in an α-helical conformation.
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
37
Qsc score
The Qsc score reflects the similarity of side chain between the models and the reference
structures. The data of 5VAU models is shown in Figure 5.3. The overall quality of the
models is high. We can see that Qsc scores have a small spread. Most of the models are
in the range of 0.5 to 0.75, only a few below 0.5.
Figure 5.3: Boxplot of Qsc score distribution of 5VAUa-Beclin1 complexes.
Comparing the data of six restraint sets, it can be found that there is no significant dif-
ference among them. Especially when the secondary structure information and a pair of
residue contact restraint (blind_2D and D-R) were added successively, there was almost no
effect on the Qsc score. Until the secondary structure information and two pairs of residue
contact restraints were provided at the same time, that is, the D-R_D-N restraint set, the
Qsc score increased a bit. We see a slight increase in Qsc in the datasets in which two or
more restraints were used (D-R_D-N, D-R_D-N_D2N, D-R_D-N_no2D). It seems that
the secondary structure has no positive impact on the model quality, and the more residue
contact restraints are not the better either.
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
38
Furthermore, compared with the Qsc scores of the reference structures from 0.708 to 0.875,
many models are in this range, which proves the high quality of the models again.
SOV_refine score
Figure 5.4 shows the SOV_refine score distribution of the 5VAU models, i.e., the degree
of similarity to the secondary structure of the reference structure.
Figure 5.4: Boxplot of SOV_refine score distribution of 5VAUa-Beclin1 complexes.
As expected, the SOV_refine scores of the restraint sets that included secondary structure
information are significantly higher than those of the restraint sets that didn’t. When no
secondary structure information was provided, setting residue contact restraints helped to
improve the SOV_refine score. In the D-R_D-N_no2D dataset, the average value is larger
than in the blind dataset, however the range of calculated values is roughly the same. When
secondary structure information was available, the addition of residue contact restraints
decreased the SOV_refine score. Exceptionally, the models with the most restraints in the
D-R_D-N_D2N set have the highest SOV_refine score overall.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
39
In addition, when the SOV_refine score is below 0.121, the model structure is disordered.
Alanine scanning mutagenesis
The scores shown in Figure 5.5 indicate the consistency of the hotspots in the 5VAU models
with those in the reference structures, using a 100% consensus.
Figure 5.5: ∆∆Gala fraction of 5VAUa-Beclin1 complexes.
The range of alanine scanning fractions is narrow. The scores are close between the six
restraint sets with the same medians, so it is impossible to distinguish the effects of sec-
ondary structure information and residue contact restraints on the scores. Most models
scored above 0.5, with similar hotspot positions to the reference structures. The closest
overall performance to the reference structures is the D-R_D-N_D2N set, while the mod-
els with the highest scores are in the blind and D-R_D-N_no2D sets with poorer overall
results.
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
40
Self mutagenesis
Self mutagenesis is used as an additional control to check the quality of the model structure
after the reconstruction of a coarse-grained model generated by CABS-dock into an all-
atom model. The free energy change of a good quality model should be close to 0.
Table 5.2 shows the range of the free energy change of the models under the six retraint
sets. Most of the models have no change in free energy, especially for the D-R_D-N_no2D
set. Furthermore, the change of free energy of the rest models is also less than 0.01. This
proves that all the reconstructed all-atom models have been well optimized.
Restraint set
∆∆Gself range (kcal/mol)
blind
0.000 - 0.047
blind_2D
0.000 - 0.095
D-R
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N_D2N
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N_no2D
0.000 - 0.000
Table 5.2: The range of ∆∆Gself in different restraint sets.
RMSD
In our automated pipeline, RMSD is optional and is used only for benchmarking.
As
described in subsection 4.2.6, we calculated the RMSD for different subsets of atoms.
Figure 5.6 shows the RMSD distribution of BH3 motif backbone under different restraint
sets, based on the peptide orientation.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
41
Figure 5.6: Boxplot of BH3 backbone RMSD distribution of 5VAUa-Beclin1 complexes.
Obviously, there is a big difference in RMSD between expected and unexpected models.
The RMSD values of the expected models are small, all of them are less than 10 Å, and
even some of them are less than 5 Å. The RMSD values of the unexpected models are
larger, ranging from 10 Å to 20 Å. In fact, most of them are higher than 15 Å. This tells
us that, as expected, the relative orientation of the peptide respect to the protein has a
major influence on the calculated RMSD.
In terms of different restraint sets, the three sets that were provided both secondary struc-
ture information and residue contact restraints have smaller RMSD values, that is, the
model structure is more similar to the reference structures. However, setting more residue
contact restraints did not significantly improve the RMSD values of the models. Further-
more, only providing the residue contact restraints almost had no effect on the RMSD
values of the models. In contrast, the secondary structure information had a greater posi-
tive impact on the model.
5.1.3.2
5FCG
In this section we detail the results obtained using 5FCGa as the apo structure for our
peptide-protein binding. 5FCG is a BCL2-HBx complex which is the only available struc-
ture of BCL2 complex with a peptide containing a BH3 motif different from Beclin1.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
42
Peptide orientation identification
For the models generated with 5FCGa as the apo structure, the position numbers of the
residue pairs used to define the ligand orientation are still 85, 164; 157, 179. After cal-
culating the distances between the residue pairs, we obtained the following results (Table
5.3).
Restraint set
Expected poses
Unexpected poses
Reversed
Partially out
Totally out
blind
1
19
4
0
15
blind_2D
7
13
4
1
8
D-R
13
7
6
0
1
D-R_D-N
18
2
2
0
0
D-R_D-N_D2N
19
1
1
0
0
D-R_D-N_no2D
18
2
1
1
0
Table 5.3: The number of expected and unexpected models with different restraint sets.
Unsurprisingly, the blind docking results were the worst, and we obtained only one model
with expected peptide orientation. After providing the secondary structure information
(blind_2D), the situation improved - although the number of models outside the binding
pocket decreased by a large extent, the number of expected models was still less than
half of the total. Adding residue contact restraints significantly reduced the number of
unexpected models. However, the number of residue contact restraints was not directly
correlated with the number of unexpected models, as whether two or three pairs of residue
contact restraints were provided did not have a significant effect on the results. In addition,
when residue contact restraints were provided first, the secondary structure information
did not have an effect on the results and seemed to be dispensable.
Finally, during the visual inspection of the obtained poses using PyMOL, model_15 un-
der the blind_2D restraint set and model_12 under the D-R_D-N_no2D restraint set
appeared to be as expected, however they were marked as not expected in the pipeline.
This suggests that a fine-tuning of the parameters for classifying models as expected or
unexpected might be necessary.
Qsc score
We compare the side chain residue contact situation between the models and the reference
structures by calculating the Qsc score. Figure 5.7 shows the distribution of the Qsc scores
we obtained on different datasets.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
43
Figure 5.7: Boxplot of Qsc score distribution of 5FCGa-Beclin1 complexes.
The Qsc scores of the two sets without setting residue contact restraints had a wide range.
Combining the peptide orientation data, it was found that the Qsc scores of the models out
of the pocket were from 0 to 0.167, and most of them were zero. When the secondary struc-
ture information was provided without distance restraints, the Qsc scores were significantly
increased, with a median value over 0.5 and a maximum value over 0.75.
For the four sets with residue contact restraints, their Qsc scores were higher and had a
lower spread. However, using one, two or three residue contact restraints did not affect the
Qsc scores significantly. When the secondary structure information was not provided, the
median and the third quartile of the D-R_D-N_no2D restraint set both increased.
The Qsc scores of the reference structures (from 0.708 to 0.875) provide us with the ref-
erence values for the good models.
Many models in the datasets with residue contact
restraints have good side chain quality.
SOV_refine score
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
44
The SOV_refine score is used to evaluate the secondary structure of the models. The
distribution of SOV_refine score is shown in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Boxplot of SOV_refine score distribution of 5FCGa-Beclin1 complexes.
As expected, providing secondary structure information can help the models to get higher
SOV_refine scores. The SOV_refine scores of several models reached the highest value of
1, that is, their secondary structures were completely consistent with the reference struc-
ture. Adding residue contact restraints on the premise of providing secondary structure
information had little effect on the models. Even when the three pairs of residue contact
restraints were added, the quality of the secondary structure of the model decreased in-
stead, and several disordered models appeared. However, when the secondary structure
information was not provided, the influence of residue contact restraints on SOV_refine
score was positive. When the SOV_refine score was lower than 0.121, the ligands of the
models had no α-helix structure and were disordered.
Alanine scanning mutagenesis
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
45
Alanine scanning mutagenesis is used to find the position of the hotspots of protein binding.
Figure 5.9 reports the consistency between the alanine scanning of the model mutation
experiment in silico and the results of the experiment on the reference structures.
Figure 5.9: ∆∆Gala fraction of 5FCGa-Beclin1 complexes.
It is not difficult to see that the results of the six constraint groups are similar, and it is
difficult to distinguish the influence of secondary structure information and residue contact
restraints. But it seems that the results of D-R_D-N_D2N and D-R_D-N_no2D sets are
slightly better than those of the other four groups. Interestingly, the D-R_D-N_no2D
group contains both the models with the highest and lowest scores.
Self mutagenesis
Self mutagenesis means mutating the residue at each position into itself. We can check the
quality of the reconstructed model through the change of the free energy.
According to statistics, the ∆∆Gself of each restraint set was from 0 to 0.047 kcal/mol
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
46
(Table 5.4). This is exactly what we expected, which means that the reconstructed model
structures had no quality problems.
Restraint set
∆∆Gself range (kcal/mol)
blind
0.000 - 0.047
blind_2D
0.000 - 0.047
D-R
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N_D2N
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N_no2D
0.000 - 0.047
Table 5.4: The range of ∆∆Gself in different restraint sets.
RMSD
As mentioned earlier, RMSD is only a benchmark metric. Figure 5.10 shows the RMSD
distribution of BH3 backbone in different orientations.
Figure 5.10: Boxplot of BH3 backbone RMSD distribution of 5FCGa-Beclin1 complexes.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
47
As we can see, the RMSD value span of the overall models was very large, ranging from
0 Å to 40 Å. We can distinguish the orientation of the peptides according to the size of
RMSD. The RMSD values of the expected models were concentrated, all of which were
less than 10 Å. In fact, all of them were less than 7 Å, indicating a good similarity among
the models and the reference structures. The RMSD values of unexpected models were
between 10 Å and 40 Å, and they were dispersed. Overall, D-R and D-R_D-N sets had
the best performance, and the RMSD values of all the models were less than 5 Å, which
also indicated that setting additional residue contact restraints did not have a remarkable
effect on the models. In addition, by comparing the results of blind, blind_2D, D-R_D-N
and D-R_D-N_no2D sets, it was found that the secondary structure information had a
significant influence on the model RMSD, while it was not significant to provide the residue
contact restraints alone.
5.1.3.3
1GJH
1GJH is the only solved structure of BCL2 in its ligand-free state. Consequently, it can
provide a real-world application of unbound docking for the Beclin1 peptide onto the
BCL2-BH3 pocket.
Peptide orientation identification
For the apo structure 1GJHa, after alignment with the reference structural sequence men-
tioned in the method, the position numbers of the residue pairs used to define the orien-
tation of the ligand are 88, 168; 160, 183. The statistics of the model poses generated by
the six sets of restraints are shown in the table below (Table 5.5).
Restraint set
Expected poses
Unexpected poses
Reversed
Partially out
Totally out
blind
1
19
2
0
17
blind_2D
1
19
6
3
10
D-R
13
7
5
0
2
D-R_D-N
18
2
2
0
0
D-R_D-N_D2N
17
3
1
2
0
D-R_D-N_no2D
16
4
4
0
0
Table 5.5: The number of expected and unexpected models with different restraint sets.
We can find that adding secondary structure information alone does not significantly im-
prove the number of expected models. However, after adding secondary structure infor-
mation and residue contact information or adding multiple residue contact information,
the number of unexpected models is significantly reduced. This indicates that providing
two or more restraints can help ligands to dock to the correct binding pocket, thereby im-
proving the docking accuracy. In addition, similar to the case of 5FCGa generated models,
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
48
providing secondary structure information significantly reduced the number of models out
of the pocket. However, in the case of providing residue contact restraints in advance, it
seems that the secondary structure information had a little negative effect on the binding
orientation.
As mentioned earlier, we double checked our models by PyMOL. Except for the model_16
under the D-R_D-N_D2N restraint set, all the models were correctly classified. We con-
sidered model_16 as expected by visual inspection, but it was shown in the pipeline as
unexpected. This indicates that our pipeline for peptide orientation evaluation needs fur-
ther improvement, and we may improve the identification accuracy by adding another pair
of residues in the future.
Qsc score
Qsc score is used to evaluate the similarity of the residue contact situation between 1GJH
models and the reference structures. Figure 5.11 shows the distribution of Qsc scores of
1gjh models under different restraints. In general, the range of Qsc scores is wide, and the
provision of residue contact information can significantly increase the Qsc score.
Figure 5.11: Boxplot of Qsc score distribution of 1GJHa-Beclin1 complexes.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
49
For datasets of blind and blind_2D, we can see that many models had Qsc scores with 0. As
mentioned above, we also used PyMOL to double check and classify the unexpected models
in three categories. Combined with Qsc data, we found that all models with Qsc values
below 0.25 bound outside the pocket, i.e. half of the models in the blind_2D restraint
set had Beclin1 motifs that were not in the expected binding pocket. When secondary
structure was provided along with the contact information of a pair of residues (i.e., D-R),
Qsc scores increased significantly, with a median above 0.5. Interestingly, adding another
pair of residue contact restraint on this basis increased Qsc scores, while continuing to add
residue contact restraint decreased Qsc scores. In addition, we obtained the largest set of
Qsc scores when only two pairs of residue contact information were provided without the
secondary structure information. This suggests that as far as Qsc is concerned, providing
secondary structure information does not necessarily improve the models from the point
of view of the contacts between protein and peptide.
For the five reference structures, their Qsc scores ranged from 0.708 to 0.875. Comparing
these values with the Qsc scores of the models obtained under the six sets of restraints,
we observed that only when the residue contact information were provided, a few models’
Qsc scores were in this range.
SOV_refine score
The purpose of calculating the SOV_refine score is to compare the secondary structure of
Beclin1 in the model with that of the reference structure. The reference secondary structure
is derived from the E chain of 5VAU complex (CCHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHC). The
secondary structures were assigned by the DSSP program.
The results are shown in Figure 4.3. Providing the secondary structure of Beclin1 can help
us to obtain a higher SOV_refine score, that is, the secondary structure of the model is
more similar to the reference structure. The model structures obtained without providing
secondary structure information are more disordered.
However, the SOV_refine score
decreased when both secondary structure and residue contact restraints were provided
at the same time. This is likely due to the fact that imposing multiple restraints and
conditions makes it harder to satisfy all of them at the same time. In addition, even when
secondary structure restraints were performed, models with low SOV_refine scores were
still generated. When the SOV_refine fraction was lower than 0.143, no α-helical structure
was formed in models.
It is worth to note that the SOV_refine score is not the primary parameter for our model
selection. In this case, it is fine as long as the secondary structure of the model has partial
α-helix, i.e., the SOV_refine score is higher than 0.143. This is because we may not know
the secondary structure of the SLiM in practical applications.
==PAGE:58==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
50
Figure 5.12: Boxplot of SOV_refine score distribution of 1GJHa-Beclin1 complexes.
Alanine scanning mutagenesis
The scores shown here report the consistency between the results when alanine scanning
mutagenesis was performed on the model versus on the experimental reference structures,
using 100% consensus. Alanine scanning mutagenesis is used to find hotspots for bind-
ing, and the results of a good model should partially overlap with those of the reference
structures.
As can be seen by Figure 5.13, the distribution of each set of restraints is similar, indi-
cating that this metric cannot distinguish among different sets of restraints. The overall
performance of the D-R_D-N_D2N set is the best. But comparing the other restraint
sets, it is difficult to see the effect of secondary structure and contact restrictions on the
results of alanine scanning mutagenesis.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
51
Figure 5.13: ∆∆Gala fraction of 1GJHa-Beclin1 complexes.
Self mutagenesis
We use self mutagenesis as an additional control. This is because CABS-dock uses coarse-
grained model in the modeling process, and reconstructs the model into all-atom form in
the last step. Self mutagenesis can be used to check the quality of the reconstruction work
and the final all-atom model structure. Self mutagenesis in this context means calculating
the change of free energy upon mutation of a residue with the same residue type (e.g.
Alanine to Alanine). We do not expect the free energy to change much after mutating. If
not, it indicates that the side chain or the surrounding environment of the model was not
well optimized.
As shown in Table 5.6 below, the ∆∆Gself of the models generated under each set of
restraints is zero or close to zero, indicating that none of these models had problems
during the reconstruction process and the quality of these models is very high.
==PAGE:60==
5.1 Preliminary generation and evaluation of BCL2-Beclin1 complexes
52
Restraint set
∆∆Gself range (kcal/mol)
blind
0.000 - 0.047
blind_2D
0.000 - 0.095
D-R
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N_D2N
0.000 - 0.047
D-R_D-N_no2D
0.000 - 0.047
Table 5.6: The range of ∆∆Gself in different restraint sets.
RMSD
RMSD is limited to the benchmark calculations for known complexes to assess the quality
of the generated models. For models generated based on the apo structure 1GJHa, the
RMSD calculations are performed after the BCL2 alignment based on 1GJHa considering
the different chain length from the reference structure.
Figure 5.14 shows the distribution of BH3 backbone RMSD under different restraint sets,
with the values from 0 Å to 35 Å. Although the expected models had smaller RMSD
values while the unexpected models had larger RMSD values, we still cannot distinguish
the peptide orientation of the models. In addition, the RMSD values were similar among
the restraint sets, and we cannot find the effect of secondary structure information and
residue contact restraints on the RMSD either.
Figure 5.14: Boxplot of BH3 backbone RMSD distribution of 1GJHa-Beclin1 complexes.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Over the past decade, substantial progress has been made in the development of BH3
mimetic drugs targeting the BCL2 protein family. Here, we present a novel and effec-
tive approach to perform a first coarse prediction of the 3D structure of the BCL2-BH3
complexes, and a set of methods and pipelines to evaluate the quality of such models.
Starting with three different apo structures, we first tested the reproducibility of our ap-
proach, by testing the reproducibility of CABS-dock using the same random seed. Indeed,
as we expected, we could confirm that the software returns identical results when using
the same random seed.
We then evaluated the effects of using different parameters, such as number of Monte Carlo
cycles and clustering iterations. We ran different CABS-dock simulations with different
sets of parameters and evaluated the quality of the resulting models. We could not find
remarkable differences between the results of such simulations, with the exception that
increasing the number of Monte Carlo cycles slightly increased the SOV_refine scores of
the models generated under D-R restraint set. Still, this does not justify the extended
run time of such simulations; furthermore, as we expect to perform further refinement on
the CABS-dock generated models, such as with using Rosetta FlexPepDock[22], we would
expect this to more than make up for the identified differences.
We then performed docking simulations using CABS-dock and evaluated our models using
our model evaluation pipeline. We collected six different quality measures of models ob-
tained using three different apo structures: peptide orientation, Qsc, SOV_refine, alanine
scanning mutagenesis, self mutagenesis and RMSD.
We have successfully docked BCL2 protein with its BH3 containing peptide based on three
different apo structures: 5VAUa, 5FCGa and 1GJHa. As we expected, the dataset obtained
using 5VAUa as an apo structure had overall the top quality models, and 1GJH dataset
had the worst quality models. This is expected as the conformation of 5VAU is already
primed to bind a peptide, while 1GJH is the conformation of the protein in the free state.
In this sense, 1GJH represents a more realistic test, being similar to a proper blind docking
==PAGE:62==
54
attempt. Importantly, even when using 1GJH, we were able to identify models of sufficient
quality for refinement, which highlights the usefulness of our approach.
After obtaining the models, we evaluated them from six metrics to measure the similarity
between the models and the reference structures. These metrics evaluate the models from
the aspects of binding orientation, side chain residue contact, secondary structure, hotspot
positions and so on. In order to identify a good quality model, a correct binding orientation
is just the basic but not sufficient condition of qualified models. It should be noted the
way we measure whether a residue is in the correct orientation relies on distances between
protein and peptide. Partially, this also takes into account the relative location of one to
another. Despite this, as we obtained models with correct orientation but low Qsc, it is
by itself not enough to establish the quality of our models. Furthermore, our method for
orientation detection sometimes failed to classify poses against simple visual inspection of
the models. We might test other methods (e.g. based on angle calculations) to identify
peptide orientation.
Qsc and SOV_refine score are crucial metrics for distinguishing model quality. For ∆∆Gala
and ∆∆Gself, we cannot see differences in different datasets. In this case, we used RMSD
only for benchmarking the performance of our quality score. In real-world applications, we
may not be able to measure the RMSD, if we are lacking similar experimental structures
to do so, but the rest five metrics are enough to evaluate the models.
We have tested our docking protocol using different sets of restraints. We have supplied
to the algorithm information regarding the location of the binding sites and bound confor-
mation by specifying distance restraints between pairs of residues or secondary structure.
In our tests, the blind case (i.e. the test without restraints) performed poorly in all in-
stances except 5VAU. Instead, using two restraints and secondary structure information
(D-R_D-N dataset) showed overall the best performance.
This means both secondary
structure and residue contact information have huge effects on the quality of models. Al-
though D-R_D-N is the best performance group, providing secondary structure with a
single pair of residue contact information (i.e. D-R restraint set) is sufficient to generate
good quality models. It is overall expected that providing more information to the docking
algorithm restricts the search space and results in better models, however the results we
have obtained suggest that providing such information has a drastic effect on the results.
In real-world applications, in which the experimental bound structure is not necessarily
known, providing information about contacts or secondary structure might still be very
helpful in generating quality models. We suggest providing our pipeline with as much
known information as possible.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this project, we described the first two steps of a multi-tier approach for de novo pre-
diction of the three-dimensional structure of protein-SLiM complexes and validated our
approach by modeling a complex consisting of a key regulator in the apoptosis pathway,
the survival protein BCL2 and its ligand Beclin1, which contains a BH3 motif. We used
a computationally inexpensive docking method based on a coarse-grained model, CABS-
dock, to collect the initial structures of the BCL2-Beclin1 complexes. And then we applied
our model evaluation pipeline to screen the models by calculating six different metrics,
thereby preparing for the next step of model refinement with Rosetta FlexPepDock[2].
Applying our automated pipeline, we successfully predicted the 3D structure of the BCL2-
Beclin1 complex, and also further simulated real applications using the BCL2 apo structure
that binds with other BH3-only proteins and the unbound BCL2 apo structure without
ligand. Moreover, through our model scoring pipeline, we also tested the reproducibility
of the approach and the effects of different CABS-dock parameters and restraints on the
model quality. The results show that our approach is reproducible, and different CABS-
dock parameters do not significantly affect the model quality, and the D-R_D-N dataset
performs best, i.e., both secondary structure information and residue contact information
can improve the model quality. Of the used quality score, Qsc, peptide orientation and
SOV_score were found to be suitable to rank poses for their quality, while calculating
changes in binding free energy did not allow to distinguish the models according to their
quality. For the shortcomings found in the test, we will optimize the pipeline for improve-
ment in the future.
Our pipeline successfully generated starting models for future refinement.
Next steps
include using the best quality models (Qsc score over 0.5 with α-helical secondary structure
and correct peptide orientation) with Rosetta FlexPepDock[22] for refinement, and then
using our model evaluation pipeline to score the output models to identify the best ones.
In fact, our model evaluation pipeline can be used on models generated by any method,
including pre- and post-refinement. This means that more accurate and computationally
expensive methods can be used to improve model quality.
==PAGE:64==
56
Understanding the 3D structure of the pro-survival BCL2 protein in complex with its BH3
motif-containing ligand is essential for the discovery of new drugs and deeper understanding
the molecular mechanisms of apoptosis. In the future, we will apply our automated pipeline
to discover more 3D structures of the BCL2-BH3 complexes, thereby guiding the design of
new BH3 mimetics.
==PAGE:65==
Appendix A
Appendix
The appendix shows the figures collected from parameter comparison.
==PAGE:66==
58
Figure A.1: Comparison of 5VAU Qsc score under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:67==
59
Figure A.2: Comparison of 5VAU SOV_refine score under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:68==
60
Figure A.3: Comparison of 5VAU ∆∆Gala fraction under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:69==
61
Figure A.4: Comparison of 5FCG Qsc score under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:70==
62
Figure A.5: Comparison of 5FCG SOV_refine score under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:71==
63
Figure A.6: Comparison of 5FCG ∆∆Gala fraction under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:72==
64
Figure A.7: Comparison of 1GJH Qsc score under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:73==
65
Figure A.8: Comparison of 1GJH ∆∆Gala fraction under different parameter combination.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1] K. Van Roey, B. Uyar, R. J. Weatheritt, H. Dinkel, M. Seiler, A. Budd, T. J. Gib-
son, and N. E. Davey, “Short linear motifs: ubiquitous and functionally diverse pro-
tein interaction modules directing cell regulation,” Chemical reviews, vol. 114, no. 13,
pp. 6733–6778, 2014.
[2] B. Mészáros, Z. Dosztányi, and I. Simon, “Disordered binding regions and linear mo-
tifs—bridging the gap between two models of molecular recognition,” 2012.
[3] N. E. Davey, K. Van Roey, R. J. Weatheritt, G. Toedt, B. Uyar, B. Altenberg,
A. Budd, F. Diella, H. Dinkel, and T. J. Gibson, “Attributes of short linear motifs,”
Molecular BioSystems, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 268–281, 2012.
[4] E. A. Cino, W.-Y. Choy, and M. Karttunen, “Conformational biases of linear motifs,”
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 117, no. 50, pp. 15943–15957, 2013.
[5] M. Fuxreiter, P. Tompa, and I. Simon, “Local structural disorder imparts plasticity
on linear motifs,” Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 950–956, 2007.
[6] A. Zanzoni, D. M. Ribeiro, and C. Brun, “Understanding protein multifunctionality:
from short linear motifs to cellular functions,” Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences,
vol. 76, no. 22, pp. 4407–4412, 2019.
[7] H. Sámano-Sánchez and T. J. Gibson, “Mimicry of short linear motifs by bacterial
pathogens: a drugging opportunity,” Trends in biochemical sciences, vol. 45, no. 6,
pp. 526–544, 2020.
[8] S. Ren, G. Yang, Y. He, Y. Wang, Y. Li, and Z. Chen, “The conservation pattern
of short linear motifs is highly correlated with the function of interacting protein
domains,” BMC genomics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2008.
[9] B. Uyar, R. J. Weatheritt, H. Dinkel, N. E. Davey, and T. J. Gibson, “Proteome-
wide analysis of human disease mutations in short linear motifs: neglected players in
cancer?,” Molecular BioSystems, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 2626–2642, 2014.
[10] S. S. Sologova, S. P. Zavadskiy, I. M. Mokhosoev, and N. T. Moldogazieva, “Short lin-
ear motifs orchestrate functioning of human proteins during embryonic development,
redox regulation, and cancer,” Metabolites, vol. 12, no. 5, p. 464, 2022.
[11] C. Chica, F. Diella, and T. J. Gibson, “Evidence for the concerted evolution be-
tween short linear protein motifs and their flanking regions,” PLoS One, vol. 4, no. 7,
p. e6052, 2009.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[12] V. Neduva and R. B. Russell, “Linear motifs: evolutionary interaction switches,” FEBS
letters, vol. 579, no. 15, pp. 3342–3345, 2005.
[13] F. Diella, N. Haslam, C. Chica, A. Budd, S. Michael, N. P. Brown, G. Travé, and T. J.
Gibson, “Understanding eukaryotic linear motifs and their role in cell signaling and
regulation,” Frontiers in Bioscience-Landmark, vol. 13, no. 17, pp. 6580–6603, 2008.
[14] A. Aouacheria, C. Combet, P. Tompa, and J. M. Hardwick, “Redefining the bh3 death
domain as a ‘short linear motif’,” Trends in biochemical sciences, vol. 40, no. 12,
pp. 736–748, 2015.
[15] R. J. Weatheritt and T. J. Gibson, “Linear motifs: lost in (pre) translation,” Trends
in biochemical sciences, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 333–341, 2012.
[16] P. Zhou, B. Li, Y. Yan, B. Jin, L. Wang, and S.-Y. Huang, “Hierarchical flexible
peptide docking by conformer generation and ensemble docking of peptides,” Journal
of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1292–1302, 2018.
[17] J. Verburgt, Z. Zhang, and D. Kihara, “Multi-level analysis of intrinsically disordered
protein docking methods,” Methods, 2022.
[18] H. Tao, Y. Zhang, and S.-Y. Huang, “Improving protein–peptide docking results via
pose-clustering and rescoring with a combined knowledge-based and mm–gbsa scoring
function,” Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 2377–
2387, 2020.
[19] G. Weng, J. Gao, Z. Wang, E. Wang, X. Hu, X. Yao, D. Cao, and T. Hou, “Com-
prehensive evaluation of fourteen docking programs on protein–peptide complexes,”
Journal of chemical theory and computation, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3959–3969, 2020.
[20] H. Lee, L. Heo, M. S. Lee, and C. Seok, “Galaxypepdock: a protein–peptide docking
tool based on interaction similarity and energy optimization,” Nucleic acids research,
vol. 43, no. W1, pp. W431–W435, 2015.
[21] I. Antes, “Dynadock: A new molecular dynamics-based algorithm for protein–peptide
docking including receptor flexibility,” Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinfor-
matics, vol. 78, no. 5, pp. 1084–1104, 2010.
[22] N. London, B. Raveh, E. Cohen, G. Fathi, and O. Schueler-Furman, “Rosetta flexpep-
dock web server—high resolution modeling of peptide–protein interactions,” Nucleic
acids research, vol. 39, no. suppl_2, pp. W249–W253, 2011.
[23] S. J. De Vries, M. Van Dijk, and A. M. Bonvin, “The haddock web server for data-
driven biomolecular docking,” Nature protocols, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 883–897, 2010.
[24] M. Ciemny, M. Kurcinski, K. Kamel, A. Kolinski, N. Alam, O. Schueler-Furman, and
S. Kmiecik, “Protein–peptide docking: opportunities and challenges,” Drug discovery
today, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1530–1537, 2018.
[25] N. London, B. Raveh, and O. Schueler-Furman, “Peptide docking and structure-based
characterization of peptide binding: from knowledge to know-how,” Current opinion
in structural biology, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 894–902, 2013.
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
[26] M. Kurcinski, M. Jamroz, M. Blaszczyk, A. Kolinski, and S. Kmiecik, “Cabs-dock web
server for the flexible docking of peptides to proteins without prior knowledge of the
binding site,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 43, no. W1, pp. W419–W424, 2015.
[27] N. Alam, O. Goldstein, B. Xia, K. A. Porter, D. Kozakov, and O. Schueler-
Furman, “High-resolution global peptide-protein docking using fragments-based piper-
flexpepdock,” PLoS computational biology, vol. 13, no. 12, p. e1005905, 2017.
[28] P. Zhou, B. Jin, H. Li, and S.-Y. Huang, “Hpepdock: a web server for blind peptide–
protein docking based on a hierarchical algorithm,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 46,
no. W1, pp. W443–W450, 2018.
[29] M. Blaszczyk, M. P. Ciemny, A. Kolinski, M. Kurcinski, and S. Kmiecik, “Protein–
peptide docking using cabs-dock and contact information,” Briefings in bioinformatics,
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2299–2305, 2019.
[30] M. P. Ciemny, A. Debinski, M. Paczkowska, A. Kolinski, M. Kurcinski, and S. Kmiecik,
“Protein-peptide molecular docking with large-scale conformational changes: the p53-
mdm2 interaction,” Scientific reports, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2016.
[31] J. Li, A. Fu, and L. Zhang, “An overview of scoring functions used for protein–ligand
interactions in molecular docking,” Interdisciplinary Sciences: Computational Life
Sciences, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 320–328, 2019.
[32] M. Zalewski, S. Kmiecik, and M. Koliński, “Molecular dynamics scoring of protein–
peptide models derived from coarse-grained docking,” Molecules, vol. 26, no. 11,
p. 3293, 2021.
[33] J. F. Kerr, A. H. Wyllie, and A. R. Currie, “Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon
with wideranging implications in tissue kinetics,” British journal of cancer, vol. 26,
no. 4, pp. 239–257, 1972.
[34] L. Portt, G. Norman, C. Clapp, M. Greenwood, and M. T. Greenwood, “Anti-apoptosis
and cell survival: a review,” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Cell
Research, vol. 1813, no. 1, pp. 238–259, 2011.
[35] A. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. W. Lai, and D. T. Yew, “Apoptosis–a brief review,” Neuroem-
bryology and Aging, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 47–59, 2004.
[36] S. Elmore, “Apoptosis: a review of programmed cell death,” Toxicologic pathology,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 495–516, 2007.
[37] K. Vermeulen, D. R. Van Bockstaele, and Z. N. Berneman, “Apoptosis: mechanisms
and relevance in cancer,” Annals of hematology, vol. 84, no. 10, pp. 627–639, 2005.
[38] G. Xu and Y. Shi, “Apoptosis signaling pathways and lymphocyte homeostasis,” Cell
research, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 759–771, 2007.
[39] D. A. Carson and J. M. Ribeiro, “Apoptosis and disease,” The Lancet, vol. 341,
no. 8855, pp. 1251–1254, 1993.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[40] D. E. BREDESEN, “Apoptosis: overview and signal transduction pathways,” Journal
of neurotrauma, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 801–810, 2000.
[41] J. C. Reed, “Apoptosis-based therapies,” Nature reviews Drug discovery, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 111–121, 2002.
[42] A. Strasser, L. O’Connor, and V. M. Dixit, “Apoptosis signaling,” Annual review of
biochemistry, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 217–245, 2000.
[43] R. S. Wong, “Apoptosis in cancer: from pathogenesis to treatment,” Journal of exper-
imental & clinical cancer research, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2011.
[44] A. Lawen, “Apoptosis—an introduction,” Bioessays, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 888–896, 2003.
[45] B. A. Carneiro and W. S. El-Deiry, “Targeting apoptosis in cancer therapy,” Nature
reviews Clinical oncology, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 395–417, 2020.
[46] K.-M. Debatin, “Apoptosis pathways in cancer and cancer therapy,” Cancer Immunol-
ogy, Immunotherapy, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 153–159, 2004.
[47] R. Singh, A. Letai, and K. Sarosiek, “Regulation of apoptosis in health and disease: the
balancing act of bcl-2 family proteins,” Nature reviews Molecular cell biology, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 175–193, 2019.
[48] P. E. Czabotar, G. Lessene, A. Strasser, and J. M. Adams, “Control of apoptosis by
the bcl-2 protein family: implications for physiology and therapy,” Nature reviews
Molecular cell biology, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 49–63, 2014.
[49] J. Kale, E. J. Osterlund, and D. W. Andrews, “Bcl-2 family proteins: changing part-
ners in the dance towards death,” Cell Death & Differentiation, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 65–
80, 2018.
[50] J. Montero and A. Letai, “Why do bcl-2 inhibitors work and where should we use
them in the clinic?,” Cell Death & Differentiation, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 56–64, 2018.
[51] A. N. Hata, J. A. Engelman, and A. C. Faber, “The bcl2 family: Key mediators of
the apoptotic response to targeted anticancer therapeuticsbcl2 family and targeted
therapies,” Cancer discovery, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 475–487, 2015.
[52] K. A. Sarosiek, X. Chi, J. A. Bachman, J. J. Sims, J. Montero, L. Patel, A. Flanagan,
D. W. Andrews, P. Sorger, and A. Letai, “Bid preferentially activates bak while bim
preferentially activates bax, affecting chemotherapy response,” Molecular cell, vol. 51,
no. 6, pp. 751–765, 2013.
[53] D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, “Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation,” cell,
vol. 144, no. 5, pp. 646–674, 2011.
[54] H. Wang, M. Guo, H. Wei, and Y. Chen, “Targeting mcl-1 in cancer: current status
and perspectives,” Journal of Hematology & Oncology, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2021.
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
70
[55] W. D. Fairlie and E. F. Lee, “Targeting the bcl-2-regulated apoptotic pathway for the
treatment of solid cancers,” Biochemical Society Transactions, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 2397–
2410, 2021.
[56] S. M. Kønig, V. Rissler, T. Terkelsen, M. Lambrughi, and E. Papaleo, “Alterations of
the interactome of bcl-2 proteins in breast cancer at the transcriptional, mutational
and structural level,” PLoS computational biology, vol. 15, no. 12, p. e1007485, 2019.
[57] M. Kurcinski, M. Pawel Ciemny, T. Oleniecki, A. Kuriata, A. E. Badaczewska-Dawid,
A. Kolinski, and S. Kmiecik, “Cabs-dock standalone: A toolbox for flexible protein–
peptide docking,” Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 20, pp. 4170–4172, 2019.
[58] S. Kmiecik, D. Gront, M. Kolinski, L. Wieteska, A. E. Dawid, and A. Kolinski,
“Coarse-grained protein models and their applications,” Chemical reviews, vol. 116,
no. 14, pp. 7898–7936, 2016.
[59] M. Kurcinski, A. Badaczewska-Dawid, M. Kolinski, A. Kolinski, and S. Kmiecik,
“Flexible docking of peptides to proteins using cabs-dock,” Protein Science, vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 211–222, 2020.
[60] A. Koliński et al., “Protein modeling and structure prediction with a reduced repre-
sentation,” Acta Biochimica Polonica, vol. 51, 2004.
[61] M. Blaszczyk, M. Kurcinski, M. Kouza, L. Wieteska, A. Debinski, A. Kolinski, and
S. Kmiecik, “Modeling of protein–peptide interactions using the cabs-dock web server
for binding site search and flexible docking,” Methods, vol. 93, pp. 72–83, 2016.
[62] B. Webb and A. Sali, “Protein structure modeling with modeller,” in Functional ge-
nomics, pp. 39–54, Springer, 2017.
[63] M.-y. Shen and A. Sali, “Statistical potential for assessment and prediction of protein
structures,” Protein science, vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2507–2524, 2006.
[64] J. Köster and S. Rahmann, “Snakemake—a scalable bioinformatics workflow engine,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 19, pp. 2520–2522, 2012.
[65] M. Tiberti, T. Terkelsen, K. Degn, L. Beltrame, T. C. Cremers, I. da Piedade,
M. Di Marco, E. Maiani, and E. Papaleo, “Mutatex: an automated pipeline for in
silico saturation mutagenesis of protein structures and structural ensembles,” Brief-
ings in Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 3, p. bbac074, 2022.
[66] D. Van Der Spoel, E. Lindahl, B. Hess, G. Groenhof, A. E. Mark, and H. J. Berendsen,
“Gromacs: fast, flexible, and free,” Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 26, no. 16,
pp. 1701–1718, 2005.
[67] S. Pronk, S. Páll, R. Schulz, P. Larsson, P. Bjelkmar, R. Apostolov, M. R. Shirts,
J. C. Smith, P. M. Kasson, D. Van Der Spoel, et al., “Gromacs 4.5: a high-throughput
and highly parallel open source molecular simulation toolkit,” Bioinformatics, vol. 29,
no. 7, pp. 845–854, 2013.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[68] V. Sora, M. Tiberti, S. M. Robbani, J. Rubin, and E. Papaleo, “Pyinteraph2 and
pyinknife2 to analyze networks in protein structural ensembles,” bioRxiv, 2020.
[69] W. Kabsch and C. Sander, “Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recog-
nition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features,” Biopolymers: Original Research
on Biomolecules, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2577–2637, 1983.
[70] L. J. McGuffin, K. Bryson, and D. T. Jones, “The psipred protein structure prediction
server,” Bioinformatics, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 404–405, 2000.
[71] T. Liu and Z. Wang, “Sov_refine: a further refined definition of segment overlap
score and its significance for protein structure similarity,” Source code for biology and
medicine, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2018.
[72] J. Schymkowitz, J. Borg, F. Stricher, R. Nys, F. Rousseau, and L. Serrano, “The
foldx web server: an online force field,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 33, no. suppl_2,
pp. W382–W388, 2005.
[73] B. C. Cunningham and J. A. Wells, “High-resolution epitope mapping of hgh-receptor
interactions by alanine-scanning mutagenesis,” Science, vol. 244, no. 4908, pp. 1081–
1085, 1989.
[74] R. J. Gowers, M. Linke, J. Barnoud, T. J. Reddy, M. N. Melo, S. L. Seyler, J. Doman-
ski, D. L. Dotson, S. Buchoux, I. M. Kenney, et al., “Mdanalysis: a python package
for the rapid analysis of molecular dynamics simulations,” in Proceedings of the 15th
python in science conference, vol. 98, p. 105, SciPy Austin, TX, 2016.
[75] J. Köster and S. Rahmann, “Building and documenting workflows with python-
based snakemake,” in German Conference on Bioinformatics 2012, Schloss Dagstuhl-
Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2012.
[76] T. Jiang, M. Liu, J. Wu, and Y. Shi, “Structural and biochemical analysis of bcl-
2 interaction with the hepatitis b virus protein hbx,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 113, no. 8, pp. 2074–2079, 2016.
[77] W. L. DeLano et al., “Pymol: An open-source molecular graphics tool,” CCP4 Newsl.
Protein Crystallogr, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 82–92, 2002.
