==PAGE:1==
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constructing a hierarchical, compositional, Bayesian 
model for analysis of multiple-timepoint single-cell 
RNAseq data of bone marrow leukemic cells during 
ALL therapy 
A bioinformatic master thesis study by Signe Modvig, S163636, DTU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
Content 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Study background  
1.2.Compositionality and CoDA in RNAseq data 
1.3 Bayesian analysis and Stan/RStan 
1.4 Aims 
 
2. Methods 
 
2.1 Patients and overall study design 
2.2 Flow cytometry 
2.3 Single cell library preparation and sequencing 
2.4 Bioinformatic tools 
 
3. Results 
 
3.1 Initial data processing  
3.2 Seurat workflow – Data QC, normalization, scaling, and dimensionality reduction 
3.3 A compositional approach 
3.4 A hierarchical Stan model for scRNAseq data 
 
4. Discussion 
 
4.1 Main findings in a clinical context 
4.2 Study limitations 
4.3 Study conclusions and perspectives 
 
5. Appendix A: Project scripts 
 
6. References 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
 
Introduction  
1.1 Study background 
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a malignant disease of the bone marrow, characterized by 
the uncontrolled proliferation of clonal, immature lymphoid precursor cells, leading to impairment 
of the normal bone marrow function. Symptoms of ALL include fatigue due to low hemoglobin, 
bleeding/bruising due to thrombocytopenia, fever/infections due to leukopenia, and leg pain due to 
the expansion of malignant cells in the bone marrow of the femurs. ALL is the most common 
malignancy in childhood, with 35-40 new pediatric and 15-20 new young adult cases per year in 
Denmark. The prognosis of ALL has improved significantly over the last decades, and with current 
treatment regimens the overall survival exceeds 90%[1]. This improvement can, to a high extent, be 
contributed to the implementation of minimal residual disease (MRD)-guided treatment 
stratification. MRD measures the amount of remaining leukemia in the bone marrow at fixed 
timepoints during therapy, thus reflecting the therapeutic sensitivity of the malignant cells. The end 
of induction (day 29) MRD level is the single most accurate predictor of ALL relapse[2, 3], and it is 
used by the clinicians to guide the level of chemotherapeutic treatment intensity in the individual 
child. However, although current protocols perform risk-based treatment stratification, 15% of 
patients with ALL continue to experience relapse[1] and display a poor therapy response with 
persisting MRD[3, 4]. Relapsed ALL has a dismal prognosis, and improved early identification of 
patients in high risk of relapse is therefore paramount, as is the identification of the specific 
biological mechanisms for relapse in these patients. 
In line with the high predictive value of end of induction MRD, leukemia relapse is thought to arise 
from a small subset of cells that survive chemotherapy, persist as MRD, and subsequently re-initiate 
malignant growth. In acute myeloid leukemia, these cells comprise a rare, biologically distinct 
population of leukemia-initiating cancer stem cells[5], but this does not appear to be the case in 
ALL, where a high proportion of leukemic cells among various immunophenotypes and 
developmental stages display leukemia-initiating potential in xenotransplantation experiments[6],[7, 
8], and tumor progression/relapse is rather a stochastic process[5]. Accordingly, deep sequencing 
has uncovered extensive intra-leukemic genomic heterogeneity at diagnosis[9] and revealed a 
branching evolutionary pattern. Heterogeneity and clonal evolution play a role for relapse, where 
mutations in oncogenes, DNA mismatch repair or drug resistance genes are observed in early 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
 
relapses[10, 11]. Late relapses, however, show reduced clonal dynamics[12], suggesting that 
resistant cell subsets also arise from phenotypical heterogeneity.  
 
 
Figure 1 Leukemic development during induction therapy. Top panels: Induction chemotherapy 
eliminates the leukemic clone. Bottom panels: Early environment-mediated drug resistance 
(EMDR) protects a subset of leukemic cells through soluble factor mediated drug resistance (SFM-
DR) and cell adhesion mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR), allowing the leukemic cells to survive 
chemotherapy and persist as minimal residual disease (MRD). This leads to acquired resistance 
(caused by de novo mutations from chemotherapy-induced DNA damage and/or therapy-induced 
selection of subclones) and eventually to leukemic relapse.  
 
A link between phenotypic heterogeneity and relapse could be environment-mediated drug 
resistance (EMDR, Figure 1)[13], which is thought to occur during early therapy, where the bone 
marrow microenvironment protects a subset of cells, allowing them to survive long enough to 
develop de novo mutations (early relapses) and/or cause relapse at therapy cessation (late relapses).  
Accordingly, Ebinger et al showed intra-leukemic phenotypic heterogeneity in a patient-derived 
xenograft (PDX) model, with a small leukemic subset displaying a quiescent, adherent phenotype at 
diagnosis, highly selected for by chemotherapy, and resembling the gene expression profile of 
MRD cells in a very limited number of patients (n=5)[14]. In line with this, our group have shown 
immunophenotypic heterogeneity to be common in ALL[15, 16] and we found that high MRD 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
 
levels associate with upregulation of integrins involved in CAM-DR[17, 18] and an immature 
immunophenotype (CD34highCD38low), shown to be quiescent and enriched for by therapy[19, 
20]. Based on this, we hypothesize that, in some patients, a subset of leukemic cells enters a 
resistant cell state, less susceptible to chemotherapeutics targeting proliferating cells, and persists as 
MRD to potentially cause relapse. We expect to see intra-leukemic heterogeneity at both time of 
diagnosis and at MRD timepoints, and we hypothesize that such resistant cell subsets comprise a 
larger fraction of cells (or are exclusively present) in patients with a poor therapy response. With 
this study, we hope that key pathways can be identified in such resistant cells, providing insights 
into mechanisms of resistance and relapse and possibly identifying new druggable target in ALL 
therapy.  
 
1.2 Compositionality in scRNAseq data 
When examining abundances of an entity (transcripts in RNA sequencing, species in 
Metagenomics, etc) within different conditions, it is important to distinguish between absolute 
abundance and relative abundance[21]. A simple example of this is shown in Figure 2, where the 
increase in absolute abundance of one transcript from condition A to B, will lead to decreased 
relative abundance of all other transcripts in condition B. Relative abundances are relevant in 
compositional data, which refers to quantitative measurements of parts/components of a closed 
whole (i.e. the data sum up to a constant value, which is an artefact of the sampling procedure[22, 
23]) and the measurement of any one component is only interpretable relative to other components 
within that whole. 
 
Figure 2 The increase in absolute abundance of a single transcript (yellow) from condition A to 
condition B (blue boxes) decreases the relative abundance of all other transcripts (stacked bar 
graph). Figure created with Biorender.com. 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
 
 
Compositionality exists at multiple levels in single cell RNA sequencing data, and this includes the 
data in this thesis, generated from bone marrow cells (Figure 3). Firstly, the bone marrow sample 
serves as a closed composition of cell subsets, where relative distributions between these subsets are 
affected by each other. This can, to a certain extent, be accounted for using flow cytometry 
combined with measurement of the bone marrow cell concentration to estimate the “ground truth” 
on absolute cell concentrations in the material, albeit with a level of uncertainty incorporated. 
Secondly, due to the NGS assay technology itself, scRNAseq data (as all other sequencing data) are 
compositional in nature. The library size, determined by the sequencing depth of the individual cell, 
serves as a constraint, where the abundance of each transcript, measured as counts, is only 
interpretable relative to other transcript counts within that cell[23]. Finally, the cell may itself be 
compositional, if only a certain volume of RNA can be synthesized per time unit. This would lead 
to a compensatory downregulation of other genes, as a mere “bystander-effect” without biological 
incitament, in case of a substantial increase in one or a few genes. Since the two latter (Figure 3B 
and C) call for similar data analysis precautions, and since the first (Figure 3A) can be somewhat 
accounted for as mentioned above, the compositional focus in this thesis will be on the RNA 
sequencing data from a single cell as a closed composition.  
 
Figure 3 Compositionality exists at multiple levels in scRNAseq data of bone marrow leukemic 
cells. A: The sample drawn from the bone marrow is a closed composition with regard to cell subset 
distribution. B: The library size is a closed composition determined by sequencing depth of the 
NGS technology applied. C: The cell may itself be compositional, if only a certain amount of RNA 
transcription can take place per time unit. Figure created with Biorender.com. 
  
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
 
As a consequence, sequencing data exist in a non-Euclidean space[23], or rather in a simplex[24] 
with one fewer dimensions than the number of components[25]. This hampers the use of many 
widely used statistical methods and warrants an alternative approach to standard normalization.  
 
Normalisation versus LR transformation 
The primary goal of scRNAseq normalization is to remove the influence of technical effects in the 
underlying molecular counts, while preserving true biological variation[26]. Among these technical 
effects, a major focus of most normalization methods is the variation in library size[23]. Many 
different normalization methods exist, but one of the most recent and widespread is the 
SCTransform approach from the Seurat workflow[26], which will also be used for standard 
normalization in this thesis. The SCTransform constructs a generalized linear model (GLM) for 
each gene with UMI counts as the response and sequencing depth as the explanatory variable. It 
pools information across genes with similar abundances, hereby regulating the parameter estimates 
of the GLM to obtain reproducible error models. The residuals of this regularized negative binomial 
regression then comprises the normalized data with preserved biological heterogeneity. In contrast 
with unconstrained or zero-inflated negative binomial models, this avoids overfitting of the data for 
genes with low/moderate abundances. However, like other normalization methods, it does not 
account for the compositional nature of the sequencing data.  
 
The compositional approach (compositional data analysis, CoDA) uses log-ratio transformation 
instead of normalization. The log-ratio transformation allows for the data to be interpreted in 
Aitchison space while remaining closed[23, 24, 27]. This allows for interpretable results when 
examining gene ratios in the data. There are three commonly used types of log ratio (LR) 
transformation: ALR, CLR, and ILR. The ALR (additive log ratio) transform uses a defined 
reference feature, chosen within the composition, and the logarithm of each feature divided by this 
reference feature is used. An advantage of the ALR is that it is easily interpretable, but a 
disadvantage is that it does not maintain distance across transforms[28]. It does work well for most 
statistical modelling, however[29]. The ILR (isometric log ratio) transform maps data isometrically 
into a space of real coordinates with respect to an orthonormal basis[29], respecting distances 
between transforms with regard to the Euclidean metric, but it is hard to interpret and so not that 
often used in RNAseq data analysis.  
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
 
The CLR (centered log ratio) transform uses the geometric mean of the sample/cell as the 
denominator. Although  CLR transformation can therefore be seen as equivalent to standard 
normalization, correcting for library size, the CLR does not claim to “open” the data. The CLR 
provides a more robust metric than the ALR, and, similar to the ILR, it provides four important 
properties: scale invariance (multiplying by a constant does not change results, and keeping data 
closed or open does not either[29]), perturbation invariance (conversion between units does not 
change results), permutation invariance (changing the order of components does not change results) 
and sub-compositional dominance (subsets contain less information than full composition[23, 
30])/coherence (inferences about subcompositions should be consistent, regardless of whether the 
inference is based on the subcomposition or the full composition)[31]. The Aitchison distance[23, 
27] is simply the Euclidean distance between CLR-transformed compositions, holding scale 
invariance, perturbation invariance, permutation invariance and sub-compositional 
dominance/coherence.  
Since compositional data analysis relies on log ratio transformations, the dataset cannot contain 
zeros, so this needs to be handled in a CoDA pipeline.  
 
Zero correction 
There are two types of zeros: essential zeros and rounded zeros[32]. Zeros cannot be part of a 
dataset used for compositional analysis, since it hampers the generation of log ratios across the set 
and hereby downstream analyses, such as PCA and clustering, etc.[29], but the two types of zeros 
must be treated differently, hence it is of importance to start by characterizing the type of zeros in 
the dataset. Essential zeros denote the absolute absence of a feature, while a rounded zero denotes a 
value below the limit of detection (LOD) of the assay. All zeros in sequencing data can be 
considered as a form of rounded zeros (albeit with special features: count zeros), under the 
assumption that all genes are expressed in at least one copy. This assumption can of course be 
challenged, but not with relevance to the data at hand. 
Replacing count zeros with a small positive value is a commonly used strategy in sequencing data 
analysis, and a necessary prerequisite for CoDA, and several approaches for how to perform this 
replacement have been published[29, 32]. The choice of method should ensure that the dataset is 
not skewed by the imputations, hereby impairing accurate representation of relative differences in 
the dataset. It is therefore important to perform a multiplicative adjustment of the non-zero 
components after zero replacement. A second feature of significance in sequencing data (or count 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
 
data), is that they are multinomial, i.e. each gene in each cell can take a variety of discrete values. 
This separates them from other data with rounded zeros, and requires specific strategies for 
replacement, of which the Bayesian multiplicative (BM) approach has proven useful in comparative 
studies[33]. A multiplicative simple replacement can also be applied for compositional count data, 
but should be limited to datasets with less than 10% zeros[33]. A useful package for performing 
zero replacement in count data using both the BM approach and the multiplicative simple 
replacement is the zCompositions package[29]. zCompositions uses the Dirichlet distribution as 
prior for the BM approach, which is considered the conjugate prior of the multinomial distribution. 
Under certain circumstances, the BM approach can generate imputed proportions falling above the 
lowest estimated probability of a multinomial part (c/n, where c is the count and n is the number of 
trials). In such cases, the imputation is adjusted by using a fraction of the minimum c/n for that part 
(typically 0.65[29]). Both the BM approach (cmultRepl, default: GBM) and the simple 
multiplicative replacement (multRepl) incorporate a subsequent multiplicative adjustment of the 
non-zero components (hence the names) conserving ratios in the dataset. 
 
Proportionality 
Although frequently used in standard datasets containing absolute information, correlation analysis 
is not meaningful in compositional data using only relative information[31] (an example is seen in 
Figure 2, proportions of components can falsely appear correlated across samples/conditions simply 
due to changes in levels of other components).  
An acknowledged alternative to correlation is proportionality. Proportionality can be applied to 
relative data, since proportions (e.g. ratios between CLR transformed components of the data to 
ensure same scaling) fulfill the CoDA criteria of scale invariance, subcompositional coherence and 
permutation invariance[31].   
Lovell et al has proposed a “goodness-of-fit to proportionality” statistic, ϕ, to assess the 
proportionality of any pair of variables. ϕ is related to logratio variance (VLR, var(log(x/y))) and is 
zero when x and y behave perfectly proportionally. The closer ϕ is to zero, the stronger the 
proportionality[31]. The log ratio variance is the same for relative values and their absolute 
equivalents[34]. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 
1.3 Bayesian analysis and Stan/RStan 
 
Bayesian analysis 
Bayesian inference is a method of statistical inference, where prior knowledge/beliefs/probabilities 
are updated based on new data into so-called posterior probabilities. Unlike in frequentist statistics, 
the Bayesian definition of probability is indeed a “degree of belief”/a way of quantifying 
uncertainty, and probability distributions over possible parameter values are used as a way of 
expressing this uncertainty. 
At the heart of Bayesian inference is Bayes’ theorem, which can be derived from expressions on 
conditional probability. Bayes’ theorem is useful for obtaining posterior probabilities for parameters 
in a model (and also for comparing models): 
 
 
 
Bayes theorem is in this case shown for the parameters of a model (a given parameter termed as wi). 
The posterior probability of the parameters given the data, P(wi|D), is equal to the probability of the 
data given the model parameters, P(D|wi), also known as the likelihood, multiplied by the P(wi), the 
prior probability of the parameters, and divided by the marginal probability, P(D), the total 
probability of the data under any possible values of parameters, i.e. the (sum/integral) of all 
conditional probabilities of data given all (discrete/continuous) parameter values. Especially in the 
case of continuous parameter values, this value is hard to compute. 
The parameter space is the space that covers all possible values for all parameters in a given model. 
For any given point in parameter space, the prior is known and the likelihood can be computed 
based on the data. For estimation of the posterior probability without actually computing P(D), the 
MCMC (Markov chain Monte Carlo) method is used. Here, the likelihood x prior is calculated for a 
given position in parameter space, using a proposal distribution, and then a step is taken in 
parameter space, calculating a new likelihood x prior. If the new likelihood x prior is higher than 
the previous, the step is accepted. If it is lower, it is accepted with a probability (increasing with 
shorter difference between old and new likelihood x prior). Chain (or chains, hot and cold) then 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
 
move around in parameter space and will have a tendency to move “upwards” and to sample more 
at the top, and eventually, after a sufficient number of iterations, the samples will resemble the 
probability distribution. Each step is written in a file (the old position is written if the new move is 
not accepted), and the posterior probability distribution for the parameters can then be determined 
from the empirical distribution of the samples. The oldest MCMC algorithm is the Metropolis-
Hastings algorithm[35]. However, this method lets chains do long and tedious random walks in 
parameter space, which is somewhat inefficient, especially if the target distribution is complex, e.g. 
with multiple peaks or donut shapes, etc. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo leaps in the manner of a particle 
on a frictionless surface in a random direction and samples along the path. The larger steps and the 
physics-like approach makes for more efficient sampling[35]. The inefficient “backwards” track of 
the HMC is further eliminated in the No U-turn sampler (NUTS) algorithm, which simulates the 
path in both directions, to determine when a U-turn is made and thus when to sample. The NUTS 
algorithm is used by Stan. 
 
Stan/RStan 
Stan is a C++ library for Bayesian modeling and inference, and RStan is the R interface to Stan[36-
38]. Stan provides a Bayesian modelling language for model specification. A parser then translates 
the model to C++ code, and it is subsequently compiled to an executable program and loaded as a 
Dynamic Shared Object (DSO, an object file intended to be shared/used simultaneously by several 
applications) in R. The DSO can then be run to sample from the posterior distribution.  
 
The Stan program for model specification and building includes several blocks, of which the three 
most important are:  
 
The data block - specifies the (known and fixed) data that is conditioned upon in Bayes Rule.  
The parameters block - declares all unknown quantities, whose posterior distribution is sought 
The model block – specifies prior distributions as well as likelihoods to define the posterior 
 
Apart from these, it is possible to add blocks to define functions, transform data and parameters, 
and generate quantities, that do not affect the likelihood. Data is declared once and passed to each 
of the chains, while the posterior in the model block is evaluated at every leapfrog step during every 
iteration of the NUTS algorithm[37]. 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
 
 
After the Stan program is constructed, running stanc() translates to C++, and the stan() function 
compiles the C++ code to a DSO, loads the DSO and samples the posterior given the provided data 
and other specified conditions. Conditions specified are typically the number of Markov chains, 
number of iterations per chain, of which a specified number can be assigned to warm-up, number of 
cores for parallelization, and thinning (e.g. if not all iterations should be kept), as well as a seed for 
the random number generator. The stan function returns a stanfit object and also saves the DSO to 
avoid recompilation when the same model is used again.  
The model can (and should) be validated with simulated data and inference, and with assessing 
convergence of the chains. Chain convergence is evaluated by Rhat(R^), which should be 1, 
indicating chain convergence to stationary distribution (no variation between or within chains).  
 
1.4 Aims 
 
The overall scientific aim of this study is  
 
- 
To uncover mechanisms for therapy resistance and relapse in ALL through deep 
phenotyping of the leukemia on a single cell level, focusing on intra-leukemic heterogeneity 
and cell subsets surviving induction chemotherapy 
 
 
The bioinformatic aims of this master thesis project are:  
 
- 
To account for the general data analysis pipeline of single cell RNAseq data 
- 
To understand the main ideas in Bayesian statistical modelling 
- 
To describe challenges in compositional data and how to account for these in data analysis 
- 
To use the probabilistic programming language Stan to implement Bayesian models of 
single cell transcriptomics data 
- 
To understand the concept of hierarchical models and construct such a model for multiple 
timepoint scRNAseq data 
- 
To use the R package Seurat for standard scRNA pipeline data QC, normalization, 
dimensionality reduction and differential gene expression analysis 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
 
Material and methods 
 
2.1 Patients and overall study design 
We prospectively included 40 patients with ALL, 33 patients with BCP-ALL and 7 patients with T-
ALL. Of the 40 patients, six were relapses. All Danish patients <45y with ALL are monitored by 
MRD at Rigshospitalet, and all eligible patients within the inclusion period were included, thus 
comprising a consecutive cohort of Danish patients. Bone marrow samples from days 0, 15, 29, 50 
and 71 were included, as long as detectable MRD persisted. For a substudy of heterogeneity in BM, 
peripheral blood and CSF at diagnosis, we included six patients with CSF involvement, three with 
CNS involvement at time of diagnosis and three with combined CNS and BM relapse. Specific 
analyses for this substudy are not shown in the thesis, but the patients are part of the main cohort 
and therefore included. The project workflow is shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4 Project workflow. 
 
Flow cytometry  
At diagnosis, the leukemia-associated immunophenotype (LAIP) was identified by highly 
standardized, high-sensitivity 8-colour flow cytometry using antibodies, panels, and settings from 
the current European ALL treatment protocol ALLTogether in accordance with published 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
 
guidelines[3, 4, 39]. The optimal surface marker combination for sorting was chosen based on the 
LAIP. Cells were index-sorted, so the immunophenotype of individual cells could be coupled 
directly to the RNAseq profile of the same cell. The same procedure was used for peripheral blood 
and CSF at diagnosis. At MRD timepoints, sorting gates were set based on a combination of the 
LAIP and prior knowledge on patterns of surface marker modulation during therapy[3, 40], then 
adjusted when >10 MRD cells were visible, and single cell sorting was performed into 384well 
plates. Immediately after sorting, plates were centrifuged for 120sec and subsequently snap-frozen 
on dry-ice and stored at -80 degr. C until analysis. Apart from malignant cells, one row (14 cells) of 
healthy, mature B-cells and one row of T-cells (for BCP-ALL) or CD4 and CD8 cells (for T-ALL) 
were included. These cells were both used as an additional check for batch effects and as controls 
for direct cellular effects of the chemotherapy. After sorting, all flow cytometric data was manually 
reviewed to ensure correct annotation of malignant and healthy cells. Flow cytometric analysis and 
sorting was performed on an ARIA III (Becton Dickinson).  
Single cell RNA library preparation and sequencing 
For sc library preparation we used the CEL-seq2 protocol[41], adapted to FACS-sorted cells in 
384well plates (SORTseq, Figure 4)[42, 43]. The CEL-seq2 protocol provides highly accurate 
quantification of RNAs by the incorporation of unique molecular identifiers (UMIs, random 
nucleotide sequences tagging individual mRNA molecules) allowing for the distinction between 
original molecules and amplification duplicates that derive from the cDNA/library amplification. 
Further, CEL-seq2 relies on linear amplification by in vitro transcription after the initial reverse 
transcription, allowing for a less biased amplification and a high complexity of mRNA 
molecules[44]. To ensure adequate sequencing depth, we performed a pilot sequencing at 1mio 
reads/cell for a single patient sample and we were able to establish that a reading depth of 150.000 
reads per cell was adequate, while deeper sequencing did not add additional complexity to the 
library. We sorted one/two plates (376-752 cells) per condition, and this set-up was considered 
sufficient for statistically significant results based on the litterature: In an elegant, comparative 
study of library preparation methods, Ziegenhain et al found that for the CEL-Seq2 method, 
statistical significance could be reached for 5% differentially expressed genes in two groups with a 
power of 0.8 and a 5% FDR for 110 cells at 250.000 reads/cell, due to the high library complexity 
of this method[44]. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina Nextseq, and library preparation and 
sequencing was performed by SCDiscoveries, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 
 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
 
Bioinformatic data analysis 
The initial bioinformatic pipeline was performed at the sequencing facility (SCDiscoveries, Utrecht, 
the Netherlands). This included trimming, alignment to the Hg38 transcriptome, demultiplexing and 
generation of count matrices (Figure 5). 
  
Figure 5 Initial bioinformatic pipeline performed at SCDiscoveries, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 
Figure created with Biorender.com. 
 
For downstream bioinformatic analyses we used R version 4.1.0. The Seurat package (version 
4.0.5) was used for the standard scRNAseq pipeline, and for the CoDA approach we used 
zCompositions (1.4.0-1) and robCompositions (2.3.1). For the Stan model we used Rstan (2.21.7). 
Most R scripts were run on Computerome 2. All analyses are described in detail in the results 
section and a list of scripts used for sections 3.1-3.5 can be found in Appendix A. All scripts can be 
accessed through github: https://github.com/s163636/scRNAseq-of-MRD-cells. 
 
Results 
 
3.1 Initial data processing 
The surface marker profile for each cell was exported from the flow cytometer, cleaned, and 
prepared for merging with the scRNAseq data (01_1_load_fcm.R, appendix A). Each plate was 
carefully reviewed to ensure correct annotation of all cells (blasts/mature B-cells/mature T-
cells/CD4 cells/CD8 cells), and this information on cell type along with information on patient ID, 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
 
timepoint (day 0/15/29/71/other), tissue (bone marrow/peripheral blood/cerebrospinal fluid), and 
plate number (1 or 2) was prepared for merging with scRNAseq data (01_2_load_annot.R, appendix 
A). The scRNAseq count matrices were filtered to remove ERCC spike-in reads, and subsequently 
only cells with a non-ERCC transcript count over 1200 were included. The threshold of 1200 
transcripts was based on plots showing that transcript counts>1200 separated viable cells from 
apoptotic/dead cells (Figure 6). Subsequently, flowcytometry data, metadata and scRNAseq data 
were merged for each plate in a Seurat object (01_3_load_RNA.R, appendix A). 
 
Figure 6 Transcript count versus mitochondrial content per cell. Representative plots of eight 
plates. Threshold of 1200 transcripts per cell was chosen for filtering only viable cells in 
downstream analyses 
 
3.2 Seurat workflow – Data QC, normalization, scaling, dimensionality reduction and differential 
gene expression analysis 
We used the Seurat package from the Satija lab[45] for downstream data analysis of the scRNAseq 
data. Samples were initially merged into one Seurat object, after which the content of mitochondrial 
RNA and ribosomal RNA was checked (Figure 7A). As shown in Figure 7, a threshold of <30% 
mitochondrial content aligned well with the presence of >1200 transcripts, indicating viable cells 
above this threshold. We therefore filtered at this threshold (Figure 7B, and 
02_clean_and_merge_comp.R, appendix A).  
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
 
  
Figure 7 Percentage of mitochondrial (left) and ribosomal (right) RNA before (top) and after 
(bottom) filtering for <30% mitochondrial RNA in the merged dataset.  
 
During review of the flow cytometric sorting procedure, wells that included non-blasts/non-
matureB/T were labeled as empty. These were excluded from analysis, along with empty wells 
(03_1_remove_empty_comp.R, appendix A).  
The scRNAseq data was then normalized, scaled, and the top 3000 variable features (the 3000 
genes with the highest variance to expression ratio) were identified, using the Seurat SCTransform 
procedure (method of normalization described under normalization in the background section). The 
contribution of mitochondrial genes to the variation in the dataset was regressed out 
(03_2_normalize_comp.R, appendix A), since these did not comprise the genes of interest for the 
research question. The identified variable features in the dataset were then used for downstream 
PCA, nearest neighbor identification, clustering and, finally, UMAP visualization. The PCA was 
specified to include 80 PCs but did not show divergent results when choosing 50 or 100. The 
FindNeighbor function makes a Shared Nearest Neighbor (SNN graph) by determining the k-
nearest neighbor and then calculating neighborhood overlap (Jaccard index). The clusters are then 
determined by this SNN graph and visualized in the UMAP plot. An overview of all the samples 
shown by patient (Figure 8A) and timepoint (Figure 8B) shows that the inter-patient variation is the 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
 
most prominent for the majority of samples. The plot also indicates that some of the MRD cells  
might share common traits, as a large subset of these are grouped in the top-right part of the plot, 
carefully suggesting a common signature (Figure 8B), although with a high degree of uncertainty. 
 
 
Figure 8 UMAP plot illustrating the full scRNAseq dataset coloured by patient (A) and timepoint 
(B, days after diagnosis). The black circle surrounds samples with minimal residual disease from 
different patients. 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
 
 
Examining patient-specific samples, it appeared that in some cases, the malignant cells after 
induction therapy resembled more the healthy, mature cells, compared with diagnosis, while in 
others, the malignant cells during/after induction therapy cells appeared to remain similar to the 
malignant blasts at diagnosis (Figures 9 and 10). This is somewhat consistent with what is known 
about prednisolone-induced immune marker modulation and could be a sign of therapy-sensitive 
versus therapy-resistant cell states. It was also evident, that heterogeneity existed within the same 
patient at the same timepoint in some cases (Example given in Figure 10A). However, since UMAP 
plots only displays semi-quantitative distances, we wanted to explore these associations in further 
detail. So, to investigate the degree of maturity in the leukemic blasts, we sorted healthy B-cell 
progenitors (stage I, II and III) and mature B-cells from patients (n=3, 5 plates) who underwent 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and were free of relapse during follow-up of at least 6 
months. These cells are currently undergoing scRNA sequencing at SCDiscoveries and so data 
could not be included in this thesis. When the data is ready, analyses of differential gene expression 
as well as trajectory analyses will be performed as well. Instead, we went on to examine the 
associations with CoDA. 
 
 
Figure 9 Example of a patient with BCP-ALL where the malignant cells on day 15 and day 29 (and 
a small fraction on day 0) are located closer to the mature cells (left plot), and an example of a 
patient with BCP-ALL, where the malignant cells at follow-up timepoints remain most similar to 
the malignant cells at diagnosis (right). 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Top left panel: Example of a patient (pt 20) with T-ALL where the majority of the 
malignant cells on day 15 and day 29 remain most similar to the malignant cells at diagnosis, while 
a subpopulation on day 29 and on day 71 locate close to the mature cells. Top right panel: A patient 
(pt 30) with T-ALL where all the malignant cells on day 15 remain similar to the malignant cells at 
diagnosis. Bottom panels: A patient (pt 17) with T-ALL where all the malignant blasts are located 
closer to the mature cells (left plot is coloured by timepoint, right plot by cell type). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
 
3.3 A compositional approach 
To account for the compositional nature of RNA sequencing data, we constructed the CoDA 
pipeline shown in Figure 11.   
 
Figure 11 Pipeline for initial CoDA of scRNAseq data. Figure created with BioRender.com.  
 
We chose to use Bayesian multiplicative replacement, a method preferred for count data, as 
described in the introduction section. We performed the replacement for each plate separately, since 
this most accurately would reflect the LOD of the individual plates, while taking into account that at 
least two cells on each plate had to have detectable levels of the genes in question. Data was then 
closed cell-wise to a simplex and then merged. After merging, some genes were naturally only 
present in a subset of the plates, and since the average levels of these were suspected to be lower 
than those of the genes present in some of the cells on a particular plate, we decided to use a simple 
multiplicative replacement, based on the LOD of the entire dataset 
(03_7_platespecific_zerocorr_comp.R, appendix). The fraction of the LOD was set to 0.65, since 
this was found to be the optimal fraction by Martín-Fernandez et al[29, 32]. The simple 
multiplicative replacement is recommended only if the fraction of zero values is lower than 
10%[32]. We calculated a zero fraction of 7.49% in a representative subset of the data and 
concluded that the choice of method was appropriate.  
We subsequently identified the top 3000 variable genes, chosen based on expression level-corrected 
variance. This was done to preserve relevant signals while reducing size and background noise of 
the dataset. CLR transformation was performed and this dataset then formed the basis for 
downstream dimensionality reduction.   
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
 
Examining a PCA scree plot suggested that the first 7 PCs should be included in further analyses 
(although not reaching 80% of variance when added up) since subsequent PCs only contributed 
<2% each (Figure 12). 
 
 
Figure 12 Scree plot showing percentual variance explained by the first 10 PCs in the dataset. 
 
However, plotting the PCS showed that the healthy B- and T-cells did not cluster together across 
plates, and that the majority of variance was explained by either immunophenotype of the malignant 
blasts (BCP versus T-ALL) or by differences between individual cases and also individual plates 
from same patient sample, rather than differences in sample timepoint or tissue, as expected (Figure 
13). UMAP visualization was tested with a range of n_neighbors and min_dist values, yielding an 
optimum of n_neighbors=20 and min_dist=1, based on visual assessment. This did, however, still 
not provide much biological sense (Figure 14).  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
 
 
Figure 13 PCA plots based on the pipeline from Figure 11. Colour by immunophenotype (left), 
celltype (middle), and timepoint (right).  
 
Figure 14 UMAP plots based on the pipeline from Figure 11. Colour by patient (left), plate 
(middle), and immunophenotype (right). Different plates from same patients do not overlap.  
 
We speculated that the plate-specific zero correction introduced a technical bias, exaggerating plate-
wise differences and clouding the biological signals. Inspecting the 3000 variable genes indeed 
showed a high percentage of zero-corrected genes, and we therefore changed the pipeline to address 
this issue (Figure 15). 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
 
  
Figure 15 New pipeline for initial CoDA of scRNAseq data.  
 
Including only the 3000 most variable genes and performing zero correction in one step allowed for 
a more uniform and less overpowering zero correction. Inspecting downstream PCA plots (Figure 
16) now showed clear separation between healthy and malignant cells, and the two first PCs seemed 
to roughly represent immunophenotype (PC1) and, suspectedly, degree of maturity (PC2).
 
Figure 16 First two PCs of PCA analysis of full dataset based on pipeline in Figure 15. Colour by 
immunophenotype (left), timepoint (middle) and celltype (right).   
  
Likewise, plates from same samples now showed nice overlay in the UMAP plots (Figure 17), in 
congruence with switch of zero-correction method. Furthermore, the healthy, mature cells now 
clustered together, providing a nice sanity-check. Patient-specific differences were less clear than 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
 
those seen in the Seurat workflow (Figure 8), suggesting that the CoDA approach extracted overall 
trends in the dataset to a higher extent.  
 
Figure 17 UMAP plots based on the pipeline from Figure 11. Colour by immunophenotype (top 
left), patient (top middle), celltype (top right), timepoint (bottom left), tissue (bottom middle), and 
plate (bottom right).  
 
Inspecting individual UMAP plots showed similar overall findings as the UMAP plots from the 
Seurat pipeline. However, in some of the patients, it was evident that a small fraction of the cells 
seemed to locate close to the mature cells, while the bulk of the cells at MRD timepoints still co-
localized with the blasts at diagnosis (Figure 18). For some of the patients (e.g. patient 20), this was 
also the case in the Seurat pipeline, but for others (e.g. patient 1), this was not. The majority of 
patients, however, showed a trend towards the bulk of the malignant cells at MRD timepoints 
approaching the mature cells (examples shown in Figure 19).  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
 
 
Figure 18 Three examples of patients where only a very small fraction of the blasts at diagnosis and 
MRD timepoints locate close to/alongside the mature cells. Top panels are coloured by timepoint, 
bottom panels are colured by celltype 
 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
 
 
Figure 19 Three examples of patients where the majority of the blasts at diagnosis and MRD 
timepoints approached/located close to the mature cells. Top panels are coloured by timepoint, 
bottom panels are colured by celltype. 
 
Since the dimensionality reduction analyses in both pipelines suggested that our hypothesis could 
hold true, we wanted to model the distribution and signatures of subpopulations across timepoints, 
while adjusting for intra-individual/cytogenetic differences. Subsequently, the gene signatures of 
these subsets could then be characterized based on degree of maturity, and their resemblance to 
previously published therapy resistance gene signatures[46] could then be evaluated.  
 
We specified our hypothesis to the following (illustrated in Figure 20):   
Some cells are sensitive to induction therapy and some are resistant. Further, the sensitive cells 
undergo phenotypic changes (e.g. “maturation”, overcoming the leukemic maturation stop) during 
therapy, while the resistant cells do not.  
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
 
Thus, we could simplify to three populations: Resistant and Primitive (R_P), Sensitive and 
Primitive (S_P), and Sensitive and Mature (S_M). Each population would have a distinct gene 
expression profile (and immunophenotype), and the distribution of these three populations would 
vary during the course of therapy in each patient, as well as between patients.  
 
 
Figure 20 Hypothesis regarding intra-leukemic heterogeneity and therapy resistance. Three 
subpopulations exist: Resistant and Primitive (R_P, black), Sensitive and Primitive (S_P, dark 
purple), and Sensitive and Mature (S_M, light purple). Distribution of the three varies between 
patients and timepoints. Therapy can prime the S_P cells to S_M cells. The S_M cells are 
subsequently killed by the therapy and disappear from the bone marrow. However, the R_P cells 
remain unchanged. The presence of resistant cells already at diagnosis predicts a poor therapy 
response with remaining MRD during consolidation therapy (day 50/71), while if only S_M cells 
are present in a sample, it predicts the subsequent bone marrow sample to be without MRD. Figure 
created with BioRender.com. 
. 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
 
For testing of this hypothesis, we decided to construct a hierarchical, compositional, Bayesian 
model using Stan. 
 
3.4 A Stan model for scRNAseq data 
We started out with a simple model of one cell population in one patient at one timepoint. This was 
done to ensure that the model could run and that QC parameters looked good, including conversion 
of chains. Furthermore, it would make troubleshooting in the more advanced model easier, when 
complexity could be introduced step-wise. We chose to use zero-corrected, log-ratio transformed 
data as input, rather than including the log-transform in the Stan program, since this improved 
model performance (the alternative model we tested was able to handle zeros but needed a separate 
alr-transformed vector per cell, which took a very long time to fit). The model is shown in Figure 21 
and the full script is in the appendix (rstan_model1_comp_ilr.R). It models all cells from the same 
sample being normally distributed around a common, “sample-specific”, frequency vector of log-
ratio transformed gene count means (lr_mu) with the standard deviation (lr_sigma). The normal 
distribution fits because we have done the log-ratio transform, otherwise, it would be a multinomial 
distribution. 
 
Figure 21 Stan model for a single timepoint in a single patient 
 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
 
We tested the model with data from a single plate, running two chains with 10.000 iterations (half 
used for warm-up). We found nice convergence of the chains (Rhat=1), and traceplots of different 
positions from lr_mu and lr_sigma (examples in Figure 22) had the desired “hairy caterpillar” 
appearance (random scatter around a stable mean value, equal for both chains). 
 
 
Figure 22 Traceplots showing iterations vs. sampled values for positions 1 (left) and 6000 (right) of 
lr_mu (top) and lr_sigma (bottom) from the single-sample Stan model. All plots display a “hairy 
caterpillar” formation.  
 
We then wanted to expand the model to include more than one population of cells. We therefore 
introduced a mixture model, which brought on new challenges. We started out by defining two 
subpopulations with frequencies alpha and 1-alpha. However, we wanted to be able to specify more 
than two subpopulations, so we incorporated an alpha value for k subpopulations and used the 
log_sum_exp to add up the log posteriors (multiplying posteriors is equivalent to adding up log 
posteriors) for each subset and each cell to the target value (when using a model with more than one 
subpopulation, we could no longer use the ~, and we instead specified the target value explicitly).  
Another challenge was label switching, meaning that the chains can switch during sampling (since 
the posterior probability will be the same regardless of the names(labels) of the two 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
 
subpopulations). We therefore used the Stan concept ordered for a vector of the length k (number of 
subpopulations) and then we sliced the vector of µ’s and put the last value in this ordered vector. In 
that way, we ensured that label switching could not occur (model shown in Figure 23, full script 
incl comments in the appendix, Rstan_model2_comp_ilr_centered.R).  
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
 
 
Figure 23 Stan model of a single patient with several populations, centered 
 
When running this model, however, we did not get chain convergence. We then decided to switch 
to non-centered parameterization, since centered parameterization can sometimes be problematic 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
 
for the sampling algorithm, making it hard to get convergence of chains, especially in models with 
few data and small standard deviations (subpopulations’ µ close to the overall µ). This called for a 
change in the structure of the model, as illustrated in Figure 24.   
 
 
Figure 24 Centered versus non-centered parameterization. The distribution plots illustrate a single 
sample population with different subpopulations, each comprising of individual cells. The blue 
circles illustrate that x1 is indirectly dependent on µ overall in the centered model, but directly in the 
non-centered. This provides better conditions for the sampling algorithm since correlation of 
parameters is now avoided. Figure created with BioRender.com. 
 
The model is shown in Figure 25, and script including comments in appendix, 
Rstan_model2_comp_ilr_noncentered.R). The model is not fully finished, so it has not been run yet, 
but it is included to give an idea of the structure. 
  
Next model steps will include layers of timepoint and patient/cytogenetic group. Apart from the 
challenges accompanying the expanded hierarchical nature of the model, it will also be necessary to 
accommodate the not fully nested (=cross-classified) multi-level nature of this data (multiple 
patients at every timepoint and multiple timepoints for each patient).  
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
 
 
Figure 25 Stan model of a single patient with several populations, non-centered 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
 
Discussion 
 
4.1 Main findings in a clinical context 
This is the first comprehensive study using single cell RNA sequencing to characterize MRD cell 
subsets in ALL. The combination of flowcytometric sorting and plate-based library preparation 
allows for detection of very rare events (down to 1/100.000 cells), thus providing the basis for 
comparison of MRD cell profiles in both good and poor responders. This comparison has not been 
done before, it forms the basis for our main findings, and it would not have been feasible using a 
droplet-based approach. Further, the identification of leukemic cells at MRD timepoints using 
protocol-defined, standardized flowcytometry-based MRD-detection using the LAIP provides an 
RNAseq-independent annotation of the cells, allowing a more robust identification of leukemic 
subpopulations. Likewise, supplementing the standard scRNAseq workflow with a compositional 
approach ensures robustness of the findings, as these are less prone to being skewed by technical 
artefacts. 
 
In line with our hypothesis, we demonstrate intra-leukemic heterogeneity at both time of diagnosis 
and during therapy. Further, our findings suggest differences in gene expression profiles related to 
degree of maturity, both between subpopulations within the same patient and between good and 
poor responders. This allowed us to refine our hypothesis, as shown in Figure 20, and it is in line 
with the presumed effect of glucocorticoid therapy, one of the hallmarks of induction therapy, 
which is thought to push the cells towards maturation[47, 48], although the exact mechanisms for 
the effects are not known. Further, surface marker modulation during induction therapy is a well-
described phenomenon, and this marker modulation pattern tends to resemble maturation of the 
blasts (downregulation of CD38, CD10, and CD34 and upregulation of CD20 and CD45[47]). To 
further investigate the degree of maturity in the leukemic blasts, we have sorted healthy B-cell 
progenitors and mature B-cells for scRNAseq. This will allow us to investigate Euclidian distance 
from the subpopulations to different maturation stages of healthy B-cells and hereby determine, if 
the patterns, we have observed in the UMAP and PCA plots of both compositional and standard 
analyses, does in fact represent differences in maturation state. We will also investigate if the cells 
might comprise a compositional path on a maturity/sensitivity spectrum rather than distinct 
subpopulations.  
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
 
Candelli et al[46] recently proposed a gene signature of resistance, predictive of relapse, but this 
was only applied in a cytogenetic subset of ALL (KMT2A-rearranged ALL), and only at time of 
diagnosis. Further, even though their signature was based on glucocorticoid response, they found 
that the strongest signal in the signature was that of quiescence, and so they could not distinguish 
whether the decreased proliferative activity of the resistant cells at diagnosis was linked to a stem-
like or more mature phenotype[46, 48]. Our next steps will therefore include an assessment of the 
Euclidian distance of the subpopulations identified in the Stan model to the composition identified 
in Candelli et al, to investigate if this resistance signature is enriched in certain subsets and/or in 
poor responders, and furthermore to couple the signature to the trajectory of maturation to 
determine the maturity level of the cells displaying this gene expression profile.  
 
Furthermore, we will perform differential gene expression analysis between the identified 
subpopulations as part of the standard Seurat workflow, and corresponding proportionality analysis 
as part of the compositional workflow to identify signatures of resistance at MRD timepoints.  
 
We will also incorporate information on cytogenetic status, since it is well-known that e.g. patients 
with a high hyperdiploid subtype of ALL have high levels of MRD at end of induction, but still 
have a low risk of relapse. Thus, we suspect that this subgroup might have a high degree of 
“maturation” (but lack the R_P subpopulation) at end of induction, explaining this discrepancy. 
Initial inspection of patient-specific UMAP plots suggested that this could be the case, but 
validation in the hierarchical model is needed. If specific gene signatures related to poor therapy 
response are identified, it will be valuable to assess whether these can be identified already at time 
of diagnosis, and we therefore plan to perform trajectory analyses, incorporating information on 
timepoints, and we can afterwards use the patients with no detectable MRD to investigate whether 
the presence of such subsets at diagnosis are restricted to poor responders.  
 
4.2 Study limitations 
Our study has several limitations. The cohort has a relatively low frequency of patients with 
refractory disease, which is a combination of a limited inclusion period and a low ALL incidence in 
Denmark (inclusion period 1.5 years, 20 eligible patients per year), and a low frequency of poor 
responders in ALL in the current treatment protocol (around 10-15%). Thus, the majority of patients 
are intermediate or standard risk patients and few had persisting MRD at day 71.  
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
 
 
The annotation of blasts using the LAIP has advantages, as described above, but although all sorted 
cells were manually reviewed, a few patients had populations at MRD timepoints that could not 
unequivocally be assigned as malignant or healthy, prompting exclusion.   
 
The choice of a UMI-based method over a full-length transcript method for library preparation 
allowed for more accurate quantification[44], however, UMI-based methods are not well-suited for 
SNV detection. Information on mutations could have aided in the assessment of trajectory analyses 
and allowed for more accurate identification of resistant cell subset hallmarks.   
We chose to focus on a compositional approach, since sequencing data are compositional in nature, 
while the impact of choosing a non-compositional approach for single-cell RNA sequencing data 
has not previously been assessed. A disadvantage of the compositional approach, however, is the 
zero correction of a large proportion of zeros in the dataset. The Bayesian multiplicative approach 
keeps the original ratios but causes a slight distortion of the dataset[29, 32, 33], and the effect of 
this distortion, given the high percentage of zeros in single cell RNAseq data, is hard to estimate. 
Furthermore, when we chose to switch from plate-wise zero-correction to a zero-correction on 
merged data, the plate-wise variations in LOD were not taken into account. However, since the 
major drawback of CoDA is the zero-correction, decisions on zero-correction method will always 
be a balancing act of accounting for technical features while still preserving biological signals in the 
dataset.  
 
The reduction of the dataset to only the top 3000 variable genes lessened the impact of zero-
correction on the results, but on the other hand it potentially led to loss of meaningful information 
embedded in the counts of the excluded genes. Using cmultRepl is considered the most accurate 
approach for count data for many reasons (described among others in Martín-Fernández et al[33]), 
but a limitation of this method, when applied on the merged dataset, was that it assumed an 
underlying common distribution, which might not hold true across timepoints and patients.  
 
Important analyses and QC check are still missing from the study and will need to be performed 
before final conclusions can be made. The Stan models still miss the final hierarchical layers, they 
need to be further tweeked with regard to using lr-transformed input data versus raw counts and 
perhaps including covariance, and only the first model has been tested with simulated data. Finally, 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
 
we have not yet explored all zero correction options, performed proportionality analyses or, as 
mentioned before, looked at differentially expressed genes and trajectory analyses.  
 
Conclusion and perspectives 
Deep phenotyping on a single cell level by scRNAseq of leukemic cells at diagnosis and during 
therapy allows for detailed characterization of heterogeneity as well as unraveling of previously 
unexplored mechanisms of resistance in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. With this study, 
we have demonstrated that heterogeneity indeed exists at diagnosis and during therapy and our 
findings suggest that this heterogeneity could play a role for therapy resistance through intra-
leukemic variations in the glucocorticoid-induced ability to overcome the leukemic maturation stop, 
but more detailed analyses are still needed to verify this hypothesis. We found that a compositional 
approach of scRNAseq was feasible, increasing the robustness of our findings, and that a 
hierarchical, compositional Bayesian model can serve as a useful tool for answering complex 
biological questions when dealing with large-scale scRNAseq datasets.   
 
Clinical perspectives 
Relapse in ALL holds a poor prognosis and there is a prominent need for research embedding a 
deeper understanding of the malignant clone into clinical care. The deep molecular and phenotypic 
characterization of therapy-resistant subpopulations can lead to a more accurate stratification of 
children at high risk, where phenotypic biomarkers of poor outcome can change therapeutic 
strategies, including experimental treatments, for patients with a poor prognosis. Likewise, 
improved prognostication will help minimize excess treatment-induced toxicity in patients with a 
benign disease course. ALL treatment stratification is primarily based on MRD measures, and so it 
is crucial that we continue to refine these analyses. NGS-based methods for MRD-monitoring are 
being developed for clinical implementation as part of the European Collaboration, EuroMRD. The 
current project can lead to a change in MRD analysis, where we perform real-time flow sorting and 
rapid deep sequencing of residual malignant blasts, identify enriched and perhaps targetable 
characteristics, and adjust therapy accordingly.  
 
Bioinformatic perspectives 
CoDA analysis studies of scRNAseq data are scarce, and studies exploring both CoDA and standard 
methods are called for. Although RNA sequencing data (single cell as well as bulk) are 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
 
compositional, it remains unknown, if the standard data analysis pipelines are biased to a degree 
where biological meaning is distorted or lost, or if the difference between them and the CoDA 
approach are negligible. If the latter is the case, it will be useful to clarify it, but if the former is the 
case, it will be a game changer for the use of RNA sequencing data in medical research. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
 
Appendix A – overview of scrips in R used for the project  
Most analyses have been run on Computerome 2, these end with _comp. All scripts are available at 
https://github.com/s163636/scRNAseq-of-MRD-cells 
Data cleaning: 
01_1_load_fcm.R - Flow cytometry data loading and cleaning 
- Format from csv to rds. 
- Only include relevant markers. 
- Coupling from well number (A1-P24) to cell number (1-384) 
 
01_2_load_annot.R - Annotation data loading and cleaning 
-Format from xlsx to rds 
- Create relevant metadata: patient ID, timepoint, tissue, plate number 
- Manually define tissue for the few plates with several tissues on same plate 
 
01_3_load_rna.R - RNAseq data loading and filtering 
- Load RNAseq data (Barcode counts, tsv format) 
- Remove ERCC spike in reads 
- Filter >1200 transcripts 
- Creates Seurat object 
- Adds flow cytometry data as ADT assay 
- Adds annotation data as metadata 
- Saves Seurat objects as .rds 
 
02_clean_and_merge_comp.R - Merges data from all patients  
- Merge all Seurat objects 
- Visualize mitochondrial and ribosomal content prior to filtering 
- Filter away cells with more than 30% mitochondrial genes 
- visualize after filtering 
- Save merged Seurat object as .rds 
 
03_1_remove_empty_comp.R – Removes cells annotated as empty  
- Only cells annotated as blasts or healthy B/T cells are kept 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
 
Seurat workflow: 
03_2_normalize_comp.R – Runs SCTransform  
- Normalization 
- Regressing out effect of mitochondrial genes 
- Scaling 
- Identification of top variable genes 
 
03_3_subsets_comp.R – Creates relevant subsets for analysis 
- Subsets by immunophenotype 
- Subsets by tissue 
- Subsets by timepoint 
- Subsets by relapse/non-relapse 
 
03_4_dimensionality_reduction_comp.R – Performs dimensionality reduction 
- Makes PCA and UMAP plots for full dataset (patient-specific plots in separate script, not included)  
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Compositional data analysis: 
03_7_platespecific_zerocorr_comp.R - Performs zero correction, pipeline in figure 11 
- Loops over plates, performs zerocorrection (cmultRepl) and makes into simplex 
- Merges all plates 
- Finds LOD of merged dataset and performs second round of zero correction (multRepl) 
- Makes ready for Seurat  
 
03_8_findvariablefeatures_comp.R – Finds variable features, pipeline in figure 11 
- Finds top 3000 variable genes 
- Extracts data frame with count data for only these 3000 genes in all cells 
 
03_9_CLR_transform_comp.R – CLR transforms, pipeline in figure 11 
- CLR transforms dataframe with only variable genes 
 
03_8_2_reverse_findvariablefeatures.R – Finds variable features, pipeline in figure 15 
- Finds variable features from non-zerocorrected dataset (output from 03_1) 
 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
 
03_7_2_reverse_zerocorr_comp.R – Zerocorrects and CLR transforms, pipeline in figure 15 
- Zerocorrects dataset from 03_8_2 
- CLR transforms with cmultRepl 
 
(There are several scripts for plots, only two are shown here as examples) 
04_3_compositional_PCA_varPCA_comp.R – PCA and plots 
- Adds metadata 
- Performs PCA 
- Makes scree plot and PC plots based on pipeline in figure 11 
 
04_3_2_compositional_PCA_varUMAP_reverse_ptspec_comp.R – Patient-specific UMAP plots 
- Adds metadata 
- Loops on patients making UMAP plots coloured by metadata based on pipeline in figure 15 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Stan models:  
Zero_handling.R – Prepares single-plate count data for Stan 
- Filters for genes present in >50cells on a single plate for Stan model testing 
- Performs zero-correction (cmultRepl) 
- Makes relative  
 
Ilr_transform_plate_comp.R – Prepares single-plate count data for Stan 
- ILR-transforms plate for Stan input 
 
Rstan_model1_comp_ilr.R – Stan model 1  
 
Rstan_model2_comp_ilr_centered.R – Stan model 2 centered  
 
Rstan_model2_comp_ilr_noncentered.R – Stan model 2 non-centered  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Project functions: 
99_project_functions.R – converts plate ID to information on patient, timepoint, tissue and plate 
99_project_functions_2.R – converts plate position to cell number 
 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
 
References 
 
1. 
Toft N, Birgens H, Abrahamsson J, Griskevicius L, Hallbook H, Heyman M, Klausen 
TW, Jonsson OG, Palk K, Pruunsild K, Quist-Paulsen P, Vaitkeviciene G, Vettenranta K, Asberg 
A, Frandsen TL, Marquart HV, Madsen HO, Noren-Nystrom U and Schmiegelow K (2018) Results 
of NOPHO ALL2008 treatment for patients aged 1-45 years with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 
Leukemia 32:606-615. doi: 10.1038/leu.2017.265 
2. 
Zhou J, Goldwasser MA, Li A, Dahlberg SE, Neuberg D, Wang H, Dalton V, 
McBride KD, Sallan SE, Silverman LB, Gribben JG and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute ALLC 
(2007) Quantitative analysis of minimal residual disease predicts relapse in children with B-lineage 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia in DFCI ALL Consortium Protocol 95-01. Blood 110:1607-11. doi: 
10.1182/blood-2006-09-045369 
3. 
Modvig S, Madsen HO, Siitonen SM, Rosthoj S, Tierens A, Juvonen V, Osnes LTN, 
Valerhaugen H, Hultdin M, Thorn I, Matuzeviciene R, Stoskus M, Marincevic M, Fogelstrand L, 
Lilleorg A, Toft N, Jonsson OG, Pruunsild K, Vaitkeviciene G, Vettenranta K, Lund B, 
Abrahamsson J, Schmiegelow K and Marquart HV (2019) Minimal residual disease quantification 
by flow cytometry provides reliable risk stratification in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 
Leukemia 33:1324-1336. doi: 10.1038/s41375-018-0307-6 
4. 
Modvig S, Hallbook H, Madsen HO, Siitonen S, Rosthoj S, Tierens A, Juvonen V, 
Osnes LTN, Valerhaugen H, Hultdin M, Matuzeviciene R, Stoskus M, Marincevic M, Lilleorg A, 
Ehinger M, Noren-Nystrom U, Toft N, Taskinen M, Jonsson OG, Pruunsild K, Vaitkeviciene G, 
Vettenranta K, Lund B, Abrahamsson J, Porwit A, Schmiegelow K and Marquart HV (2020) Value 
of flow cytometry for MRD-based relapse prediction in B-cell precursor ALL in a multicenter 
setting. Leukemia. doi: 10.1038/s41375-020-01100-5 
5. 
Senft D and Jeremias I (2019) A rare subgroup of leukemia stem cells harbors relapse-
inducing potential in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Exp Hematol 69:1-10. doi: 
10.1016/j.exphem.2018.09.006 
6. 
Rehe K, Wilson K, Bomken S, Williamson D, Irving J, den Boer ML, Stanulla M, 
Schrappe M, Hall AG, Heidenreich O and Vormoor J (2013) Acute B lymphoblastic leukaemia-
propagating cells are present at high frequency in diverse lymphoblast populations. EMBO Mol 
Med 5:38-51. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201703 
7. 
Kong Y, Yoshida S, Saito Y, Doi T, Nagatoshi Y, Fukata M, Saito N, Yang SM, 
Iwamoto C, Okamura J, Liu KY, Huang XJ, Lu DP, Shultz LD, Harada M and Ishikawa F (2008) 
CD34+CD38+CD19+ as well as CD34+CD38-CD19+ cells are leukemia-initiating cells with self-
renewal capacity in human B-precursor ALL. Leukemia 22:1207-13. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.83 
8. 
le Viseur C, Hotfilder M, Bomken S, Wilson K, Rottgers S, Schrauder A, Rosemann 
A, Irving J, Stam RW, Shultz LD, Harbott J, Jurgens H, Schrappe M, Pieters R and Vormoor J 
(2008) In childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia, blasts at different stages of immunophenotypic 
maturation have stem cell properties. Cancer Cell 14:47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.05.015 
9. 
Hunger SP and Mullighan CG (2015) Redefining ALL classification: toward detecting 
high-risk ALL and implementing precision medicine. Blood 125:3977-87. doi: 10.1182/blood-
2015-02-580043 
10. 
Spinella JF, Richer C, Cassart P, Ouimet M, Healy J and Sinnett D (2018) Mutational 
dynamics of early and late relapsed childhood ALL: rapid clonal expansion and long-term 
dormancy. Blood Adv 2:177-188. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017011510 
11. 
Ma X, Edmonson M, Yergeau D, Muzny DM, Hampton OA, Rusch M, Song G, 
Easton J, Harvey RC, Wheeler DA, Ma J, Doddapaneni H, Vadodaria B, Wu G, Nagahawatte P, 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
 
Carroll WL, Chen IM, Gastier-Foster JM, Relling MV, Smith MA, Devidas M, Guidry Auvil JM, 
Downing JR, Loh ML, Willman CL, Gerhard DS, Mullighan CG, Hunger SP and Zhang J (2015) 
Rise and fall of subclones from diagnosis to relapse in pediatric B-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. 
Nat Commun 6:6604. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7604 
12. 
De Bie J, Demeyer S, Alberti-Servera L, Geerdens E, Segers H, Broux M, De 
Keersmaecker K, Michaux L, Vandenberghe P, Voet T, Boeckx N, Uyttebroeck A and Cools J 
(2018) Single-cell sequencing reveals the origin and the order of mutation acquisition in T-cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia 32:1358-1369. doi: 10.1038/s41375-018-0127-8 
13. 
Meads MB, Gatenby RA and Dalton WS (2009) Environment-mediated drug 
resistance: a major contributor to minimal residual disease. Nat Rev Cancer 9:665-74. doi: 
10.1038/nrc2714 
14. 
Ebinger S, Ozdemir EZ, Ziegenhain C, Tiedt S, Castro Alves C, Grunert M, Dworzak 
M, Lutz C, Turati VA, Enver T, Horny HP, Sotlar K, Parekh S, Spiekermann K, Hiddemann W, 
Schepers A, Polzer B, Kirsch S, Hoffmann M, Knapp B, Hasenauer J, Pfeifer H, Panzer-Grumayer 
R, Enard W, Gires O and Jeremias I (2016) Characterization of Rare, Dormant, and Therapy-
Resistant Cells in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Cancer Cell 30:849-862. doi: 
10.1016/j.ccell.2016.11.002 
15. 
Obro NF, Marquart HV, Madsen HO, Ryder LP, Andersen MK, Lausen B, Albertsen 
BK, Wehner PS, Helgestad J and Schmiegelow K (2011) Immunophenotype-defined sub-
populations are common at diagnosis in childhood B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 
Leukemia 25:1652-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.136 
16. 
Øbro NF SS, Madsen HO, Schmiegelow K, Marquart HV. (2015) LAIP heterogeneity 
calls for refined 
immunophenotype-based patient sub-classification in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.  ESCCA 
Annual Meeting, Sicily, IT  
17. 
Scharff B, Modvig S, Marquart HV and Christensen C (2020) Integrin-Mediated 
Adhesion and Chemoresistance of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Cells Residing in the Bone 
Marrow or the Central Nervous System. Front Oncol 10:775. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.00775 
18. 
Shah Scharff BFS, Modvig S, Thastrup M, Levinsen M, Degn M, Ryder LP, 
Schmiegelow K, Christensen C and Marquart HV (2020) A comprehensive clinical study of 
integrins in acute lymphoblastic leukemia indicates a role of alpha6/CD49f in persistent minimal 
residual disease and alpha5 in the colonization of cerebrospinal fluid. Leuk Lymphoma 61:1714-
1718. doi: 10.1080/10428194.2020.1731500 
19. 
Modvig S, Wernersson R, Obro NF, Olsen LR, Christensen C, Rosthoj S, Degn M, 
Jurgensen GW, Madsen HO, Albertsen BK, Wehner PS, Rosthoj S, Lilljebjorn H, Fioretos T, 
Schmiegelow K and Marquart HV (2022) High CD34 surface expression in BCP-ALL predicts 
poor induction therapy response and is associated with altered expression of genes related to cell 
migration and adhesion. Mol Oncol 16:2015-2030. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.13207 
20. 
Lutz C, Woll PS, Hall G, Castor A, Dreau H, Cazzaniga G, Zuna J, Jensen C, Clark 
SA, Biondi A, Mitchell C, Ferry H, Schuh A, Buckle V, Jacobsen SW and Enver T (2013) 
Quiescent leukaemic cells account for minimal residual disease in childhood lymphoblastic 
leukaemia. Leukemia 27:1204-1207. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.306 
21. 
Lin H and Peddada SD (2020) Analysis of compositions of microbiomes with bias 
correction. Nat Commun 11:3514. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17041-7 
22. 
van den Boogaart KGaT-D, R. (2008) “compositions”: a unified R package to analyze 
compositional data. Comput. Geosci. 34:320–338.  
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
 
23. 
Thomas P. Quinn, Ionas Erb, Mark F. Richardson and Tamsyn M. Crowley (2018) 
Understanding sequencing data as compositions: an outlook and review. Bioinformatics 34:2870-
2878.  
24. 
Aitchison J (1986) The Statistical Analysis of Compositional Data. Chapman and 
Hall, London, 416 p. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-4109-0.  
25. 
Thomas P. Quinn IE, Greg Gloor, Cedric Notredame, Mark F. Richardson, and 
Tamsyn M. Crowley (2019) A field guide for the compositional analysis of any-omics data. 
GigaScience 8:1-14.  
26. 
Hafemeister C and Satija R (2019) Normalization and variance stabilization of single-
cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biol 20:296. doi: 
10.1186/s13059-019-1874-1 
27. 
J. Aitchison CB-V, J. A. Martín-Fernández & V. Pawlowsky-Glahn (2000) Logratio 
Analysis and Compositional Distance. Mathematical Geology 32:271-275.  
28. 
http://www.statsathome.com/2017/08/09/we-can-do-better-than-the-alr-or-softmax-
transform/.   
29. 
Palarea-albaladejo J, Martín-fernández, Josep Antoni (2015) zCompositions — R 
package for multivariate imputation of left-censored data under a compositional approach. 
Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 43:85-96.  
30. 
K. Gerald van den Boogaart RT-D (2013) Analyzing Compositional Data with R (Use 
R!)  
31. 
Lovell D, Pawlowsky-Glahn V, Egozcue JJ, Marguerat S and Bahler J (2015) 
Proportionality: a valid alternative to correlation for relative data. PLoS Comput Biol 11:e1004075. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004075 
32. 
J. A. Martın-Fernandez CB-V, and V. Pawlowsky-Glahn (2003) Dealing With Zeros 
and Missing Values in Compositional Data Sets Using Nonparametric Imputation. Mathematical 
Geology 35.  
33. 
Josep-Antoni Martín-Fernández KH, Matthias Templ, Peter Filzmoser, and Javier 
Palarea-Albaladejo6 (2015) Bayesian-multiplicative treatment of count zeros in compositional data 
sets. Statistical Modelling 15:134-158.  
34. 
Quinn TP, Richardson MF, Lovell D and Crowley TM (2017) propr: An R-package 
for Identifying Proportionally Abundant Features Using Compositional Data Analysis. Sci Rep 
7:16252. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16520-0 
35. 
McElreath R (2016) Statistical Rethinking. 
36. 
Cohen D (2020) Applied Bayesian Statistics Using Stan and R.   
37. 
https://mc-stan.org/.   
38. 
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rstan/vignettes/rstan.html.   
39. 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03911128.   
40. 
DiGiuseppe JA and Wood BL (2019) Applications of Flow Cytometric 
Immunophenotyping in the Diagnosis and Posttreatment Monitoring of B and T Lymphoblastic 
Leukemia/Lymphoma. Cytometry B Clin Cytom 96:256-265. doi: 10.1002/cyto.b.21833 
41. 
Hashimshony T, Senderovich N, Avital G, Klochendler A, de Leeuw Y, Anavy L, 
Gennert D, Li S, Livak KJ, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Dor Y, Regev A and Yanai I (2016) CEL-Seq2: 
sensitive highly-multiplexed single-cell RNA-Seq. Genome Biol 17:77. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-
0938-8 
42. 
Grun D, Muraro MJ, Boisset JC, Wiebrands K, Lyubimova A, Dharmadhikari G, van 
den Born M, van Es J, Jansen E, Clevers H, de Koning EJP and van Oudenaarden A (2016) De 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
 
Novo Prediction of Stem Cell Identity using Single-Cell Transcriptome Data. Cell Stem Cell 
19:266-277. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.05.010 
43. 
Muraro MJ, Dharmadhikari G, Grun D, Groen N, Dielen T, Jansen E, van Gurp L, 
Engelse MA, Carlotti F, de Koning EJ and van Oudenaarden A (2016) A Single-Cell Transcriptome 
Atlas of the Human Pancreas. Cell Syst 3:385-394 e3. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2016.09.002 
44. 
Ziegenhain C, Vieth B, Parekh S, Reinius B, Guillaumet-Adkins A, Smets M, 
Leonhardt H, Heyn H, Hellmann I and Enard W (2017) Comparative Analysis of Single-Cell RNA 
Sequencing Methods. Mol Cell 65:631-643 e4. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.01.023 
45. 
Satija R, Farrell JA, Gennert D, Schier AF and Regev A (2015) Spatial reconstruction 
of single-cell gene expression data. Nat Biotechnol 33:495-502. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3192 
46. 
Candelli T, Schneider P, Garrido Castro P, Jones LA, Bodewes E, Rockx-Brouwer D, 
Pieters R, Holstege FCP, Margaritis T and Stam RW (2022) Identification and characterization of 
relapse-initiating cells in MLL-rearranged infant ALL by single-cell transcriptomics. Leukemia 
36:58-67. doi: 10.1038/s41375-021-01341-y 
47. 
Gaipa G, Basso G, Aliprandi S, Migliavacca M, Vallinoto C, Maglia O, Faini A, 
Veltroni M, Husak D, Schumich A, Ratei R, Biondi A, Dworzak MN and Group IB-A-F-M-S 
(2008) Prednisone induces immunophenotypic modulation of CD10 and CD34 in nonapoptotic B-
cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. Cytometry B Clin Cytom 74:150-5. doi: 
10.1002/cyto.b.20408 
48. 
Rhein P, Scheid S, Ratei R, Hagemeier C, Seeger K, Kirschner-Schwabe R, Moericke 
A, Schrappe M, Spang R, Ludwig WD and Karawajew L (2007) Gene expression shift towards 
normal B cells, decreased proliferative capacity and distinct surface receptors characterize leukemic 
blasts persisting during induction therapy in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia 
21:897-905. doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2404613 
 
