==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Stowage Planning for Roll-on/Roll-off Ships with
Stochastic Optimization
Cecilia Rosdahl Lund s174309
Siv Cartland Hansen
s174316
Supervisor: Associate Professor Dario Pacino
Co-supervisor: Alastair Main
January 22, 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis is part of the ROROGREEN project which aims to improve the operations related
to Roll-on/Roll-off (RORO) shipping such that the industry can become more sustainable. A
RORO ship can reduce its CO2 emission and fuel consumption of a voyage by sailing at reduced
speed. This increases the sailing time, and in order for this strategy to work the turnaround time
in port has to be decreased. Eﬀicient stowage planning is therefore an important operational
decision as it affects both the turnaround time and profitability of a voyage. An issue in the
industry is the availability of cargo at the time of planning which complicates the stowage
planning process. A stochastic model can represent the uncertainty related to the arrival of
cargo more accurately and create more flexible stowage plans. This project examines if the
RORO stowage planning problem can be improved by implementing a stochastic program to
solve the problem compared to a deterministic model. To solve the problem a MIP model as
well as a heuristic inspired by Variable Neighbourhood Search is proposed. The exact model
can only be solved for small toy-sized instances and it can therefore not be used for industry-
sized problem instances. The heuristic is able to provide good solutions for both the smaller
instances as well as instances with a more realistic representation. The results show that the
benefit of using a stochastic program to solve the DRSSP is small with large variations for the
different problem instances.
This project has opened up for new research within the use of
stochastic programming for RORO stowage planning problems, and future research might be
able to examine the use of stochastic models in a more practical setting.
Keywords: Stowage Planning, Maritime Transportations, RORO Ship, Mixed Integer Pro-
gramming, Stochastic Programming, Variable Neighbourhood Search
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Technology, Management and Economics at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science degree in Business Analytics.
It is assumed that the reader has a good understanding of operational research and mathematical
modelling as well as general knowledge about algorithms and statistics.
Copenhagen, January 22, 2023
Cecilia Rosdahl Lund
s174309
Siv Cartland Hansen
s174316
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following
Dario Pacino, Assoc. Prof., DTU
for giving us the opportunity to be part of the ROROGREEN project and for his guidance and
valuable support during the project.
Alastair Main, DTU
for his guidance and insights into the Dynamic RORO Ship Stowage Planning problem as well
as for providing a good foundation for this work.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Modelling under Uncertainty
5
3.1
Stochastic Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Metaheuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Stowage Planning for RORO Ships
10
4.1
Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Rehandling of Cargo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Mathematical Modelling
15
5.1
Modelling Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Deterministic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Scenario Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Stochastic Programming Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Solution Method
26
6.1
Construction Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Improvement Phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Evaluating Modelling Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Computational Study
35
7.1
Evaluating Heuristic Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Stability Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Comparing Solution Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.5
Value of Stochastic Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8
Conclusion
56
Bibliography
59
Appendix A: System Information
60
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The transportation of wheeled cargo such as cars, trailers and other types of rolling equipment
is an important trade facilitation both internationally and within Europe.
Roll-on/Roll-off
(RORO) ships are vessels specialised in rolling cargo. The RORO fleet is relatively small com-
pared to the containerised fleet. In 2022 container ships accounted for 13% of the world fleet
while general cargo carriers including RORO ships1 only represented 3.5% in terms of dead-
weight tonnage [1]. However, there are several advantages to using RORO ships. Unlike con-
tainer shipping which requires specialised loading and discharging equipment, RORO shipping
has the advantage that cargo can be rolled directly on and off the vessels. Fewer modal shifts
are generally also required [2]. After a drop in maritime trade volume due to the pandemic and
supply chain issues, the demand for consumer goods picked up again in 2021 and 2022 as the
global economy started to recover. Recent uncertainties in the market have led to a stagnation in
demand, and the industry is faced with new challenges and a need for development [1]. Over the
past years, the competition has intensified and companies are seeking to increase their eﬀiciency
and optimise earnings for each trip. At the same time, the industry needs to comply with envi-
ronmental regulations and reduce emissions to meet targets set by the International Maritime
Organisation (IMO) [3]. It is therefore important to have cost and energy-eﬀicient operations
that can reduce the environmental impact of each trip while still remaining profitable.
A commonly used strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) is through slow steam-
ing, which is the practice of significantly slowing down the speed of the vessel to reduce fuel
consumption. Cutting down turnaround times in ports gives vessels more time and flexibility
to slow steam and reduces the costs related to staying in port. The turnaround time is highly
dependent on the loading and unloading operations and stowage planning is therefore a key
operational decision. Stowage planning is the process of assigning vehicles to specific positions
on the deck. RORO ships typically only have one or two entry points to the decks from which
all cargo needs to enter and exit. The handling of cargo can therefore approximately be seen as
a LIFO queue. This complicates the stowage planning as the decision maker has to consider the
loading and discharge ports for later stowed cargo when assigning positions. If conflicts arise
then cargo will have to be shifted, and this increases the turnaround time in port. It is therefore
important to develop a good stowage plan that takes as much cargo as possible on board while
at the same time minimising the time spent on port operations.
RORO shipping has only recently become the subject of research where especially operational
decisions related to stowage planning have been the focus.
The research within the field of
stowage planning for RORO ships is limited compared to that of container stowage planning,
and it could therefore be relevant to draw parallels to research within this area. However, there
are some vital differences in the construction of the stowage plans. Containers are stowed in
stacks while rolling cargo is driven onto the deck. This requires different approaches on how to
handle shifting. Furthermore, containers can be seen as homogeneous whereas wheeled cargo is
often heterogeneous which further complicates the planning. It is therefore worth studying the
RORO stowage planning problem in itself.
When creating stowage plans for RORO ships, current research assumes that all cargo is available
at the time of planning. However, the arrival time for all cargo is often not known in advance.
It might be that cargo arrives as scheduled, or it is delayed or it might not show up at all.
When assuming that all cargo arrives on time the stowage plan will have to be altered every
1UNCTAD groups general carriers as multi-purpose and project vessels, RORO cargo and general cargo [1]
1
==PAGE:8==
time a cargo booking does not show. The longer the planning horizon, the more uncertainty
is associated with these decisions and the more complicated the planning process becomes. It
would therefore be more reasonable to assume that arrival times of cargo are stochastic and
include this uncertainty in the stowage planning process.
A stochastic model represents the true structure of the stowage planning process more accurately,
since decisions about where to stow available cargo need to be made before all information
becomes available.
The problem itself is stochastic in nature, so the question is whether a
stochastic programming model can capture the uncertainty and lead to better decisions. This
leads to the overall problem statement of this thesis:
Thesis Statement
Can the RORO stowage planning problem be improved by using stochastic optimisa-
tion compared to a deterministic model?
This project proposes a two-stage stochastic programming model to optimise the stowage plan-
ning process. The model schedules the loading operations and assigns positions to the cargo
available at the terminal given that the arrival times of other cargo bookings are unknown.
The objective of the model is to minimise the relationship between the costs related to the fuel
consumption of the voyage and the revenue gained from transporting cargo. This captures the
balance between staying in port to load more cargo and departing earlier to sail at reduced speed.
The model gives a new perspective on RORO stowage planning and how to handle uncertainties
in the decision problems.
The remainder of this project is organised as follows. Chapter 2 introduces the current research
on the RORO stowage planning problem to examine the current practices and gaps in the
literature. Chapter 3 gives a brief overview of stochastic programming and the metaheuristic
used in this project. The RORO stowage planning problem and its representation are presented
in chapter 4. Chapter 5 introduces the deterministic model and once the uncertainties have been
identified and represented, a two-stage stochastic model with different scenarios is presented.
Stochastic models are inherently diﬀicult to solve, and an alternative solution method is therefore
often needed to solve the problem. A heuristic inspired by Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS)
is therefore introduced in chapter 6, and the tests and results as well as the quality of the solution
methods are presented in chapter 7. Lastly, the findings are summarised in chapter 8.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature Review
This chapter explores the literature related to the RORO Ship Stowage Planning (RSSP) prob-
lem and the modelling of uncertainties related to stowage planning. The research within stowage
planning for RORO ships is relatively sparse, and all assume that cargo is available at the ter-
minal when the stowage plan is drawn up. All key papers use deterministic models and do
not address the uncertainties related to delays and no-shows.
Therefore a brief overview of
how stochastic programming has been applied to problems in the container shipping industry is
presented as well.
Prior to 2011, research within the field of stowage planning for maritime transportation focused
mainly on stowage planning for container and bulk vessels whereas research in the RORO in-
dustry focused on the safety and damage control of cargo [4]. The RSSP problem for deep-sea
ships was introduced in 2011 by Øvstebø et al. and provided a foundation for research within
this field. Øvstebø et al. considered a problem with multiple port calls and multiple decks
where each deck was divided into lanes. The model was solved using a commercial solver but a
heuristic was also developed for faster execution times. Hansen et al. proposed the 2D RORO
Ship Stowage Planning (2DRSSP) problem which treated the RSSP as a multi-port, single-deck
problem with no stability constraints and used a more flexible grid representation [5]. Models
were tested under different objectives, and the analysis showed that the most practical stowage
plan was obtained when considering grouping vehicles from the same cargo together as well as
considering which areas of the deck were less exposed to shifting [5].
In 2018 Puisa addressed the gap between stowage planning and fire safety by formulating a MIP
model for the RSSP problem focusing on fire safety and stability [6]. Puisa redefined the grid
representation by introducing a separate grid for each cargo type for each deck. This reduced
computational complexity but resulted in a lower deck utilisation. The proposed MIP model was
solved to optimality for small to medium-sized instances using a commercial solver. However,
as complexity increases with the dimensionality of the vessel and cargo, the model could not be
used to solve industry-sized instances.
In 2020 Hansen et al. proposed an improvement to their previous work by defining constraints
which explicitly accommodated for shifting. However, due to the complexity of the new con-
straints and sets, the model could not be solved using a commercial solver other than for small
instances.
Thus, an Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS) heuristic was proposed
[7]. The heuristic yielded feasible and practical stowage plans with few shifts but did not take
stability considerations into account. More recently, research has taken a sustainable view on
the RSSP by minimising the ballast water necessary to ensure stability of the ship [2]. Jia et
al. proposed a MIP model which used a simpler grid representation since cargo was assumed
to be standardised. The results showed a significant reduction in ballast water and thereby a
reduction in fuel consumption.
Common for all the above-mentioned papers is that they all consider the demand to be available
at the time of planning. In reality, only some cargo bookings have arrived at the terminal when
loading operations start. Main et al. proposed a new formulation of the RSSP, namely the
Dynamic RORO Ship Stowage Planning (DRSSP) problem which takes the arrival time of cargo
into account and uses a weighted objective function to minimise the trade-off between cargo
revenue and fuel cost [8]. The model aims at scheduling the loading sequence of cargo at each
port considering their fixed arrival times in order to decrease the time spent on handling and
rehandling cargo. Even though it is assumed that not all freight is available at the time of
3
==PAGE:10==
planning, the proposed model is still deterministic and uses fixed arrival times. It does therefore
not fully utilise the uncertainties related to the arrival of cargo. In table 2.1, a brief overview of
the characteristics of the mentioned papers as well as this thesis can be seen.
To our knowledge, the uncertainties in RORO stowage planning have not yet been addressed.
There are some studies investigating the uncertainties in the container shipping industry but
the literature is still quite sparse. Christensen et al. [9] and Meng et al. [10] both addressed
the need for stochastic models to handle uncertain cargo demand.
Christensen proposed a
multi-stage stochastic model for the cargo-mix problem with the aim of determining optimal
cargo compositions to optimise revenue on a liner service. The compact formulation proved
too complex to solve and a rolling horizon-based matheuristic was instead developed with good
results. Meng et al. focused on the strategic level and proposed a two-stage model for the short-
term liner ship fleet planning problem given uncertain demand. The model was solved using
decomposition methods. Li et al. [11] addressed the issue of container weight uncertainties in
the multi-port stowage planning problem. A stochastic programming model was outlined, but
since the problem could not be solved in the current form, the model was transformed into both
a robust optimisation model and a chance-constrained model. It was still not possible to solve
all cases, so a heuristic was designed to solve the stochastic chance-constrained model.
Stowage planning problems can be seen as special types of 2D bin packing problems [5]. Packing
problems occur in many different industries and the literature on deterministic packing problems
is extensive. Stochastic models have also been proposed for a range of problems considering the
weight, size or profit of an item as uncertain. It has, however, proved diﬀicult to generalise
findings in packing problems to RORO stowage problems due to increased complexity in the
way cargo enters and exits the deck among other things and we will therefore not go further
into this.
As can be seen from these few examples, solving stochastic problems can present a significant
challenge and alternative approaches are usually necessary. The appropriate solution approach
is very problem specific and depends on how the problem is modelled.
Papers
Cargo
Objective
Port
Deck
Arrivals
Stability
Optional
Mandatory
Cargo revenue
Ballast water
Shifting
Fuel consumption
Singe pair port
Multiple ports
Single deck
Multiple decks
Deterministic
Stochastic
Øvstebø et al. [4]
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Hansen et al. [5]
*
*
*
*
Puisa [6]
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Hansen et al. [7]
*
*
*
*
Jia et al. [2]
*
*
*
*
*
Main et al. [8]
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
This thesis
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Table 2.1: Brief overview of the literature related to RORO stowage planning inspired by [12]
4
==PAGE:11==
3
Modelling under Uncertainty
This project examines the use of stochastic programming to optimise the stowage planning
process for RORO ships. The aim of this chapter is to provide a general understanding of the
methods used in the project including two-stage stochastic programs. Lastly, a brief introduction
to metaheuristics is presented since a VNS-inspired heuristic is proposed as a solution method.
In many situations, decisions might need to be made before important information is available
or there might be some uncertainty in the data. This could be information regarding demand,
costs or quality which are either completely unavailable or only estimates. Common practice
is to learn what you can about these parameters, use the expected values as input and then
apply sensitivity analysis to determine how critical the parameters are to the solution [13]. The
deterministic model with expected values can be a good base case if the solution is stable relative
to the parameter variations. However, deterministic models cannot propose solutions which use
the variability and can at most find solutions that are optimal for some fixed scenarios. Stowage
planning for RORO ships is typically done with a stowage module, which can be as advanced
as stowage optimisation models or as simple as Excel sheets [2]. This process assumes that
all information is available when the plan has to be drawn up. However, all booked cargo is
usually not available when the ship arrives at the terminal and the exact arrival time and loading
sequence are subject to a lot of uncertainty. An approach could be to generate stowage plans for
different forecasted scenarios. However, solving each forecast separately will give the decision
maker multiple solutions which are only favourable for that specific scenario. In reality, it is not
known how the uncertainty will be realised. Stochastic models utilise the uncertainty and should
therefore produce stowage plans that are flexible to variation in the arrival times. Stochastic
models minimise the expected costs and are therefore well suited to problems that need to be
solved often such as stowage problems.
3.1
Stochastic Optimisation
A simple class of stochastic programs is stochastic linear programs which are very similar to
deterministic linear programs (LP) except that data is represented as discrete or continuous
random variables rather than fixed values.
The model commits to a decision and then the
random event is realised and the outcome can be observed. The goal is to optimise over all
possible values of the random variable and find the solution which performs best on average.
The model optimises expected return which is less appropriate if it is a one-time decision since the
decision maker might be unlucky and observe very unfavourable realisations of the uncertainty.
Here the decision maker’s attitude to risk becomes important. However, if the problem needs
to be solved often, then a stochastic linear program should perform well on average.
An extension of stochastic programs is stochastic recourse programs. Here the decision maker
makes an initial decision before the outcome of the random variable is realised and then a
recourse action can be taken to compensate for the initial decision. An example could be that
initially we decide to invest in a factory with a certain capacity, then the uncertainty in demand
is realised and the decision maker can set up a production schedule. The idea behind recourse
programs is that the decision maker only makes decisions based on the data available at the
time and not on future (unknown) data. The model can include several different stages where
recourse actions can be taken in each stage as new information is revealed. This is called a
multi-stage stochastic program.
Stochastic optimisation utilises that uncertainty in data can be estimated using probability
distributions. The uncertain data is described by a random variable and can be both continuous
5
==PAGE:12==
such as stochastic arrival times or discrete such as the demand at an airline. In the deterministic
model, the expected value of the random variable is simply used instead of the distribution.
This is called the expected value program (EV) and results in the expectation of expected-value
solution (EEV) if the EV solution is applied to all scenarios. However, using expected values is
not a guarantee that the model performs well on average since the solution is only optimal for
the expected values. In practice, there is zero probability that these values will be realised and
the program does not actually use the information about uncertainty.
If the possible outcomes of the random variables are represented as scenarios, the stochastic
solution can be found by optimising over the scenarios. The complexity of the model increases
compared to a deterministic model, but all available information about uncertainty is used.
This approach yields the expected value of recourse solution (RP). For a minimisation problem
RS ≤EEV , which is used to define the value of stochastic solution (VSS):
V SS = EEV −RP
The VSS quantifies the benefit of using stochastic programming compared to using expected
values.
The issue that stochastic programs try to address, is that the decision maker does not have
perfect information when making decisions. If it was possible to wait until the uncertainty was
resolved before committing to the first decision, the solution could be optimised even further.
This is called the wait-and-see approach and consists of applying the optimal solution when
we know what is going to happen.
In practice, this is not possible since decisions must be
made before the information is known. Using the wait-and-see solutions (WS), the expected
value of perfect information (EVPI) can be defined. For a minimisation problem it holds that
WS ≤RP ≤EEV , and the EVPI can therefore be defined as:
EV PI = RP −WS
The EVPI is the maximum amount the decision maker would be willing to pay to obtain a priori
information.
3.1.1
Two-stage models
The most common stochastic program is a two-stage model which has two decision stages. Many
decision problems are inherently two-stage where first a major long-term decision such as opening
a factory and investing in production equipment needs to be made, and then at a later point the
demand is revealed and the exact production schedule can be decided. First-stage decisions have
to be made prior to the realisation of the uncertainty, and they must therefore be made as an
estimate given the current information. These decisions are known as here-and-now decisions.
The second-stage decisions are made after the uncertainty has become known, and can be used
in a corrective manner to adjust the solution according to the new information [14]. Thus, the
recourse decisions taken in the second stage compensate for the here-and-new decisions.
Except for a few exceptions such as the Newsboy problem [13], stochastic programs require that
the distribution representing the uncertainties takes on finite discrete values called scenarios.
Scenarios are a realisation of the random variable describing the underlying uncertainty in the
problem. Due to the uncertainty in the data, there are different scenarios for how the randomness
will be realised. For the factory example, this could be that the future demand is discretised into
three possible scenarios: low, medium and high, where each scenario has a certain probability
of unfolding. The stage-wise structure of a two-stage stochastic program is illustrated below,
where the scenarios are represented as branches in the scenario tree. Each branch represents a
realisation of the random event which will happen with some probability π.
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.1: A general scenario tree for a two-stage stochastic program
A standard representation for the two-stage stochastic programming model [14] can be formu-
lated as:
min
z = cT x + Eξ[min q(ω)T y(ω)]
(3.1)
s.t. Ax = b
(3.2)
T(ω)x + W(ω)y(ω) = h(ω)
∀ω ∈Ω
(3.3)
x ≥0
(3.4)
y(ω) ≥0
∀ω ∈Ω
(3.5)
where x and y(ω) are the decision variables for the first and second stage respectively with
a second-stage decision variable for each scenario ω ∈Ω. The random vector ξ describes the
uncertain data for T, W, h and q. The matrix T contains the stochastic influence factors, W is
the recourse matrix which describes the reaction after uncertainty is revealed, h is the stochastic
requirements, and lastly q is the stochastic costs. The realisation of the uncertainty from ξ is
obtained in a scenario, ω, which is contained in the set of all scenarios, Ω.
The objective function of the model has a first stage and a recourse part. The cost of the first-
stage decisions is described by cT x, and Eξ[min q(ω)T y(ω)] is the recourse function expressing
the expected value of the outcome of the second-stage decisions over all the scenarios.
It is defined by the Law of Large Numbers [15] that when the second-stage data ξ can be modelled
as a random vector with a known distribution, and the process repeats itself, then the average
of the total cost will converge to the expectation of the recourse function [15]. The expectation
can therefore be written as a weighted sum over the scenarios, and as the number of scenarios
is finite this corresponds to writing the deterministic equivalent of the stochastic optimisation
problem. As each scenario, ω, has a probability πω of being realised, the recourse part of the
objective function can be expressed as
Eξ[min q(ω)T y(ω)] =
∑
ω∈Ω
π(ω)q(ω)T y(ω)
Thus, the deterministic equivalent objective function for the two-stage stochastic model can be
7
==PAGE:14==
written as
min
z = cT x +
∑
ω∈Ω
π(ω)q(ω)T y(ω)
(3.6)
The set of constraints 3.3 and 3.5 are scenario-dependent, which means that there is a constraint
and variable for each scenario. The model complexity will increase with the number of scenarios.
The quality of the approximation of the objective function increases when more scenarios are
included in the stochastic program [15]. Generating scenario trees for a stochastic program and
deciding on a number of scenarios is a key modelling choice and will be discussed in later chapters.
3.2
Metaheuristic
A stochastic program is an exact method, and it guarantees to find a proven optimal solution
if enough time is provided. However, it is often the case that the exact methods cannot find a
solution within what is considered a reasonable time frame. An alternative solution method can
therefore be used to find good solutions while still having an acceptable computational time.
Metaheuristics are examples of such solution methods and they often perform robust searches
of the solution space [16]. A metaheuristic applies problem-specific knowledge and high-level
strategies which makes it capable of finding high-quality solutions. It cannot be guaranteed nor
proved that a metaheuristic will find the global optimum, and one is only certain of the solution
being a local optimum. Many different metaheuristic frameworks exist including search heuris-
tics which are popular for many applications. Research has shown that Variable Neighbourhood
Search (VNS) finds excellent approximations to MIP models, and it is frequently applied in the
fields of scheduling and packing where it has proven to find high-quality solutions [17].
3.2.1
Variable Neighbourhood Search
VNS is first proposed by Mladenović and Hansen in 1997 [17]. The idea behind the VNS heuris-
tic is to systematically change neighbourhoods by first finding a local optimum and thereafter
using a perturbation phase to escape the current basin of attraction and explore another neigh-
bourhood structures. The VNS framework is developed to utilise three facts [17]:
1. A local optimum in one neighbourhood is not necessarily also a local optimum in another
neighbourhood
2. A global optimum is a local optimum in all possible neighbourhoods
3. For many problems, a local minimum in one neighbourhood is relatively close to the local
minimum in another neighbourhood
Especially the third fact is interesting as it is often not known which local optima are close to
one another. It is therefore important to perform an organised neighbourhood study of the local
optimum such as the one performed in the VNS until a new and better local optimum is found
and the search is moved [18]. The structure of the organised neighbourhood study is presented
below.
8
==PAGE:15==
Algorithm 1 Basic VNS [17]
Input An initial solution x, number of neighbourhood structures kmax, stopping time tmax
Output New solution x
1: t ←0
▷Initialise time
2: while t ≤tmax do
3:
k ←1
▷Initialise neighbourhood
4:
while k < kmax do
5:
x′ ←Shake(x, k)
▷Generates x′ at random from the kth neighbourhood of x
6:
x′′ ←LocalSearch(x′)
▷Performs local search
7:
x, k ←NeighbourhoodChange(x, x′′, k)
▷Changes the neighbourhood
8:
end while
9:
t ←CpuTime()
10: end while
11: return x
The basic VNS (BVNS) combines both the deterministic and stochastic changes of a neigh-
bourhood and uses a predefined sequence of neighbourhood structures. A stochastic phase is
included by randomly creating a new solution x′ within the kth neighbourhood structure. This
is performed in the Shake operation, where the perturbation forces the algorithm to move into
a new area of the neighbourhood and thereby escape the local optimum. The deterministic part
of the BVNS is the local search which finds a local optimum in the current neighbourhood struc-
ture. When performing local search either the first descent heuristic (first improvement strategy)
or the steepest descent heuristic (best improvement strategy) is used. The first descent is less
computationally heavy and can therefore be useful for large problems while the steepest descent
heuristic might find better solutions. The NeighbourhoodChange function changes the neigh-
bourhood by comparing the incumbent solution with the new solution obtained after having
performed local search in the kth neighbourhood. If the new solution has a better objective
value, then the incumbent value is updated, and k is reset. Otherwise, the next neighbourhood
in the sequence is explored. The neighbourhood improvements are continued until all neigh-
bourhood structures have been visited, and then if the time limit has not been reached the
neighbourhood searches are conducted once more.
9
==PAGE:16==
4
Stowage Planning for RORO Ships
Stowage planning is an important operational decision in RORO shipping and it is a key factor in
ensuring eﬀicient port operations and reducing turnaround time for vessels in port. This chapter
will give an introduction to the issues related to RORO stowage planning and the problem this
project attempts to solve.
RORO ships usually operate on predefined routes similar to liner shipping networks and make
port calls where cargo is either loaded or unloaded. These routes are often from a supply region
where cargo is loaded to a demand region where cargo is discharged. At each supply port there is
a known number of cargo bookings. A cargo booking consists of a number of vehicles with a given
size, weight and destination port. In some cases, such as a carrier purely transporting cars, the
vehicle specifications will not vary greatly and it makes sense to consider cargo as homogeneous
entities. Most often the specifications will vary from cargo to cargo, and this project therefore
considers cargo bookings as heterogeneous but vehicles within a booking as homogeneous with
known size and weight. Cargo is often divided into two categories: Mandatory cargo which the
carrier is obligated to transport due to contractual obligations, and optional cargo which the
carrier can choose to bring to generate additional revenue. This project assumes that all cargo is
optional, and a cargo booking is therefore not required to be loaded and shipped. Furthermore,
as cargo is optional not all vehicles in a booking have to be transported.
Figure 4.1: Overview of RORO ship1
When cargo is loaded it is rolled onto the ship using a ramp and then placed on one of the decks
of the ship. RORO ships usually have several decks of various heights that are accessible through
ramps which is illustrated in figure 4.1 where an overview of a RORO ship can be seen. On each
deck there is a single exit/entry point which all cargo must pass through when loaded or un-
loaded. This complicates what would otherwise have been a simpler packing problem since there
must be a path leading from the entry point to the chosen position on deck. If the path is blocked
by another vehicle, then this must be shifted to another position or temporarily discharged which
can be both time-consuming and complicated if the deck utilisation is high. Creating eﬀicient
stowage plans which reduce shifts and allow easy loading and unloading procedures is therefore
a key aspect of stowage planning. Another important factor is the seaworthiness of a vessel,
which is especially important when considering a ship with multiple decks. If too much cargo is
placed on one side, in the front or in the back of the ship then the vessel becomes unstable and
can tilt. If too much cargo is placed on the upper decks, then the vessel is more sensitive to the
sidewise stability [4]. Before departure a loading computer checks whether a vessel is seaworthy
by calculating the stability of the ship. If the stability requirements are not met, a new stowage
plan must be formulated or the ship must take in more ballast water to be stabilised [2]. The
1Source: https://www.walleniuswilhelmsen.com
10
==PAGE:17==
last option should be minimised since it involves taking on excess weight which increases fuel
consumption. This project simplifies the problem by focusing on a single deck representation of
a RORO ship, and it is therefore not essential to include stability considerations in the problem.
Cancellations and no-shows are very common in the shipping industry since the pricing strategy
does not penalise customers if the cargo does not show up as scheduled. This means that in
practice, cargo arrives at the port over time and all bookings are not readily available when
loading is scheduled to start. The decision maker is therefore faced with the problem of either
waiting for cargo that might not show up or departing for the next port call. Therefore, stowage
planning must also take the arrival time of cargo into consideration.
If the decision maker
chooses to wait for the cargo, then the ship must increase the sailing speed such that it can
still arrive as scheduled. If the ship does not wait for the delayed cargo, then it can sail at a
lower speed. When a vessel sails at a lower speed the fuel consumption is reduced which likewise
results in a lower CO2 emission. The main factors controlling the fuel consumption are the size
of the ship and the cruising speed where the consumption increases exponentially with the speed
[19] which makes slow steaming an attractive strategy. However, there is a lower limit on the
speed which can be either due to technical reasons or because it results in unacceptable service
levels. For vessels with a fixed schedule, the turnaround time in port will decide how much time
can be spent sailing to the next port and consequently the fuel costs of the sailing leg.
An estimation of the arrival time might be known, but there is still a high degree of uncer-
tainty especially since stowage planning considers multiple port calls where there can be days
or weeks between each port. The longer the time horizon is, the less information is available
to the decision maker, but decisions still need to be made about what to do with the available
cargo and when to depart for the next port. The stowage plan can be revised and updated
later but the decisions made at the planning time about where to stow the available cargo will
affect the operations in the next port. This project introduces a deterministic model inspired
by Main et al.
[8] to solve the Dynamic RORO Ship Stowage Planning (DRSSP) problem.
The deterministic model uses fixed arrival times to represent the delays in arrivals. However,
this does not model the uncertainties accurately, and a stochastic version of the DRSSP using
stochastic arrival times is therefore introduced. The overall goal of the model is to minimise the
relationship between fuel consumption costs and the revenue gained from transporting cargo by
finding the right balance between staying in port to load more cargo and departing sooner to
save fuel. This can also be seen as a compromise between revenue and GHG emissions since the
amount of CO2 emitted from a ship is directly related to the consumption of bunker fuel.
4.1
Representation
The DRSSP problem only considers one deck which can be represented as a grid consisting of I
rows and J columns in which a grid cell (i, j) is an area where a vehicle can be stowed. A grid
representation is chosen as it allows for more flexibility than dividing the deck into lanes. The
representation becomes more flexible and realistic as the grid resolution increases, but this also
increases the complexity of the problem as there are more positions to consider. All the grid
cells are assumed to be of the same size. The cell (1, 1) is located in the bottom left corner of
the grid, corresponding to the stern of the ship. The deck layout describing where pillars are
placed and the shape of the bow etc. is created by indicating that some cells are unusable. It
is assumed that vehicles access the deck using a ramp connected to the port terminal, and this
ramp is utilised when the ship is in port. Therefore, the ramp area has to be clear during the
loading and unloading processes, but during the voyage it is possible to stow cargo in this area.
If the problem concerned a multi-deck ship, the same would hold for the ramps connecting the
decks as these ramps can be raised and lowered when the ship is in port.
11
==PAGE:18==
Cargo is modelled as rectangular objects, and when a vehicle is loaded, the lower left corner of
the vehicle is anchored in a cell (i, j). A vehicle is placed with its front facing the bow which is
the most common way of stowing vehicles on a RORO ship [7]. As cargo bookings differ in size,
some vehicles occupy more cells than others. A vehicle anchored in cell (i, j) will occupy the
space from i to i + SL
c −1 and j to j + SW
c
−1. The constants SL
c and SW
c
are the length and
width of a vehicle from cargo c measured in grid cells and can be calculated as SL
c =
⌈
(V L
c +B)|I|
DL
⌉
and SW
c
=
⌈
(V W
c
+B)|J|
DW
⌉
[7]. V L
c
and V W
c
are the actual length and width of the vehicle, DL
and DW are the length and width of the deck, B is the minimum clearance between stowed
vehicles, and |I| and |J| are the number of rows and columns in the grid representation. A valid
anchor position is defined as any cell where the cargo can be anchored without conflicting with
the dimensions of the deck or any unusable areas. It is assumed that vehicles cannot share cells
- even if a vehicle only uses part of the cell no other vehicle can be placed in that cell. This is
an overestimation of the area used, but it ensures that the required clearance between stowed
vehicles is taken into account.
A possible representation of the grid layout can be seen in figure 4.2 where it can be seen that
even though the truck only uses a small proportion of some cells, the whole area is coloured
indicating that no other vehicle can use this area while it is occupied. The bow of the ship is
framed by the grey cells where the grey colour indicates that cells are unusable. The exit area
is indicated by the X.
Figure 4.2: A possible grid representation for a RORO ship where grey cells are unusable areas
and X represents the exit area
It is assumed that ports are separated into a loading and unloading region, which means that
the first ports are all loading ports and the last ports are unloading ports. A stowage plan
therefore has to be planned for each sailing leg between the loading ports. During the sailing leg
between the last loading port and the first unloading port all vehicles are stowed on the deck.
12
==PAGE:19==
An illustration of a possible stowage plan for a voyage with four ports can be seen below. Here
the loading region consists of ports 1 and 2, and the unloading region is ports 3 and 4. Cargo
1 and 2 are loaded in port 1, and cargo 3 is loaded in port 2. Both cargo 1 and 3 are unloaded
in port 3, and it is therefore only cargo 2 which is being transported all the way to port 4. The
figure shows the stowage plan for each sailing leg.
Figure 4.3: A possible stowage plan during each sailing leg
If a vehicle is blocking the path of another vehicle from/ to the exit area during the loading and
unloading processes, it is possible to shift the vehicle, but it will be placed in the same position
afterwards. Minimising the rehandling of cargo is an important aspect of the DRSSP and it is
therefore necessary to examine how shifting can be represented in the problem.
4.2
Rehandling of Cargo
There are different ways of representing shifting. Hansen et al. [7] use arc flows to represent how
cargo moves in the grid and when a vehicle should be shifted. The path of a vehicle is found by
assigning demand and supply to the different squares to represent whether the vehicle is moving
from or to that square or simply transiting through. The use of arc flow and supply/demand
gives optimal flexibility as a vehicle can have multiple ways of moving around the deck and is
not restricted to a certain path. However, this representation is computationally heavy due to
the large number of constraints and the exponential growth in constraints with the size of the
grid and the number of cargo. A simplification is therefore implemented where only a single
shortest path from a feasible anchor position to the exit area is considered for each cargo type.
A shift will occur when vehicle d is placed on vehicle c’s path to and from its positions if there
is a conflict during loading or unloading.
A stowage plan is feasible even if vehicle d occupies a position which is used by vehicle c during
its loading or unloading process. In this case vehicle d has to be shifted in order for vehicle c to
pass. Cargo will need to be rehandled in two situations:
1. If cargo c is loaded prior to cargo d and needs to be unloaded before d, then d has to be
shifted if it blocks the exit route for c.
2. If cargo c is loaded before cargo d and blocks the access to the position where d is to be
stowed, then c will have to be shifted in order for d to enter.
13
==PAGE:20==
If cargo c and d are loaded in the same port, then it is assumed that neither has to be shifted
as they will then be stowed in an order where there will be no conflicts between the two cargo
bookings.
Restricting cargo to enter and exit with predefined paths is of course a limitation, and will
cause the model to overestimate shifting. If the neighbouring squares are unused, the vehicles
would simply use this path. However, this representation should favour placing vehicles from
the same cargo in lanes which is common practice. Using the shortest path formulation will
reduce flexibility, but it also decreases the complexity of the model significantly.
4.2.1
Computing the shortest paths
Since vehicles follow fixed paths when entering and exiting the deck, these paths are calculated
for each cargo type and each feasible anchor position. The paths are determined by finding
the shortest path between the ramp and a given coordinate in the grid. Not all positions are
usable for all cargo types due to size differences, and the paths are therefore computed for each
cargo booking individually. Figure 4.4 shows an example of how the paths are used to determine
shifting.
Figure 4.4: To the left, a possible stowage plan at a port where cargo C1 has to be unloaded. In
the middle, the shortest paths for each of the vehicles in C1. To the right, shifting the vehicle
from cargo C2 is necessary when unloading C1.
To determine the paths, the grid can be represented as a graph where each possible anchor
position is a vertex. Two vertices are connected if cargo c can move from one cell to the other
in the grid. The paths can then be found by applying a standard shortest path algorithm using
the node corresponding to the exit square as the source node. Cargo might be too wide or tall
for the exit square to be a valid position due to unusable areas. In these cases, the source node
is simply adjusted by moving the exit square such that a path can be found. To determine the
shortest path from each square to the exit, the Bellman-Ford algorithm is applied. The network
is acyclic so Dijkstra’s algorithm could also be used. However, as the paths are precomputed
the longer running time is not a significant issue. The algorithm returns a path from the exit
area to each position in the grid, but the paths only contain the anchor positions which would
be used by the cargo. The paths are updated such that all squares used by the cargo are saved,
e.g. if position (i, j) is part of the path then so are all positions with length-coordinates between
i and i + SL
c −1 and width-coordinates between j and j + SW
c
−1. This process is repeated for
each cargo booking and the resulting set of paths can be used as input to the DRSSP model.
14
==PAGE:21==
5
Mathematical Modelling
In this chapter, the deterministic and stochastic models for the DRSSP are presented. The
models rely on some assumptions and modelling choices which are presented and discussed in
the following. Hereafter the deterministic model, inspired by current research by Main et al.,
is introduced. Lastly, the generation of scenarios and the stochastic model are presented in
sections 5.3 and 5.4.
5.1
Modelling Assumptions
The models rely on some key assumptions which are made in order to simplify the problem.
The DRSSP problem deals with minimising the turnaround time in port such that the ship can
slow steam between two port destinations. A vessel has restrictions regarding speed such as a
minimum speed and a maximum speed that it can sail at given the engine design. The lower
and upper speed bound used in this model is estimated based on average speeds for RORO and
small-sized container vessels.
The fuel consumption of a vessel is affected by more than just the speed such as weather and
ship conditions. The equation used is a simplification proposed by Main [8] which allows the
fuel consumption to be estimated using the design speed and design consumption. The design
consumption is the fuel consumption that the engine was designed to have. Here we use a design
consumption of 18.8 tonne/day and a design speed of 12 knots.
Fuel consumption =
(
speed
design speed
)3
· design consumption
However, since both the speed and the fuel consumption are variables in the model this would
be a non-linear calculation, and it is therefore transformed into a linear function. This is done
by discretising the speed into a suﬀiciently large number of values between the minimum and
maximum speed and finding the fuel consumption for the different speed values. Figure 5.1
shows the relationship between speed and fuel consumption after it has been transformed into
a linear function. The time it takes to sail a sailing leg is directly related to the speed and the
distance of the voyage. This function is also discretised for modelling purposes.
The discretisation is to some extent a limitation as the model has to choose one of the discrete
points rather than the continuous value, but it is a necessity such that the model remains linear.
Figure 5.1: Fuel consumption as a function of speed discretised into 20,000 points.
15
==PAGE:22==
When a vessel slow steams it takes a longer time to sail the sailing leg, and it is assumed that
a vessel should be able to slow steam if all cargo bookings arrived on time and were loaded as
scheduled. To model this, a buffer is added to the sailing schedule such that it is possible to
handle the booked cargo if all arrive on time while still slow steaming.
The last assumptions have to do with how shifting is handled in the model. It is assumed that
once a vehicle is placed in its position, it has the same position throughout the whole journey.
The vehicle can be shifted to allow for other vehicles to enter or exit the deck, but it is placed
in the same position afterwards.
Shifting a vehicle takes time as it delays the loading and
discharging operations. It is assumed that for every shift the time spent in port is increased
by twice the handling time since the vehicle has to be discharged and reloaded. It is therefore
desirable to avoid rehandling of cargo, which can be enforced by penalising every time a shifting
operation is performed. The penalty will not only be an increase in the time spent in port
but also a small cost for every shift performed. This will provide incentives for finding feasible
stowage plans with few or no shifts.
5.2
Deterministic Model
The deterministic model for the DRSSP problem assumes that arrival times are fixed and is
used as a base-case model. The DRSSP problem is a multi-objective optimisation problem as
the model has two optimisation goals, namely maximising revenue from shipped cargo and min-
imising fuel consumption and CO2 emissions of the voyage. These two objectives are conflicting
which means that the improvement of one objective comes at the expense of the other. The
revenue will be increased when more cargo is loaded onto the vessel, which will increase the time
spent in port. This will have a negative effect on fuel consumption as the sailing speed must be
increased in order for the vessel to arrive as scheduled. Likewise, if the sailing speed should be
at its minimum, the number of cargoes to be loaded will decrease. The α-parameter controls
the trade-off between revenue and fuel consumption, and when α = 1 only the fuel consumption
is considered, and the ship will leave port immediately to minimise fuel consumption without
bringing any cargo. If α = 0 then only revenue is considered, and the decision will be to stow as
much cargo as possible regardless of shifting, while still respecting that the ship cannot sail faster
than a given maximum speed. The objective function should only be considered an expression
of explicit costs if α = 0.5. For other α-levels it should just be viewed as a target function since
the trade-off between cost and revenue will be affected by the α-parameter.
The following sets, parameters and decision variables are defined for the deterministic model:
Sets
C
Set of cargo
P
Set of ports
I
Set of rows
J
Set of columns
N
Set of squares where cargo can be placed, N ⊆I × J where squares are
represented by the pair (i, j)
Nc
Set of squares where lower left corner of cargo c ∈C may be placed, Nc ⊆N
Qijc
Set of positions where placing cargo c would cover position (i, j)
Bij
Set of neighbouring squares to position (i, j)
P L
Set of loading ports, P L ⊂P
P L
c
Loading port p ∈P of cargo c ∈C
P U
c
Unloading port p ∈P of cargo c ∈C
P LU
Set of ports where shifting may occur P LU = P\{1, |P|}
16
==PAGE:23==
P LU
c
Set of loading and unloading ports for cargo c, P LU
c
= {P L
c , P U
c }
CR
p
Set of cargo to be loaded or unloaded at port p ∈P
CN
p
Set of cargo not to be loaded or unloaded at port p ∈P
CRL
p
Set of cargo loaded at port p ∈P
W
Set of discrete points for fuel consumption
SU
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting conflicts might occur during unloading
SL
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting conflicts might occur during loading
SPijc
Set of squares in path from exit to position (i, j) ∈Nc for cargo c ∈C
Parameters
α
Weight between fuel consumption and revenue
CFuel
Cost of bunker fuel
T mean
p
Time sailing from port p to p + 1 at the design speed of the vessel
CRev
Revenue per cargo
d
Small penalty for shifting cargo
Rc
Number of vehicles in cargo c ∈C
M
Big M
hc
Handling time for each vehicle in cargo c ∈C
Acp
Arrival time of cargo c in port p
Cconsumption
w
Coeﬀicient for fuel consumption using discrete point w
Ctime
p,w
Coeﬀicient for travelling time between port p and p + 1 using discrete point w
T slow
p
Duration when sailing at minimum speed from port p to port p + 1
T fast
p
Duration when sailing at maximum speed from port p to port p + 1
The model includes the Big M notation in order to bound some of the constraints. The Big M
is set to a suﬀiciently large value. The following decision variables are used in the model:
Decision variables
xijc
{
1
If a vehicle from cargo c is placed in cell (i, j)
0
Otherwise
ypcd
{
1
If cargo c is stowed before cargo d in port p ∈P L
0
Otherwise
δijcp
{
1
If cargo c is shifted at position (i, j) in port p ∈P LU
0
Otherwise
STcp
Starting time for loading cargo c in port P L
c
Deptp
Departure time for port p
Bp
Fuel consumption between port p and p + 1
TTSp
The actual time it takes to sail between port p and p + 1 where T fast
p
≤TSSp ≤T slow
p
λw,p
Used to select a discrete interval for each point w between port p and p + 1
The model can then be formulated as follows:
Objective
min
α
∑
p∈P
CFuel · Bp · T mean
p
−(1 −α)
(
∑
c∈C
(i,j)∈Nc
CRev · xijc −
∑
p∈P LU
c∈CN
p
(i,j)∈Nc
d · δijcp
)
(5.1)
17
==PAGE:24==
Constraints
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc ≤Rc
∀c ∈C
(5.2)
∑
c∈C
(i′,j′)∈Qijc
xi′j′c ≤1
∀(i, j) ∈N
(5.3)
δijcp ≤xijc
∀p ∈P LU, c ∈CN
p , (i, j) ∈Nc
(5.4)
ypcd + ypdc = 1
∀p ∈P L, c ∈CRL
p
, d ∈CRL
p
, c ̸= d
(5.5)
STcp + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc) −M(1 −ypcd) ≤STdp
∀p ∈P L, c ∈CRL
p
, d ∈CRL
p
, c ̸= d
(5.6)
STcp ≥Acp −M(1 −xijc)
∀c ∈C, p = P L
c , (i, j) ∈Nc
(5.7)
STcp ≤M
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc
∀c ∈C, p = P L
c
(5.8)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijc
(i′,j′)∈Qkld
(
xi′j′d −δi′j′dp
)
≤M · (1 −xijc)
∀(c, d) ∈SU, (i, j) ∈Nc, p = P U
c
(5.9)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
(
xi′j′c −δi′j′cp
)
≤M · (1 −xijd)
∀(c, d) ∈SL, (i, j) ∈Nd, p = P L
d
(5.10)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
xi′j′c ≤M(2 −xijd −ypcd)
∀p ∈P L, c ∈CRL
p
, d ∈CRL
p
, (i, j) ∈Nd, c ̸= d
(5.11)
Deptp ≥STcp + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc)
∀c ∈C, p = P L
c
(5.12)
Deptp = T slow
p
−TTSp −
∑
c∈CN
p
(i,j)∈Nc
2 · δijcp · hc
∀p ∈P LU
(5.13)
Deptp = T slow
p
−TTSp
∀p ∈{1, |P|}
(5.14)
Bp =
∑
w∈W
Cconsumption
w
· λw,p
∀p ∈P
(5.15)
TTSp =
∑
w∈W
Ctime
p,w · λw,p
∀p ∈P
(5.16)
∑
w∈W
λw,p = 1
∀p ∈P
(5.17)
xijc ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, (i, j) ∈Nc
(5.18)
δijcp ∈{0, 1}
∀p ∈P LU, c ∈CN
p , (i, j) ∈Nc
(5.19)
STcp ∈R+
∀c ∈C, p ∈P L
(5.20)
ypcd ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, d ∈C, c ̸= d, p ∈P L
(5.21)
Bp ∈R+
∀p ∈P
(5.22)
TTSp ∈R+
∀p ∈P
(5.23)
Deptp ∈R+
∀p ∈P
(5.24)
λw,p ∈{0, 1}
∀w ∈W, p ∈P
(5.25)
18
==PAGE:25==
The objective function (5.1) minimises fuel consumption while maximising the revenue from
cargoes. The α-parameter controls how each objective is weighted.
• Constraint (5.2) ensures that at most Rc vehicles are placed on board. This allows for all
or part of the cargo to be left at port.
• Constraint (5.3) ensures that cargo cannot overlap when placed on the deck.
• Shifting is allowed but a vehicle can only be shifted if it is placed on the ship. This is
ensured by constraint (5.4).
• Constraint (5.5) ensures precedence such that if both cargo c and d are loaded in port p,
either c is loaded before d or vice versa.
• Constraints (5.6 - 5.8) control the starting time for handling cargo such that if cargo c is
loaded before cargo d in port p, then cargo d cannot be loaded before the loading process
of cargo c has finished. Furthermore, the loading process of cargo cannot begin before it
has arrived, and if it is not brought onboard the ship, there will be no starting time for
that cargo.
• Constraints (5.9) and (5.10) are shortest path constraints, and they ensure that if cargo is
placed on the shortest path used by any other cargo to enter or exit the deck, then a shift
will occur.
• Constraint (5.11) ensures that if c is loaded before d in port p, then c cannot block the
path for d.
• Constraints (5.12 - 5.14) control the departure time of the vessel from port p, such that
the vessel cannot depart until all cargo has been loaded. In the ports where shifting might
occur, the departure time is also dependent on how long it takes to shift cargo.
• Constraints (5.15) and (5.16) calculate the fuel consumption needed and the time it takes
to sail from port p to p + 1 based on two different discretised functions.
• Constraint (5.17) ensures that only one point of the linear functions is picked for each port
in constraint (5.15) and (5.16) respectively.
• Constraints (5.19 - 5.25) declare the variables used in this model.
Constraints (5.4) and (5.8) bound the δ-variable and the starting time variable. These bounding
constraints are not strictly necessary as they do not affect the objective function, but they are
implemented to ease the interpretation of the results.
5.3
Scenario Generation
The deterministic model assumes that all arrival times and possible delays are known in advance.
In practice, arrival times are uncertain, and the solution found by the deterministic model is
therefore not realistic to implement. The arrival times are stochastic and they can therefore not
be represented with certainty but they can be modelled under different assumptions. If n cargo
bookings are delayed then these uncertainties can be represented as an n-dimensional random
variable where the delays can be any values between 0 (the cargo arrives on time) and ∞+
(the delay is greater than the modelling horizon). The realisation of the uncertainties is then
captured in the different scenarios modelled. The arrival times are continuous variables which
mean that in theory there can be an infinite number of scenarios each with a very low probability
of being realised. The stochastic processes therefore need to be quantified into a finite number
of scenarios while still capturing the original distribution. Even though the scenario tree should
be close to the original distribution it does not have to match all aspects of the distribution
19
==PAGE:26==
in a statistical sense [13]. It is important to understand which distributional properties that
are critical for the optimisation problem, and these should be the properties where the scenario
tree matches the true distribution. The number of scenarios needed increases with the number
of properties the discretisation should match. The key element is that the stochastic process
should be discretised such that it is not driving the optimisation problem [13]. For the DRSSP
problem, it means that the stowage plan should depend on the problem itself and how it is
modelled rather than the specific scenarios generated.
5.3.1
Discretising the stochastic process
The true distribution describing the arrival time of the bookings is not known and data is not
available to analyse past patterns. However, given that the arrivals can be seen as independent
delays an Exponential distribution is used, such that X ∼Exp(λ). The distribution is based
on some strong assumptions, and it is diﬀicult to say how closely it represents reality without
access to more data. Considering the scope and goal of this thesis it is deemed acceptable for
the examined problem. The distribution has a mean of λ = 120, indicating that on average
a booking arrives 120 minutes late. This is a rough estimate based on discussions with our
supervisors and their domain knowledge of the industry.
It is now possible to model the arrival times for the cargo. We assume that around 50% of cargo
is available at the terminal when the ship arrives and that the remaining cargo arrives according
to the exponential distribution. The bookings are assumed to be independent, and a delay can
therefore simply be drawn from the distribution for each cargo. If the delay results in an arrival
time which is beyond the defined time horizon (the departure of the ship), it is truncated to fit
within the time horizon.
The scenarios are generated by sampling from the distribution meaning that only a finite set of
all the possible realisations are considered. Each scenario has the same probability in the scenario
tree depending on the number of scenarios generated. Thus if N scenarios are generated each
scenario has a probability of 1/N. Sampling is the most straightforward method to create a
scenario tree and has the nice property that it should converge to the true distribution in the
limit [13]. Shapiro provides theoretical proof for the required sample size necessary to solve
the true problem with a chosen probability and accuracy [20]. It shows that the size required
to guarantee a reasonable quality solution is often extremely high for practical problems [13].
This raises one of the important considerations of stochastic programming: How many scenarios
should be generated? The number of scenarios depends both on the scenario generation process
and the model that uses them. Using pure sampling, it can be diﬀicult to capture tail events
with a limited number of sampled scenarios since it is unlikely to sample from the tail of the
distribution especially when the dimensionality increases.
However, in practice the method
might still lead to good results, but this needs to be tested empirically by examining the results
from the optimisation model. We will therefore go more into depth with the quality of the
discretisation and the number of scenarios in section 7.2 after a solution method has been
established.
An alternative approach to sampling is property matching where scenarios are generated to
match a chosen set of statistical properties.
This requires a high level of understanding of
which properties the model reacts to and precise knowledge about the underlying distribution.
However, using complicated methods to match the properties of estimated distribution will not
provide much valuable information for this project as information about the true distribution is
sparse.
20
==PAGE:27==
5.4
Stochastic Programming Model
In this section, a two-stage stochastic programming model is formulated for the DRSSP. The
first stage in the model is related to decisions about where to stow cargo which is available in the
first port, given that it is unknown if and when the other bookings will arrive. The second-stage
decisions are related to the cargo with unknown arrival times. In this stage, the decision maker
also decides when to depart the ports and hereby the speed and fuel consumption of each sailing
leg. It is clear to see that information about the arrival times for cargo will not become available
at the same time. The decision maker will get more information as each booking arrives, and
just as a number of bookings are available in port 1 at the time of planning, so are some bookings
when the vessel arrives at the subsequent loading ports. The problem can therefore be seen as
multistage in nature with potentially as many stages as there are loading ports. However, using
a multistage model will not affect the value of the decisions taken in the first stages, and it
would increase the complexity of the model as the number of decision variables and constraints
explode with the number of stages. We would therefore argue that it is relevant to continue
with two stages. The decisions regarding the delayed cargoes are therefore all merged into the
second stage which covers the entire planning horizon.
The stochastic model is similar to the deterministic model, but additional sets, parameters and
decision variables have been defined to differentiate between stages. The stage of a set S is
indicated by superscript, where S1 indicates that it relates to the first stage and S2 indicates
that it relates to the second stage. Below the sets, parameters and decision variables relevant
beside those defined in section 5.2 are summarised.
Sets
Ω
Set of scenarios ω ∈Ω
C1
Set of cargo bookings which are available at the first loading port C1 ⊆C
C2
Set of cargo bookings where the arrival time is still uncertain C2 ⊆C
C1,N
p
Set of on-time cargo not to be loaded or unloaded at port p
C2,N
p
Set of delayed cargo not to be loaded or unloaded at port p
C1,RL
Set of on-time cargo loaded at port 1
C2,RL
p
Set of delayed cargo loaded at port p
S1,1,U
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting might occur during unloading, and where both
cargo bookings are on-time, S1,1,U ⊆SU
S1,2,U
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting might occur during unloading, and where cargo
c is on time at port 1 and cargo d is delayed, S1,2,U ⊆SU
S2,1,U
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting might occur during unloading, and where cargo
c is delayed and cargo d is on time, S2,1,U ⊆SU
S2,2,U
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting might occur during unloading, and where both
cargo bookings are delayed, S2,2,U ⊆SU
S1,2,L
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting might occur during loading, and where cargo
c is on time and cargo d is delayed, S1,2,L ⊆SL
S2,2,L
Set of cargo pairs (c, d) where shifting might occur during loading, and where both
cargo bookings are delayed, S2,2,L ⊆SL
Note that loading conflicts cannot occur between cargo bookings if both are on time (c ∈C1, d ∈
C1), since it is assumed that cargo cannot be shifted in the same port it is loaded. This also
holds for cargo pairs c ∈C2 and d ∈C1, since delayed cargo cannot be loaded before on-time
cargo. It is therefore not necessary to define S1,1,L and S2,1,L.
Parameters
Aω
cp
Arrival time of cargo c ∈C in port p ∈P in scenario ω ∈Ω
21
==PAGE:28==
Decision variables
First-stage
xijc
{
1
If a vehicle from cargo c ∈C1 is placed in cell (i, j) ∈Nc
0
Otherwise
ycd
{
1
If cargo c ∈C1,RL is stowed before cargo d ∈C1,RL in port 1
0
Otherwise
STc
Starting time for loading cargo c ∈C1 in port 1
Note that the first-stage decision variables are only defined for port 1.
Second-stage
zω
ijc
{
1
If a vehicle from cargo c ∈C2 is placed in cell (i, j) ∈Nc for scenario ω ∈Ω
0
Otherwise
uω
pcd
{
1
If cargo c ∈CRL
p
is stowed before cargo d ∈CRL
p
in port p ∈P L for scenario ω ∈Ω
0
Otherwise
δω
ijcp
{
1
If cargo c ∈C is shifted at position (i, j) ∈Nc in port p ∈P LU for scenario ω ∈Ω
0
Otherwise
ST ω
cp
Starting time for loading cargo c ∈C2 in port P L
c for scenario ω ∈Ω
Deptω
p
Departure time for port p ∈P for scenario ω ∈Ω
Bω
p
Fuel consumption between port p ∈P and p + 1 for scenario ω ∈Ω
TTSω
p
The actual time it takes to sail between port p ∈P and p + 1 for scenario ω ∈Ωwhere
T fast
p
≤TTSω
p ≤T slow
p
λω
w,p
Used to select discrete interval for each point w between port p ∈P and p + 1 for
scenario ω ∈Ω
Objective
min
(5.26)
α
∑
ω∈Ω
p∈P
πω · CFuel · Bω
p · T mean
p
−(1 −α)
(
∑
c∈C1
(i,j)∈Nc
CRev · xijc +
∑
ω∈Ω
πω
(
∑
c∈C2
(i,j)∈Nc
CRev · zω
ijc −
∑
p∈P LU
c∈CN
p
(i,j)∈Nc
d · δω
ijcp
))
Constraints
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc ≤Rc
∀c ∈C1
(5.27)
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
zω
ijc ≤Rc
∀c ∈C2, ω ∈Ω
(5.28)
∑
c1∈C1
(i′,j′)∈Qijc1
xi′j′c1 +
∑
c2∈C2
(i′,j′)∈Qijc2
zω
i′j′c2 ≤1
∀(i, j) ∈N, ω ∈Ω
(5.29)
δω
ijcp ≤xijc
∀p ∈P LU, c ∈C1,N
p
, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω
(5.30)
δω
ijcp ≤zω
ijc
∀p ∈P LU, c ∈C2,N
p
, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω
(5.31)
ycd + ydc = 1
∀c ∈C1,RL, d ∈C1,RL, c ̸= d
(5.32)
uω
pcd + uω
pdc = 1
∀p ∈P L, c ∈CRL
p
, d ∈C2,RL
p
, c ̸= d, ω ∈Ω
(5.33)
22
==PAGE:29==
STc + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc) −M(1 −ycd) ≤STd
∀c ∈C1,RL, d ∈C1,RL, c ̸= d
(5.34)
STc + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc) −M(1 −uω
1,c,d) ≤ST ω
d,1
∀c ∈C1,RL, d ∈C2,RL
1
, ω ∈Ω
(5.35)
ST ω
cp + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
zω
ijc) −M(1 −uω
pcd) ≤ST ω
dp
∀p ∈P L, c ∈C2,RL
p
, d ∈C2,RL
p
, c ̸= d, ω ∈Ω
(5.36)
STc ≥Ac,1 −M(1 −xijc)
∀c ∈C1, (i, j) ∈Nc
(5.37)
ST ω
cp ≥Aω
cp −M(1 −zω
ijc)
∀c ∈C2, p = P L
c , (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω
(5.38)
STc ≤M
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc
∀c ∈C1
(5.39)
ST ω
cp ≤M
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
zω
ijc
∀c ∈C2, p = P L
c , ω ∈Ω
(5.40)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijc
(i′,j′)∈Qkld
xi′j′d −δω
i′j′dp ≤M · (1 −xijc)
∀(c, d) ∈S1,1,U, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω, p = P U
c
(5.41)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijc
(i′,j′)∈Qkld
zω
i′j′d −δω
i′j′dp ≤M · (1 −xijc)
∀(c, d) ∈S1,2,U, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω, p = P U
c
(5.42)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijc
(i′,j′)∈Qkld
xi′j′d −δω
i′j′dp ≤M · (1 −zω
ijc)
∀(c, d) ∈S2,1,U, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω, p = P U
c
(5.43)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijc
(i′,j′)∈Qkld
zω
i′j′d −δω
i′j′dp ≤M · (1 −zω
ijc)
∀(c, d) ∈S2,2,U, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω, p = P U
c
(5.44)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
xi′j′c −δω
i′j′cp ≤M · (1 −zω
ijd)
∀(c, d) ∈S1,2,L, (i, j) ∈Nd, ω ∈Ω, p = P L
d
(5.45)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
zω
i′j′c −δω
i′j′cp ≤M · (1 −zω
ijd)
∀(c, d) ∈S2,2,L, (i, j) ∈Nd, ω ∈Ω, p = P L
d
(5.46)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
xi′j′c ≤M · (2 −xijd −ycd)
∀c ∈C1,RL, d ∈C1,RL, c ̸= d, (i, j) ∈Nd
(5.47)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
xi′j′c ≤M · (2 −zω
ijd −uω
1,c,d)
∀c ∈C1,RL, d ∈C2,RL
1
, c ̸= d, (i, j) ∈Nd, ω ∈Ω
(5.48)
∑
(k,l)∈SPijd
(i′,j′)∈Qklc
zω
i′j′c ≤M · (2 −zω
ijd −uω
pcd)
∀p ∈P L, c ∈C2,RL
p
, d ∈C2,RL
p
, c ̸= d, (i, j) ∈Nd, ω ∈Ω
(5.49)
23
==PAGE:30==
Deptω
1 ≥STc + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
xijc)
∀c ∈C1, ω ∈Ω
(5.50)
Deptω
p ≥ST ω
cp + (hc
∑
(i,j)∈Nc
zω
ijc)
∀c ∈C2, p = P L
c , ω ∈Ω
(5.51)
Deptω
p = T slow
p
−TTSω
p −
∑
c∈CN
p
(i,j)∈Nc
2 · δω
ijcp · hc
∀p ∈P LU, ω ∈Ω
(5.52)
Deptω
p = T slow
p
−TTSω
p
∀p ∈{1, |P|}, ω ∈Ω
(5.53)
Bω
p =
∑
w∈W
Cconsumption
w
· λω
w,p
∀p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.54)
TTSω
p =
∑
w∈W
Ctime
p,w · λω
w,p
∀p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.55)
∑
w∈W
λω
w,p = 1
∀p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.56)
xijc ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C1, (i, j) ∈Nc
(5.57)
zω
ijc ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C2, (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω
(5.58)
δω
ijcp ∈{0, 1}
∀p ∈P LU, c ∈CN
p , (i, j) ∈Nc, ω ∈Ω
(5.59)
STc ∈R+
∀c ∈C1
(5.60)
ST ω
cp ∈R+
∀c ∈C2, p ∈P L, ω ∈Ω
(5.61)
ycd ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C1,RL, d ∈C1,RL, c ̸= d
(5.62)
uω
pcd ∈{0, 1}
∀p ∈P L, c ∈CRL
p
, d ∈CRL
p
, c ̸= d, ω ∈Ω(5.63)
Bω
p ∈R+
∀p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.64)
TTSω
p ∈R+
∀p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.65)
Deptω
p ∈R+
∀p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.66)
λω
w,p ∈{0, 1}
∀w ∈W, p ∈P, ω ∈Ω
(5.67)
The objective (5.26) is the minimisation over the fuel consumption minus the revenue obtained
by transporting cargo. The fuel consumption is scenario-dependent, and it is therefore averaged
over the different scenarios weighted by the likelihood of each scenario. The revenue is split into
two parts: The revenue obtained by taking cargo available at port 1 onboard and the revenue
from the second-stage cargo. The latter includes a small penalty term for every shift. The last
part is also a weighted average over the scenarios.
• Constraints (5.27) and (5.28) ensure that we do not take more vehicles on board for each
booking than the total number of vehicles.
• Constraint (5.29) ensures that cargo cannot overlap i.e. two vehicles cannot use the same
position (i, j).
• Constraints (5.30) and (5.31) bound the δ-variables such that cargo cannot be shifted if it
is not placed on board.
• Constraints (5.32) and (5.33) ensure precedence between cargo bookings, and constraints
(5.34 - 5.36) use this relation to ensure that if cargo c is loaded before cargo d then the
loading process of cargo d cannot begin before cargo c is finished. This constraint must
be defined for all combinations of available and uncertain cargo.
• Constraints (5.37) and (5.38) ensure that the handling process cannot begin before the
24
==PAGE:31==
booking has arrived. The first constraint is defined for the available cargo in port 1, while
the second constraint is defined for the second-stage cargo.
• Constraints (5.39) and (5.40) bound the starting time of cargo such that if cargo is not
transported, then the starting time is restricted to be zero.
• Constraints (5.41 - 5.46) control whether or not cargo is shifted, where the first four
constraints handle the possible conflicts during unloading and the last two handle the
possible conflicts during loading.
• Constraints (5.47 - 5.49) ensure that when two cargo bookings are loaded at the same port
and if d is stowed before c, then cargo d cannot be placed on cargo c’s path to and from
entry. Thus shifting is not allowed for cargo which has just been loaded.
• Constraints (5.50) and (5.51) ensure that the departure time cannot be before all vehicles
have been handled. The first constraint is for the on-time cargo and thus only concerns
port 1, while the second constraint concerns all loading ports.
• Constraints (5.52) and (5.53) balance the departure time with the time it is possible to
spend on the sailing leg. In the first constraint, all ports except the first and last are
considered. In these ports, shifting might occur which will reduce the sailing time. The
second constraint applies only to the first and last ports as no shifting is allowed.
• Constraints (5.54 - 5.56) are very similar to constraints (5.15 - 5.17) in the deterministic
model except they are defined for every scenario.
• Lastly the domains of the variables are defined in (5.57 - 5.67).
As can be seen, the two-stage model is much more extensive than the deterministic model and
it is not expected that it can be used in practice in the current form.
25
==PAGE:32==
6
Solution Method
The stochastic DRSSP model can be solved to optimality for a few small instances only (see table
7.1 for instance characteristics). The number of variables and constraints in the model quickly
becomes intractable for a commercial solver. For realistically sized instances the solver struggles
to even build the model and cannot find feasible solutions. To solve instances of practice rele-
vance, we propose using a search heuristic which uses principles from VNS. VNS systematically
explores different neighbourhoods and has been used for a wide variety of applications. In the
DRSSP problem, the sequence of cargo has to be decided as well as the sailing schedule, and
it can therefore be seen as a mixture of a packing problem with additional complexity and a
scheduling problem. VNS approaches have been used to eﬀiciently solve these kinds of prob-
lems [17]. The basic structure of VNS is also appropriate for the multi-objective aim of the
DRSSP. Opposed to previous research in the RSSP problem which often deals with optimising
one specific aspect such as maximising revenue [4], minimising shifts [5] or minimising ballast
water [2], the DRSSP has two conflicting objectives which must be balanced. On the one hand,
the heuristic needs to decide which cargoes are profitable to transport given that it will incur
additional fuel costs to wait and handle the vehicles. On the other hand, it needs to decide on
the positions of cargo that require as few shifts as possible. The heuristic should be able to
change between these decisions and they can therefore be treated as different neighbourhoods
in a VNS.
The heuristic is adapted to handle the two-stage framework. The first-stage decisions are ini-
tialised with a construction algorithm and then updated using different neighbourhood struc-
tures.
Each scenario can be seen as a separate deterministic instance where the first-stage
decisions have been fixed.
To evaluate the quality of the first-stage decisions, the scenarios
need to be solved. Ideally, it would be possible to solve the second-stage decisions to obtain
the expected value of a given first-stage decision with an exact and deterministic method. We
considered using a MIP model or a matheuristic to solve the second stage since this would allow
us to determine the exact objective, however, in our initial experiments it was clear that it would
not be possible to build even a reduced model for medium or large-sized instances. Instead, the
second-stage decisions are also approximated using the neighbourhood functions. The actual
decisions made in the second stage are not important themselves since they will not be applied
unless the specific scenario is realised which is very improbable. But it is nevertheless necessary
to optimise these for each scenario to get the best approximation of the expected value from the
first-stage decisions. Therefore the second-stage decisions are also initialised using a construc-
tion heuristic and then explored similarly to the first stage. The framework of the proposed
search heuristic can be seen in algorithm 2.
26
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 2 Heuristic for solving the stochastic DRSSP problem
Input A problem instance π, set of scenarios Ω, parameters α and γ
Output A solution x
1: x′ ←constructionHeuristic(π, α)
▷Inititialise solution
2: x ←x′
▷Save the current best
3: Initialise weights w for first-stage neighbourhoods
4: while termination criteria not met do
5:
for s ∈Ωdo
6:
x′ ←VNS(x′, γ, α)
▷Optimise each scenario using a basic VNS
7:
end for
8:
if Cost(x′) < Cost(x) then
▷Accept new solution
9:
x ←x′
10:
end if
11:
Update weights w
12:
x′ ←improve(π, x, w, γ, α)
▷Search first-stage neighbourhood and build 
13:
second-stage decisions with construction heuristic
14: end while
15: return x
The framework consists of a construction heuristic which greedily inserts cargo into the stowage
plan. Hereafter the improvement phase begins where the first-stage and second-stage decisions
are optimised. This is done through different neighbourhood structures until the termination
criterion is met. In the following, the components of the heuristic are presented, and lastly the
modelling choices are discussed in section 6.3.
6.1
Construction Algorithm
The first step of the heuristic is to build an initial solution from scratch. In order for the solution
to be feasible, the heuristic must determine a valid stowage plan and sailing schedule but since
all cargo is treated as optional, there is no requirement for the volume of cargo transported. A
feasible solution could therefore be to transport no cargo. However, to begin the search from a
good starting point, we allow some time to build a good initial solution.
A greedy heuristic is proposed which builds the solution iteratively from an empty deck. A
feasible solution requires that both first and second-stage decisions are made. For flexibility
these are constructed as two separate steps where the first adds the on-time cargo to the solution
and the second adds the delayed cargo to the solution. The heuristic repeatedly places vehicles
on the deck until all vehicles are placed or there are no more available and valid positions. The
decision regarding which square on the deck to place the vehicle in is determined by the square
sequence parameter. The square sequence is an ordered list of squares which determines the
position to consider in each step. If the position is valid for the vehicle considered, then the
vehicle is anchored in this square. Otherwise, the algorithm continues searching according to
the sequence.
The initial solution found by the construction heuristic has a big impact on the final stowage
plan. Initial testing showed that there is no specific sequence which works best for all instances.
Depending on deck layout and cargo sizes it can be better to stow from bow to stern or vice
versa. Therefore, a new solution for each square sequence is initialised, and the solution with
the lowest objective is chosen as the initial solution. The four predefined sequences consider
the squares starting from each corner of the grid in the direction from bow to stern or stern to
bow. E.g. the first sequence sorts the squares from coordinate (|I|, 1) (upper left corner of the
27
==PAGE:34==
bow), then position (|I| −1, 1) and so on. It is preferable to place cargoes lane by lane instead
of randomly on the deck since the precomputed shortest paths are still used to enter/exit the
deck. It was also considered whether to sort positions from portside to starboard or vice versa.
However, this would have resulted in stowage plans where cargoes are placed in blocks from bow
to stern and entire bookings had to be shifted to allow vehicles placed closer to the bow to exit.
The final sequences are illustrated in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The four square sequences. The solid arrows show the primary direction and the
dashed arrows give the secondary direction
An overview of the construction algorithm can be seen below.
The first-stage decisions are
initialised as in line 2 where all cargo available in port 1 is assigned a position on the deck. This
means that all on-time cargo is initially part of the solution. Cargoes as well as positions are
considered by the algorithm in a certain order: Cargoes are sorted according to the number of
sailing legs, such that cargo bookings which are discharged the latest are assigned a position
first, and the positions on deck are considered according to the square sequence q. Lastly, the
heuristic updates the starting times for the cargoes and the loading sequence. The departure
time and sailing time for the next sailing leg are not determined yet since it is scenario specific.
Algorithm 3 constructionHeuristic
Input A problem instance π and parameter α
Output A solution x
1: for each sequence q do
▷Test each predefined square sequence
2:
x1 ←greedyInsertionx1(π, q)
▷Initialise 1st-stage decisions
3:
x ←greedyInsertionx2(π, x1, α, q)
▷Build 2nd-stage decisions
4: end for
5: Select the sorting q and greedy solution x with lowest objective
6: return x
After the first-stage decisions have been fixed, the second-stage decisions are initialised to obtain
a feasible solution. As can be seen in line 3 in algorithm 3, this step takes an instance π, the
fixed first-stage decisions x1, the α-parameter and the chosen square sequence q as input. The
goal of this construction heuristic is to build a good initial solution for each scenario given the
position of first-stage cargo. This allows us to get the best approximation of the objective value
from the first-stage decisions. Contrary to the first-stage decisions squares are considered from
the opposite side of the deck using the same direction. This means that first and second-stage
bookings will initially be positioned at opposite ends of the grid which results in fewer shifts
than grouping them together.
For each port, the algorithm estimates whether it will be profitable to transport this cargo given
28
==PAGE:35==
the arrival time. This is done to avoid adding cargo which would have to be removed bit-by-
bit in the search phase because it is not profitable to wait. The decision is simply made by
comparing the cost of waiting for the cargo against the gain in revenue. The cost is found by
calculating the difference between the cost of the sailing leg with the current departure and the
cost of the sailing leg if waiting for the cargo. This is calculated by assuming that adding the
cargo will not result in more shifting. The revenue cargo c represents is simply the revenue per
cargo, CRev, multiplied by the number of vehicles, Rc. It can therefore be determined if it is
profitable to transport cargo c by checking whether
α · δfuelcost < (1 −α) · CRev · Rc
It is possible that cargo c does not represent enough value by itself to warrant the additional
waiting time. However, by looking at two or more delayed cargo bookings together they represent
enough value for the ship to wait in port and use more fuel on the next sailing leg.
The
construction heuristic therefore checks whether it is profitable to wait for the set of cargoes c and
d where d is the cargo arriving directly after c. The aim is that the construction heuristic builds
a solution which includes roughly the cargo that is profitable given the α-level. The search phase
can hereby focus on optimising the stowage plan to reduce shifts and further optimise the sailing
schedule. The assumption is that it is possible to find zero-shift solutions to most problems in
our data set. It is therefore chosen to be optimistic when evaluating the profitability of cargo by
only looking at the delay from loading cargo and not the potential penalties that shifting might
incur. After having chosen which cargoes to transport, the heuristic simply assigns positions to
all vehicles. Cargoes are considered by arrival time, so the cargoes arriving earliest are placed
furthest away from the entry/exit to avoid loading conflicts. Finally, the number of shifts can
be calculated and the sailing schedule can be finalised. An example of a stowage plan generated
with the construction heuristic can be seen below.
Figure 6.2: An example of a stowage plan generated by the construction heuristic for a single
scenario using a grid representation of 100×38. The black squares represent the unusable areas,
and the other colours represent cargo bookings.
29
==PAGE:36==
6.2
Improvement Phase
For most instances the stowage plan initialised by the construction heuristic is far from optimal,
and it is therefore necessary to optimise the first-stage decisions to find a better solution to the
problem. Due to the stochastic nature of the problem, a neighbourhood change has to be made
to the first-stage decisions which are then evaluated by optimising the second-stage decisions for
each scenario and examining the incremental change in objective value. This section dives into
how the improvement phase for the stochastic model is constructed.
6.2.1
Optimising first stage decisions
The first-stage decisions are made before the uncertainty is revealed and these drive the second-
stage decisions. In order to improve the first-stage decisions obtained from the construction
algorithm different neighbourhood structures are introduced, and these are then adaptively cho-
sen. An adaptive approach allows for improving neighbourhoods to be visited more frequently,
and it guides the search away from a local optimum.
Once a neighbourhood structure has
been selected, a search within that certain neighbourhood is started. Initially, the search is
very targeted and it uses predefined strategies to find neighbours such that only high-quality
solutions which could result in the discovery of a local minimum are evaluated. However, if no
neighbours fulfil these strategies then randomness is introduced into the search which enables
the algorithm to move into a new area of the solution space and escape the local minimum. The
overall termination criterion is run time.
For every change made to a first-stage decision, the objective value is evaluated by solving the
second-stage scenarios. A first-stage decision is therefore only accepted if the objective value is
smaller than the current best objective value. A Simulated Annealing (SA) acceptance criteria
could have been considered such that worse solutions are accepted in the beginning to drive the
search into an unexplored area of the solution space. However, due to the complexity of the
neighbourhoods, few changes can be made to the first-stage decisions, and it might therefore
not be possible for the search to reach a new local minimum if it is brought into a worse part
of the solution space. A more restricted but guided acceptance criterion is therefore used - only
accepting improving solutions.
6.2.2
Estimating the expected objective value
In order to evaluate the quality of the change in the first-stage decisions, the second-stage
decisions have to be optimised for each scenario. This is done by applying a basic VNS to every
scenario which allows us to find the expected objective value. The VNS performs local search
in the chosen neighbourhood structure where the search across neighbourhoods is performed
until the termination criteria are met. Due to the neighbourhood operations being relatively
computationally cheap, many iterations can be carried out within the time frame, and it might be
the case, that the algorithm performs many iterations without finding any improvements which
can be time-consuming. Therefore, the VNS terminates if 50 iterations without improvement
have been completed or the time limit has been reached. The pseudo-code for the basic VNS
can be seen below.
30
==PAGE:37==
Algorithm 4 VNS
Input Current best solution x′, parameters α and γ
Output A solution x′
1: i ←0
▷Initialise counter
2: k ←1
▷Initialise neighbourhood
3: while termination criteria not met do
4:
x′′ ←x′
5:
x′′ ←localSearch(x′′, k, α, γ)
▷Find local minimum for kth neighbourhood
6:
x′, k ←neighbourhoodChange(x′, x′′, k)
7:
Update counter i
8: end while
9: return x′
The VNS explores the neighbourhoods in a predefined sequence:
1. Ruin and recreate
2. Move vehicle
3. Remove cargo
4. Add cargo
This means that the first neighbourhood structure that the search visits is the ruin and recreate
neighbourhood where a simple local search is performed. The solution is evaluated using the
neighbourhood change function summarised in algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 neighbourhoodChange
Input Current best solution x′, new solution x′′, current neighbourhood k
Output Current best solution x′, new neighbourhood k
1: if Cost(x′′) < Cost(x′) then
2:
x′ ←x′′
3:
k ←1
▷Return to initial neighbourhood
4: else
5:
k ←k mod 4 + 1
▷Go to next neighbourhood in sequence
6: end if
7: return x′, k
Again a simple acceptance criterion is used where the solution is accepted if its objective value is
smaller than that of the current best solution. If a solution is accepted then the neighbourhood
sequence is reset to the initial neighbourhood. If the solution is worse than the current best
solution, the next neighbourhood in the sequence is visited, and local search is performed in
this neighbourhood structure. This systematic search is performed until the termination cri-
teria described above are met, and then the same process is repeated for the remaining scenarios.
6.2.3
Neighbourhoods
In order to improve the solutions, four improvement strategies are defined. The first strategy
is called ruin and recreate as it ruins a percentage of the solution and recreates it again in a
different manner. The second strategy exchanges cargo by moving a vehicle to a more lucrative
position. The third and fourth strategy simply removes cargo from the solution and adds cargo
31
==PAGE:38==
to the solution respectively. These neighbourhoods are applied to both the first and second
stage as described above.
Ruin and recreate
The first neighbourhood structure updates the way the greedy construction heuristic builds the
stowage plan by destroying parts of the solution and recreating it in a new way. The parameter
γ defines how much of the solution to keep. The construction heuristic only focuses on having
as few loading conflicts as possible and disregards the unloading sequence of cargo bookings.
It is therefore desirable to insert the last loaded cargo in a manner where both loading and
unloading conflicts are considered. This is done by removing the last inserted cargo until only
γ percentage of the solution remains. If a booking is partially removed it is randomly chosen
which vehicles to remove. The positions from which cargo has just been removed are now tabu.
This means that the vehicles cannot be reinserted at these positions. This is done to ensure that
a new neighbourhood is examined.
The recreation of the solution adds one vehicle at a time and is repeated until 1 −γ% of the
solution has been reinserted. A vehicle can only be inserted at a valid non-tabu position. Thus,
when reinserting a vehicle each valid position is evaluated according to the number of shifts
that will occur if placing the vehicle in that particular position as well as its grouping score.
The score indicates that vehicles from the same cargo booking are placed close together. This
neighbourhood structure is used for both first and second-stage decisions, and the only difference
is the cargo bookings. In the first-stage improvement phase, only first-stage cargo is considered
and likewise only second-stage cargo is considered when improving the second-stage decisions.
This improvement move is dependent on the hyper-parameter γ. The smaller the value of γ, the
more of the solution is ruined. A small γ will result in an almost entirely new solution, and it
can be diﬀicult to find new improving solutions. It is therefore desired to have a γ-value which
destroys enough of the solution to move into a new neighbourhood while still finding good so-
lutions such that this improvement strategy is chosen during the improvement phase. Through
initial testing, it has been found that for this problem a γ-value of 0.8 leads to good results.
Moving cargo
This strategy tries to improve the solution by moving a vehicle to a currently unoccupied po-
sition. When a vehicle is placed badly in the stowage plan it results in shifts in future ports
which is undesirable. In order to resolve this, the vehicle being shifted is examined along with
the vehicle causing the shift, as it might be more lucrative to remove one or the other.
In the first stage, shifts between first-stage cargoes are examined, and if shifts exist then a
random cargo c is chosen from the candidates. As this strategy tries to find the cause of a shift,
it is examined which cargo d is causing the shift. The vehicle causing the shift is then moved to
another position, and if no shifts exist in the stowage plan then a random vehicle is chosen. The
new position is chosen by estimating the purity score of the possible positions. The position
with the highest grouping score is chosen, and the vehicle is moved.
For second-stage cargo, it is estimated what the objective value would be if cargo c is moved
and what it would be if cargo d is moved. For both moves, the new position is chosen from the
valid positions by looking at the grouping score and an approximation of shifting. The position
with the lowest number of shifts and the highest grouping score is chosen. The two candidates
are then compared, and the candidate resulting in the lowest objective value is chosen. If no
cargo is being shifted, then no move is made.
32
==PAGE:39==
Removing cargo
The remove neighbourhood structure is based on the observation that the greedy construction
heuristic tries to insert all vehicles. However, based on the α-value it might not be the best deci-
sion to bring all vehicles in a cargo booking. Furthermore, it might be that one or more vehicles
are positioned such that they are shifted in later ports. This strategy tries to accommodate for
these considerations.
In the first-stage improvement phase, it is examined if there are shifts among first-stage cargoes.
If shifts occur then all the vehicles that are being shifted are removed from the stowage plan. If
there are no shifts then a vehicle is randomly chosen and removed from the solution.
For second-stage decisions, the time it takes to sail the different sailing legs are examined, and
if the RORO ship slow steams on all sailing legs then no cargo is removed. However, if this
is not the case, then the three sailing legs with the highest fuel consumption are chosen. The
ports associated with these sailing legs are examined and a candidate list of potential cargo
bookings is created. If it is a loading port, then a cargo booking is randomly chosen between
those bookings that are being loaded in that particular port. Again it is examined if a shift
will occur in later ports, and if cargo is shifted, then a shift position is randomly added to the
candidate list. If no shifts occur for that cargo booking then a random position is chosen. If
the examined port is an unloading port then a position is chosen at random and added to the
candidate list.
All candidates are evaluated by removing it and examining the objective value. If a lower ob-
jective value is found, then the solution is updated. The neighbour which results in the solution
with the lowest objective value is chosen.
Adding cargo
This operator examines whether or not cargo should be added to the solution. For a first-stage
decision it is examined if there is any first-stage cargo to add, and if so then it is randomly
chosen which cargo booking and how many vehicles from this booking to add. The vehicles are
assigned a position by evaluating which valid position will give the fewest shifts and have the
highest grouping score. The loading sequence and the starting times for later cargo bookings
are updated accordingly.
The neighbourhood structure for the second-stage decisions is slightly different as only one
vehicle is added to the solution. Furthermore, as more information is available when making
second-stage decisions, there is more to consider when deciding whether or not to add a vehicle
to the stowage plan. At first, it is examined where in the loading sequence the randomly chosen
cargo booking c belongs. In some cases, a vehicle can be added to the stowage plan without
delaying departure. If this is not the case, then it must be examined whether it is profitable
to bring an extra vehicle or not. This is done by comparing the extra revenue gained with the
extra cost of sailing at a faster speed. Again the loading sequence and the starting times for
later cargo bookings must be updated accordingly.
6.3
Evaluating Modelling Choices
Initial testing of the heuristic shows that the construction heuristic finds good-quality solutions
which are then improved step by step in the search phase. The heuristic generates quite realistic
stowage plans where vehicles from the same cargo are generally grouped together in blocks. The
MIP model has few restrictions on the structure of the solution which can result in impractical
stowage plans. Vehicles from the same cargo can be scattered across the deck, and while this
33
==PAGE:40==
exploits the entire capacity, it is not easily applied in reality. In this aspect, the heuristic provides
more appropriate solutions. Below an example of a stowage plan generated by the heuristic and
the MIP solver can be seen.
(a) Solution generated by MIP solver
(b) Solution generated by heuristic
Figure 6.3: An example of a stowage plan for a single scenario using a grid resolution of 15×15.
The colours represent cargo bookings.
The neighbourhood operators are generally very targeted and use guiding strategies to generate
neighbours which should improve the objective solution. This is necessary since calculating the
objective value is heavy and the heuristic can therefore not perform as many iterations. However,
this also means that the neighbourhoods become quite small and the search can become trapped
in local optima. If the problem could be represented such that it was cheap to update the solution
through for instance delta-evaluation, then it could be interesting to make the neighbourhoods
less targeted and more random.
Different metaheuristic frameworks could also have been tested for the DRSSP. For the general
RORO stowage problem, ALNS has been applied with success [7] and for container stowage
problems which has been covered more in the literature, the GRASP algorithm has been applied
with good results [21]. Since our heuristic is quite dependent on the initial solution, it could be
interesting to restart the search from a new starting point like in the GRASP framework.
The key issue lies in estimating the expected cost of a certain first-stage decision. It is very
time-consuming to evaluate the change in objective since the recourse function must be solved.
If it was possible to compute the recourse function analytically, the heuristic would be simpler
and the search could become much wider. It was also considered whether the first-stage decisions
could be filtered such that only promising solutions needed to be evaluated in full. This has
for instance been implemented by Parreño et al. where a statistical filter was used to filter
unpromising solutions found by the greedy randomised construction algorithm before applying
the local search procedure [21].
However, this also requires a fitness function to assess the
objective value which leads to the same problem of approximating the incremental change in
the objective.
34
==PAGE:41==
7
Computational Study
In this section a computational study of the proposed heuristic is presented on a number of test
instances. The tests are run on the DTU HPC Cluster (LSF 10) and the mathematical model
is implemented in Julia and solved using the commercial optimisation solver Gurobi. System
specifications can be seen in Appendix A: System Information. Different aspects of the heuristic
are tested and the results are presented and discussed in section 7.1. Hereafter the number of
scenarios is examined by testing the stability of the solutions in section 7.2. A short comparison
of the heuristic and exact solver is presented in section 7.3 and a sensitivity analysis of key
parameters is carried out in section 7.4. Lastly, in section 7.5 it is investigated whether the
proposed stochastic model provides value compared to using a deterministic model.
The test instances are created by Jone Hansen and Alastair Main based on scaled outlines of
real decks and cargo bookings. A typical deck has a length greater than 100 m and a width
greater than 40 m [5] but to have instances that are solvable for the MIP model, smaller test-
layouts are also used. In total 23 different instances are tested, and the characteristics can be
seen in table 7.1. The ten small toy-size instances have grid resolutions between 15 × 15 and
25 × 25. They each consider 6 −8 different cargo bookings with between 76 and 178 vehicles in
total. The layout is a simple square without any unusable spaces and thus does not realistically
represent a deck. For these instances, the MIP model can find a solution within a reasonable
time horizon and it is therefore possible to compare the heuristic with an exact solution. There
are eight medium-sized instances which all have a grid resolution of 100 × 38 and 6 different
cargo bookings. The total number of vehicles varies from 193 to 420. For the medium-sized
instances there are between 5 and 10 ports in total. The large instances have grid resolution of
200 × 75 and there are up to 15 different cargo bookings. The large instances vary from 173 to
512 vehicles in total. For the medium and large instances, the MIP model cannot be used to
solve the DRSSP problem, and it is therefore only the heuristic which is used to make stowage
plans for these instances.
The individual sailing distances and schedules are based on routes serviced by DFDS in the
Baltic and North Sea regions, but the sailing routes and port sequences are randomly generated
for each instance. The parameter used for fuel cost is based on the average fuel cost during 2021
for the EMEA1 market [22], and cargo revenue is estimated based on available prices for RORO
transportation. The handling time for a cargo booking is dependent on the number of vehicles
and the size of the cargo. The larger the dimensions, the more time is needed to load and
discharge a vehicle. The handling times are based on rough estimates provided by our advisors.
1European, Middle East and Africa
35
==PAGE:42==
Test instance
Grid resolution
# bookings
# ports
% of usable
area of deck
Deck
utilisation (%)
s1
15 × 15
6
6
100
76
s2
15 × 15
8
8
100
74
s3
15 × 15
6
6
100
91
s4
15 × 15
8
8
100
88
s5
20 × 20
6
6
100
77
s6
20 × 20
8
8
100
74
s7
20 × 20
6
6
100
89
s8
20 × 20
8
8
100
92
s9
25 × 25
6
6
100
75
s10
25 × 25
8
8
100
73
m1
100 × 38
6
5
88
75
m2
100 × 38
6
6
88
75
m3
100 × 38
6
6
88
75
m4
100 × 38
6
8
88
75
m5
100 × 38
6
8
88
75
m6
100 × 38
6
10
88
75
m7
100 × 38
6
10
88
75
m8
100 × 38
6
5
88
75
l1
200 × 75
6
5
89
75
l2
200 × 75
6
5
89
75
l3
200 × 75
6
6
89
75
l4
200 × 75
15
8
89
90
l5
200 × 75
15
10
89
90
Table 7.1: Test instance characteristic
Initial testing showed that the large test instances were diﬀicult to solve due to the complexity
of the shortest path strategy. Therefore, component and stability testing are only performed for
small and medium-sized instances.
7.1
Evaluating Heuristic Components
The proposed heuristic consists of different components which are analysed further in the follow-
ing section. First, some of the key decisions in the heuristic are evaluated. This includes whether
to add more randomness by including a small perturbation move, how much time to spend on
each scenario and how each of the neighbourhood structures affects performance. Furthermore,
it is examined how introducing short-term memory into the search affects the solution quality.
The sequence of neighbourhoods is also analysed further by comparing the fixed sequence with
a random neighbourhood change and an adaptive approach where the sequence depends on how
well the neighbourhoods perform.
The solutions are affected by stochasticity from both the scenario generation and the heuristic.
In order to control the variance, ten replications are performed for each test instance. For each
test across the set of instances, the same scenarios are generated to remove the noise from the
scenario generation process. This allows for direct comparison between the results obtained for
a test instance when evaluating the heuristic components.
Pertubation
The heuristic uses principles from VNS to improve the second-stage decisions by systematically
exploring different neighbourhood structures. In a classic VNS the local search phase of each
36
==PAGE:43==
neighbourhood is usually a deterministic procedure and stochasticity is introduced by making a
random move within the neighbourhood. This is referred to as shaking the solution and is meant
to create a perturbation large enough to move the search into a new but promising neighbour-
hood. However, the local search procedures in the heuristic already have some stochasticity, e.g.
by choosing a random cargo booking to add. When optimising a scenario, the neighbourhoods
are simply searched until the termination criteria are met without applying any shaking. It is
therefore examined whether the algorithm improves by introducing more randomness through
a shake move. A very simple shake move which randomly swaps two vehicles is implemented,
and the results are visualised in figure 7.1 for both small and medium instances. As can be
seen, the solution improves the most in the first iteration where it starts from the purely greedy
insertion heuristic and then optimises each scenario. In the next steps, the algorithm makes
smaller incremental improvements by updating the first-stage decisions. For all instances, the
algorithm without shaking converges fastest. In figure 7.1a the algorithms converge to the same
given enough time, which can be explained by the fact that the neighbourhood operations are
very cheap for small instances and the algorithm can therefore do many iterations and eventu-
ally escape non-improving neighbourhoods introduced by the shake move. For larger instances,
as in figure 7.1b, searching the neighbourhoods is more expensive and the algorithm therefore
struggles to find a good stowage plan when the search becomes more random and less targeted.
In larger grids swapping two vehicles can introduce a lot of shifting, and the heuristic does not
seem able to compensate for this.
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
Figure 7.1: Testing shaking
The main thing we are interested in for these experiments is how the algorithms differ over time,
which can be diﬀicult to see when they converge fast and have very long tails where only small
improvements are found. The results are therefore log-transformed which is shown below in
figure 7.2. For the following tests, the results are visualised as log transformations.
37
==PAGE:44==
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
Figure 7.2: Testing shaking. Visualised using log-transformed data
Overall, the perturbation move has a negative effect on performance and it is therefore chosen to
continue with the more deterministic approach where the randomness is in the search procedure
instead of using shaking.
A shake move which was adapted to each neighbourhood might
produce better results as the randomness only would occur within the kth neighbourhood. The
perturbation would therefore be smaller, resulting in a more targeted search.
Termination criteria for optimising a scenario
Optimising the solution for each scenario is a key part of estimating the quality of the first-stage
decisions. If the algorithm allows too little time to optimise a scenario then a solution might
appear worse than it is, and if it spends too much time on a single scenario, then the algorithm
can perform fewer iterations and test fewer first-stage decisions. The goal is to spend as little
time as possible on each scenario while still allowing the algorithm to find the best possible
stowage plan for each scenario. Therefore different termination criteria for when to stop the
optimisation of a single scenario are examined. The termination criteria are based on both time
and number of iterations, such that the search terminates if either a predefined amount of time or
a number of iterations has passed without improvement. For the small instances, the algorithm
is tested using 1 second and 25 iterations without improvements, 5 seconds and 50 iterations
without improvement or 10 seconds and no iteration limit. For medium instances, the algorithm
is tested using 30 second and 25 iterations without improvements, 60 seconds and 50 iterations
without improvement or 90 seconds and no iteration limit. Different combinations of time and
iteration limits could of course also be tested but the computational time would quickly become
intractable so only three criteria are tested for each set of instances. The results are shown in
figure 7.3 where it can clearly be seen that using only time as a stopping criterion causes the
algorithm to converge much slower. For the small instances, 10 seconds means the algorithm
can only evaluate very few first-stage decisions and it does not converge within the given time.
The first two criteria converge to the same value which shows that the algorithm actually spends
very little time on each scenario for these problems. For the larger problems, the criteria with 30
seconds, 25 iterations is initially best but after around 15 minutes it plateaus and is outmatched
by the heuristic using 60 seconds, 50 iterations. For medium-sized problems, 60 seconds and 50
iterations seem suﬀicient to allow the algorithm to converge to a good solution.
38
==PAGE:45==
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
Figure 7.3: Testing different termination criteria for second stage decisions
The termination criteria are therefore set to 5 seconds, 50 iterations without improvement for
small instances and 60 seconds, 50 iterations without improvement for medium instances. Ex-
periments have shown that the iteration limit is especially important for the small instances
as moves are very computationally cheap and the search therefore often terminates because it
cannot find improvements rather than reaching the time limit. For the larger instances the time
limit is the more important factor since the search is more time-consuming.
Neighbourhood structures
The algorithm uses four different neighbourhoods which are systematically explored. Since it
is quite costly to search the neighbourhoods, it is analysed how each of the neighbourhood
structures affects performance. In figure 7.4 the results from the experiment can be seen, where
the baseline includes all neighbourhood operators and the remaining show the results from
removing one operator. The ruin and recreate neighbourhood is abbreviated to RR.
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
Figure 7.4: Testing neighbourhood structures
For the small instances the tests reach almost the same solutions, but the algorithm without
ruin and recreate converges faster since this is the most computationally heavy neighbourhood.
This indicates that the operators can to some degree compensate for each other. For the medium
instances, the algorithm is significantly worse without the add and remove neighbourhoods while
the move and ruin and recreate neighbourhoods only provide marginal improvements. However,
39
==PAGE:46==
the baseline model with all neighbourhood structures reaches the lowest objective for both sets
of instances without causing the algorithm to converge slower. This shows that each of the
neighbourhoods has a positive impact on the performance of the algorithm.
Introducing memory
The two neighbourhoods add and remove might result in cycling where vehicles are removed
from the stowage plan and reinserted in the same positions. In order to prevent cycling it is
considered to implement a short-term memory which remembers ten grid positions such that
some positions are tabu for a certain period if a vehicle has been removed from or placed at
the position.
The positions are considered tabu for all cargo bookings even if the position
was not previously occupied by that cargo booking. This restricts the search, however as the
memory is only short-term it is not considered a limitation. Memory is introduced for both
first-stage and second-stage decisions as these decisions are separate in the decision process.
However, due to the deterministic phase of the BVNS where a local search is performed for the
kth neighbourhood before moving to a new neighbourhood structure, the effect of the memory
across neighbourhoods might not be that large.
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
Figure 7.5: Testing short-term memory
Figure 7.5 shows that no improvement is observed when introducing memory for either the
small or the medium-sized instances.
Furthermore, when looking at the convergence of the
heuristic for both instance sizes, it can be seen that when the search does not utilise short-term
memory, it converges slightly faster. However, there is no significant difference, and the two
searches terminate with the same objective value for both instance types. When examining the
number of iterations performed for both of the algorithms it can be seen that the algorithm
can do fewer iterations when the heuristic uses short-term memory, and it is therefore more
computationally expensive to use memory. As the algorithm only manages to perform a few
first-stage improvements compared to the number of second-stage improvements, it is decided
that the time should be spent on performing first-stage improvements rather than searching
through the short-term memory.
Sequence of neighbourhood structures
The basic VNS uses a sequential order of neighbourhood structures to define which neighbour-
hood to visit next when no further improvements can be found in the current neighbourhood.
If an improvement was found then the search returns to the initial neighbourhood, and if no
improvement is found the next neighbourhood in the sequence is visited. It can therefore be the
case that the initial neighbourhoods will be explored more in depth than the later neighbour-
hoods in the sequence [18]. In order to avoid bias towards the first neighbourhood structures
40
==PAGE:47==
in the sequence, randomness is introduced to the neighbourhood change function. Two alterna-
tive neighbourhood sequences are considered, namely using a random neighbourhood sequence
and an adaptive neighbourhood sequence. When using a random sequence of the neighbourhood
structures (RVNS), the next neighbourhood is randomly drawn from the list of candidates. This
introduces some randomness into the second-stage decisions. However, there is the disadvantage
that no learning occurs, and this can result in a neighbourhood being searched even if there has
been no improvement for the last iterations. Nonetheless, due to the fact that the second-stage
local search utilises a first-descent strategy, a local search in a non-improving neighbourhood
structure will terminate quickly. An alternative to the random sequence is to introduce learning
and apply an adaptive sequence (AVNS). In the adaptive sequence, equal weights are initialised
and these are then updated according to whether or not the neighbourhood structure resulted
in an improvement of the objective value. This results in non-improving neighbourhoods being
searched less.
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
Figure 7.6: Testing the sequence of neighbourhood structures
The figure above shows that for both small and medium-sized instances the VNS with a sequen-
tial order performs slightly better than the RVNS and AVNS. The benefit of using VNS can
especially be seen for the small instances, where the decrease in objective value is more signifi-
cant. Furthermore, it can be seen that for the medium instances, VNS converges to a slightly
better objective value - although the difference is around 0.03% and therefore not significant.
Based on these tests it is decided to use a sequential order of the neighbourhood structures.
Using a different neighbourhood sequence might yield different results. However, there are some
restrictions on the ordering of neighbourhoods. The construction heuristic adds all vehicles in a
profitable booking, and it is therefore most relevant to consider removing cargo before adding.
This implies that the remove neighbourhood should be searched before the add neighbourhood,
thus only changing the ordering of the ruin and recreate and move neighbourhoods. Due to
the randomness in the ruin and recreate neighbourhood structure, this would allow the search
to make larger neighbourhood changes before performing more local changes. Therefore, the
current neighbourhood sequence is kept.
41
==PAGE:48==
Convergence
Metaheuristics can, unlike MIP models, not prove that the local optimum is in fact a global
optimum, and it is therefore uncertain whether the results are optimal. For some of the small
instances, the optimal solution can be found by the MIP model, but for the medium-sized
instances the optimal solution is unknown. However, it can be visualised that the heuristic
converges to an optimum given enough time. Therefore, the objective value over time is examined
for the different instances. This is done by increasing the run time of the algorithm to 200
seconds for small instances and 7.200 seconds for medium and large instances. This will give an
indication of what the running time should be in order for the algorithm to converge within a
reasonable time frame.
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
(c) Large instances
Figure 7.7: Testing convergence of the algorithm
Figure 7.7a shows that for small instances the algorithm converges very fast. It can be seen
that the largest decrease in objective value is within less than 10 seconds when the construction
heuristic is improved. Hereafter, the improvements are minor and the algorithm quickly reaches
its optimum. For small instances no more than 100 seconds are needed, and even with this
time limit the algorithm has been at its minimum for quite some time. In figure 7.7b it can
be seen that for medium instances the algorithm converges fairly fast as well, and after 3.000
seconds only marginal improvements are found. The large instances converge much slower and
improvements are found until the algorithm is terminated after two hours.
As a rule of thumb a time limit of 10 minutes is acceptable when using algorithms to find stowage
plans in the container shipping industry since stowage plan coordinators often need to run several
forecasted scenarios [23]. Given that the model solves the stowage planning problem for each
42
==PAGE:49==
scenario, a run time of 10 minutes would only result in one iteration for each scenario, and the
heuristic would not have enough time to converge. In the proposed model the uncertainty in the
forecasts is implemented in the scenarios and it is not necessary to run the model for different
forecasts. Considering this and given the performed tests, a run time of 100 seconds for the
small instance and 3.600 seconds for the medium instances is deemed reasonable. A run time of
an hour would probably not be possible in a practical setting, but for the purpose of this project,
it is more important that the algorithm converges. For the large instances, the algorithm does
not seem to have converged even after an hour, but for practical reasons the run time is kept at
this limit.
7.2
Stability Testing
Stochastic models require discrete distributions to represent the uncertainty but sometimes the
discretisation can end up driving the solution such that the model is not solving the underlying
problem but rather the specific scenario tree. Ideally, the scenario generation procedure should
not affect the solution, and the solution should be relatively stable across replications and
unbiased compared to the true solution. In and out-of-sample stability are measures that can
be used to analyse whether the model is solving the problem and not simply noise generated by
the scenario generation process. In this section the in-sample stability is analysed for small and
medium size instances to decide on the number of scenarios.
In-sample stability measures the variation within the model results given the size of the scenario
tree. It is desired to have a small variation as this indicates that the model is stable and can
handle randomness. What is considered a reasonable variation depends on the problem, data,
construction method etc. The model is said to have in-sample stability when the number of
scenarios ensures that the chosen level of variation is respected. In-sample stability ensures that
whichever scenario tree is generated, the model should converge to approximately the same ob-
jective value, but it could still be converging to wrong values if the scenario generation method
is biased. Out-of-sample stability measures how close the obtained objective values are to the
true values. Ideally, the in-sample stability and out-of-sample stability should be close to each
other as this would indicate that the stochastic model is stable and unbiased. However, out-of-
sample stability requires the true data distribution. If the true values are unknown then trying
to perform an out-of-sample stability test is not feasible.
7.2.1
In-sample stability for small instances
To calculate the in-sample stability for a specific number of scenarios, the heuristic is used to
solve each of the ten test instances using ten replications. For each replication, the scenario
tree is randomly generated according to the scenario generation process presented in section 5.3.
For the small instances, the solution method is examined when having 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50
scenarios. The overall run time increases proportionally with the number of scenarios and the
time limit for the algorithm is increased accordingly.
The average standard deviation over all replications and instances for a given number of scenarios
is calculated and the results can be seen below. In figure 7.8a the standard deviation is shown
for each instance and in figure 7.8b the average is shown over all instances.
43
==PAGE:50==
(a) Standard deviation for each instance
(b) Average standard deviation
Figure 7.8: Variability for different numbers of scenarios
Figure 7.8b shows that the average standard deviation decreases significantly between five and
ten scenarios, which indicates that there is a lot to be gained from having ten scenarios rather
than five. As expected, the variance decreases when growing the scenario tree, but the largest
effect is when going from five to ten scenarios.
To get an overview of how the solutions vary, the objective values obtained for the different
instances are visualised and examined. In order to get the values on the same scale the mean
has been subtracted for each instance. The x-axis is also fixed so the variation can be compared
when increasing the size of the scenario tree. When having only five scenarios there are many
outliers quite far from the mean value, while already at ten scenarios the objectives become
much more centred. When increasing the number of scenarios, this becomes even more evident,
but overall not much is gained when increasing the number past 20.
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 7.9: Results for each instance. Normalised to allow for comparison across instances which
can have solutions on very different scales.
For all scenario values, the percentage-wise variation is considered to be extremely low. When
using ten scenarios, the standard deviation is approximately 750 which is only around 0.13%
compared to the scale of the objective values. However, it indicates that solutions for the same
problem will still deviate some from the mean which is something to take into consideration
when evaluating the performance.
7.2.2
In-sample stability for medium instances
The in-sample stability tests are performed in the same manner as for the small instances. As
the medium instances take a longer time to converge, these are only tested for up to 30 scenarios.
The solution method is examined when having 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30 scenarios. Similar to the
small instances, the time limit increases according to the number of scenarios.
The standard deviation between the ten replications for each of the instances as well as the
45
==PAGE:52==
average over all instances can be seen in figure 7.10. The largest decrease in standard deviation
happens when using ten rather than five scenarios, but there is also a significant decrease going
from 10 to 20 scenarios. However, when using 20 scenarios in the heuristic the run time will
increase to more than an hour which quickly becomes impractical.
(a) Standard deviation for each instance
(b) Average standard deviation
Figure 7.10: Variability for different numbers of scenarios
The normalised objective values over the ten runs are visualised below. It can be seen that for
five scenarios there are many outliers - especially for instances 3 and 4. These two instances
have more cargo than the other instances compared to the deck size. This means that if the
scenario tree includes a scenario from an extreme point of the distribution, it can have a large
impact on the solution. Compared to the small instances, the variance is larger which makes
sense since the problems are more complicated and it is harder for the heuristic to find good
stowage plans.
46
==PAGE:53==
Figure 7.11: Normalised objective values for the medium instance
The analysis shows how the solutions become more stable when increasing the number of sce-
narios in the model. As an increase in the scenario tree results in an increase in run time, this
trade-off should be taken into consideration. The variance can come from both the scenario
generation method and the solution method, and a large scenario tree would only decrease the
variance generated by the scenario generation method. Taking into account both computation
time and in-sample stability, using ten scenarios for both small and larger problems is considered
the best compromise. This keeps the time spent to around one hour for medium instances while
ensuring a reasonable level of variation in the model.
Using a larger number of scenarios might have yielded a better approximation but the programs
become computationally harder. It can be useful to sample a very large number of scenarios
and then reduce the scenarios to a reasonable number by applying scenario-reduction techniques.
Clustering is a commonly used approach where a large number of random scenarios are simu-
47
==PAGE:54==
lated with Monte Carlo sampling, and clustering is then performed to partition the scenarios
into clusters [24]. This would potentially capture the distribution better as more scenarios are
sampled while still controlling the size of the scenario tree. When using this technique other
considerations arise such as which clustering method to use, how many clusters to generate and
how to calculate the cluster probabilities. It could be interesting to see how this method would
impact the stability and number of scenarios needed. This is left for future work.
7.3
Comparing Solution Methods
The goal of this section is to evaluate the results generated by the heuristic compared to the
exact model for different values of the α-parameter. The exact model can only be solved for
small instances, and this section therefore only examines the scaled-down problems.
The instances are solved using a commercial MIP solver and the proposed heuristic. To reduce
noise, the results from the heuristic and MIP model are averaged over ten replications, and they
are solved using the same set of scenario trees. The results are summarised in table 7.2 which
for the MIP model reports the objective value and the gap to the optimal solution as well as
the average amount of cargo, the average number of shifts and the average sailing speed. For
the heuristic the average objective, number of cargoes, shifts and speed are presented.
Instance
MIP
Heuristic
Obj
Gap (%)
# cargo
# shifts
Speed
Obj
# cargo
# shifts
Speed
1
459,863
1.4
22
0
10.00
459,812
26
0
10.00
2
532,292
0.8
15
0
10.00
532,272
17
0
10.00
3
369,539
1.1
42
0
10.00
369,745
44
1
10.00
4
692,719
0.8
20
0
10.00
692,721
23
0
10.00
5
379,582
2.4
60
0
10.00
380,223
71
3
10.02
6
634,503
2.3
56
0
10.00
634,232
76
0
10.01
7
460,061
1.2
60
0
10.00
460,189
69
1
10.02
8
729,280
1.8
81
0
10.00
729,016
100
0
10.01
9
536,118
1.7
85
0
10.02
535,519
95
6
10.01
10
484,293
2.1
38
0
10.00
484,336
46
0
10.01
Table 7.2: Results from solving the ten small instances with α = 0.5 using an exact solver and
the proposed heuristic
The results clearly show the limitations of solving the problem with a commercial solver. The
solver is allowed one hour to solve the model, but even for these small instances with α = 0.5 the
time limit is reached before the optimal solution is found. The heuristic solves the problems in
minutes and finds better solutions than the MIP model more than half the time. The solutions
are very close to each other, but in general the heuristic chooses to transport more cargo which
leads to shifting for a few instances. For problem instance 9, the heuristic finds a solution with
more shifting but the overall objective is significantly lower which indicates that the heuristic
finds near-optimal solutions. However, without the MIP model having converged to the optimal
solution, it can be diﬀicult to verify optimality.
The value of α is a key choice since it controls whether the model prioritises revenue or fuel
consumption. To examine how the value of α affects the solution, the problems are solved when
varying α between 0 and 1 incrementing the value by 0.1. As before, the problems are solved
using both the MIP solver and the heuristic over a number of replications and the average
is reported. In figure 7.12a the average objective value is visualised for different levels of α.
When using α = 0 the model ignores the fuel consumption and only values the revenue from
transporting cargo and stows as much cargo as possible. This results in a negative objective
48
==PAGE:55==
value. The objective value then increases linearly as α is increased. The scale of the objective
values is very large and it is diﬀicult to see if there is any difference between the results obtained
by the MIP solver and the heuristic. The results are therefore normalised as shown in figure
7.12b where the gaps between the lower and upper bounds become clear. The gap is largest
for α = 0.1 and then decreases slowly as the parameter is increased. For lower values of α it
becomes more profitable to transport delayed cargo and the problem becomes more complex as
it is diﬀicult to find a good stowage plan. When α is closer to 1, the model can find optimal
solutions for most instances but on average there is still a small gap. When α = 1 the problem
is very simple as the ship departs as soon as possible and the solver therefore finds the optimal
solution in less than a minute.
(a) Objective for different α-levels.
(b) Normalised objective for different α-levels.
Figure 7.12
It can be seen in figure 7.12b that the heuristic finds equally good or better solutions than the
solver when α ≤0.5, while for α ≥0.6 the solutions are very close to each other. For α = 0 the
heuristic finds a solution better than the lower bound reported by the MIP solver, which should
not be possible. This is due to a simplification in how shifts are evaluated by the heuristic. In
the exact model, it is not allowed to shift cargo in its loading port. This is a hard constraint to
prevent rehandling cargo. In the heuristic this is treated as a soft constraint and is penalised like
a standard shift. When α = 0 all cargo is profitable regardless of delay and for some instances
where the deck utilisation is very high, it becomes impossible for the solver to find a feasible
stowage plan which transports all cargo. This is to some extent due to the limitations in how
the loading/unloading of cargo is represented. When using predefined paths for the cargo to
enter and exit, the model is less flexible than when for instance using a flow-representation as
proposed by Hansen et al. [5] or Main et al. [8]. The heuristic, on the other hand, allows
these shifts and it can therefore find a stowage plan which includes all cargo resulting in a lower
objective function.
Since the objective value depends on the number of cargoes and the sailing speed, these are also
visualised below in figure 7.13 for both solution methods.
49
==PAGE:56==
(a) Number of vehicles transported
(b) Average sailing speed
Figure 7.13
It can be seen in figure 7.13a that for the MIP model, the number of cargoes transported is
almost stable for α-values between 0.1 and 0.9.
The heuristic behaves a bit differently and
actually transports more cargo when α < 0.6. Figure 7.13b shows the average speed over all the
sailing legs. When α > 0.3 both solutions decide to sail very close to the lowest possible speed.
This is most likely due to the size of the problem and how the instances have been generated:
The small instances do not include a large amount of cargo and the potential delay is therefore
not very significant compared to overall sailing times.
In conclusion, the heuristic and the MIP model find solutions close to each other in terms of
objective value. A closer inspection shows that the solutions are exactly the same for some
replications but vary in terms of cargo volume and number of shifts in other cases. The solution
methods show slightly different behaviour in how the heuristic sometimes chooses to transport
more cargo at the cost of additional shifting, while the MIP model transports less cargo with
no shifting.
7.4
Sensitivity
The DRSSP problem has two main parameters other than α, namely the cost of bunker fuel and
the revenue gained from transporting cargo. These two parameters directly influence the decision
of whether or not to wait for delayed cargo bookings and gain the extra revenue or depart from
the port and save fuel expenses. When fuel prices increase it becomes more expensive to sail at
faster speeds, and it might therefore be less profitable to wait for delayed cargo. On the other
hand, if the revenue from transporting cargo is increased, waiting for delayed cargo suddenly
becomes more lucrative and vice versa.
The weight between fuel cost and cargo revenue is
defined by the α-parameter which influences the results as well. A sensitivity analysis is therefore
performed to examine how the solution changes when the fuel cost and the cargo revenue are
varied for different α-levels while holding other parameters fixed. The analysis is carried out for
three medium instances (m1, m4, m6) which each has a different number of cargo bookings and
ports. Ten replications are performed for each α-value.
IMO regulates the amount of sulphur present in bunker fuel oil. In order to comply with these
regulations many operators use Very Low Sulphur Fuel Oil (VLSFO)[25], and it is therefore
assumed that this fuel type is used by the RORO operators. The price of VLSFO has fluctuated
significantly over the last couple of years during both the corona pandemic and the current
energy crisis [22]. Going back to January 2020, the price for one metric tonne of VLSFO was
around €205. However, in 2021 the average price was around €520. In June 2022 the cost
50
==PAGE:57==
reaches its maximum of €1.006 [22]. The baseline for the fuel cost is €520, and it is examined
how the solution will vary when the more extreme values of €205 and €1.006 are used. However,
the low fuel cost value might not be a realistic representation of the current market. Cargo
revenue is estimated based on available prices for transporting RORO cargo, and the baseline
is set to €270. The revenue gained depends on many factors such as characteristics and size of
cargo, and this information is not publicly available. The value is therefore varied with ±50%
such that it is examined what the solution will be when cargo revenue is €135 and €405. The
results of the sensitivity analysis for α = 0.5 can be seen in the table below.
Percentage change
Baseline
Low Fuel Cost
High Fuel Cost
Low Revenue
High Revenue
Objective
556,269
-64.7%
+99.6%
+3.3%
-3.2%
# cargoes
257
+20.0%
-4.7%
-5.3%
+1.8%
Avg. speed
10.04
+0.6%
+0.0%
+0.0%
+0.0%
Table 7.3: Percentage change in objective value, number of cargoes and average speed when
varying fuel cost and cargo revenue
In table 7.3 it can be seen that for α = 0.5 varying the fuel cost has the largest impact on
the solution. The objective value decreases by 64.7% when the fuel cost is low. The change
in objective value does not tell much about how the solution changes, and it is therefore also
examined what happens to the number of cargoes shipped and the sailing speed. It can be seen
that when the fuel cost is low the number of cargoes transported increases by 20%. The sailing
speed increases as well but only by 0.6%.
It is now examined how the model behaves for all α-levels. This is done by a visual examination
where first the objective value, then cargo volume and lastly the sailing speed are studied.
Figure 7.14: The objective value for α-levels when varying the fuel cost and cargo revenue
The figure shows that the fuel cost has a larger impact on the solution for higher values of α.
When α = 1 the model only focuses on minimising the fuel cost and the gap between using a low
and a high fuel cost is very large. The opposite trend can be seen when varying cargo revenue
as when α = 1 no cargo is being shipped. However, the difference in the objective values for
α = 0 is not that significant. The three objectives quickly approach each other and for α ≥0.7
there is no significant difference.
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.15: The cargo volume for all α-levels when varying the fuel cost and cargo revenue
To get a better overview of how the solution changes the cargo volume is examined. The trend
is as expected where the amount of cargo decreases as α increases. The model transports the
most cargo when the fuel cost is low or the cargo revenue is high. As the revenue does not vary
as much as the fuel cost, the difference between the three cases is not as large as for the fuel
cost experiments. The cargo volume becomes steady around α = 0.5 for all revenue levels and
around α = 0.6 for all fuel costs. When α is lower than this, the cargo volume is more sensitive
to the values of these parameters. For the corner cases when α takes on values close to zero
or one, the results do not accurately represent realistic decisions. When α is close to one, the
model chooses to transport no cargo which is not practical due to for instance profitability of
the voyage or stability of the vessel.
Figure 7.16: The average speed for all α-levels when varying the fuel cost and cargo revenue
When α is low the model does not prioritise minimising the fuel consumption, and the sailing
speed is therefore higher, but it quickly decreases as α is increased. When the fuel cost is high or
the revenue per cargo is low, the speed is as expected generally lower. However, when α reaches
0.6 all models have a sailing speed close to the minimum speed with only marginal differences.
The analysis showed that especially for lower values of α the solution is sensitive to changes
in the fuel cost and cargo revenue. For both tests, the solution becomes steady with respect
to cargo and sailing speed around α = 0.6 with a drop in the number of cargoes at α = 1.
When modelling, special attention should be given to the value of these parameters especially
if revenue is weighted higher than the cost related to fuel consumption.
52
==PAGE:59==
7.5
Value of Stochastic Solution
This section examines if there are any benefits from using a stochastic program compared to a
deterministic model using expected values. To quantify the benefit of the stochastic model, the
Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS) is used. This is obtained by first finding the expected
value solution (EV) using expected values for the arrivals. This means that the deterministic
model is solved using the expected delay of 120 minutes for all cargo bookings. Hereafter, the
first-stage decisions are fixed to those values obtained from the EV solution, and the model is
solved for all scenarios. This results in the expectation of the expected value solution (EEV).
The solution to the recourse problem (RP) is then found which optimises the expected value
over all scenarios. Lastly, the value of the stochastic solution can be calculated:
V SS = RP −EEV
Since the DRSSP problem is a minimisation problem there is a benefit of using stochastic
programming when V SS ≤0. The more negative the VSS is, the more there is to be gained
from using a stochastic model over a deterministic model. The VSS is found for both small,
medium and large instances and the results are visualised below as box plots such that the
variation within each instance across different replications can be examined.
(a) Small instances
(b) Medium instances
(c) Large instances
Figure 7.17: Value of stochastic solution for the different test instances when using α = 0.5
Figure 7.17a shows that for small instances the value of using a stochastic program is minimal,
and for some instances the average VSS over the ten replications is even positive. The same
holds true for the medium instances which also show that the VSS fluctuates around zero from
53
==PAGE:60==
problem to problem. However, the average VSS (visualised as the dotted blue line) indicates
that there is something to be gained. For the small instances the average lies around -130 and
for the medium instances the mean is around -800, which shows a small benefit from using a
stochastic program but clearly there is a lot of variation across the different instances. Figure
7.17c shows the results for the large instances which look almost random. As discussed earlier,
the heuristic struggles to solve large instances, and it does not always converge within the one-
hour time limit. The number of scenarios has also not been evaluated for large instances, and
it is therefore likely that it is the scenario tree and the randomness in the heuristic which is
driving the solutions. We will therefore not go more into depth with the large instances, but
focus on the small and medium-sized problems.
The results so far deal with the case where revenue from cargo and fuel costs are weighted
equally. If revenue is weighted higher such that more cargo is transported, there might be more
to gain from using a stochastic model since the first-stage decisions become more important.
The VSS is therefore also calculated for different values of α. The results are summarised in
the table below which shows the average VSS, standard deviation and 95% confidence interval
from running ten replications over all instances for both the small and medium instances. The
standard deviation and confidence interval are shown to examine the uncertainty related to the
VSS.
Small instances
Medium instances
α
VSS
Std.
95% conf.
VSS
Std.
95% conf.
0.0
-1.0
1.0
[-1.6, -0.4]
-10.9
4.0
[-13.6, -8.1]
0.1
-254.1
1651.8
[-1277.9, 769.7]
-914.9
2190.7
[-2433.0, 603.2]
0.2
-127.1
1738.0
[-1204.3, 950.2]
-1313.2
3031.7
[-3414.1, 787.6]
0.3
-36.4
1292.4
[-837.4, 764.6]
-721.7
2841.3
[-2690.7, 1247.2]
0.4
-17.9
204.5
[-144.7, 108.8]
-1,267.4
2684.7
[-3127.8, 593.1]
0.5
-130.8
917.3
[-699.3, 437.8]
-802.5
2265.1
[-2372.1, 767.2]
0.6
-155.3
800.0
[-651.2, 340.6]
-414.3
1585.1
[-1512.8, 684.1]
0.7
-100.8
605.8
[-476.3, 274.7]
-465.0
1282.4
[-1353.7, 423.6]
0.8
15.7
362.0
[-208.7, 240.1]
-560.5
1011.9
[-1261.7, 140.7]
0.9
-65.3
239.9
[-214.0, 83.4]
-141.4
407.8
[-423.9, 141.2]
1.0
0.0
0.0
[0.0, 0.0]
0.0
0.0
[0.0, 0.0]
Table 7.4: Average VSS, standard deviation and 95% confidence interval for small and medium
instances
It can be seen that for the small instances the value of the stochastic solution is very small for
any α-value. Almost all of the confidence intervals range over positive values, which indicates
that we cannot say with certainty whether there is any benefit in using this stochastic model
for these instances. For the medium-sized instances, the average VSS shows that there is a bit
more to be gained from using a stochastic program, but it is still diﬀicult to say whether it is
a significant VSS. In most cases, the standard deviation is quite large, and when looking at the
95% confidence intervals it can be seen that for some α-levels the value of stochastic solution
might be positive. This indicates that the gain from using this stochastic program to solve the
DRSSP is limited using the current solution method.
A possible explanation for the small VSS could be that there is too much noise from the scenario
generation method and the solution method. However, for the small and medium instances the
stability tests showed that when using 10 scenarios the variation was at a reasonable level.
Alternative scenario generation methods might reduce the variance further and provide more
54
==PAGE:61==
stable solutions which could lead to more conclusive results. This is something which could be
considered for future work. Another possible explanation is that there is not enough stochastic
cargo to see the full impact of using a stochastic program. Furthermore, data is generated such
that only 50% of the cargo bookings arriving at port 1 are on time. The arrival times of the
remaining cargo bookings are stochastic. The first-stage decisions are therefore only made for
a small part of the total cargo volume, and the placement of these vehicles might not have the
desired effect on the overall stowage plan. This means that the benefit of using a stochastic
model decreases when the second-stage decisions are not affected that much by the first-stage
decisions.
As mentioned above, the results are not very conclusive regarding the benefit of using a stochastic
program. The following points could be interesting to implement to examine the impact they
would have on the VSS. Firstly, more stochasticity could be introduced to the problem by
modelling the arrival of each vehicle as stochastic rather than the entire booking having an
uncertain arrival time. This would however cause the complexity to grow exponentially. Another
relevant approach would be to use a rolling horizon scheme and solve the problem individually
for each loading port. At each port 50% of bookings would then be available and these would
be part of the first-stage decisions. Except for the first port, the solution would already include
cargo which had been brought along. This would mean that the first-stage decisions would have
more of an impact on the quality of the stowage plan. These improvements could be analysed
in future work.
55
==PAGE:62==
8
Conclusion
The stowage planning problem is an important part of the operational decisions for RORO oper-
ators and it is a key part of reducing turnaround times in ports and having eﬀicient operations.
This thesis has analysed the Dynamic RORO Ship Stowage Planning (DRSSP) problem which
considers the arrival time of cargo when drafting a stowage plan. The objective of the model is
to maximise profits from transporting cargo and minimise voyage costs through slow steaming.
To solve the dynamic stowage planning problem we have proposed a two-stage stochastic program
which treats the arrival times of cargo as stochastic. The problem has been studied as a single-
deck problem with a flexible grid representation where the vessel makes multiple port calls to
pick up cargo. The model has two decision stages. In the first stage, the model considers cargo
which is available at the first port and then assigns positions while taking the booked cargo into
consideration. The arrivals are modelled as exponentially distributed delays which are used to
generate different scenarios. The scenarios are a discretisation of the true underlying distribution
but are a necessary part of stochastic programs. Stability tests showed that ten scenarios were
appropriate when considering the trade-off between running time and the stability of the model.
To solve the two-stage model a heuristic inspired by Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS) was
developed. The heuristic utilised four neighbourhood structures to search for high-quality first-
stage decisions. To evaluate the objective value, the recourse problem needed to be solved each
time the first-stage decisions were updated. Since the structures of the first and second-stage
decisions resemble each other, a similar approach was used to solve each scenario. However, the
estimation of the objective value is very time-consuming which is an issue in our modelling that
should be addressed in future work.
The exact model could only be solved for instances with a grid resolution of up to 25 × 25
positions.
The heuristic provided good results for instances with a grid resolution of up to
100 × 38 positions within a reasonable time frame.
For problem instances larger than this,
the heuristic struggled to find good solutions as it did not converge within the one-hour time
limit. It was examined how sensitive the model was to changes to bunker fuel cost and revenue
gained from transporting cargo. This could give an indication of how the model would react to
market changes and whether the results were robust. The analysis showed that the solution was
quite sensitive to changes in fuel cost and cargo revenue when the α-value was below 0.6. This
indicated that when cargo revenue is prioritised, the model is more affected by price fluctuations.
To examine whether there was something to be gained from using a stochastic program com-
pared to a deterministic model, the value of the stochastic solution was computed. Solving the
DRSSP problem using the heuristic showed that for both small and medium-sized instances
there was a small benefit from using the stochastic model. However, there was significant varia-
tion in the results. Possible reasons for this could include the noise from the scenario generation
methods and the solution method as well as limited stochasticity in the test instances. Poten-
tial improvements could be to use alternative scenario generation methods such as clustering
to examine whether this would reduce the noise introduced by the scenario generation process.
This might provide more representative scenarios and could potentially result in higher quality
solutions. Furthermore, additional stochasticity could be introduced to the problem by having
arrival times for each individual vehicle rather than one arrival time for the entire cargo book-
ing. These improvements might lead to more conclusive results regarding the benefit of using a
stochastic program compared to a deterministic model.
The optimal stowage planning problem should ideally be solved taking practical considerations
56
==PAGE:63==
such as vessel structure and stability into account. Given the additional computational effort
required to solve the stochastic program, it is diﬀicult to say, how much value the stochastic
program should represent in order for it to have practical relevance. However, the benefits of
using a stochastic program can be seen even for a simplified model with several restrictions on
the loading and unloading processes. Future improvements could be explored to obtain a more
detailed understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of using a stochastic model for the
DRSSP problem.
57
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1] UNCTAD.
Review of Maritime Transport 2022.
Technical report, 2022.
URL https:
//unctad.org/system/files/official-document/rmt2022_en.pdf.
[2] Beizhen Jia, Kjetil Fagerholt, Line Blander Reinhardt, and Niels Gorm Malý Rytter.
Stowage Planning with Optimal Ballast Water.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfor-
matics), volume 12433 LNCS, pages 84–100. Springer Science and Business Media Deutsch-
land GmbH, 2020. ISBN 9783030597467. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-59747-4{\_}6.
[3] IMO.
IMO’s work to cut GHG emissions from ships.
URL https://www.imo.org/en/
MediaCentre/HotTopics/Pages/Cutting-GHG-emissions.aspx.
[4] Bernt Olav Øvstebø, Lars Magnus Hvattum, and Kjetil Fagerholt. Optimization of stowage
plans for RoRo ships. Computers and Operations Research, 38(10):1425–1434, 10 2011.
ISSN 03050548. doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2011.01.004.
[5] Jone R Hansen, Ivar Hukkelberg, Kjetil Fagerholt, Magnus Stålhane, and Jørgen G Rakke.
2D-Packing with an Application to Stowage in Roll-on Roll-off Liner Shipping. Technical
report.
[6] Romanas Puisa. Optimal stowage on Ro-Ro decks for eﬀiciency and safety. Journal of
Marine Engineering and Technology, 20(1):17–33, 2021. ISSN 20568487. doi: 10.1080/
20464177.2018.1516942.
[7] Jone R. Hansen, Kjetil Fagerholt, Magnus Stålhane, and Jørgen G. Rakke. An adaptive
large neighborhood search heuristic for the planar storage location assignment problem:
application to stowage planning for Roll-on Roll-off ships. Journal of Heuristics, 26(6):
885–912, 12 2020. ISSN 15729397. doi: 10.1007/s10732-020-09451-z.
[8] Alastair Main, Dario Pacino, and Filipe Rodrigues. EURO 2022-Espoo WC-23 3 - The
Dynamic RORO Stowage Planning. 2022.
[9] Jonas Christensen, Alan Erera, and Dario Pacino. A rolling horizon heuristic for the stochas-
tic cargo mix problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Re-
view, 123:200–220, 3 2019. ISSN 13665545. doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2018.10.010.
[10] Qiang Meng, Tingsong Wang, and Shuaian Wang. Short-term liner ship fleet planning with
container transshipment and uncertain container shipment demand. European Journal of
Operational Research, 223(1):96–105, 11 2012. ISSN 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2012.06.
025.
[11] Jun Li, Yu Zhang, Jie Ma, and Sanyou Ji. Multi-Port Stowage Planning for Inland Container
Liner Shipping Considering Weight Uncertainties. IEEE Access, 6:66468–66480, 2018. ISSN
21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2878308.
[12] Seyed Parsa Parvasi, Alastair Ronald Main, and Dario Pacino. RoRo Ships Stowage Plan-
ning: Using a Novel MIP Model and Stability Constraints. In 2022 8th International Con-
ference on Control, Decision and Information Technologies (CoDIT), pages 1309–1311.
IEEE, 5 2022. ISBN 978-1-6654-9607-0. doi: 10.1109/CoDIT55151.2022.9804029. URL
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9804029/.
58
==PAGE:65==
[13] Alan J. King and Stein W. Wallace. Modeling with Stochastic Programming. Springer New
York, New York, NY, 2012. ISBN 978-0-387-87816-4. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-87817-1.
[14] John R. Birge and François Louveaux. Introduction and Examples. In Introduction to
Stochastic Programming, pages 3–48. 2017. ISBN 978-1-4614-0236-7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
4614-0237-4. URL http://www.springer.com/series/3182.
[15] Alexander Shapiro and Andy Philpott. A Tutorial on Stochastic Programming. Technical
report, 2007.
[16] Michel G. Gendreau and Jean-Yves Potvin.
Preface.
In Handbook of Metaheuristics,
pages vii–xiii. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
ISBN 331991085x, 3319910868,
9783319910857, 9783319910864.
[17] Pierre Hansen, Nenad Mladenović, Jack Brimberg, and José A.Moreno Pérez. Variable
neighborhood search.
In International Series in Operations Research and Management
Science, volume 272, pages 57–97. Springer New York LLC, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
91086-4{\_}3.
[18] Pierre Hansen and Nenad Mladenović. Variable neighborhood search. In Search Method-
ologies: Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques, Second
Edition, pages 313–338. Springer US, 1 2014. ISBN 9781461469407. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
4614-6940-7{\_}12.
[19] Jean-Paul Rodrigue. Chapter 4 – Transport, Energy and Environment. In The Geography
of Transport Systems. 5 edition, 2020. ISBN 978-0-367-36463-2.
[20] Alexander Shapiro. Monte Carlo Sampling Methods. pages 353–425. 2003. doi: 10.1016/
S0927-0507(03)10006-0.
[21] Francisco Parreño, Dario Pacino, and Ramon Alvarez-Valdes. A GRASP algorithm for the
container stowage slot planning problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 94:141–157, 10 2016. ISSN 13665545. doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2016.07.011.
[22] Ship & Bunker. EMEA Average , 2023. URL https://shipandbunker.com/prices/av/global/
av-g20-global-20-ports-average#VLSFO.
[23] D. Pacino, A. Delgado, R. M. Jensen, and T. Bebbington. Fast Generation of Near-Optimal
Plans for Eco-Eﬀicient Stowage of Large Container Vessels. Technical report, 2011.
[24] Daobao Xu, Zhiping Chen, and Li Yang. Scenario tree generation approaches using K-means
and LP moment matching methods. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics,
236(17):4561–4579, 11 2012. ISSN 03770427. doi: 10.1016/j.cam.2012.05.020.
[25] IMO. Reduced limit on sulphur in marine fuel oil implemented smoothly through 2020, 1
2021. URL https://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/PressBriefings/pages/02-IMO-2020.aspx.
59
==PAGE:66==
Appendix A: System Information
The tests have been run using the Julia version 1.7, and Gurobi Optimizer version 9.5.2. The
tests have been compiled using the central DTU HPC cluster. This is a general compute resource
for students, and it contains a number of different hardware components.
4 x Lenovo ThinkSystem SD630 V2
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6342 (24 core, 2.8 GHz)
• 512GB memory (16 x 32GB DDR4-3200)
• FDR-Infiniband
• 10 GBit-Ethernet
• 480 GB SSD
28 x Lenovo ThinkSystem SD530
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6226R (16 core, 2.90GHz)
• 11 x 384GB memory (12 x 32GB DDR4-2933)
• 17 x 768 GB memory (12 x 64GB DDR4-2933)
• FDR-Infiniband
• 10 GBit-Ethernet
• 480 GB SSD
24 x Lenovo ThinkSystem SD530
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6126 (12 core, 2.60GHz)
• 2 x 192GB memory (12 x 16 GB DDR4-2400)
• 21 x 384GB memory (12 x 32 GB DDR4-2400)
• 1 x 768 GB memory (12 x 64 GB DDR4-2400)
• FDR-Infiniband
• 10 GBit-Ethernet
• 480 GB SSD
In total
• 576 Cores
60
==PAGE:67==
4 x Lenovo ThinkSystem SD530
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6142 (16 core, 2.60GHz)
• 384 GB memory (12 x 32 GB DDR4-2666)
• FDR-Infiniband
• 10 Gbit-Ethernet
• 480 GB SSD
In total
• 128 Cores
30 x Huawei XH620 V3
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Processor 2650v4 (12 core, 2.20GHz)
• 256 GB memory (16 x 16 GB DDR4-2666)
• FDR-Infiniband
• 480 GB-SSD disk
In total
• 720 Cores
6 x Huawei XH620 V3
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Processor 2650v4 (12 core, 2.20GHz)
• 512 GB memory (16 x 32 GB DDR4-2400)
• FDR-Infiniband
• 480 GB-SSD disk
In total
• 144 Cores
47 x Huawei XH620 V3
Each node is configured with:
• 2x Intel Xeon Processor 2660v3 (10 core, 2.60GHz)
• 128 GB memory
• FDR-Infiniband
• 1 TB-SATA disk
In total:
• 940 Cores
See www.hpc.dtu.dk for more information.
61
==PAGE:68==
