==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master Thesis Mathematical Modelling
Optimization of the Saving and Dissaving
Problem using Operations Research
DTU Lyngby - January 22, 2023
Tobias Nielsen
s174499
Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen
Supervisor
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis present a mathematical model for optimization of the saving- and dissaving problem that we all
face throughout our life, and attempts to solve the problem with optimization research. A model containing
the tax- and pension rules of Denmark is presented, as well as variants for e.g. someone with a mortgage.
Also presented is real world data concerning real peoples pensions and finances, and my model is held up to
compare against this data. In all cases, both simulated and comparing to the real world, it is shown that with
enough time for the model to optimize over, the results show an increased pension fund at retirement resulting
in higher consumption during retirement, and thus an assumed quality of life increase.
1
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis is written as the final part of my master’s degree in Mathematical Modelling and Com-
putation at DTU. The thesis is 30 ETCT points, and a mandatory part of the education. The target audience
is people interested in operations research, mathematical modelling or personal finances. Having a basic un-
derstanding of how a mathematical model is optimized using operations research is needed to understand the
thesis, while most financial parts will be explained directly, the fundamentals of optimization will not.
All models are written in GAMS Studio 39. While not much hard math was needed for this thesis, when
applicable, I did my math using Maple 2022 or written in Python.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Kourosh Rasmussen, for all the invaluable help he has given me throughout
the thesis. I would also like to thank Tobias Jessen - s174292 for sparring with me and idea sharing.
Throughout this thesis, some technical terms (fagtermer) will be used, and some will not seem entirely accurate
when translated from Danish to English. Below I have created a table for some of the words that I have
translated, and the translation I have used.
Some of the words in the table are given as a help for the
translation, while others are given as a help for the abbreviation, which makes it easier to read the models.
Danish
English
Abbreviation
Ratepension
Annuity Pension
AP
Livsrentepension
Life Annuity pension
LP
Aldersopsparing
Lump Sum
LS
Folkepension
Public Pension
PP
Arbejdsmarkedsbidrag
Workplace contribution
AM
Beskæftigelsesfradrag
Employment Deduction
ED
Jobfradrag
Job Deduction
JD
Tobias Nielsen - s174499
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction and Motivation
4
2
The Core Model
5
2.1
Modelling the Core Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Results of the basic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
The Saving- and Dissaving Model
7
3.1
Pension- and Tax Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Annuity Pension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Life Annuity Pension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.3
Public Pension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.4
Lump Sum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.5
Taxes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.6
Deductions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The Saving- and Dissaving Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Payouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3
Taxes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.4
Deductibles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.5
Savings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Using the Model on Real Data
19
4.1
The Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
The Subjects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Subject 1: The Long Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Subject 2: The Medium Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Subject 3: The Rich Guy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Discussion of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Model Variants
32
5.1
Adding a Mortgage to the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Minimal Payment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Future Work
36
6.1
Multiple Pension Funds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Discussion
39
8
Conclusion
40
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction and Motivation
In this thesis, I wish to model the saving- and dissaving problem that every person faces throughout their
lifetime. Everyone has to save some of the money they earn throughout their life, to fund their life after
they retire and no longer gain a steady salary. This is called the savings problem, as it entails how to most
efficiently save your wages and how to store the money. Knowing every option is vital if one wants to get as
much money as possible when retired. Even when knowing all the possibilities of storage, there are taxation
rules that either punish or reward you, and each way of storing your money has their own set of these rules as
well as benefits and drawbacks.
Then you retire, and all the money you have saved up now has to be used in the smartest way, giving you the
most enjoyment out of the rest of your life. This is the dissaving problem. After retirement, your money can
still earn money off interest, so it is in your best interest to not spend too much money early in retirement,
such that the compound interest can keep you living a happy life until your death.
I will model the saving- and dissaving problem as an operations research mathematical model, and solve it using
appropriate methods, in order to maximize the amount of money you can have between your hands throughout
your entire life, both while saving and dissaving. The saving- and dissaving problem can be modelled in many
ways, using more and more complex rules. For every model in this thesis, it holds that the rules used to build
the model, are the rules used in Denmark for taxes, pension, loans and mortgages, and everything else. It also
holds, that any value of currency will be given in values equal to todays’ value of the currency. So even if a
model runs over the span of 70 years, the output will be given in 2022/2023 values.
The goal of modelling the saving- and dissaving problem, is to hopefully inform the common man about how
they can save more money, possibly leading to a better life post retirement, without sacrificing quality of life
during the working years. The goal is not to replace talking to a professional retirement councilor, but instead
to give a tool for better understanding of ones own finances, and a starting point when entering counselling.
Since models are very rigid, and do not understand the fine varieties of daily financing, a meeting with a
retirement councilor or equivalent financial advisor is always recommended, as they know all the ins and outs
of the system and how to exploit it to your fullest benefit. The human element also allows councillors to tailor
a solution that fits exactly your needs, while the model is rigid in giving a solution that gives the best objective
value.
This problem is interesting to look at, since it affects almost every single person. Most people will not have
the necessary knowledge regarding the entire finance system, and maybe even about their own finances, to
make informed decisions with their money. During an interview with a retirement councillor, I was informed
that the average person could ’earn’ hundreds of thousands kroner, simply by making better financial decisions
throughout their lifetime. What I hope to accomplish with this thesis, is create a tool to inform the general
public. To give them knowledge about the general system and their own finances, as well as an initial solution
they can show their councillor to start a discussion.
4
==PAGE:6==
2
The Core Model
In a bit, I will explain the saving- and dissaving model. First off, by showing what I call the core model. The
name is given to this model, as it has been simplified from the full model I will show you later, and instead
only contains the core elements that makes the full model work while still giving results that are within the
scope of the saving- and dissaving problem. This is done in order to ease you into the model, and explain
some bits at a time. The core model contains only a few rules. All income is taxed at 38%, and you can only
store your savings in one place, which is then paid out after you retire. Savings are tax deductible, and your
saved money increases by a 5% interest each time step.
2.1
Modelling the Core Model
The user of the model simply has to input their age, their yearly salary and their minimum consumption for
a given year. The minimum consumption is something the user has to determine with themselves, based on
their current lifestyle, and how they wish their lifestyle to be during their retirement years. Model-wise, this
is set to 0 at any time, since it has no actual influence in the model, and setting it to 0 lets the model have
free reign over the optimization.
max
YearlyConsumption ≥Minimum Consumption
(1)
s.t.
Consumptiont = TotalIncomet −Taxest −Savingst
∀t
(2)
Consumptiont ≥YearlyConsumption · 1.0
t ∈wt
(3)
Consumptiont ≥YearlyConsumption · 0.8
t ∈rt
(4)
TotalIncomet = Salaryt + Payoutt
∀t
(5)
Taxt = (TotalIncomet −Savingst) · 0.38
∀t
(6)
Fundt = Fundt−1 · 1.05 + Savingst −Payoutt
∀t
(7)
The objective of the model is to maximize consumption throughout your lifetime. Consumption is defined as
all that is left after taxes and what you set aside for your savings. This is a good objective function, because
consumption can (to a degree) be correlated directly to quality of life, as more money in your hands means
you can afford more luxury items, going out to restaurants, going to events, dental care and all sorts of other
goods and services. Thus, maximizing for consumption, is to some degree maximizing for quality of life.
The model contains a couple of different t’s. These are the time periods that the model is split into. This
simple model contains only 3. Namely t, which is the entire timeline of the model, here ages 35 to 90, wt
which are the working years, 35 to 69, and rt which are the years during retirement, 70 to the death of the
client at age 90.
A bar is set for consumption at the age of retirement. Here, the consumption is decreased to 80%. When you
retire, many of your daily expenses goes down. For one, at that point your children have surely gotten old
enough that they no longer rely on you financially at all, but your expenses on luxuries and things such as
clothes, food, entertainment, insurance and especially transport are all reduced as you age. Since both income
and expenses reduces at the point of retirement, I put that in the model as a 20% decrease in consumption
in equation (4). At the same time, your salary goes to 0, but you start getting money paid out from your
pension fund. In this version, the size of the payout is decided by the model entirely. As one can expect, the
model starts withdrawing the pension fund when there is no longer a stable salary being given each month,
5
==PAGE:7==
and pays out in equal chunks, such that each year has the same income, even after retirement. Taxes are
simply modelled as 38% of what is left after depositing a part into the pension fund. The pension fund is then
left to gather interest at a rate of 5% each year.
2.2
Results of the basic model
This basic model allows me to show some of the vital results of the larger, more complex and intricate models
that will come later. Namely the total fund and the consumption stair, which is what I call the decrease of
20% in consumption when you retire, as well as the increase and later depletion of your pension fund.
I now run the model with the parameters as just explained. t = [35; 90], retiring at t = 69, and a user salary
of 550000DKK a year.
Figure 1: The evolution of the pension fund and the user consumption over 55 years.
Here, I would have loved to shown off the consumption stair, as defined by equations (3) and (4), and explained
above. But the simple model manages to keep the consumption exactly equal throughout the persons entire
life, allowing them to consume 298611DKK each year. Simplifying the model gives simplified results.
Each year, the model decides to save 68368DKK. This is quite a bit, and with 45 years of compound interest,
the model ends up with 6175070DKK saved when entering retirement. The pension fund still racks up interest
while retired, but it quickly depletes when taking out huge chunks of it to pay for your daily needs. The
pension fund looks as I expect it to, with a growth that looks exponential until retirement, where the curve
dives faster for every time step, as the interest fails to make up the payout.
While this model is good for building upon, and explaining the basics, it also shows the shortcomings of this
type of modelling in an easy way. Firstly, the odds are, that both your salary and consumption will change
drastically throughout your life, for example at a change of job, marriage, kids, car or a mortgage. But the
model does not know this. If you are not getting a small salary raise each year, your salary is effectively getting
smaller, as inflation rises. This is not a problem with the way I have handled the model, as I note earlier that
all monetary values are given in todays’ money. But, if a person switches job, a salary can change quite a bit,
both for the better or for the worse. If such a shift in either salary or consumption occurs, the model has to
be run from scratch with new inputs. A user would have to give their new age, salary and how much money
they have in their fund(s), and then run it anew. This will allow the model to change how much they should
save, and also increase or decrease the consumption according to the new data.
Another problem, is that the model aims to have completely depleted your pension fund at the age of death.
6
==PAGE:8==
The age of death in the model could be given by public known data from Danmarks Statistik [1]. The statistics
say that the average age of death in Denmark is about 82 years. But the actual age of death remains unknown,
which makes quite a difference, since many rules rely on guessing or predicting the death of the retiree, which
is obviously impossible. If using an average age of death, you run the risk of the user living long past the age
that the model predicts they will die at. This means the user will have to use other tricks to keep themself
afloat in their late years, as this cannot be modelled to precision. As we will see in a bit, one of the pension
products that are offered in Denmark actually tries to prevent situations like this by paying a set amount
until your death, but otherwise you have to find money yourself. This is a problem that cannot be ”modelled
away”, in the sense that it is absolutely impossible to predict when someone dies. The chosen course of action
here, is to increase the time of death to a number well above the average lifespan. This directly causes the
model to be slightly conservative with your money, and giving you a larger safety net in your elderly years.
3
The Saving- and Dissaving Model
To expand the model we first need to know some of the rules of the tax- and pension systems. While there
are many rules, and most of them have conditions upon them, we need to know the ins and outs of the system
that governs both, to maximize consumption. Given a quick overview, the rules are not as bad as one might
believe, and the modelling can then begin.
3.1
Pension- and Tax Rules
In Denmark, there are several different pension products, each with different rules for payments going in and
out. In my model I use four pension products, namely annuity pension (ratepension), life annuity pension
(livsrentepension), public pension (folkepension) and the lump sum (aldersopsparing). I will quickly go through
the basics of the rules for each product, as well as taxes and deductions.
First, a general thing about the Danish tax system is that almost everyone pays some percentage of their
salary directly into a pension fund. The percentage and which type of pension product you are paying towards
will all be described in your employment contract. There is a free deposit from your employer directly, as well
as a mandatory deposit taken from your salary into your pension fund. The money is taken before AM is
applied, meaning that it is tax deductible. I have chosen to not have this explicitly in my model, but instead
I consider the salary input as your gross salary, meaning the employers pension deposit is added to the salary
in the input phase.
3.1.1
Annuity Pension
Annuity pension is the pension product that most people will associate with the word pension. Each year you
can deposit money into your pension account, and when you retire they are paid out in chunks each month.
You can deposit up to 59200DKK each year with a full tax deduction. Further deduction rules apply, and will
be explained in 3.1.6. The deposited amount is then invested by your pension company, and the returns of
the investments are taxed at a 15.3% rate. As the money is paid back to you after your retirement, normal
A-tax is paid. When you retire, you choose how many years your annuity pension is paid out over. Annuity
pensions are paid out in set instalments over a minimum of 10 years, and a maximum of 30 years, meaning
that each month throughout your chosen period, you get the same amount of money, until the time runs out.
If you die before the full pension has been paid out, the remains are left for your family.
7
==PAGE:9==
3.1.2
Life Annuity Pension
Life annuity pension is often described as more of an insurance than a pension product. The tax rules for life
annuity pension are slightly more complicated due to this, but the simple explanation is, that if you choose
to sign up for a life annuity pension, you have to pay some tax free amount each year over at least a 10-year
period. When you retire, you get paid some amount each month until you die, no questions asked. Thus,
people who die early will help pay for the people who die later, ensuring everyone gets some money to spend
for the rest of their lives.
An important thing to note, is that the life annuity pension is set up to be the main tax ”loop hole”, as
every payment to your annuity pension fund is deductible from your taxes, on the one condition that you can
continue to pay the rate for at least 10 years. Again, the returns of the investments of your fund are taxed at
only 15.3%, and you pay A-tax on the payouts. According to [2], the yearly payout will be approximately 5%
of the life annuity fund at the time you get your first payment. Meaning that if you have saved 2000000DKK
at the time of your first payment, each year you will get paid 2000000 · 0.05 = 100000DKK, divided equally
between each month.
3.1.3
Public Pension
Public pension is the government pension fund. The money is paid out in monthly instalments, and the amount
depends on you and your partners salary. A base payment of 78700DKK is given to all retirees (except in the
rare case, where the retiree is still earning more than 348700DKK from working). On top of the base payment,
you can be entitled to supplementary pension. To earn the full supplement, you need to have a yearly income
lower than 89700DKK. Here, income is interpreted as the sum of the annuity- and life annuity pension payout,
as well as interests, and if you have a working salary you are allowed a yearly salary of 122000DKK that does
not count towards reducing the supplement.
Public pension as well as its supplement are both gradual, meaning that a higher salary does not mean losing
your whole pension and supplement, but instead lowers the amount that is paid out to you monthly. For
the base public pension, all money earned above the aforementioned 348700DKK, reduces the payout by 30%
of that money, meaning no base public pension will be paid out, if the retiree earns 610500DKK. For the
supplement, all earnings above 89700DKK reduces the supplement with 30.9%, meaning the supplement will
be completely gone at 379900DKK yearly income.
3.1.4
Lump Sum
The lump sum is a one-time payment that you can get earliest 3 years before the public retirement age. Each
year you can save up to 5500DKK, until 5 years before the public retirement age, where you can save up to
54200DKK, as long as you have not yet started getting either annuity- or public pension. Again, the returns
of the investments of your funds are taxed at 15.3%, but the payout of the lump sum is not taxed. The payout
also does not count against income in the given year, such that it does not lower your public pension payout.
Your entire lump sum is paid out in full at once when you choose to get it paid out.
3.1.5
Taxes
The taxes can be summed up slightly faster. AM is the workplace contribution, this is a tax of 8%, taken
before any other taxes. A-tax is the standard tax of Denmark. A-tax consists of the lowest federal tax, a
tax for your municipality and the church tax. Summed up, A-tax is 38% and is what most people consider
8
==PAGE:10==
the normal tax rate. T-tax is the tax on the people who earn the most. Every krone earned beyond a yearly
544800DKK is taxed at 15% extra, on top of the A-tax. PAL is the tax on returns earned on investments,
and is set at 15.3% of the return.
3.1.6
Deductions
Finally, the Danish tax system has several ways of earning tax deductions. Some cannot be modelled, such
as the now abolished craftsman deduction, where a quarter of what you paid any type of craftsman could be
deducted from your tax, up to some maximum value. This cannot accurately be modelled, as some people
have never even hired a craftsman to fix anything, while some people might do it every year. Thus, any type of
deduction that is based on lifestyle decisions are not included in the model. In the model are the 4 deductions
that happen automatically through your salary and your savings. Ededuct is the employment deduction of
10.65%, up to a max of 41600DKK. Jdeduct is the job deduction of 4.5% of all income above 202700DKK,
at a max of 2700DKK. Pdeduct is the personal deduction, in Denmark it is often called the ”free card” and
is a deduction of 46600DKK each year. Finally, the pension deduction. In any given year more than 15
years away from your retirement, you gain 12% extra deduction on your savings to your annuity pension, up
to a maximum deposit of 75600DKK. In any year less than 15 years away from your retirement, the bonus is
raised to 32% with the same max deposit. Resulting in the bonus capping out at 75600 · 0.12 = 9072DKK and
75600 · 0.32 = 24192DKK before and after 15 years to retirement respectively.
What this deductions means, is that the first 59200DKK are deducted by 112% and 132% respectively, since
deposits into your instalment pension can be deducted completely, and now also with the pension deduction on
top. The final 75600 −59200 = 16400DKK will only be deducted using the pension deduction of respectively
12% and 32%.
3.2
The Saving- and Dissaving Model
Now that all the rules are understood, I can expand on the core model by implementing them. In the following
model, all the tax- and deduction rules as just explained are included. The consumption stair has been given
an extra step 10 years after retirement (age 79), where the consumption further decreases 20% from the base.
The model includes the 4 pension products, and these are the only way you can store excess money.
As with the core model, the inputs are the current age, age of retirement, your salary, minimum consumption
and initial funds in your pensions. What the model then outputs is of course the base consumption, as well as
the actual consumption across the entire interval. The model also outputs how you should save your money,
by showing the deposit into each pension fund. I can freely output every variable as I see fit, if the result is
interesting to look at.
Before running the model, I will introduce some new t’s, which help me with specifying time on some of
my constraints. When applicable, I divide rt, the retirement years, into early- and late retirement years ert
and lrt respectively. This is done for the final step in the consumption stair as mentioned above. For use
in the pension deduction, I divide wt into two as well. I call the two units PDT1 and PDT2 for pension
deduction 1, the period with more than 15 years until retirement, where the bonus is 12% and pension de-
duction 2 where the bonus is 32%. I do the same thing for deposits into the lump sump fund, where a time
set is defined for the period up to 5 years before retirement called LST1 and another for the last 5 years LST2.
9
==PAGE:11==
max
BaseConsumption ≥Minimum Consumption
(8)
s.t.
Consumptiont = Incomet −Taxest −Savingst
∀t
(9)
Consumptiont ≥1.0 · BaseConsumption
t ∈wt
(10)
Consumptiont ≥0.8 · BaseConsumption
t ∈ert
(11)
Consumptiont ≥0.6 · BaseConsumption
t ∈lrt
(12)
Incomet = Salaryt + PensionPayoutt
∀t
(13)
Funds
APfundt = APfundStart + xAP,t
t = t0
(14)
APfundt = APfundt−1 · (1 + Returnst · (1 −0.153)) + xAP,t −APpayt
∀t
(15)
LPfundt = LPfundStart + xLP,t
t = t0
(16)
LPfundt = LPfundt−1 · (1 + Returnst · (1 −0.153)) + xLP,t
∀t
(17)
LPfundt = LPfundt1
t ∈rt
(18)
LSfundt = LSfundStart + xLS,t
t = t0
(19)
LSfundt = LSfundt−1 · (1 + Returnst · (1 −0.153)) + xLS,t −LSpayt
∀t
(20)
FundSumt = APfundt + LPfundt + LSfundt
∀t
(21)
Payouts
PensionPayoutt = APpayt + LPpayt + PPpayt + LSpayt
t ∈rt
(22)
LPpayt = LPtotaltr · 0.05
t ∈rt
(23)
PPbaset = 78700
t ∈rt
(24)
PPrett = (APfundt + LSfundt) · Returnst
t ∈rt
(25)
PPsalt = (APpayt + LPpayt)
t ∈rt
(26)
PPsumt = PPrett + PPsal
t ∈rt
(27)
PPsuppBaset = PPsumt −89700
t ∈rt
(28)
PPsuppBaset ≤Mpp · (1 −Ypp,t) + 379900
t ∈rt
(29)
PPsuppBaset ≥−Mpp · Ypp,t + 379900
t ∈rt
(30)
PPsuppt ≤89700 · Ypp,t
t ∈rt
(31)
PPsuppt ≤89700 −PPsuppBaset · 0.309 + (1 −Ypp,t) · Mpp
t ∈rt
(32)
PPsuppt ≥0
t ∈rt
(33)
PPpayt = PPbaset + PPsuppt
t ∈rt
(34)
LSpayt = LSfundt
t ∈rt
(35)
Taxes
Taxest = 0 · TaxInc1 + 0.38 · TaxInc2 + 0.53 · TaxInc3
∀t
(36)
TaxInct = TaxInc1 + TaxInc2 + TaxInc3
∀t
(37)
TaxInct = Incomet −AM −(APdedt + xLP,t + Edeductt + Jdeductt)
t ∈wt
(38)
TaxInct = Incomet −LSpayt
t ∈rt
(39)
TaxInc1t = 46600
∀t
(40)
TaxInc2t = 552500 −46600
∀t
(41)
AMt = (Salaryt −xAP,t) · 0.08
t ∈wt
(42)
10
==PAGE:12==
Deductibles
Edeductt ≤41600
t ∈wt
(43)
Edeductt ≤0.1065 · (Salaryt −AMt)
t ∈wt
(44)
JDbaset = (Salaryt −AMt) −202700
t ∈wt
(45)
JDbaset ≤Mjd · Yjd,t
t ∈wt
(46)
JDeductt ≤2700 · Yjd,t
t ∈wt
(47)
JDeductt ≤JDbaset · 0.045 + (1 −Yjd,t) · Mjd
t ∈wt
(48)
JDeductt ≥0
t ∈wt
(49)
Savings
Savingst = xAP,t + xLP,t + xLS,t
∀t
(50)
APdedt = 1.12 · xAPfullt + 0.12 · xAPbonust
t ∈PDT1
(51)
APdedt = 1.32 · xAPfullt + 0.32 · xAPbonust
t ∈PDT2
(52)
xAP,t = xAPfullt + xAPbonust
∀t
(53)
xAPfullt ≤59200
∀t
(54)
xAPbonust ≤75600 −59200
∀t
(55)
xAP,t = 0
t ∈rt
(56)
xLP,t ≥0
∀t
(57)
xLP,t = 0
t ∈rt
(58)
xLS,t ≤5500
t ∈LST1
(59)
xLS,t ≤54200
t ∈LST2
(60)
xLS,t = 0
t ∈rt
(61)
xLS,t ≥0
∀t
(62)
As mentioned, the model contains four of the Danish pension products. I have chosen not to implement ATP,
the Danish workplace supplementary pension, which is actually legally required from all employees to pay
into. I have chosen not to do this, as payout of ATP is quite low, while the modelling needed to implement
ATP, while not difficult, would be a tad complex. The three pension funds you manage yourself all collect
interests/gain returns at the rate described by the Returns variable. I have simply decided that the returns
are 5% before retirement, 4% after retirement but before 80, and 3% after 80. This aligns with real world
pension firms giving you options for how much risk you are willing to endure with your funds. People are
advised to take higher risks because that often means bigger returns, until they retire, or at least very close to.
Then, since you are living more or less directly off of your interests during retirement, having too high a risk is
not advised, although in your early retirement while you are still relatively energetic, you might still want to
squeeze the last bit out of your funds. Finally, when you get older, you just want the safety and security that
low risk investments affords you. The returns are modelled this way, as it was never my intention to model
the stock/bond market. As a comparison, according to Business Insider [3], the S&P500 has an average yearly
return of 10.7% since its inception in 1957. Danish pension funds mostly invests in bonds, so the returns
should be much lower than that, but less risky, thus I find that 5% returns seem to be a good estimate for my
model.
The model has been divided into sections, defined by the title in italics on the left side of the equations. This
hopefully allow for easier readability and subsequently understanding of the model. As can be seen, this model
is essentially all the meat and muscles on top of the backbone consisting of the core model. With the additions
11
==PAGE:13==
being several new rules, more options for saving and lots of added complexity.
3.2.1
Funds
In this section, I define how saved money is stored in individual funds. All three funds start at the value given
by their respective XXfundStart variable, as well as the amount saved in the first timestep t0. Each fund
then gather interest and returns at the rate defined by Returnst as described above. PAL tax is removed
directly from the returns.
Note that the life annuity pension stops gathering returns after retirement. This is due to how the payouts of
this specific product is handled. 5% of the amount at the time of the first payment is paid out for the rest of
the users life. Since the payment will be exactly at the first year of retirement, the fund stops evolving, and
the payout is not deducted from the fund, as the payment is static for the rest of your life.
3.2.2
Payouts
The total pension payout of a given time period is the sum of the four possible pension products.
The
payment of the life annuity pension is as mentioned 5% of the fund at the time of retirement, for every time
step remaining. The payout of LS is simply just the entirety of the fund.
For the public pension, a bit more work has to be done. Every retiree is entitled to the base of public pension
of 78700DKK a year, given by the variable PPbase. The supplement to this then has to be calculated. First,
I calculate the income that counts towards reducing the supplement. This is given by the returns of your
investments, in this model given by the APfund and LSfund returns, as well as the payout of the annuity-
and life annuity pensions. These are summed, and the minimum value of 89700 is deducted from this sum
to create the base of which to calculate the value of the supplement. I now introduce a binary variable Ypp
in equations (29) and (30).
These two equations define, that the binary variable is equal to 1, whenever
PPsuppBase is less than 379900, which is the exact value at which you are no longer entitled to a single
krone of supplementary pension. Thus, when PPsuppBase goes over this value, equation (31) becomes 0,
while equation (32) becomes Mpp, an arbitrarily large number. Thus, the value of the supplement when the
supplement base is too large, has to be larger than or equals to 0 (eq (33)), smaller than Mpp (eq (32)) which
is arbitrary, and smaller than or equals to 0 (eq (31)), meaning it just becomes 0. When the supplement base
is lower than 379900, meaning that Ypp = 1, the value of the supplement is simply calculated by 30.9% of the
difference between 89700 and PPsuppBase.
The payout of the annuity pension is completely unconstrained in the retirement years.
The model will
optimize the payout itself, such that the highest consumption is achieved.
3.2.3
Taxes
The nature of the taxes was explained quickly above in section 3.1, but here follows an explanation of how
they work in the model. I have modelled the taxes using a bucket method. This means I divide the taxable
income into 3 buckets, and tax the buckets individually with the percentage needed. In equation (36), I show
the three buckets. The first bucket is taxed 0%, this is due to the personal deduction. The second bucket
is taxed at normal A-tax rates of 38%, and the last bucket is taxed with the additional 15% of the top tax,
resulting in a 53% tax rate. The taxable income, meaning the part of ones income that is legible for taxation, is
defined in equation (38) as your income after AM and minus all deductions. The size of the buckets are defined
as, first the size of personal deduction, second as the difference between the top tax limit and the personal
12
==PAGE:14==
deduction, and the third bucket is just whatever is left after filling these two. The model will automatically
fill the buckets in the order that gives the lowest amount of taxes paid, as this obviously increases how much
is left for consumption afterwards.
Finally, AM is 8% of your salary after saving to your annuity pension.
3.2.4
Deductibles
There are 4 deductibles in Danish law. Employment deduction has an upper constraint of 41600DKK, and
is subsequently calculated as 10.65% of ones income. These two constraints are enough to give the exact
employment deduction.
The constraints for job deduction are a bit more complex. JDbase is the amount of money which we base
the size of the job deduction off of, that being all salary (after AM) above 202700DKK. The second JDbase
constraint declares the binary variable YJD,t that I want to be 1 for a positive value of JDbase. Enforcing
that YJD,t is 1 for positive JDbase is done in the second JDeduct constraint. Here, the actual value of the
deduction is given by 4.5% of the base of the deduction. The second term then declares that if YJD,t = 1, then
JDbase has to be positive, or else JDeduct will not be able to be assigned a value between 0 and 2700 which
is eq (47) and eq (49) respectively. This method is almost entirely identical to the one used to calculate the
public pension supplement, having only changed the conditions for when the binary variable changes value.
The personal deduction of 46600DKK is added directly into the tax buckets, so this one has no entries in the
deduction section. While the final deduction, the retirement deduction, is added directly into the savings of
annuity pension.
3.2.5
Savings
Savings are given by x’s, as these are the important decision variables that define the size of the pension fund,
and thus the consumption after retirement. The constraint for LS is defined by how much you are legally
allowed to put into that specific type of pension fund. The limit is 5500DKK up until 5 years before the age of
public retirement, where you are allowed to deposit 54200DKK a year until retirement. The constraint for LP
is simply that it has to be a positive number, as there are no rules for how much you are allowed to deposit
into an LP fund. This is due to the nature of the life annuity pension, and as I described earlier, how it is
often viewed as an insurance more than a pension product. Since this is the case, people with a lot of money
are allowed to deposit as much as they want into an LP fund. The short-term gain for the user is the tax
deduction, while the long-term gain for the Danish government is that they will likely have to pay less public
pension to someone with a very large annuity pension fund. Also, if the user dies before having withdrawn
all of his money from the annuity pension fund, the pension firm and the government will for the most part
profit off of the remaining money.
For the savings into the annuity pension, a bucket method is used again, since the upper limit of the retirement
deduction is larger than the limit for deductible savings of AP. The AP savings has two buckets, xAPfull
and xAPbonus. xAPfull defines the limit of which a deposit to an annuity pension is completely deductible
at 54200DKK, while xAPbonus is the upper limit for the retirement deduction, where you earn a percent of
your deposit as further deduction. As explained in section 3.1.6, retirement deduction is a bonus deduction of
12%/32% in the years before/after 15 years until your retirement. Meaning that every 100DKK saved nets a
tax deduction of 112/132DKK in each respective period.
13
==PAGE:15==
3.3
Results
For these results, all the simulated users start at age 35 and die at 90. None of them have any funds saved
before running the model, so the only input left is their salary. I simulate three people with varying salary, one
with a relatively low yearly income of 350000DKK, one well-off person with a salary of 550000DKK, and finally
someone with high wages at 850000DKK yearly. I also show a run of the model without the consumption stair,
meaning that the user of the model is not willing to lose any amount of consumption, even after retirement.
This is done to show how big the impact of lowering consumption after retirement is. Minimum consumption
has been set to 0.
This allows the model to find the best possible solution, as it reduces the amount of
constraints that it has to take into account.
In all cases, I expect the model to prioritise hitting the deduction limit for the annuity pension at 59200DKK
as the first order of business, and then the limit on the lump sum at 5500DKK afterwards. Atleast at first.
The model will not want the lump sum to be too big, as the payout is only in a single time step, so it does not
increase the overall consumption, it just saves a lot of money in that one single step. I cannot say what the
limit to the lump sum model is, but when it is reached, the model will then start prioritising the life annuity
higher than the lump sump. This will increase the payout throughout every time step of the retirement,
instead of just the single year, and will thus give a better objective.
Before showing the results of my model, I need something to compare the results to. For a base case, I create
a scenario where the user wishes to have their funds paid out as quickly as possible. To do this, I set a single
new constraint that denotes that the APfund has to be empty as soon as possible, meaning 10 years into
retirement.
APfundt = 0
t ∈lrt
(63)
The obvious result here, is that the model will start prioritising the life annuity heavier than in my standard
model, such that this constraint will matter less overall. But this is fine, it will still work out as a base case
for me to compare against. There are other issues with this way of making a base case, especially the fact that
the saving portion will still be model optimized and thus, hypothetically better than what an average person
would do with their finances.
I show here the medium income base case.
Figure 2: The evolution of the total pension fund including each separate pension product, and the consumption over
55 years in the medium income base case.
14
==PAGE:16==
The base case saves up a total of 5009689DKK, just above 5 million and as I predicted, most of it is saved in
life annuity. The consumption is given at 353874DKK a year.
Now let’s see what the model can do without the base case constraint of eq(63).
Figure 3: The consumption of users with a yearly salary of 350000DKK (blue), 550000DKK (with/without the con-
sumption stair in orange/yellow), and 850000DKK (gray)
The respective consumption is 247527DKK for the low income user, 359977DKK for the medium income
and 336394DKK for the medium income without the consumption stair, and finally 509972DKK for the high
income user. All three an improvement to their respective base case.
Figure 4: The medium- and big income consumption compared to their respective base case.
The low income consumption has been omitted here, as the difference is too small to be presented visually. The
base case consumptions are found at 246761DKK for the low income user, 353874DKK for the medium income
user and 503594DKK for the big income user. A decrease in consumption compared to normal of 990DKK,
6625DKK and 6835DKK. While this does not seem like especially large numbers, the difference throughout a
15
==PAGE:17==
life time adds up. For the low income user, the difference is the smallest, as low funds leaves very little space
to optimize upon, and when the model ends it has only gained 49115DKK. The medium income has a lot bit
bigger impact, and has a lifetime consumption increase of 327830DKK. The big income user has a lifetime
consumption increase of 339017DKK. As with the low income user, having too much money also leaves little
space for improving, as the model can just fill up every single bucket that increases consumption on the other
side. Again, I have to highlight the fact that the base case also takes advantage of the optimal savings of
the model, so the difference between the base case and a normal run of my model will be smaller than the
difference between a real person that has not used the model, and haven’t had help with their finances.
Note also the relatively small difference in consumption between the two medium income users with and without
the consumption stair constraint. Without the consumption stair, you choose to reduce your consumption
throughout your working life with 23583DKK, which in itself is quite a bit of money of course, about 2000DKK
each month, but the payoff after retirement is pretty big. During the early retirement years, the difference in
consumption between these two otherwise identical persons is 48412DKK and it increases to 120408DKK in
the late retirement years making up a life time difference of 1001645DKK, one million in consumption, in favor
of the user without the consumption stair. On the other hand, if you look only at the consumption during the
working years, the user with the consumption stair has consumed 815970DKK more than their counterpart.
In a real world case, this is something worth thinking about for a user. A yearly consumption of 336394 as an
88-year-old is probably way too much, but the weights of the stair could be adjusted to better fit into a users
lifestyle, interests and perceived longevity.
Another thing to think about, is the fact that 20% of the large income is a much bigger step than the 20%
out of the small income. A person this wealthy might not wish to reduce their consumption that much just
because they retired. Again, a new weight could be chosen, or alternatively a maximal loss measured in DKK
instead. This is up to the user again, and can be changed quite easily to adjust the needs of the individual.
Now for the funds. How much is saved each time step changes drastically by income. As expected, the model
favours hitting the limit of AP and LS, until LS has reached some limit the model decides is optimal. There
is never saved above the limit of 59200DKK for the annuity pension before the pension deduction increases to
32% at age 55, then in some cases the savings will reach the full limit of 75600DKK.
Again I would like to bring attention to the two medium income solutions, and how wildly they differ.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 5: The total fund, as well as how the the individual funds evolve for each of the 4 different scenarios. Total
fund size ends up at 1519469DKK for low income, 4189840DKK for medium income, 7105439DKK for medium income
without the consumption stair and 8503747DKK for the big income.
Looking first at the two medium solutions, we notice how much more money is saved up by the user without
the consumption stair. It is this huge difference that results in the wildly dissimilar consumption both before
and after retirement. During the working years, much more money has to be saved up, and while it does give
tax deductions, it does not make up for the raw consumption of the normal medium income user. Thus, the
difference as described above occurs. Then, when the pension funds start paying out, naturally the payouts
are just that much bigger, and the consumption can stay constant for the no-stair user.
It is the same principle that causes the base case solutions to have more money saved in all three cases. Since
the AP fund is dissuaded due to the suboptimal base case condition, the model instead puts more money into
the LP fund, resulting in a higher total fund size with a lower consumption.
Besides this, the results are as expected. At age 55, everyone has a bit more money to save each year due to
the retirement deduction, but this is not very apparent, since at this point, the funds are large enough that
the interest rate is the biggest contributor to the size increase between time steps. The decreased consumption
at age 80 is very easy to spot, especially on the low income fund. This is due to how the low income fund
has both no LP fund and obviously a much lower total fund. This means that the small bit of money the low
income fund has, produces less money through interests, and thus the ’crack’ becomes more visible.
3.3.1
Discussion
Looking at the taxes, the numbers are a bit lower than what I expected. In percentages, the bigger the income
the bigger percent of it is paid in tax due to the top tax. With taxes defined as the sum between the A-tax,
the top-tax and AM, and the taxation percent calculated using the numbers from the very first working year,
17
==PAGE:19==
the lowest income pays 31.2% of his total income, the medium income pays 32.7% of his, while the large
income pays 34.5% of theirs. This is very little, considering that the taxation percent in the model is given
at a minimum of 38%. Finally, the medium income user with the constant consumption pays only 29.2% of
their income as taxes. When calculating the tax percentage off of only the taxable income, the numbers are
closer to what I would expect, at 41.3%, 43.5%, 47% and 43.9% in the same order as before. These numbers
look more realistic, but the means to achieve them are a bit odd. Calculating the taxation percent on only
the taxable income is a bit counter-intuitive, as AM is decided before the deductions, so calculating it on only
the taxable income means using numbers from both before and after deductions, which is a bit odd.
The no-stair user has a huge tax deduction from their savings, since in each time period their savings constitutes
16.6% of their entire income. This is the reason their consumption is so low, and also why their deduction is
so large resulting in the very low taxation rate. It goes to show, that the model uses the given deductions to
their fullest extent, and that the average person might be able to score some lower taxes (as well as a higher
pension payout) by paying more into their life annuity pension, on the offset that they are willing to lower
their current consumption.
Whether this is a realistic way to assume people handle their finances is not really possible to conclude on.
Every single person on Earth will have their own opinion on how much has to be saved for their retirement.
Some will be comfortable living off just the mandatory AP savings on top of their public pension and supple-
ment, while others would probably be ashamed, and think that getting the pension supplement means they
have failed. Thus, I cannot make judgements on what is best, only that that is how the model optimises, and
finds the solution that has the highest possible consumption.
Interestingly enough, even the low income user, a person with only 1.6 million DKK saved for 20 years of
retirement, does not get the full public pension supplement before age 80, where his own AP fund pays out
only just above 40000. This goes to show just how low the lower limit for the full supplement is. Discarding
interest, there is only just about 80000DKK a year, for 20 years, and still he is unable to be entitled for the
full supplement. This is also an indicator of how the model works. Even when resources are spread very
thin, it manages to make the most of it, and give the person a chance at a good retirement. This shows how
important it is to have a good sense of your finances, and how much you can ’earn’ from getting help needed
by a counsellor, or in this case a model.
A note on the graphs of my fund. The way I have decided to model the LP fund results in them looking a bit
odd. It is due to how I have modelled the LP fund to remain constant after starting to pay out. This could
have been mitigated using a dummy for the LP fund, where the dummy decreases as the money is paid out,
but I chose not to do this, as it does not change anything. The way LP is paid out is decided at the time of
they first payment, and thus, evolving the size of the fund afterwards is moot.
When looking at the output of my model, I cannot verify directly whether this specific solution is in fact the
best one. But I can check to see if the model behaves as I expect it to, as well as verifying some of the results
using online calculators for taxes and the public pension supplement. For the taxes, I can check my results
using Visma Dineros top tax calculator. This calculates the top tax before deductions, and the only thing I
have to do, is then to apply the deductions in the appropriate order to see if the number is equivalent. For
the pension supplement I use The Senior Handbooks supplement calculator. Both of these are reputable firms
doing work in the tax and pension sectors respectively, so their calculations and information is trustworthy.
Doing these calculations helps me make sure that there are no errors present and builds confidence in the
correctness of the overall result, since I know that two of the key pieces are calculated correctly.
18
==PAGE:20==
4
Using the Model on Real Data
I have received from Penly a large data set½ containing pension information of about 1200 real people. The
data contains various information such as their salary, age, current pension fund, when they will retire and for
how long, and much more. With that, I would like to test my model against these peoples own approach to
their retirement savings.
The major problem I ran into with this, is that the data set of course did not align perfectly with my model,
and did not contain monthly consumption. This makes a lot of sense, since that it not something that is easily
trackable like a salary or a savings deposit, and it can swing wildly from month to month. To accommodate
this, I had to find another way to compare solutions, which ended up being how much they manage to save
for retirement, and how the money is paid out after retirement.
4.1
The Data
Before doing anything else, I have to present the data and the problems I had with it. The first thing I noticed,
was that not every row contained salary. If no salary is present, it would be hard to do anything, as that is a
key component of my model. This is not really a problem, as I only needed data from a few people to do a
comparison, so I just choose ones that contained salary.
The next thing was that understanding the data was in itself a difficult task. Looking at the very first entry in
the data set, an entry that I will introduce in a bit, I found three variables named monthlyPensionPaymentSum,
monthlyLifelongPensionPaymentSum and monthlyPensionPaymentSum15Y ears as well as copies of these
variables other places in the data under a different name with the same value. They all sound like they might
describe somewhat the same thing, but their values range from 11000 to 15000, and neither three (nor any
combination of their sums) seem to make up what the person would actually get paid from their pension,
assuming that the final entry in the timeseries that describe their total fund is the one used for the calculation.
Finally, while it is stated how much is saved at the users current point, as well as how much they save each
year, there is no way to tell which pension product is saved into, leaving me to guess.
Solving the two problems was luckily hassle free. The first problem was solved by completely disregarding the
payment variables. Since I could not figure out how these variables were supposed to be understood, I decided
to not use them at all, and calculate a payout myself. The second problem I had to just make up a mixture
of the three pension products. I tried out both 4 : 2 : 1 and 6 : 3 : 1 of AP : LP : LS, and found that 6 : 3 : 1
made the most sense, which I will expand on further a bit later.
4.2
The Subjects
First, I’ll introduce the three persons I have chosen. They are rows 1, 20 and 51 in the excel data sheet Penly
Pension Analysis Dataset.
The first person was chosen for their relative young age of 41, and their salary of 564000 is very close to the
medium income salary that I used previously. The young age gives plenty of space for my optimization model
to prove its worth, and the salary allows me to compare it somewhat equally to the medium income solution.
Comparing the initial starting fund, to my medium income solution at age 41, I see that theirs is nearly double
what my model has at that age at 776000DKK compared to 408479DKK of my model, but the annual deposit
into a pension fund is given as only 12 · 2116 = 25392DKK, less than half of the limit for AP. So there is a lot
of time to do optimization, and a lot of money to do the optimization with.
19
==PAGE:21==
The next person was chosen for their income only. They are relatively close to their retirement as a 52 year
old, but their salary is 546600DKK a year, and thus almost exactly the same as my medium income user.
Here, the age is a drawback, but the close income makes up for it. Their starting fund is exceptionally large at
2677000DKK, and they save 99300DKK each year. Here, the question might be if they are saving too much.
For my third and final person, I chose one with an income almost exactly as my big income solution of earlier.
I found a 50 year old with an income of 852000DKK. Their starting fund is 1457000DKK, almost exactly a
million less than what my model has with that income at that time. This is probably due to the savings being
less than the previous person, coming in at 98892DKK a year.
For each person, a timeseries was given in the data under the name Projection. In here was an entry for every
year before the users retirement, and what the size of their pension fund would be projected to at that age.
Using this, together with the given annual deposits, I could calculate how much interest their savings were
earning each year, so that I could modify my model for better comparisons. I found that all three projections
had an average interest rate very close to 3%. Therefore I chose to change my Returns variable, such that the
interest during the working years was exactly 3%, and then it falls to 2% during the early retirement, and 1%
in the late retirement years. The switch from early to late retirement years I have chosen to keep constant at
age 80, no matter when the user retires or their life is projected to end.
4.3
Subject 1: The Long Optimization
In quick summation, the first subject has a salary of 564000DKK a year, has a starting fund of 776000DKK,
is 41, retires at 70 and dies at 92. I have chosen to interpret the data point named numberOfPensionY ears
as an indicator for when the person dies.
The first thing I want to introduce is Penlys timeseries for the savings of the user. There is a an entry for
every year until retirement, and one extra. The extra entry is for the months between the final entry, and
the exact date of the birthday the year the person retires. Using the first subject as an example, lets pretend
their birthday is in May, but they input their data in February. Their age in the system will be 41 years and
9 months. There is 28 years until this subject retires, so there will be 28 entries in the timeseries, from their
current age of 41 years and 9 months up to 69 years and 9 months. Then there will be a final entry of the last
3 months until their age is exactly 70. In lieu of something better, what I did was to just treat the last step
as completely equal to any other time step, even though it was just a few months. This will be visible on the
graph, as the last time step has a substantially lower increase than the previous ones.
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 6: The saving as given by the Penly data with 4 different approaches to simulating dissaving.
To come up with a valid dissaving process, I try out 4 different candidates. The first one is a completely naive
dissaving, where I simply divide the total fund in the final entry of the timeseries with the number of years
the subject is projected to be retired. In the case of this subject, the two numbers are 3046006DKK and 22
years.
The second I call int, as I let the fund rack in interest at the same rate as my Returns variable, meaning 2%
for the early retirement years, and 1% in the late retirement years after 80. I then simply solve for the number
that depletes the fund at age 92.
The third is the naivestair. This method implements the 20% decrease in consumption by simply reducing
the amount the pensions has to pay out with the same amount in the same time period. Reducing the pension
payout is not exactly equal to reducing the consumption, but they somewhat correspond, as there are no other
income sources for the user than pensions. Again, a simple solve command finds me the number that empties
out the pension fund before the death of the user.
The last method, the one I ended up going with as it most closely resembles how my model dissaves I called
the intereststair. This both lets the fund earn interest, while applying the 20% decrease in payout at age 80.
The pension payouts resulting from the different dissaving methods are as follows.
Naive
Int
NaiveStair
IntStair
ert
138454
161821
157010
182230
lrt
138454
161821
125608
145784
The numbers look about as one would expect in comparison with one another. When comparing these numbers
to the pension payout of my model, it is important to note that the Penly data does not contain public pension,
as that does not come from ones own savings. The issue with that, is that it is also difficult to guess at what
the three subjects would be eligible for in pension supplement, as I do not have the info required to calculate
21
==PAGE:23==
it, and even with my assumed fund composition, the calculation contained too many unknowns for me to be
confident in the result, and therefore public pension is completely ignored when it comes to the Penly data.
The next thing I want to know, is if my model can create a better setup for retirement than what is projected
in the given timeseries. For this, I run the model from the very first entry and all the way to the end. Here is
where the ratios 4 : 2 : 1 and 6 : 3 : 1 of AP : LP : LS of the fund comes into play. The two ratios are made
up under the belief that the annuity pension is the most important of the 3, and thus should be the biggest
part of the fund. I figured it should be double that of the life annuity, but the question was how much bigger
than the lump sum the life annuity should be. The lump sum cannot be very large, as the yearly deposit limit
is really small, but also because a too large lump sum will cause an imbalanced consumption in the year it is
paid out, which my model is not too fond of. I have tried both ratios, and found that the 4 : 2 : 1 meant that
the lump sum would become too large off of compound interest alone, lowering the overall consumption. Now
whether 6 : 3 : 1 is the correct ratio is of course up for discussion. Neither of the ratios are even remotely close
to any of the solutions my model comes up with. Looking at the peak of the fund, at age 69, of my medium
and large income solutions seen in figure 5, the ratio is 24 : 0 : 1 for the medium income and 53.88 : 43.8 : 2.4
for the big income. But I choose 6 : 3 : 1 and go along with it.
The starting fund of the subject is 776000, meaning the three individual funds start at 465600DKK for the
AP fund, 232800DKK in the LP fund, and 77600DKK in the lump sump.
Figure 7: The total fund created by my model, starting at t0 of the first subjects Penly data.
My model manages to save up just shy of 5 million DKK. Contrary to previous solutions, the fund is mostly
made up of life annuity. This is due to the larger life span of this person than the ones I made up. My life
annuity pays out 5% of the fund each year, so when the person is retired for 22 years, the total payout is
110%. The fact that my model knows this before hand could be called cheating to some extent, but the Penly
data seemingly knew so too. My model increases the fund size at retirement age by slightly less than 2 million
DKK, compared to the timeseries provided. Sadly, I have no values to compare how good the two solutions
are during the working years, so I cannot say if the 2 million larger fund comes at a great cost of quality of
22
==PAGE:24==
living during the working years, and just have to rely on my model to come up with a solution where the user
still has money enough for their daily life.
Besides the naive dissaving method I explained above, I have another way to compare my model to the solution
given in the data. I call this the end model. The end model is a run of my model for only the dissaving portion
of the users life. Taking the final entry in the projected time series as starting input, again with the 6 : 3 : 1
ratio. I can then use the naive dissaving as a base case, and stack my models saving and dissaving against the
savings of the data and dissaving of my model.
Figure 8: The total fund of my model, the Penly data with my naive dissaving process, and the end model running the
dissaving from the final entry of the Penly data.
Here we clearly see how much more money my model is able to save up for retirement. But once again, I run
into a problem with comparing the different solutions. Since my model explicitly contains life annuity, and
as I explained early, paying out from the life annuity pension does not reduce the fund size, so when plotting
the fund size as I do here, I cannot ascertain the payout by looking at the rate the fund becomes lower, as it
does not become lower. Here, the idea of a dummy fund that decreases when paying out, just for the sake of
visual clarity is not a possibility, as the extended payout would mean the fund would go into the negatives as
more life annuity is paid out than what was saved in the first place. Another small thing is how the timescale
of my solution does not match exactly to the way the timeseries does. As can be seen in the first entry of my
full model and end model, they do not align with the corresponding entry of the source. This is because my
model has moneyflow already in the first entry, meaning the full model starts saving at t0 and the end model
starts paying out of the pension funds at t70. This causes the slight gap between the solutions. For the full
model, the benefit and detriment cancel each other out, but the end model is slightly punished compared to
the two other solutions.
The next thing I can try to compare, is by simply looking at the sum of pension payout for each of the three
scenarios. But then I run back into the problem with the public pension as described earlier. So for the two
scenarios based on my model, I will only sum the three other pension products and ignore the public pension.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 9: The summation of the pension payout of the 3 solutions. Penly data along with a naive dissaving, a run of
the full model and the end model.
The reason ignoring the public pension like that is not entirely valid, is how the model tries to optimize for
increased supplement. This will obviously not be visible when ignoring the public pension entirely. This hurts
especially in this situation, since my model has saved up so much in life annuity, which generally allows for a
slightly larger supplement, as well as the year where the lump sum is paid out in which the supplement usually
also increase due to no payout from the other two products. We see here how the naive dissaving has a higher
pension payout in the late retirement years than the end model, but what is not visible is the fact that the
end model receives full public pension supplement, meaning that there is a payment of 168400DKK hidden in
this graph. This will become apparent when I show the consumption graph in a bit, as the consumption of the
end model is higher than the pension payout presented here. Another thing that becomes clear looking at this
graph, is how the 6 : 3 : 1 ratio gives a lump sum pension fund that is simply too big. The lump sum payout
at age 71 is a whooping 315955DKK. This handicaps the other parts of the model, by essentially lowering the
other 2 pension funds. A large part of that lump sum could have come to better use in either the AP or LP
fund, and resulted in a more consistent pension payout, and most likely a higher overall consumption.
The pension payout may not be the best comparison. Instead I can compare consumptions directly. But I
can only do so for my models full run and the end model. As I noted earlier, the Penly data contains no
consumption, and my attempts at calculating it was too unreliable.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 10: The consumption of a full run of my model and the end model.
The problem with lump sum becomes even more apparent when looking at the consumptions. My model has
saved 166884DKK in the lump sum, about half of what the end model ends up with. This allows the model to
pay out the lump sum without affecting the consumption at all. In the above graph, both of the models pay
out the lump sum at age 71, and the effect on the end model is that the consumption is lowered throughout the
rest of the users life, as they had way too much money stored in the lump sum fund. The base consumption
during retirement for the two solutions end up as 283127DKK for the full model and 230840DKK for the end
model.
I assume that my models does better than the naive solution, based off of the fact that my model did better
than the base case as seen in figure 4, and it is clear as day that my full model does a lot better than only
the end model. If the assumption holds, then here is definitive proof that if given enough freedom, in this
case time to optimize and enough money to do the optimization with, then my model is able to increase the
savings of an average person by a substantial amount as well as increase their quality of life by letting them
be able to consume more money each year, compared to what they would without my model or professional
counseling.
4.4
Subject 2: The Medium Income
The second subject is the one with an almost identical salary as the medium income user I simulated in
section 3.3 as the medium income user. This subject is 53 years old, retires early at 65 and expects to die at
age 89. They have a salary of 546000DKK a year. Each year they deposit 99300DKK into their savings. This
user has many years in the early retirement age, where the consumption is only decreased by 20% compared to
any of my other solutions. The result of this, is that the model cannot deposit too much into the life annuity,
even though the user is retired for 24 full years. Instead, the model has to balance the AP and LP fund much
closer.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 11: The total fund created by my model, starting at t0 of the seconds subjects Penly data.
A relatively balanced mix of all three pension products are seen in this case, greatly diversifying the source of
pension payouts of the second subject.
The total fund of my model caps out at 5119254DKK, just 23356DKK less than the peak of the fund given
by the Penly data.
Figure 12: The total fund of my model, the Penly data with naive dissaving process, and the end model running the
dissaving from the final entry of the Penly data.
26
==PAGE:28==
We can see that the two saving processes are almost identical, with my models ending a bit earlier than the
one given by Penly, resulting in both the scenarios made by my model, being lower than the Penly fund
throughout most of the period, partly also due to the lump sum payouts. This answered the question if the
person is saving too much, with a resounding no. The person saves almost exactly the same as my model,
which I assume is the optimal solution.
Looking again at the pension payout, the image is about the same. My models run better at first, but the
consistency of the naive dissaving process wins in the later retirement years. Again, I have to underline the
fact that public pension is not added to this sum.
Figure 13: The summation of the pension payout of the 3 solutions. Penly data along with a naive dissaving, a run of
the full model and the end model.
For this particular subject, it definitely seems like the naive solution is better than the one my model is able
to come up with. The issue is of course having way too much money deposited in a lump sum, disallowing a
nice continuous payout at the expense of the one incredibly large one, resulting in overall lower consumption.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 14: The consumption of a full run of my model and the end model.
The lowered spike of the full model results in an increased consumption of just about 3000DKK each year,
which is not a lot. In fact, the difference throughout every single year does not make up for the difference in
the payout of the lump sum, meaning that end model actually pays out a larger amount of money in this case,
even though the base consumption is generally lower.
What we see here, is that 14 years is too little for the model to optimize a solution. This is most apparent
in the large spike when the lump sum is paid out, the year after the user retires. While the full model has a
much smaller spike than the end model, comparing it to the complete absence of a spike in figure 10, it is clear
that some condition has not been met for my model to fully optimize the solution, and we know from earlier
that the income is not the problem, thus it has to be the very short time frame given by the second subject.
Looking back at figure 11, I find that the ratio between the three pension funds are approximately 15 : 10 : 2
for AP : LP : LS. What this tells me, is that AP and LP has to be prioritized much harder than the lump
sum, when even 5 times the amount of money in life annuity compared to the lump sum still results in such a
large spike.
To recall, my models own solution with the almost exact same salary, put not a single krone into life annuity,
and had almost 200000DKK less in the lump sum when retiring, and the consumption ended up being about
100000DKK higher each year during retirement.
4.5
Subject 3: The Rich Guy
The last subject is chosen for the large salary of 852000DKK each year. They are 50 years old, there is 18
years until their retirement at age 68, and they will be retired for 22 years. Despite the large income, this
subject has only saved 1457000DKK total. Running my model with these starting criteria, it manages to build
up quite a pension fund in the few years left before retirement.
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 15: The total fund created by my model, starting at t0 of the third subjects penly data
Maxing out at 7735728DKK, there should be plenty money saved to retire healthily. My model has saved up
2.7 million more than the Penly data, which only saves up 4391950DKK.
Figure 16: The total fund of my model, the Penly data with naive dissaving process, and the end model running the
dissaving from the final entry of the Penly data.
With such a large increase size difference between the two solutions, I expect that the consumption during
29
==PAGE:31==
the final 18 working years would be a good bit higher in the Penly data version. But the consumption during
retirement years will definitely be higher for my model. Looking at the pension payout, the lowest possible
consumption of my model is higher than the naive dissaving.
Figure 17: The summation of the pension payout of the 3 solutions. Penly data along with a naive dissaving, a run of
the full model and the end model.
Again, the lump sum is the reason why the end model is doing so poorly. But the fact that the full run of the
model is has a pension payout that is just that much larger than any of the two other solutions is a bit of a
surprise to me.
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 18: The consumption of a full run of my model and the end model.
The same actually applies for the consumption. In the late retirement years, the consumption of the full model
is 2234DKK higher than consumption of the end model during the early retirement years. The bump from the
lump sum is still visible on the full model solution, so 18 years is apparently not entirely enough to completely
optimize out the last little bit of unevenness the lump sum makes.
4.6
Discussion of the Results
The comparisons with these three subjects gives me great confidence in my model. The saving process is really
efficient, and completely outclasses the saving of the Penly data in the first and third subject. Returning to
my conclusion under the first subject, it is now evident that my model needs time to become better than some
given solution. If there is not enough freedom for my model to optimize the solution, it will end up giving
something almost completely identical to the given solution, as clearly seen in figure 14.
The timeseries of the third subject did not at all take advantage of the large income to build a big pension fund.
My model on the other hand saved 236157DKK each year, allowing the consumption to grow extraordinarily
large during retirement years. It is hard to say how representative of the average person the Penly data is. The
sample size is not very large at ’only’ 1218 people. The people that have volunteered their information to Penly
is likely also someone who already has an interest in their pension fund, and whether that is because they have
realised they need help improving it, or if they have already have gotten help is hard to tell. Nevertheless,
just assuming that these are average people with an average approach at saving does not seem unreasonable,
and thus neither the results.
31
==PAGE:33==
5
Model Variants
In the real world, many specific situations can arise, such that my model is no longer sufficient. My model,
for example, cannot calculate the specific taxation rules regarding a start-up firm or if you are your own boss
through other means. The model could be built upon in many different ways, each solving a specific problem.
5.1
Adding a Mortgage to the Model
Taking out a loan to buy a house or an apartment is something many people will have to go through during
their lifetime. Many people see being in debt solely as a liability, but if you use your debt well, you can earn
money from your loan, even while paying it back. Using debt as leverage for investments is a well researched
topic, and doing it correctly will often allow you to make more money than if you had not taken out the loan.
Here I will examine if it is also possible to acquire a higher consumption throughout your life and retirement
using the debt acquired from a mortgage loan. If it is possible to earn a larger consumption, taking a mortgage
loan results in a better quality of life overall, since you both have a house that you own, as well as the bigger
possible consumption during hopefully both the remaining working years, and the entire retirement period.
The idea is to add a mortgage to the model of 2000000DKK, with an interest fee of 5%. In Denmark, it
is illegal to not pay at least your interest fees, meaning that a loan is never allowed to grow in size. I will
disregard this, and create a new type of loan product, where the loaner can freely borrow from their mortgage
to increase its size, with the drawback of that being the increased cost of interest.
To do this, I first have to decide on some rules for my new mortgage product. I decide that the loaner may
never be more in debt than 80% of the value of the house. I decide that the house has a value of 3000000DKK,
and thus the outstanding debt may never increase beyond 2400000DKK.
Next, I have to make some new constraints, as well as update some of the previous ones. The borrowing from
your mortgage payments go directly into consumption, and paying off the mortgage and interest goes directly
out of the consumption. I update the consumption to reflect this, as well as introducing the interest deduction
that is now applicable. Finally, I have to add a few constraint to calculate how much debt the borrower has
outstanding.
Consumptiont = Incomet −Taxest −Savingst −MortPayt + Borrowt
∀t
(64)
IntDeductiont = 0.226 · MortIntt
∀t
(65)
OutstandingDebtt = 2000000 −MortPayt + Borrowt
t = t0
(66)
OutstandingDebtt = OutstandingDebtt−1 + MortIntt −MortPayt + Borrowt
∀t
(67)
OutstandingDebtt ≤0.8 · 3000000
∀t
(68)
MortIntt = OutstandingDebtt−1 · 0.05
∀t
(69)
How much is paid and borrowed each time step is left completely free for the model to determine. I expext
the model to pay out some of the loan, such that the interest is a smaller drain on the consumption. Then
stay low for some time, kept somewhat constant by balancing the rate of borrowing and paying out the loan,
and then finally, as we approach retirement, the model will start borrowing heavily from the mortgage landing
on 2400000DKK borrowed at age 90.
Whatever happens to the outstanding debt at death, I am not so interested in. Whomever inherits the house
32
==PAGE:34==
it bought, inherits the debt as well. What is important, is to see if borrowing money can lead to an increase
in consumption, and through that hopefully a better life.
Again using the medium income of 550000DKK a year, I run the updated model, using 3 different interests to
see how a mortgage affects consumption.
Figure 19: The evolution of the total funds having a mortgage with varying increasing interest, as well as the consumption
for each given solution
We see here, that the 3% interest mortgage actually results in a larger pension fund than the normal solution,
while an interest of 5% or larger results in almost no money saved at all. The three mortgage solutions result
in a total fund size of 4432463DKK for the 3% interest mortgage, about a quarter million larger than the
normal solution. The 5% and 10% solutions have saved 591149DKK and 120907DKK respectively. Neither of
which should be enough to live off of for the entire retirement. And yet, looking at the consumptions, they all
seem livable, even if living sparingly might be needed with the 10% interest loan.
To reiterate, the normal solution had a consumption of 360499DKK. The new solutions have a consumption
of 312226DKK, which is a decrease of just about 50000DKK a year for the 3% interest. The 5% interest,
the interest most closely resembles what a mortgage interest would be at, has a consumption of 281270DKK,
meaning a decrease of about 80000DKK a year. Finally, the large interest of 10% gives a consumption of
217393DKK, almost 120000DKK lower than the regular solution. The reason the consumption is so low, the
pension fund is barely touched, yet the consumption is still livable, is the interest payments and subsequent
borrowing.
Figure 20: The outstanding debt of the loan for 3 different interest rates, and the money borrowed for each solution.
33
==PAGE:35==
On the left we see the outstanding debt for each of the 3 interest rates. Here it is very clear why the total
funds and the consumptions look as they do. For the 3% interest, the payments towards the loan are smaller
than the annual interest, and the loan grows towards the limit and reaches it at age 62. Then it is kept steady,
until the very large pension fund is used to pay back the loan in big chunks, using the entire lump sum to pay
back on the loan. We then see the model start borrowing from the now reduced debt, to increase it back to
the upper limit exactly at age 90.
For the two higher interests, the story is more or less the same. Pay as much as possible early on to decrease
the interest. This allows them to save just a tiny bit a few years before their retirement, and then use the
borrow possibility as an addition to the public pension, for the full duration of the retirement in the 5% case
and as long as possible in the 10% case.
The reason there is such a large difference between the 3% case and the 5% case, is the rate earned on your
pension fund. The pension fund increases by 5%. Thus, for the 3% mortgage interest, the payoff is larger
when putting the money into the pension fund than it is to reduce the size of the interest. That allows the 3%
solution to amass such a large pension fund, while the two other solutions barely deposit anything. Instead,
the 5% solution has lowered their debt enough at the point of retirement, that they can borrow an average
of 47937DKK each year, which is a decently sized supplement to the otherwise low pension payout. The big
spike at age 79 is when their annuity pension runs out and is entirely replaced by a large borrowing from the
mortgage instead.
Now, the question that remains to be answered, is whether or not this solution is better than the one without
a mortgage. As mentioned, borrowing to invest is a well researched area, where the conclusion is definitely
that it is very possible to earn more off the investments than you pay back on the loan. Here, it is not as
easy to determine. Obviously, if I just look at the two solutions, the answer is easy. Without the mortgage,
the consumption is higher, and therefor it is objectively better. But that is not necessarily the whole story.
One of the things consumption has to pay for is rent. The mortgage solution does not have to pay rent, since
it pays for a mortgage instead. So depending on the place the users live, rent can be very high or very low,
but investing in a house has historically always been a good idea. The increase in the price of the house on
top of the higher percentage of consumption going towards actual consumption might make the case for the
mortgage solution being at least equal to the normal solution.
5.2
Minimal Payment
As mentioned earlier, one of the realism problems I am facing using this model, is the time of death of the user.
When simulating a person, no matter the conditions, they will simply die at age 90. A way to circumvent this
uncertainty, is to set a minimum limit for how much of the yearly retirement payout has to come from the two
stable sources of the public pension and life annuity pension. With this modification of the model, I will set
the minimum payout at 50% of the users income at retirement age, with these two constraints.
MinPayt = PPpayt + LPpayt
t ∈rt
(70)
MinPayt ≥0.5 · Incomet
t ∈rt
(71)
What this does is to ensure that a stable income will be there for anyone living into retirement. In case you
live longer than 90, you will also still be ensured a relatively high income from the lifelong life annuity pension
and public pension, since the life annuity pension will be prioritised higher than in the previous solutions.
34
==PAGE:36==
Now, simulating a person with the medium income of 550000DKK again, with this new condition of of 50%
of the income after retirement has to come from LP and PP, I get these new results.
Figure 21: The funds evolution using the new constraint of 50% of pension payout having to come from LP and PP, as
well as the consumption using the new constraint compared directly to the consumption without it.
Looking first at the consumption, you see very little difference between the two solutions. In fact, the biggest
difference between the two solutions, which is located during the working years, amounts to only 7155DKK a
year, which again is only 596DKK a month. In the two retirement periods, this difference lessens to 5724DKK
and 4293DKK in the early- and late retirement periods respectively. The difference is really small on a day to
day basis, but it adds up. This new solution is in fact slightly worse than the base case solution I looked at
earlier. The normal medium income user had an increase in lifetime consumption of 327830DKK compared to
the base case. Using this new constraint, the consumption throughout a lifetime is decreased by 27076DKK
compared to the base case. So you have to be certain that you live long enough to see the fruits of this form
of saving.
Looking at the fund size, you can see how the total fund is a good bit bigger than the previous solution.
Before, the total fund maxed out at 4189840DKK, without any money saved to a life annuity fund. In this
new solution, the total fund is 5076469DKK. It is quite clear to see how the LP fund is being prioritized a lot
more in the new solution, where the AP fund is barely touched before age 55 when the full bonus deduction
kicks in, and is quickly used up again before 80 years of age, where the large LP fund kicks in to satisfy the
new constraint. In fact, there are only 2 deposits into the annuity before age 55 where the increase in tax
deduction through the pension deduction kicks in. At age 47, a deposit of just above 50000DKK and then a
full deposit of 59200DKK at age 54. Then, when age 55 is reached, each year has the full deposit of 59200DKK
to get full advantage of the retirement deduction, and the AP fund totals at 1445346DKK. The entire AP
fund is paid out in the early retirement years, such that the late retirement years rely solely on the life annuity
pension and public pension. Since the life annuity pension is constant, what keeps the consumption high in
the later retirement years is the public pensions supplement. The supplement increases in size by just above
40000DKK as the annuity pension runs out, which enables this person to retain a relatively high consumption.
The new solution is objectively a worse solution than the one the unmodified model gave, but that is because
the objective is very rigid. Again, this can be solved by having a talk with the user of the model, and have
them tell you their priorities in life. Making sure that 50% of their income comes from LP and PP means that
they are set for life, even if they make it to 100+ years of age. Their available consumption does not drop,
and they will have plenty of resources to spend the rest of their lives. In this case, 212000DKK each year, no
matter how old they get.
35
==PAGE:37==
This solution is pretty smart for people who presume they will live long lives, and are fine with an ever so
slightly lower quality of life during their working years. The constraint can be altered, such that the percentage
of your pension payout coming from the public- and annuity pension is higher or lower than the 50% chosen
here, depending on your own needs or preferences. Of course, a higher percentage means a lower consumption
across the board. The lower consumption is partly due to the better deduction rules for the annuity pension,
as well as the fact that an annuity pension fund can still earn interest after retirement, meaning that there are
two ways for money to increase consumption in an annuity fund that the life annuity pension cannot give. The
relative pension payouts for the model, before and after the constraint was added, clearly shows the change in
prioritization.
Figure 22: The relative pension payout of the model before and after the new constraint of 50% of pension payout having
to come from LP and PP. Left: With the new constraint. Right: Without the new constraint.
In the previous solution, seen above to the right in figure (22), the annuity pension dominates throughout the
entirety of the retirement, while the life annuity pension is 0% throughout. The public pension increases as
time goes by, as the supplement is raised due to lower payout and lower interest through the annuity pension.
There is a single time step where the lump sum is paid out, where this is the only payout along with the
mandatory public pension.
Meanwhile, the new solution gives a much more dynamic way of paying out your pension funds. We see at
first, that the model expends the available AP fund to keep the consumption as high as possible, again with
the only exception being the time step where the lump sum is paid out. When the AP fund quickly runs out,
the whole dynamic shifts, the supplement for the public pension grows, and consumption relies entirely on
the public pension and life annuity. This could go on, even if you die at age 120, and as such, this solution
(or something coming close to it) could be used on people who are in very good health. That can be hard to
determine, especially when this solution needs you to start saving up into your life annuity as fast as possible.
At the very least, a person can be advised to focus on their life annuity, if they later in their working years are
still very fit and healthy, and have no history of illnesses in their family. But again, this is the type of decision
one would have to go to a professional retirement councillor to make, instead of a mathematical model.
6
Future Work
Many things could be added to refine the model, or for it to come up with a solution to specific problems.
Many scenarios cause tax- and pension rules to differ from the norm. An entrepreneur with his own firm has
a completely new set of tax rules regarding corporate tax and his own personal earnings versus what is earned
36
==PAGE:38==
in the firm. If you are in a relationship the rules also change. For many of the rules, the limit is just doubled,
for example the deposit limit for the annuity pension simply doubles to 118400DKK. But this is not the case
always, sometimes the two individual salaries has to be taken into account separately, sometimes they are just
pooled. For example, I mentioned in section 3.1.3 that both yours and your partners salary was taken into
account when calculating public pension and its supplement, but that was changed the 1st January of 2023.
Other things one could add is more ways to store money. Currently, money is either saved or consumed. But
what if you could invest them into say a savings account, or keep them at hand in cash.
6.1
Multiple Pension Funds
One of the things one would very likely encounter in their life, is having multiple pension funds. I mentioned
in the earlier, that it is Danish custom to have your job deposit a percentage of your salary directly into your
pension fund. But the pension fund changes if you change job. This would result in you having multiple
pension funds.
I tried to implement this, but some of my constraints was giving me issues, and I sadly never managed to fix
it. I will present the theory behind the work, as I believe it to be sound, and the reason for my failure was in
my programming.
I decided to add another AP fund, to do this, I need to rework several old constraints as well as introducing sev-
eral new ones. I introduce some new binary variables to keep the constraints in check, but the most important
here is the introduction of the new index i which denotes the additional funds. Every constraint containing a
reference to annuity has been indexed with this i to show that it holds for any AP fund, no matter how many of
them there are. If the only change in the constraint is getting indexed to i, I refrain from writing them out here.
APfundt,i ≤(1 −EndShiftt,n) · Map
∀t
(72)
StartShiftt,i = 0
t ∈wt
(73)
X
t
StartShiftt,i ≤1
∀n
(74)
X
t
StartShiftt,i =
X
t
EndShiftt,i
∀n
(75)
APactivet,i = APactivet−1,i + StartShiftt,i −EndShiftt,i
∀t
(76)
X
t
APactivet,i ≤25 · StartShiftt,i
∀n
(77)
X
t
APactivet,i ≥10 · StartShiftt,i
∀n
(78)
APpayt,i ≤APactivet,i · Map
∀t
(79)
APpayt,i ≥APpayt−1,i −(1 −APactivet,i) · Mip
∀t
(80)
APpayt,i ≤APpayt−1,i + (1 −APactivet−1,i) · Mip
∀t
(81)
Before explaining the new constraints, I need to introduce the new binary variables. APactive denotes whether
APfundi is paying out in time t. When APactive is 0, there is no payout, and it switches to 1 when it pays
out.
StartShift is responsible for switching APactive on, while EndShift shifts it off when the fund is
depleted.
37
==PAGE:39==
Equation (72) disallows saving into a fund that does not become active at any point. This also means, that
if there at any point is even a single krone in APfundi, it has to become active and subsequently inactive at
some point. Equations (74) and (75) that the payout of a pension fund can only become active once, and if it
has shifted to active it must also shift to inactive, meaning that all money should be paid out in a continuous
streak. Equation (76) denotes how the the StartShift and EndShift variables turn APactive on and off
respectively. Equations (77) and (78) says that an AP fund has to payout for at least ten years in a row, and
25 years in a row at most.
The final three constraints is how APactive allows and disallows APpay to actually payout, and how much
it pays out as well. Equation (79) says that the payout can only happen when APactive is 1, while the next
two are the helping functions that determine when APactive should turn 1, as well as limiting the size of the
payout when this is not the case. The dynamic is best presented in a table.
IPactivet,n
IPactivet−1,n
(80)
(81)
0
0
APpayt−1,n ≤APpayt,n + Mip
APpayt,n ≤APpayt−1,n + Mip
0
1
APpayt−1,n ≤APpayt,n + Mip
APpayt,n ≤APpayt−1,n
1
1
APpayt−1,n ≤APpayt,n
APpayt,n ≤APpayt−1,n
1
0
APpayt−1,n ≤APpayt,n
APpayt,n ≤APpayt−1,n + Mip
Taking the rows one for one.
The double zeros in the first row means that there was no payout in the previous time step nor in the current
one. We find that the result of this, is that both APpayt and APpayt−1 has to be smaller than Mip.
A zero and a one means that EndShiftt = 1, and that the there is no more payout, but there was in the previous
time step. Here, APpayt−1 has to be smaller than Mip, while APpayt has to be smaller than APpayt−1.
Next row both there are two continuous payouts. APpayt−1 has to be smaller than APpayt and vice versa,
meaning that they have to be equal. This is in fact a real constraint for the annuity pension that I have been
ignoring this entire time. The reason that I ignore it, is that in reality changing the payout of your annuity
pension is not that difficult from year to year, but here, it helps with setting the binary variables, so I have
chosen to implement it.
In the final row, StartShiftt has just become 1, and the payout has gone active. Thus APpayt is smaller than
Mip, while APpayt−1 is smaller than APpayt.
These condition help set all the binary variables, such that the payouts only happen when they are allowed
to, and are of an allowed size.
Looking at my results, it is clear that something has gone wrong, but any attempt to fix the code was futile.
The model does not save money for retirement in a way that makes sense, and the consumption fluctuates
slightly in almost every time step. The consumption is also generally much lower than it was in the the normal
model. This is in part due to the new constraint of every payout having to be the same size, which reduces
the freedom the model has to optimize for payouts and the public pension supplement.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 23: The total fund and consumption of the model with multiple pension funds allowed.
It is clear that something is severely wrong, with these results. Had I had some more time, fixing this mistake
would have been my primary goal in the first time.
7
Discussion
Every year limits of deposit, limits for the pension funds, or the size of the deductions and other numbers like
these that I presented in my model earlier are changed. They are adjusted for inflation and other political
reasons. In Denmark all of the rules were adjusted on the 1st of January, right at the tail end of this project.
For example, in 2023, the deposit limit of annuity pension has gone up from 59200DKK to 60900DKK. The
general idea is, that the numbers have to become larger to account for inflation, but they do not always rise
at the same speed. If the rate of inflation was equal to the rise of these limits, then my decision to only use
todays valuation of money would be enough for this to not cause any trouble. In a real world application of
my model, these limits would have to be updated regularly to make sure the model stays up to date.
39
==PAGE:41==
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, I set out to create a mathematical model that could solve the saving- and dissaving problem
of the average person, allowing them to save their money in an intelligent way to increase their quality of life
during retirement.
The model I created works in that regard in almost all cases. The condition for the model to work optimally,
is that it requires time to optimize over, and enough money to optimize with. If too little time or money is
given, the result will suffer, and will in worst case be equal to the result of of the saving- and dissaving process
without using my model at all. The conditions are very intuitive, as shorter times means that the model has
fewer optimal decision to make, and too little money is just hard to optimize with in the first place.
Looking at the results of section 4, the results most closely resembling a comparison of my model versus a real
person, I find that when given the right conditions, my model outperforms a real person by a large margin,
saving up much more money than what the real world data did, and giving a much higher pension payout
during retirement years as a result. The model also improves substantially on a base case solution of paying
out every possible pension fund as fast as possible.
In addition, the model can be changed to suit the needs of an individual with relative ease. I have shown this
to be true for someone with a mortgage, and someone who wants their pensions to be a safe payout. In both
cases, the model was converted to suit the specific needs of the situation, with a resulting consumption that
was well within livable.
40
==PAGE:42==
References
[1] https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/borgere/befolkning/middellevetid
[2] http://dinpensionsopsparing.dk/livrente/?fbclid=IwAR24J__Fn6id7nsMqgLjqgx6xjOGj0BoKTAD7SzIY0x4o4q8VKo
[3] https://www.businessinsider.com/personal-finance/average-stock-market-return?r=US&IR=T
41
